The Textile Industry in Philadelphia1
======================================

By Elliot Cades, B.S. in Ec.
Assistant in Psychology
University of Pennsylvania
CONTENTS
Part l
History of the Textile Industry
Part 2
The Importance of the Industry and Its Status in Philadelphia
Part 3
Description of Jobs
Part 4
Conditions of Work
Part 5
Opening for Boys and Girls
Part 6
Training
Part 7
Advantages and Disadvantages to Boy and Girl Entering this as Com-
pared with Other Trades
Part 8
Summary
PART 1
HISTORY OF THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY
Textile manufacture is based upon the simple fact that certain
fibers, if twisted or felted together, will maintain a permanent
Ullity. Spinning and weaving are the two primary principles of
the textile industry. Spinning is the art of drawing out and
twisting a number of small fibres into a long thread. Weaving
is the art of interlacing spun threads to form a fabric, and is the
m?st highly mechanized portion of the industry. All the fibres
most suitable for textile manufacture were selected during pre-
historic time, the primitive selection of Silk, Wool, Cotton, Flax,
Jute, Ramie standing unimpaired and unimproved.
*A study prepared for use in vocational guidance in accordance with
the principles suggested in "Vocational Guidance and Job Analysis, the Psy-
chological Viewpoint" by Morris S. Viteles, appearing in this number of The
Psychological Clinic.
204 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
There are four methods of fabricating the spun material: 1.
Weaving, 2. Felting, 3. Knitting, and 4. Netting. Felting, which
most nearly rivals weaving as the primitive method of cloth produc-
tion, applies to wool and hair only. During the course of unknown
ages of weaving, four kinds of fabric have been evolved, these are:
1. Cloths, 2. Gauzes, 3. Velvets, and 4. Carpets. From these have
come the four great divisions of the weaving industry and the
four distinct types of loom.
Paleolithic man had acquired the arts of twisting cords, plait-
ing and sewing; Neolithic man cultivated flax; during the Later
Stone Age mankind selected the principal textile fibres and ac-
quired the arts of spinning and weaving.
The Egyptians were famed for the beauty of their woven stuffs.
They employed linen for religious purposes, especially for priestly
and royal vestments. Wool and cotton were also worn by the
Egyptians. The Phoenicians, the Babylonians, Assyrians and
Greeks were all famous for their textile manufactures. Rome's con-
tribution to the civilization of England was the knowledge it
brought there about textiles, especially wool. By 1258, the export
of wool from England was forbidden, and at about the same time
cotton was being used for making candle wicks. The next century
Edward III settled seventy families of weavers in England under
royal protection, and later passed several laws for the especial
protection of the woolen trades. Guilds were formed of London
Weavers in 1368, and a Company of Linen Weavers in 1386, etc.
The silk, linen, and wool industries of England received consider-
able impetus, when by the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, in
1685, 800,000 of the artisan population of France were driven
from that country.
The latter half of the sixteenth century marked the beginning
of a long list of textile machinery inventions which at its most
accelerated tempo resulted in the Industrial Revolution. Hand
weavers and spinners were thrown out of work, whole populations
found the demand for the only kind of handiwork they were capable
of doing disappear, and all this because of the endless innovation
of new machinery. John Kay's flying shuttle in 1722 resulted in
still further dislocations. The weavers who could work so much
more quickly with this invention found they did not have enough
yarn to keep them occupied. In turn this situation brought about
the invention of more spinning devices. In 1761 the Society of
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 205
Arts offered a prize for the best of these machines. The result
was that James Hargraves invented the Spinning Jenny, and in
1767 Awkwright invented the Roller Spinning Frame, and the
Water Frame. Then frame breaking riots broke out?but the in-
ventive genius of this age was bent upon the production of new
mechanical devices. Samuel Crompton's Spinning Wheel of 1779,
James Watt's Steam Engine of 1782, and Cartwright's Power Loom
?f 1785 marked the climax of the Industrial Revolution.
Most of the skilled workers in the United States were English
who settled in the New England Section and it was that part of
the country which became a center of textile manufacturing. '' In
the first mills, New England rum was served to the men at 11
o'clock each morning, a custom practiced until 1827. W^ages were
low and the hours long, work continuing from 5 o'clock in the
morning until 7 :30 in the evening, or in the summer, from sunrise
to sunset."
It is a far call from conditions such as those to conditions
to-day. In the last hundred years most of the improvements upon
the fundamental English inventions have come from the United
States, which is the most extensive user of up-to-date equipment in
large scale production. Comprising many trades, employing mil-
lions of workers, served by masses of intricate and power-driven
machinery, and utilizing annually thousands of tons of various
fibres, both animal and vegetable, textile manufacturing to-day is
complex, imposing, almost incomprehensible to the human mind.
PART 2
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE INDUSTRY AND ITS
STATUS IN PHILADELPHIA
"The Textile industry .... leads all other industries in the number
?f establishments employing more than 250 hands each."
In 1914 it employed 1,498,664 wage earners or 21.3% of the
total reported for all manufacturing industries.
"It leads all industries in the number of plants, the product of which
has a value of more than $1,000,000. It is second only to the steel and iron
industry in the amount of capital represented, which is now conservatively
estimated at $4,500,000,000. According to the 1914 census, the value of its
products was $3,414,615,000. The estimate is made that in 1920 the value of
its products was very close to $7,000,000,000 of which $499,279,939 was ex-
ported. Textile plants are scattered from coast to coast and number 12,964.
The prosperity and buying power of the managers and workers in the textile
206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
industry is, therefore, important to the prosperity of American industry as a
whole.''
The leading textile city of the United States (and of the
world) is Philadelphia. In 1919 the value of its production was
$378,000,000; the closest figure to it being $184,000,000 produced
by New Bedford, Mass.?second leading city. In these figures are
included the value of cotton, woolen, worsted, silk, linen, and jute
goods, carpets, hosiery and knit goods, hats, cordage, etc.
In addressing a group of manufacturers of cotton and woolen
products, in March, 1922, Alba B. Johnson, President of the
Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce, pointed out that in Phila-
delphia there are more than eight hundred textile mills within a
radius of fifty miles from City Hall, and that about 20% of the
population of the City earns its livelihood directly or indirectly
through the operation of textile plants. Philadelphia comprises
119 spinning plants, 278 weaving plants, 306 knitting mills and 114
dye works and finishing plants. Though the number of knitting
mills exceeds that of the weaving plants, the latter is by far the
most important branch of the industry in terms of capital invested
and value of product. The knitting trade comes second. These
mills are generally capitalized at a small figure and represent the
most competitive and unsystematized branch of the textile industry.
The dye works and finishing are, of course, subservient to the spin-
ning, knitting and weaving plants.
PART 3
DESCRIPTION OF JOBS
Under the factory system the textile industry has expanded
enormously. From being a hand industry practiced in the homes
of the producers, it has become a mechanical industry carried on
in power-driven factories. Every factory is divided into depart-
ments, each occupied with one or more details of the manufacturing
process. The cost of production has been reduced; the variety of
natural substances utilized, and the range of goods manufactured
has vastly increased. With the expansion specialization is inevi-
table. Factories are built for the purpose of making only one class
of fabric from one kind of raw material?factories for woolens,
cotton, silk, linen, and jute. More significant is the fact that many
great establishments have been organized and are employed for
the purpose of supplying prepared materials to other branches of
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 207
the textile industry. Wool combing, silk throwing, yarn spinning,
bleaching and a host of minor industries are merely parts of the
textile manufacturing processes. Even the weaving factory itself,
commonly supposed to make a finished commodity, may be nothing
more than the raw material of a finishing plant.
It is obviously impossible, in a report of this nature, to do
more than cover one phase of an industry having as many ramifica-
tions and specialized processes as the textile. I will, therefore,
confine my information to a description of the jobs in a particular
and typical plant which spins cotton yarn and weaves dress goods
material, shirting, sheeting, underwear material and similar fabrics.
The jobs described will be found with some variations in every
plant in the weaving trade.
The operations in the preparation of cotton fibre foi com-
mercial use are dependent upon the quality of the yarn desired
and the ultimate use to which it is put. Coarser and cheaper yarn
do not necessarily need the same number of operations or prepara-
tory treatments as the better grade. Thus, the mill receives the
baled compressed cotton which has been passed through the Saw
Qiu, which freed the seed from the lint. After the ties and bagging
are removed the cotton is passed into the Bale Breaker.
1. The Bale Breaker consists primarily of four sets of rollers
with fluted and saw-like discs running at accelerated speed. The
lumps in the cotton passing through are eliminated by a weighted
down top roller, negatively driven by friction against the bottom
r?Hs which are positively adjusted by gearing. This machine de-
livers the cotton in more or less loose formation. The operator must
feed the cotton as evenly as possible. He must prevent the rolls
from clogging, and he cleans and oils the machine once a week.
This is a semi-skilled operation from which the operator is usually
Promoted to the Cards.
2. The Opener is connected with the Bale Breaker and both
machines constitute the Opening Room. The new Opener is a
vertically-shaped device with a churning arrangement running
through its center. The cotton blown from the Bale Breaker is
sucked up and tossed about freeing it of dirt and opening the
fibres. The cotton is delivered in a fluffy mass. The operator
must keep the dust trunk clean, and must especially guard against
spontaneous combustion. "When necessary he must clean out the
machine. This is a semi-skilled job.
208 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
3. The Breaker Lapper is the first of three lapping machines.
From the Opener the cotton in bulk is placed in a hopper or hold
which is fed by the cotton clinging to the spike of a lattice. The
cotton is then carried lip by a lifting lattice-apron to a cylinder
and then taken off to a beater where it is freed of remaining seed,
twig, and extraneous matter and compressed and rolled into a con-
densed lap of specified width, length, weight and thickness. The
operator on this job must be a skilled worker because the lap
produced cannot be controlled by any theoretical formula but is
determined by the experience of the worker. However, in the
following lapping machines there is a better mechanical control
of the yarn. The operator must know his machine thoroughly and
in order to secure the most economical product must be able to
set the grid-bar in relation to the length of the fibre. There is no
regular promotion to this job, the time worked at the plant usually
being the avenue to Breaker Lapping.
4. Four of the cotton laps are then fed to the Intermediate
Lapper and then to the Finisher Lapper or Picker, or directly
from the Breaker Lapper to the Finisher Lapper in the case of the
lower grade yarns. The Intermediate Lapper and Finisher Lapper
do practically the same thing: cleaning, evening and delivering one
lap from four feeds. The product of the Finishing Lapper is
called a Card Lap. This is designated as weighing a certain num-
ber of ounces per yard of a specified width and of a specified
number of yards, usually forty-two.
The operators on these machines have practically the same tasks
as those on the Breaker Lapper.
5. The Card Lap is now fed to the Carder, being placed upon
lap rolls and unwrapped at the same speed as the feed roll. After
passing through the Card it is delivered in the form of a rope-
like strand without twist known as a Sliver, which has its fibres
arranged in semi-parallel order, freed of extraneous matter and
even per unit of length. It is delivered off the doffer of the Card
in the form of a web and beat off by an oscillating cone, fed through
trunk, condensing rolls, coiler head, and coiled into a can.
The Boss Carder takes care of all sets of Cards, whether there
be ten or a hnudred. He has an assistant or second hand and
helpers. The Boss Carder is the only one who can adjust the
machinery should anything go wrong; the others look on and thus
gather up information and experience. The helpers must see that
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 209
the machinery does not get clogged up with dust, must watch the
Web to see that the cotton gets the proper carding action, and that
the "clothing" is well ground. The helper who comes in without
experience does menial labor, removing the full cans and bringing
in others, and sees to it that the lap always goes in and comes out
Properly. Carding is a skilled job and is hard work because some-
thing often goes wrong with the machinery. Promotion to Boss
Carder depends upon experience and length of service.
The operations described in 2, 3, 4 and 5 are called the clean-
ing processes, and after these the Sliver is sent through the Comb-
ing Room. From this point the proper sequence in processing of
the Sliver into a manufactured yarn is a matter of opinion. If the
cotton is to be a combed yarn it is preferable to send it through the
first Drawing Frame then to the Sliver Lapper, then the Ribbon
Lapper, then the Comber, and finally through the second and third
Draw Frame.
6. The Draw Frames are used to even, parallel and arrange
the fibres in the most suitable manner. It consists of four sets of
rollers running at accelerated speeds. Thus its effect is aggiega-
ti?n and attenuation, feeding six Slivers and deliveiing one. The
reason for using the first Draw Frame prior to Combing is to
Prevent a useless waste which would be caused by that machine if
fibres were not arranged.
7- and 8. The Sliver Lapper and the Ribbon Lapper and
Comber are only used in the manufacture of combed yarn. Ihis
requires cotton of the better grade, strength and staple length.
The Sliver Lapper utilizes sixteen cards or first Drawing Slivers
^ed at one time and delivers one as a sliver lap. This is usually
to 8% inches wide and of certain weight per yard. The
Ribbon Lap takes six sliver laps and delivers one lap of the same
weight per yard. Both the Sliver Lapper and the Ribbon Lapper
Parallel the fibres and deliver them in the form of a lap.
9. In the Comber the six ribbon laps are passed through
combs which pull out the short fibres and produce a sliver of
approximately the same fibre length throughout. A second sliver
has a greater number of fibres per unit of area than a card sliver
due to the parallelzation of fibres of a single length. After the
combing operation the sliver is sent through the second and third
^rawing Frames, which resemble the first Drawing Frame. Then
the fibre is ready for the Slubber or first Roving Frame.
210 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The attendant in the Combing Room must watch the rolls, see
that the ends are being fed, that the proper weight product is com-
ing off and that the next process is being supplied. This does not
require close care as the machines are equipped with automatic
stops and the operators are therefore semi-skilled. However, the
head of the Combing Room must be a skilled worker and a mechanic
and able to utilize applied mechanics.
10. All Roving Frames reduce the sliver from a rope-like
strand into roving, having a definite number of twists per inch.
The Slubber or Roving Frame may have two sliver ends fed and
one delivered. On these machines a differential motion is used
which allows winding to take place at the same rate of speed when
the bobbin is started as when the bobbin is full. From the Slubber
to the Spinning Frame there is a gradual reduction of the sliver
to a Roving which will be used on the Spinning Frame.
11. Spinning may be done in one of two ways: by a Ring
Spinner or a Mule Spinner. The former, instead of having a
flyer as in the Roving Frame, has a traveler of a specified weight
according to the yarn desired. The spindle and bobbins speed are
the same and constant. The building up of the bobbin is controlled
by the speed of the ring rail and the distance traversed by it.
The operator on a Ring Spinner must see that the proper num-
ber of ends are fed, must piece broken ends and keep the machine
clean. He must watch the build of the bobbin and see that the
yarn is balanced. This is a skilled job requiring distribution of
attention over the roller, spinning bands, the spindles and the
"bobbins, and involving good judgment. It requires at least two
years training to be a spinner and the worker starts as an ap-
prentice around the spinner.
The Mule Spinner requires even more skill than the Ring
Spinner. This machine is more intricate though the functions are
the same as the Ring Spinner only more detailed?involving the
regulation of bands and ropes, pulleys, speed and fine adjustments.
It takes abdut five years training to become a mule spinner.
Spinning is the last operation with "single" yarn, though the
Spooling and Twisting machines are usually located in the Spin-
ning Room.
12. The Spooler winds the yarn off the bobbin on to the spool.
When full the spool should be weighed, then fed to the twister
which feeds two spools of approximately the same weight in order
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 211
to more perfectly twist the yarn. This twisting can make the
final product perfect or spoil it entirely; too much twist making
unbalanced yarn, too little twist weakening the final product. The
winding of twisted yarn on the bobbin is done in precisely the
same way as on the Spinning Frame.
The operator of a Spooling Machine puts on the new spools,
beats the skeins straight, puts them on the machine, finds the
Proper ends of yarn, and starts them winding on the spools, sets the
guides, regulates the tensions and ties all breaks with the weaver s
knot. This job requires no experience and is often handled by
women. It is very much like reeling and promotions are made
from this job to quilling or weaving.
13. The bobbins from the Twister are placed on a reel and the
skeins are reeled and the operator on the Reeler puts on the bobbins,
running the yarn ends through the proper places ready to reel.
He finds the ends and ties up the skeins with leases or water bands
and when reeled takes off the skeins and lifts off the empty bobbins.
This job is also done by women; the Reeler does not have to keep
working all the time but must watch her machine, and to get the
best ^production must do her doffing and lacing as lapidh as
Possible.
The reeled yarn is then wound and dyed in the Dyeing
department; or if it is not dyed at this juncture it is dyed in the
piece" that is as a woven fabric. The Dyeing Department is off
the main production floor and the competency requirements of its
?Perations differ from the other textile operations. Men are used,
pnly as operators in this department and their duties include the
immersion of skeins or cloth in vats of dye. The skeins have first
been knotted on beams and thus suspended in the vat. After the
yarn is dyed it is sent through centrifical driers and then up to be
spooled. The proportions and combinations of dyes are determined
by the boss of the dye department from designs submitted by the
designer.
It is essential for the head of the dye department to be ex-
perienced with all the processes of the mill to some extent, but
especially to have worked for a long time in the dye department.
This is necessary because even after laboratory tests have been
made the actually achieved results are not predictable. However, a
man trained in a technical school can cut short this long road of
apprenticeship by many years.
212 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
14. If the yarn is not dyed after twisting it is wound back
on spools and set up in a creel, the ends passed through a lease
reed, then through a condensing reed and made into a warp. This
warp is then beamed, which operation is described in detail in an
attached job specification.
15. The beamed warp, having been drawn through harness
according to a pattern, is mounted on a loom and woven. The
weave desired is determined by harness chains. If more than one
color is used in filling, the incidence of each in the design is
governed by the arrangement of the box chain.
The weaving operation is very interesting and is the best
paying job to the operator in the mill. It is somewhat similar to
beaming, requires great skill and energy and is very noisy. There
is no regular avenue of promotion to this job and among weavers
themselves, a diversity of degrees of skill exists, one measure of
skill being the ability to operate a number of different kinds of
looms. The duties of this operation are described in greater detail
in a job specification.
16. The Designer works in a room off the main production
floor and away from all detracting noises. He is a very important
individual in the productive process, and the originality of his
designs may determine, to a large extent, the salability of the
final product. It is absolutely essential that the designer be tho-
roughly acquainted with all the processes in the plant. He must be
able to visualize the finished design which should be no more com-
plicated than the looms used can turn out.
The design is first sketched on paper, then traced and cards
cut by which the pattern will be controlled in the Weaving Room.
Card Cutting is an unskilled operation and the individual who
ultimately becomes the Designer spends very little time upon it.
It may readily be seen that since the Designer must thoroughly
know all the operations it is almost imperative that he receive
some technical training if he wants to save a great amount of
time. A good many of the younger designers to-day are graduates
of such technical schools.
All of the jobs I have described are standard operations in
every cotton spinning and weaving mill though great variations
occur according to differences in quality of yarn used and custom-
ary community practices which is a complex composed of such
elements as the quality of labor employed, the amount of capital
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 213
invested, and the relative modernity or obsolescence of equipment.
The effectiveness of the factory lay-out is also an important factor,
and thus intermediate between many of the standard operations
it is conceivable that minor and preparatory operations may have
to be performed in routing the material if the factory construction
does not permit a machine to be placed where it naturally belongs
in the manufacturing process. Where these gaps occur opportuni-
ties are often offered to beginners in the trade, who at the same
time they are working these simple processes, may observe both of
the standard jobs between which they are placed.
Besides the standard jobs in the fabrication of the yarn and
cloth and what I have called the minor jobs, there are such others
as Boss Weaver, Loom Fixer, Mender, Inspector, Doffer, Section
Hand, and others. Thus, the Loom Fixer is a skilled mechanic who
repairs damages in the loom; the Inspector examines bobbins or
finished cloth; the Mender pulls out superfluous threads; and the
^offers, who usually travel in crews of from three to eight, remove
full spindles and place empty spindles upon the particular kind of
Machine at which they are working. Inspectors and Doffers are
located in the plant according to department and machine which
they are tending.
Detailed descriptions of these jobs and a statement of the
Qualifications prerequisite to success in each of them are found in
the job specifications and job psychographs included in this article.
These are presented for use in vocational guidance in accordance
\vith the principles suggested by Viteles in Vocational Guidance and
Job Analysis, the Psychological Viewpoint, appearing in this num-
ber of The Psychological Clinic.
Name of Job: Beamer Department: Beaming
Sex Male. Preferred age from 21 to 40 Age limits from 18 to ....
Kace and nationality White No. persons on this job about 45
Qualifications :
Educational Physical Mental Special
?one ....Height Med Right or L. handed ....Accuracy 5
Kead X Weight .... Exactness of movem't X Co-Ordination A, B 4
} rite X Power .... Quickness of movem't .... Concentration 4
pdd & Sub. X Endurance X Association 4
Actions  Eyesight Good Discrimination, V,
Space 4
Observation 4
lrThe preliminary work on these job specifications was done by J. T.
Sho\er, to whom acknowledgment is gratefully made.
214 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Experience required?some work with Experience desired?preferably as
yarn. splitter or counter, etc.
Personality?Patience; carefulness.
Duties :
1. Run the new warp through the drum and up to the beam, by tying it to
the old warp or by tying it to a leader.
2. Put lease rod on the warp by tying the gathered ends of warp to the rod.
3. Lay the warp in the raythe, getting the yarn placed properly according to
the pattern card, counting off all the yarn and splits, (spaces in the
raythe).
4. Put in the empty beam and tie the warp to the beam.
5. Adjust tension by use of weights.
6. Regulate speed by shifting belts.
7. When warp is finished, count and pick a lease.
8. Take the finished warp out of the frame.
a. Get the right tie yarn. b. Get the chain for cut marks.
c. Mark off the warp whenever the bell rings.
d. Tie up all breaks of yarn, making sure that the yarn is not crossed, ana
letting no loose ends run through.
e. Oil and clean machine and drums.
Form Psychograph
Name or Job: Eeamer
Department: Beaming
1. Energy
2. Rate of Discharge.
3. Endurance
4. Control
5. Co-Ordination A..
6. Co-Ordination B..
7. Initiative
8. Concentration. .. .
9. Distribution
10. Persistence
11. Alertness
12. Association
13. Discrimination V.
A.
T.
Space.
Form.
14. Accuracy
15. Memory V
A
K
16. Understanding. . .
17. Observation
18. Planfulness
19. Intelligence
20. Intellect
21. Judgment
22. Logical Analysis..
23. Language Ability.
24. Executive Ability.
Remarks
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 215
Nature and Conditions of Work:
Pav\S 7 to 5:30- Saturday from 7 to 12. Overtime
y egmning at .... per .... raised after .... to and after ... to ....
Piece rate
Tempor^y Permanent X Hot
pn?avy .... Light X Steamy
n?"Se .... Pine X Wet
C3, .... Clean X Dusty
n mg ^ Sitting .... Routine
^0lsy X Quiet .... Varied X
^ Manual labor .... Illumination good
Lif+^m^ ^ Clerical .... Ventilation fair
Pnli-11^ -X- Operative X Cement Floor X
p X Mechanical .... Wooden Floor ....
j S,.ln& .... Counting iX Wet Floor
.S .... Tying weaver's knot.
^r?ni the noise overhead, looms.
clUnes used?Beaming machine, drums, and rack or center piece.
w ,rriJIE To Learn and Nature of Training: Can do fair work in a few
year ?n e&Sy *'ob he lias lia(i sufficient yarn experience. Usually takes a
^ more to become a good beamer.
or f 0M0ti0N from splitting, counting to
r?m helping drawers-in
Allied Jobs: Splitting and gassing.
Advantages: Steady work and clean, and good pay.
Disadvantages: All standing; requires exactness and care.
emarks: Considered one of the good jobs of the industry.
Name of Job: Weaver Department: Weaving
Race^^f1"* ^>.re^erre<i age from 22 to 30 Age limits from 20 to ....
anu nationality White No. persons on this job ....
Qualifications :
NToneatl?nal Pllysical Mental Special
Read v ffei.ght -. Right or L. handed .... Co-Ordination A 5
Write ^ Weight .... Exactness of movem't X Distribution 5
Add & q i N Power .... Quickness of movem't X Discrimination V 5
Prar>t^ ? Endurance X Space Discrimina-
tions ....Eyesight good tion 5
Form Discrimina-
tion 5
?x . Observation 5
Person0]1'06 rec^u*re^ Experience desired
na ity Carefulness; patience; reliability;
^ Duties :
U^hook^?^^^n s^u^e anc^ P11^ ^ie yarn through with the shuttle
U^and s'lu^^e."1t? the right box; and when that shuttle is empty, load it
put it into the box again, passing the yarn through part or all of
tve^vin ^ 3S ma^ accor<^nS *? ^ow ^ar yarn has gone in the
6 t>F breaks yarn, making sure to thread the yarn properly through
Take ^ r?^ w*re> heddle and split (of the reed).
5. Make^0 ex*ra ends, winding them on a ball or on the beam.
_. e cuts at the proper places, and start the cloth winding on beam
again.
216 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
a. Oil and clean machine.
b. Rip imperfect weaves caused by loose ends getting into the sheds and drop
wires failing to drop. Then turn back the pattern chain to the right box
to make the pattern come out right, and start up again.
c. Adjust tension by weights.
Nature and Conditions op Work:
Hours from 7 to 5:30. Saturday from 7 to 12. Overtime
Pay beginning at .... per .... raised after .... to .... and after .... to ....
Piece rate
Temporary .... Permanent X Hot
Heavy .... Light X Steamy
Coarse .... Fine X Wet
Dirty .... Clean .... Dusty
Standing X Sitting .... Routine
Noisy very Quiet .... Varied ^
Form Psychograpii
Name of Job: Weaver
Department: Weaving
1. Energy.,
2. Rate of Discharge.
3. Endurance
4. Control...'
5. Co-Ordination A...
6. Co-Ordination B...
7. Initiative
8. Concentration. .. .
9. Distribution
10. Persistence
11. Alertness
12. Association
13. Discrimination V. .
A. .
T. .
Space..
Form. .
14. Accuracy
15. Memory V
A
K
16. Understanding...
17. Observation
18. Planfulness
19. Intelligence
20. Intellect
21. Judgment
22. Logical Analysis.. ,
23. Language Ability..
24. Executive Ability.
Remarks
Walking X Manual labor .... Illumination good
Stooping X Clerical
Lifting .... Operative
Pulling .... Mechanical
Pushing .... Counting
Ventilation fa*r
Cement floor ---
Wooden floor X
Wet floor
Jerking .... Great many details to be watched
Machines used?Weaving machine and appliances or parts.
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA
Time to Learn and Nature of Training.
Promotion from No plan, to
Allied Jobs: Beaming is a bit similar.
Advantages: Big pay, interesting work. v noisy.
Disadvantages: Requires great skill and ene gj,
Remarks:
Name op Job: Qniller Department: Cotton Wimiing
Sex Female. Preferred age from 18 to 22 Age 'in"^s this j0b 15
Race and nationality White American born iso. peisons
Qualifications: ? . ,
Educational Physical Mental Distribution 5
.... Height (B) Right or L. 1handed -- " ? 5
Rearl -v ttt ?1,1 F-vnptness of movem t A jrer^ibtt:
nead X Weight ....Exactness u x Observation 5
^ rite X Power .... Quickness o Co-Ordination A 4
^d & Sub. ....Endurance X Discrimination V. 4
Fractions .... Eyesight good
Form Psycho graph
ame of Job: Quiller
Department: Cotton Winding
1. Energy
2. Rate of Discharge
3. Endurance
4. Control _
5. Co-Ordination A.
6. Co-Ordination B.
7. Initiative
8. Concentration. . ?
9. Distribution
10. Persistence
11. Alertness
12. Association
13. Discrimination \?.
A.
T.
Space.
Form.
14. Accuracy
15. Memory V
A
K
iy. Intelligence
20. Intellect.. -
01
Understanding.
g ass?.
22 TU(^?ment
23 ^?Sical Analysis
24' r;anguage Ability. ..
? Executive Ability
xx
XX
Remarks
Alertness . ^
Experience desired?any work with
Experience required?none
ers?nality?patience; carefulness
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Duties :
1. Twist in the new warp to the old one.
2. Set the guides right.
3. Keep the warp straight and see that the ends are running on properly.
4. Doff, i. e. take off the bobbins.
5. Put on new bobbins.
a. Oil and clean machine.
b. Straighten out ends with a big lease.
c. Put on new bands whenever needed.
d. Take out tangles and twists of the warp.
e. Take out tangles of the yarn and smashes against the reeds.
f. Watch for double ends; remove and tie over if any occur.
g. Make sure that the machine is regulated properly.
Nature and Conditions of Work:
Hours from 7 to 5:30. Saturday from 7 to 12. Overtime None.
Pay beginning at .... per .... raised after .... to .... and after .... to ....
Piece rate
Temporary .... Permanent X Hot
Heavy .... Steamy
Coarse .... Fine very Wet
Dirty .... Clean X Dusty
Standing X Sitting .... Routine
Noisy X Quiet .... Varied
Walking X Manual labor
Stooping X Clerical
Lifting .... Operative
Pulling X Mechanical
Pushing .... Counting
Jerking .... tying knots.
Machines used?Quilling machine
Illumination fair
Ventilation fair
Cement Floor X
Wooden Floor X
Wet Floor
Time to Learn and Nature of Training: Helper for 2 weeks, twisting
in twisting char, etc. can learn in 3 months, may become a fair operator in 6
months.
Promotion from skein winding sometimes to
Allied Jobs: Skein winding.
Advantages: Good pay, clean work.
Disadvantages: Mostly standing work; requires careful, constant ap-
plication.
Remarks: Preferably medium height or over. This quilling is on various
colored yarns. Quilling in mercerizing department is all white yarn; and
almost always much heavier yarn in mere, dep't.
Name of Job: Spooler Department: Mercerizing
Sex Female. Preferred age from 18 to 23. Age limits from 16 to ....
Race and nationality White No. persons on this job 24
Qualifications:
Educational Physical Mental Special
None .... Height .... Right or L. handed .... Control ^
Read .... \\ eight .... Exactness of movem't X Co-Ordination B 4
Write X Power .... Quickness of movem't X Distribution
Add & Sub. X Endurance .... Observation ^
Fractions .... Eyesight good
Experience required?none Experience desired?work with yarn
Personality?patience; carefulness. /
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 219
Duties :
Put on new spools.
2. Boat the skeins straight and put them on the machine.
3- Find the proper ends of yarn and start them winding on the spools.
4- Get the guides.
0- Regulate the tension.
7 ^ie swifts evenly according to the lengths of the hanks,
rv ' e' take the spools.
Oil and clean the machine.
b- Tie the weaver's knot in all breaks. _ nnasihle
c. Handle the breaks and tangles as quick y . P " . rimning as much
d. Keep the skeins running straight, and keep the machine running
of the time as possible.
Form Psyciiograph
Name of Job: Spooler
Department: Mercerizing
i' ?nergy
? f^ate of Discharge.
? Endurance
Control
<?' Co-Ordination A...
7 Co-Ordination B...
? initiative
? Concentration
in i?lstrib"tion
Persistence
:*? Alertness
Association
Discrimination V
A
A.
T.
Space.
Form.
Accuracy..
Memory V
A
17 Fj^erstanding. . .
10' Observation
10 ^an^uliiess
2o" intelligence
f- Intellect
2?" |ud?ment
j/ ^gical Analj'sis..
94 ^;anguage Ability.
? Executive Ability.
Remarks
Nature and Conditions of Work:
p.,?,U\S t'rom 7 to 5:30. Saturday from 7 to 12. Overtime None.
. egmniiig af- raised after .... to .... and after to
5,leee rate
emporary Permanent X Hot
Coarse ~ ^?ht 5 wT^
Dj t ? Fine A Wet
y,. .... Clean X Dusty
tandmg x Sitting .... Routine
1Sy .... Quiet .... Varied
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Walking X Manual labor .... Illumination good
Stooping X Clerical .... Ventilation good
Lifting X Operative X Cement Floor ?-
Pulling X Mechanical .... Wooden Floor ^
Pushing   Counting   Wet Floor
Jerking .... Tying weaver's knot
Not quite so noisy as right in the coning department but it is near coning.
Machines used?Spooling machines
Time to Learn and Nature op Training: Can learn in a few weeks by
actual practice, as soon as the weaver's knot is learned.
Promotion from    to quilling or weaving-
Allied Jobs : Reeling.
Advantages: Steady work and pay and not heavy.
Disadvantages: Standing nearly all the time.
Remarks:
Name of Job: Coner Department: Coning (Mercerizing)
Sex Female. Preferred age from 17 to 22 Age limits from 15 to ....
Race and nationality White No. Persons on this job 88
Form Psychograph
Name of Job: Coner
Department: Coning (Mercerizing)
1. Energy
2. Rate of Discharge.
3. Endurance
4. Control
5. Co-Ordination A..
6. Co-Ordination B..
7. Initiative
8. Concentration. .. .
9. Distribution
10. Persistence
11. Alertness
12. Association
13. Discrimination V.
A.
T.
Space.
Form.
14. Accuracy
15. Memory V
A
K
16. Understanding
17. Observation
18. Planfulness
19. Intelligence
20. Intellect
21. Judgment
22. Logical Analysis..
23. Language Ability.
24. Executive Ability.
1
Remarks
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 221
Qualifications :
|d"cational Physical Mental Special
gg ? ?- Height ....Right or L. handed .... Co-Ordination A 4
\\Tpix X Weight ....Exactness of movem't XObservation 4
a J,! ep X Power ....Quickness of movem't X
?aa & Sub. .... Endurance O
Fract
i?ns .... Eyesight good
Experience desired?any work with
yarn
Experience required?None
ersonality?Carefulness; patience.
Duties :
1- Change the cones.
? Start the yarn winding on the cones.
Lay out the bobbins.
^rpy ou^ the empty bobbins.
,a' up all breaks with weaver's knot.
? Clean dirty and oily cones.
^|earL and oil the machine.
u- Keep track of set vara at the machine, so as not to mix them.
. Keep all the cones winding in uniform size if possible, but keep all cones
Winding all the time.
Important to watch the work all the time.
Nature and Conditions of Work:
Hours from 7 to 5:30. Saturday from 7 to 12. Overtime None.
"ay beginning at .... per .... raised after .... to .... and after .... to ....
Piece rate
Temporary Permanent X Hot
Heavy Li ht X Steamy
Umrse pine X Wet
!?+irt3' ...; Clean X Dusty
standing X Sitting .... Routine
^0lsy X Quiet Varied
Walking X Manual labor
too "
Lift
Stooping X Clerical
Illumination good
Ventilation good
Lifting" " Operative X Cement Floors
Pullincr ? Mechanical .... Wooden Floors X
Pushing Counting .... ^et F1?
Jerking " Tying weaver's knots
achines used?Coning machine
Time to Learn and Nature of Training: It takes but a short time to
earn a^ter the weaver's knot is learned. ?ii;.,,
Promotion from   to cone illsPector 5 or t0 ^ ?
or weaving departments.
Allied Job:
Advantages: Steady work and not very heavy. _ , ? ?
Disadvantages: Noise of the machines in the room is somewhat trying
011 nerves.
Remarks:
222 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
PART 4
CONDITIONS OF WORK
Spinning and weaving mills require large capital, most of
which is invested in machinery. These machines are much more
complex, and necessitate a larger cycle of movements from the
operator than machine tools. The effect on the type of labor
required in the industry has been that only those individuals can
be used who are intelligently self-directed. Textile machine-tending
is not monotonous, but has a definite routine.
Because most of the mills of the industry operate on a large
scale, there is little possibility of a worker rising in the ranks and
acquiring sufficient capital with which to become a mill owner. Or
if he could acquire the money, there is little possibility that he will
have acquired a knowledge of all the manifold phases of manu-
facturing. Younger mill owners, as a body of men, have been
trained in technical schools outside their own mill, though many
old-timers have been raised in the business.
All the conditions above mentioned combine to make the mill
owner, as a class, distinct from the worker, which is a situation
favorable to the formation of strong Manufacturers' Associations.
Such very strong Associations exist in the cotton and wool trade
in the textile industry. These Associations have consistently op-
posed unionization of workers and with much success. Some plants
have it as a definite policy not to employ any union labor at all*
other plants will employ union men '' as long as they do not stir up
trouble," and a third group resorts to the use of so called "labor
spies" to weed out the trouble maker. This has led to ill feeling
and sometimes to rioting.
Among the workers themselves there is nothing like unity-
Over 800,000 are unorganized workers and a Babel of small in-
dependent unions have organized the remaining 100,000 workers.
Besides the strong opposition of the Manufacturers' Association
there are other important factors which have retarded unionization-
These are the large number of women and adolescent workers em-
ployed, the utilization of newly-arrived immigrants, and the at-
titude of many old members of the craft union who will not
organize in trade or industrial unions. Two main union groups
exist in the industry. They are the United Textile Workers, who
are amalgamated with the A. F. of L. and the so-called Inde-
pendent Unions, now loosely joined together in an Association
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 223
known as the Federated Textile Unions of America. Four of these
Independent Unions" are located in Philadelphia. These aie The
Tapestry Carpet Weavers, a strong union of skilled workers; the
Bearners and Twisters, the Turkish Towel Weavers and the Ait
Square Weavers Union. In addition, the Amalgamated Brussel
Carpet Association has a good organization consisting of skilled
Workers.
The most recent points of dispute between the workers and
the mill owners in the industry has been over hours of work and
rates of pay. The hours of work customary in the average mills
vary, few strictly adhere to an eight-hour day. In many mills the
hours average between nine and ten. Thus, the discussion is cen
tered around the establishment of a forty-eight-liour week as
?Pposed to the fifty-four-hour week, though in a few cases a more
^an fifty-four-hour has been the rule.
An analysis made of the table of wages and employ ment 01
Third Federal Reserve District reveals the fact that since the
war the wages received by the various trades grouped under texti e
Products has been consistently below the average for all the in-
dustries included in the survey. The following table makes this
Point graphic.
Weekly Wage for the Month of
March Nov. Dec. No.
1923 1923 1023 Employed
All Industries*  501 $25.39 $26.45 $27.01 201,646
Textile Products:**   21-63 21,80
Carpets and Rugs   14 28.09 28.02 27.15 4,104
Cotton Goods   17 22.57 23.17 24.39 7,115
Knit Goods   26 20.78 29.75 27.85 5,750
Silk Goods   37 18.73 19.16 19.02 12,922
Worsted & Woolens   24 23.07 21.82 21.77 19,827
In interpreting these figures regularity of employment and
Proportion of unskilled, semi-skilled, and skilled labor must be
considered. In the cotton goods group it can be said that upon
^_^J^hole, the employment is steady, in many jobs there being
*A11 Industries includes Metal Products, Food Products, Building Ma-
J^ls, Boots and Shoes, Leather, Chemical and Paints, Cigar and Tobacco,
p rniture, Musical Instruments, Paper and Pulp, Printing and Publishing,
t' oleum Refining, Rubber Tires and Goods.
** The figures for Clothing and Hats, Felt and others, included under the
extile group under the table issued by the Federal Reserve Bank of Phila-
e Phia have been omitted.
224 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
no seasonal fluctuation at all, though the seasonal irregularity of
employment varies from shop to shop with the efficiency of manage-
ment in proportioning work and manufacturing alternate lines.
The majority of the operations in this group require unskilled
labor and semi-skilled labor, few highly skilled labor. In the fn'st
group the wages received vary between $12 and $16; in the second
group, which is the largest, it varies between $17 and $30; and m
the third group, between $31 and $75 and includes such jobs as
Loom Fixer, Weaver, Designer, and Department Foreman. ^T?
figures can be given for a specific job, except to classify it undei
one of the three groups, because the duties in each job vary with
the amount of specialization, the kind of machinery utilized and
the system of pay: day rate, piece rate, the task and bonus
system, etc.
PART 5
OPENINGS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
Every boy entering the trade is called a "learner" and he is
ususally assigned to some manual task as trucking cones or
spindles, or carrying beams; or he may be assigned to one of the
few simple machines such as the "Sewing Machine." This system
has some definite advantages. First, the boy by reason of the
roaming nature of his duties is given an opportunity to observe
operations in a majority of the departments. He can elect to g?
into the cloth making or weaving as distinguished from the winding
or spinning phase of the trade. Or he may decide to enter the dye
house which is non-mechanical and distinct from the machine
processes.
The first job of girls may be as menders, though this is begin-
ning at a high level, or as record keepers, but usually it is as
members of a doffing crew. Opportunities arise to help out on
some machines, and finally the learner becomes an operator. It is
true that both boys and girls who once have been transferred to a
regular operation tend to remain there. Job specifications have
been so little used and other systems of promotion been so little
developed that no regular avenues of promotion from job to job, or
to other departments exist. Such promotions are generally made
only when asked for by the employee and then constitute in the
main "transfers," and not real promotions. Thus, a Quiller may
decide that he prefers to work in the Dye House. If the super-
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA
intendent is willing, when a vacancy occurs he will b _ .g ^
The only knowledge upon which this trans er? .i ^ and
worker's "steadiness," his service recor wi ^ Worker is
Perhaps the additional knowledge that a relative
in the Dye House and will help him "learn.
PART 6
training
TRAINING ^ ^ j^self
For the majority of workers train"1^ ^roceSs as a helper
and the method is to observe, then to ^voi ~ ^ an^[ finally to
and gradually solve all the possibilities o . ^ itself there is
take charge of the operation. "Within ie^ ^ -0^ to another
usually no progressive training course 10 ^.mate amount of
*n a different department. Therefore, often depends upon
Wages which the individual worker wi , t ent into which he
the size and the relative importance of the departme
chose to come as a learner. an in a department and
Generally, the most experience m jn many mills,
oldest in point of service becomes its < ? ^ ^ yovmger
however, this type of foreman is ^}?1^.SU^e Philadelphia district
graduate of a technical school which m ^ Formal training
is known as "The Philadelphia Textile Sc
?f a sort is given to foremen. ^ foremen has been formed
In Philadelphia an association o foremen in discussion
and has done good work in bringing o&e . personnel or-
groups to consider technical theory, s op organized for-
ganization, and labor economics. Some p an ^ securcd the
man training courses for their own employees an
services of university professors to teac eir progressive
For the most part, then, there > no "Workers in the
training in the mill, and for the majority process,
industry there is no possibility of a con^nU , possibilities in the
Therefore, to attract an ambitious boy by
textile trade, it is neeessary to make dear that many- ?lto* P
pay the tuition expenses of the most P?'- * in its
Philadelphia Textile Schooh college
night courses. But in its day
graduates, some high school graduates. training embracing
This school gives a three-year ?n?e * paration
the study of all textile raw materials and the,r mitial piep
226 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
for fabrics, including spinning, dying, weaving, and finishing of
cotton, woolen, jute, and silk goods, including also a study of the
best types of machinery for their production. Naturally, this
course is broader than that for ordinary apprenticeship, vigorously
affecting the domain of the superintendent, general manager,
merchant, and capitalist. The fundamental principle on which its
methods are based introduce the atmosphere of the mill, bringing
the student face to face with practical problems, on the satisfactory
solution of which his success as a worker and later as an executive is
sure to depend. Instead of training the student to be a textile
engineer, the student's progress is measured by his ability to do
real work, judged by economic as well as technical and artistic
standards.
PART 7
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES TO BOY AND GIRL ENTERING
THIS AS COMPARED WITH OTHER TRADES
Advantages :
1. The textile industry has a strong stable organization in
all its branches except the Knitting and the fabrication of Men's
Clothing. This means for the boy or girl in the industry
assurance of regular employment at a standardized task with in-
frequent lay-offs and interruptions.
2. It offers opportunity for furthest ultimate advancement
to those boys and girls who have not attained a high level of in-
tellectual standing as measured by school progress.
3. There are no dangerous operations, conditions of work are
good, and there is no industrial disease.
4. The work is mechanical and is better described by the word
"routine" than by "monotonous."
5. The elements of each process are interesting enough to
inspire the worker's interest and fire his imagination. These ad-
vantages can be contrasted with the adverse conditions which exist
in many industries which are dangerous to life and limb, involve
the possibility of industrial disease and which are unorganized and
offer irregular employment at monotonous jobs and an unequal
wage.
Disadvantages:
1. Mills in the textile industry require extensive capital and
there is little possibility of a worker becoming an owner.
THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN PHILADELPHIA 227
2. There is no regular system of training in the mill and
??r the average worker knowledge must be gathered on the job or
by observation while the worker is "learner."
3. The executive jobs, including that of foreman, are held b>
ttien trained outside of the industry and such training cannot be
given to all textile workers. Therefore, a comparatively long
Period of training is required for the better jobs in the industry.
Lack of unionization.
PART 8
SUMMARY
1. Spinning and weaving are the two primary principles of
^e textile industry. The most important fibre spun is cotton and
the most important product is cloth. The textile industry has had
a long history and an extremely rapid development since t le
industrial Revolution which has continued to the present day.
2. In the United States the textile industry leads all others
111 value of its products, and the leading textile city m the United
States is Philadelphia.
3. To-day the textile industry is highly mechanized and
specialized, and in the cotton branch has developed a number o
standard operations a description of which gives some clue to the
kind of workers required.
4. Spinning and weaving mills require large capital, and
there are few chances of a worker ever becoming a mill ownci.
Strong Manufacturers' Associations exist in both the cot-
ton and wool division of the industry. These have consistently
^ought labor unionization. Heterogeneous racial groups, utiliza-
tion of women and immigrant labor and the superior attitude of
^raft Unions has prevented any appreciable amount of unioniza-
tion among the workers.
The question of hours of work is unsettled, and there is
110 standardized procedure for arriving at wages or wage rates,
iowever, regularity of employment is the general rule.
7. Boys and girls enter the job as learners and are promoted
uP?n such factors as satisfaction they give on the job, regularity of
attendance and length of service, but there are no regular piomo-
tlon avenues.
8- To the majority of workers, training is upon the job itself.
?rmal training of a sort is given to foremen. An association of
228 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
foremen exists which brings foremen of a different class together in
discussion groups; some plants have organized foremen training
courses for their own employees utilizing outside instructors. The
executive positions and most highly skilled jobs in the Designing
and Dyeing Departments are generally filled by men with long
years of experience or by younger graduates of the Philadelphia
Textile School or some other technical institute.
9. The advantages to a boy or girl entering a cotton spinning
and weaving mill?as opposed to a knitting mill?are regular
employment at a regular standardized task, the possibility of forg-
ing ahead in spite of deficient schooling, the absence of industrial
disease or hazard, and the interesting nature of most of the
processes.
10. The disadvantages to a boy or girl are the small possibility
of ever becoming an employer, the lack of unity and solidarity
among the workers, the absence of a regular system of training and
the length of service required usually for the best jobs.
11. A study of the spinning and weaving plant reveals the
typical nature of any job in the industry. These facts can be used
to an advantage in vocational guidance.
