Tests and Norms at a Six Year Old Performance Level
===================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1925, by Lightner Witnfer, Editor
Vol. XV, No. 9 / December, 1924
??

By Charlotte Easby-Grave, Ph.D
Clinic Teacher, The Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania
Six year old children exist, but the six year old child is an
abstraction, a hypothetical entity. Children are supposed to be
ready to enter the first grade of school at or about the time they are
six years old. However, were all children in the first grade over six
a&d under seven years, they still would not be a homogeneous
^oup, for each child is a particular individual who starts out in
life with an endowment of differentiated personality. How then,
it possible to define a six year level of competency ?
If we start with Dr Witmer's definition of human competency as "a measure of superiority which differentiates those
who are in a group from those who are not," we may define our
Problem as an attempt to determine, by certain standard tests,
which children really enter into the competitive event which opens
with enrollment in the first grade. It is not to be supposed that
^e six year level of competency begins with entrance into the first
grade or that it ends with promotion into the second grade. Children who are in the first grade of a number of Philadelphia schools
were selected for investigation as children at the six year old level,
because in this way we obtained a group of children, homogeneous
With respect to the conditions which determine their earliest official
admission to school-room competition with other children. The
chronological age of six years is the modal age acceptable to most
school administrators for first grade enrollment.

According to Learning1 the index of normal ability at the fifteen year level is "the minimum of proficiency acceptable to a unit
Member of the social group." Every individual is expected to be
1 Learning, Rebecca E. Tests and norms for Vocational Guidance at the
Fifteen Year Old Performance Level. Psychological Clinic, Vol. XIV,
1 QOo __
1922, p. 193.

262 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC

able at least to earn his living, marry, raise a family, and keep
out of an institution of social elimination.

On the other hand, at the six year level the criterion of competency is the child's congenital and potential ability to respond
to educational and other stimuli with some change of behavior
directed toward a definable level of social proficiency. The child
at this age level is presumably able to take care of himself physically. He is able to conform sufficiently to sit quiet for a stated
period of time. He is able to carry out a number of directions given
consecutively. He is for the first time required to pattern his behavior by a rule other than that of his family group. The first
grade child is therefore in the transition stage between a purely
egocentric and an alterocentric world.

PEOBLEM

The problem of this investigation, then, was to explore the
competency of first grade children. The approach to this problem
was, of necessity, twofold?both quantitative and qualitative. The
procuring of norms by a statistical treatment of the quantitative
results has developed as the only feasible means of presenting this
material for practical use, either by psychologists or educators. A
judgment of mental capacity eludes satisfactory expression in
words. The language available seems to be worn threadbare. Each
word connotes such a variety of meanings that the expression of
our judgments may easily be misinterpreted or garbled by others
to whom the terms carry an entirely different significance. It has
been necessary, therefore, to have recourse to a statistical presentation, since numbers or arithmetical expressions have a definite and
limited meaning. The deficiencies of such a method are plainly
evident. The tabular standards are inelastic. They can take no
account of external physical conditions, of possible poor physical
tone on the part of the subject, of psycho-pathic tendencies, of the
personality of the examiner, or of a hundred other individual differences. There is also the old quarrel as to whether mental capacity can even be explored by the limited means of mental tests, and
granting this, whether the results, statistically presented, can be
of any value. The second aspect of our study has been influenced
by a realization of the importance of the qualitative differences in
individuals, and a demand on the part of the school authorities
for some estimate of these, no matter how poorly expressed.

The battery of tests chosen was selected not so much with the
Purpose of standardization in mind, but because the tests were believed to form a part of a well rounded clinical picture of each
individual. These individuals were children taken from the regular first grades of the Philadelphia Public Schools. The school
authorities were naturally interested in the results from the point
?f view of individual educational treatment. The score made by
a child on any given test was important to them only as we might
express it to them in qualitative terms concerning the individual's
Cental endowment. They desired a diagnosis and a prognosis of
future progress. This younger group of children has not as yet
conformed so thoroughly to the social pattern as have older groups.
The possibilities of a qualitative study of this age level are many.
It would furnish, most of all, an excellent basis for preventive
measures in the mental field like similar modern developments in
the medical field. This preliminary study, therefore, though presented in statistical form, has included for the examiners an important qualitative aspect, and has developed the certainty that it
is along this line that further investigation should proceed.

THE GROUP

The group tested consisted of five hundred children in the
1 A and B grades. Of these five hundred, without selection, 256
were males, 244 were females. Thirty of the whole group came
from a private school, the other 470 are Philadelphia Public School
children.

Two of the public schools?one an annex of the other are in a
Neighborhood of small stores and markets. The schools are old and
in rather bad condition. Their groups of children come from poor
homes, mixed groups of colored and white. The families are, as a
^hole, of low social grade. Row houses of old fashioned construction provide poor ventilation and poor sanitary conditions.
The clothing of the children was shabby and unclean ill health a
common occurrence. The general aspect of most of the group convinced one of an environment of slovenliness and ignorance.
A third school is in a prosperous, middle-class neighborhood.
The building is new and well constructed?light, well ventilated
and sanitary. The majority of the children looked clean and well
fed, and their physical condition was better than that of the former
group. Their fathers were the employees of the Traction Com264 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
pany, skilled mechanics, storekeepers, etc. The houses were row
houses?as a rule, tidy and well ordered, with good plumbing, and,
in many cases, electricity.

The fourth and fifth schools are in an Italian quarter. They
are old buildings with only fair equipment, and almost no playground space. The atmosphere of the neighborhood is redolent of
the old country, the women with bright colored shawls and bandannas, snatches of Italian conversation, special Italian restaurants,
groceries, banks and clubs, a spirit of life, change and unrest. The
school office was the scene for the hearing of many complaints:
truancy, illness or tragedy at home, delinquency or mischievous and
malicious conduct, but always something happening. The children
were dirty, but rarely ragged. They were slow and so often lacking
in alertness that one suspected an unwise diet and irregular
regimen at home.

The private school is modernly equipped, has more than
adequate play space, and is so endowed that its staff of teachers is
excellent. The children come from the families of professional
and business men. Their environment and home training, as well
as their school advantages, are of the best.

These schools were not chosen with any other purpose than
that of their accessibility as to distance, and a willingness on the
part of the school authorities to receive us. The testing extended
over the academic years of 1922-23, 1923-24.

The conditions for examining were ideal only in the private
school. Here we had the use of a large, airy faculty room, quite
separated from the noise and bustle of the school. In two instances
the testing was done in the school office?a spot of manifold distractions. In another school we worked in a supply room, a narrow, dark place, subject to extremes of temperature, but fortunately
rather quiet and secluded. In two other schools, the testing was
carried on in the teachers' lunch room. The teachers were inclined
to conversation concerning the children and the tests?both of
which proved highly distracting.

SELECTION OF THE TESTS

This investigation was a "test experiment," not a "research
experiment," as Whipple2 distinguishes it. "The test has a diagnostic rather than a theoretical aim; its purpose is not to discover
- Whipple, Guy Montrose. Manual of Mental and Physical Tests, War*
wick and York, Inc., 1914, p. 1.

new facts, principles or laws for the science of psychology?though
such a result may indirectly be attained?but to analyze, measure
and rank the status or the efficiency of traits and capacities in the
individual under examination." In order to obtain a well rounded
picture of the '1 status" of each child, a number of tests were selected as a battery for this study. The three performance tests,
explorative of psycho-motor competency, included the Witmer
I'ormboard, the Witmer Cylinders and Young's Slot Maze A. The
^inet-Simon series provided a means of discovering social, environmental and informational background. The memory span test,
visual, auditory, reverse and learning digit spans, were an attempt
for an intellectual index. The school proficiency test involved the
child's evidence of educability and pedagogical conformity.

METHOD OF PROCEDURE

The method of procedure in examining a child of six years differs radically from that used with a fifteen year old child. The
greatest single difference lies in the time necessary for each subject. The testing of one six year old requires the full time of one
examiner. In addition to this, children at this age work slowly
and answer questions slowly. There must be no sense of hurry or
the child's whole performance is altered. He may grow excited
and careless, or he may grow shy and refuse to do any of the tests.
If the examining room is removed as far as possible from the distracting sounds of the school classroom, the testing always proceeds
more smoothly. The best of six year old children are highly distractable, and even the fact that two or three examiners are testing
other children in the same room frequently interferes with the
child's persistence of attention and efficiency. Usually three examiners work together; thus three children may be examined at
one time. The average period of each examination occupies fortyfive minutes to an hour. The school office furnishes cards which
give the child's name and address, his age in years and months, the
names of his parents, his own nativity and that of his father, and
the record of each year spent in the school grades. On the reverse
side of the card there is a record of the routine medical examination given to each school child. Each examiner is provided with
a form card on which to record information and time taken for the
tests, as well as with an analytic diagnosis sheet3 on which to make
judgments of abilities and defects, and to note any traits of per266 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
sonality observed. With these younger children, it is particularly
essential that the examiner have a sympathetic personality and
know how to make friends with children quickly. It is fatal to
laugh at any of the answers given to questions, as well as to attempt
to check any friendly confidences which the child offers, even if
they take extra time. We often found that a few minutes of conversation gave us the clue to a child's difficulties in school.
One examiner gave the Binet test and a test of school proficiency; another the Witmer Formboard and Young's Slot Maze
A, and a third gave the Witmer Cylinders, the auditory, visual and
reverse memory spans and the learning span. At least one analytic diagnosis chart was filled out for every case, and, owing to
the apportioning of the tests, almost every child was seen by three
examiners.

The first question asked of every case is "What is your name?"
This serves not only to identify the child with the proper card, but
is, in a sense, a test. The giving of a last name is placed by the
Stanford revision of the Binet test at the three year level, so that we
may expect all six year olds to be able to answer the question easily.
"Where do you live?"?on the other hand, is a more difficult question to answer, and the majority of six year olds failed to answer
it correctly. The cards provided by the school are used as a means
to prove the response. "What grade are you in?"?frequently
brings the answer, "Miss 's room." This answer is given full
credit. Questions as to race and nationality are checked up from
the card. The child is asked his age, but this is confirmed as to
exact age in years and months by the school card. Few six year
olds know their birthday month. The next question, "What does
your father do?what is his work?" elicits some of the most interesting as well as some of the most amusing responses. This query
usually leads the way to confidences about the child's life at home.
The necessary information as to the age at which the child entered
school and the number of years he has been in school is secured
from the card. Whenever scales and measuring apparatus were
available in the school, the child was carefully weighed and measured. In any case, even if exact measurement was impossible, a
judgment of physical type was made. This judgment was based
on a three point scale: 1?represents the anatomical and physical
3 See Humpstone, H. J., The Analytical Diagnosis, Psychological
Clinic, 1919, 12, 171-173, for explanation.
type which is thin, wiry, small boned and lightly muscled; 2?represents the average type in which height and weight are about equally
balanced; 3?is the heavy type, big boned and rugged. Health was
also estimated on a five point scale: 3?average good health,
4?above average, and 2?below; 1 and 5 represent the extremes:
1-?real illness, 5?a striking degree of vigor and robustness. With
all this information recorded, we now have a fair superficial background for each child, and can begin our examination with some
definiteness.

It is preferable to start the examination with the giving of the
Witnier Formboard. This test is standardized at the four year
fevel, and it may therefore be supposed that all six year olds will
solve it without much difficulty. Thus it serves to give the child
confidence, and make him feel that the examination is nothing
*aore than a series of games, at the first of which, he has already
demonstrated his ability. In addition to this, it gives the examiner
an excellent opportunity to estimate discriminability, co-ordination
and efficiency in the subject. The board is presented to the child
with the tray on the far side. The examiner says, Do you see all
these blocks ? I'm going to take them out and put them up here,
and I want to see how fast you can put them back. All right, now
Put them back just as fast as you can." During these directions
the examiner has taken the blocks out at random and placed them
in the tray. There is a five minute time limit, and if the child has
not succeeded in replacing the blocks within this time, his performance is considered a failure. If he replaces the blocks incorrectly and stops before the five minutes are up, he is asked, Is
that right?" If he does not then replace the blocks correctly,
failure is registered. In either case, he is next taught the solution
with the minimum of instruction and giveh a second trial with the
same time limit of five minutes. The directions are then, Let s
see if yon can do it much faster this time and use both hands.
The blocks are removed at random for this trial also. After completing the Formboard, the child is usually anxious to try the other
games" or "puzzles."

The Witmer Cylinders, standardized at the six year level, are
also given with a five minute limit for both trials. The examiner
gives the following directions: "Do you see how nice and smooth
all these blocks are on top, and how tight they fit? I'm going to
take them all out and put them in the middle, and I want to see
how quickly yon can put them back just where they belong."
While giving these directions the examiner runs his hand over the
top of the Cylinders to indicate their smoothness, and attempts to
rattle the block in its hole, an impossibility if the blocks are correctly placed. If the child fails to complete the test successfully
within five minutes, his performance is considered a failure. If he
stops before the time limit is up with the blocks incorrectly placed,
he is asked, '1 Is that right ?" If this question fails to call his attention to his errors, a failure is recorded. In either case, as with the
Formboard, the child is then taught how to solve the problem, with
the minimum instructions necessary. The directions for the second
trial, "Now I want you to try it over again, and see whether you
can do it much faster. Try to use both hands this time."

Young's Slot Maze A is the third performance test given. This
also requires two trials, each with a five minute time limit. The
directions are, "Do you see this little boy ? This is his shoe. The
boy wants his shoe. Now I want you to take it to him. See how
quickly you can take the shoe to the boy." These directions are
sometimes inadequate to make the child begin the test. The examiner then says, 1' Take the shoe to the little boy?find the right path.
He will get tired of waiting for it.'' If the child fails to complete
the test, the examiner takes the shoe back to the beginning and from
there guides slowly along the correct path to the boy, cautioning
the child to watch carefully. The subject is then given a second
trial, with the instruction, "See if you can take it to him faster
this time."

Tests are made of the visual, auditory, and reverse memory
spans, and of the learning span for digits. The usual Stoelting
digit cards are used. The visual span is usually tested first, with
the following procedure: "I am going to show you some numbers.
I want you to read them for me one by one, then I am going to cover
them up, and ask you what you read." If the child fails on a
series of digits, he is given another series of the same length. If
he also fails the second, he is given a trial at the next longer series.
If he fails this, we consider that the first failure showed the true
limit of his span. In giving the auditory span, the examiner says,
"Now this time, I am going to read you some numbers. I want
you to listen very carefully and when I am through I want you to
say just what I said.'' The same procedure is followed as with the
visual span. "When the limit of the span is reached, the examiner
repeats the series one higher than the auditory span until the child
is able to give it correctly. If the number of repetitions is over
ten, the test is marked failure and dropped at once. This is the
learning span. The concept of reverse span is too difficult for a
great many six year olds, and the examiner drops the test rather
than lose the child's co-operation by too many repetitions. The
procedure in giving the reverse span is to say to the child, "Now I
want you to say some numbers backward, that is, if I say 1-3, you
will say 3-1, do you see? Just the opposite of what I say." If the
child still fails to get the idea, the examiner may say, "Well, supPose I said 2-4, what would you say?" If the child hesitates, say
"4?and what was the other number?" Then another series is
given, and so on until the limit is reached, two series of the same
number of digits being given in case of failure.

The starred tests of the Terman Revision of the Binet Simon
Series are used. The usual procedure is followed in giving these
tests, except in the case of foreign children, when simpler wording
is substituted.

We know the child's grade and we often have the teacher s
rating also, but in order to complete our picture, a short test of
school proficiency is given. The reading tests consist of reading
from the child's own reader on a page which has not been studied.
The child is asked to read four or five lines, and is then checked by
naming individual words as they are pointed out. Here, as in every
test of school proficiency, the method of scoring is extremely unsatisfactory. There is no set criterion by which the reading may
be judged; the grading is therefore entirely relative. It is unfair
to expect a first grade child to read a new page with no help at all.
The difficult question is the determination of how much help the
child shall be given, and still be considered to have passed the
test. The judgment up to this time has been made arbitrarily.
The only hope of uniformity lies in the fact that nearly all the
school proficiency tests were given by the same person. The test
?f arithmetic proficiency was more satisfactory. The subject was
asked to count to fifty by one's, to twenty by two's, to fifty by
five's, and to one hundred by ten's. He was also asked to give
simple plus combinations within ten. If he failed to count by two s,
?r failed in some of the combinations, he might still be given credit
for arithmetic proficiency. All 1 B pupils were asked to write
their names, and were accredited with writing proficiency if the
name was legible even though quite imperfectly written. The 1 A
children were also asked to Avrite their names, but if they were
unable to do so, were given credit if they conld copy the printed
letters A, B, C and D with some facility. A spelling test was attempted during the first few examinations, but the majority of
the children proved to have had no real spelling drill and to have
picked up very little incidentally. The school proficiency tests
were all scored by a plus or minus judgment, with no qualifying
term such as good, fair or poor.

The five hundred individual examinations given with this procedure covered a period of several months. I was present at these
examinations and was assisted by members of the Clinic Staff and
by a group of students who had received thorough theoretical training in testing, and were anxious to gain practical experience. The
work of these students was carefully supervised, and the students
were chosen with a consideration of their accuracy, personality
and natural aptitude. The staff members assisting included Dr.
Rebecca Learning, Margaret C. Brooke, Kathryn D. Ewart; the
graduate students, Mrs. Helen W. Brown, Eleanor Bachman, and
Yale Nathanson. The undergraduates included Mary Ambler, Harriet Deacon, Beatrice Green, Beatrice McCully, Catherine Riggs,
and Sanders McComsey. A number of these students were able to
assist with the investigation only a very short time.

DATA OTHER THAN" TEST RESULTS

The information concerning the nationality of the father,
which was obtained from the school class card, furnishes us with
only a superficial picture of the probable traditions of the children's
family. The following table is a percentage classification according
to nationality.

Percentage Nationality Percentage Nationality
54.0 United States .4 Armenia
23.0 Italy .4 Scotland
10.0 Russia .4 Prance
3.0 England .4 Rumania
2.8 Germany .4 Denmark
1-4 Austria-Hungary .2 Greece
1-2 Poland .2 Czecho-Slovakia
?8 Ireland .2 Finland
?6 Sweden .2 Norway
?4 Japan
Of the 54 per cent reported born in the United States, a large
number were Jews who spoke Yiddish at home and retained many
of the customs and much of the foreign tradition of the previously
immigrating generation. Two and one half per cent of the native
born are negroes. This percentage is so small that the results are
little influenced by it. The small proportion of children of Irish
parentage is significant. Their names, however, show that many
were of Irish extraction, but the immigration is that of a previous
generation.

The children of Italian born parents form 23 per cent of the
total group. A special report of 100 of these cases, their peculiarities and distinctions, is being prepared by Kathryn D. Ewart.
The remaining 23 per cent is divided with a wide scattering
among different nations. Owing to the large number of Italians
examined, the foreign born group is predominantly of South European stock. It is most interesting to note that out of an ordinary
public school group 46 per cent have at least one parent of foreign
birth. In many cases, neither parent was American. Since it was
impossible to secure accurate information on this subject, however,
no account was taken of it. These figures suffice to show how largely
education must also include Americanization, if we are to have one
set of standards for all school children.

The effort to discover the father's occupation was only partially successful, since our only source of information was the child
himself. Twenty-seven and eight tenths per cent were unable to
answer the question, "What does your father do, what is his
work?" The remaining 72.2 per cent answered at least well enough
for the examiner to interpret and record the occupation. Taussig s
five point scale classification has been used for the arrangement of
the results. Class V, the highest, includes professional men, business executives and secondary school teachers. Class IV is made
up of clerks, shop keepers, salesmen and elementary school teachers.
All skilled workmen are classified in the third division. Class II
consists of factory and mill workers doing the simpler types of
operation. Class I includes laborers and all totally unskilled, untrained manual workers. Of this group of five hundred, 5 per cent
were in group V, 10 per cent in group IV, 41.2 per cent in group
III, 11 per cent in group II, 5 per cent in group I, and the occupations of 27.8 per cent are unknown. The large percentage in
"roup III, the class of skilled laborers, is an interesting record.
This would indicate that the major part of the group is economically
well-to-do. It should possess an inheritance of good native wit or
intelligence, but little cultural background. The group is neither
preponderantly of a very low nor of a very high social order, but
represents the respectable, industrious, independent middle class?
the so-called "backbone of the nation."

DISCUSSION OF PERFORMANCE TESTS

Intelligence has been defined by Dr Witmer as the ability to
solve what for the individual is a new problem. If we are to test
this important item of the analytic diagnosis, we must therefore
conceive some problem which can be presented under clinical conditions. It must include enough elements of newness or strangeness to require some originality and adaptability for its solution.
To date, the most satisfactory clinical method is the use of performance tests. However, these do not only present the opportunity to evaluate the subject's intelligence, but one may also estimate other abilities or defects in mental capacity. It has been
said that to see a problem sometimes denotes higher intelligence than
to solve one. In this investigation, however, with its insistent demands for practicality, the successful solution of the various problems presented has been considered the criterion of intelligence. As
an index to psychomotor competency the mechanical tests are invaluable. From the behavioristic standpoint, they offer an opportunity to observe performance under specific conditions. It was
with these considerations in mind that the three performance tests
were chosen as a part of our battery, in the effort to present a
complete clinical picture of the first grade child.

Formboard

The Witmer Formboard4 has been standardized at the four
year level; that is to say, at the four year level, 50 per cent of children may be expected to complete the test successfully in five minutes. The Formboard proved to be satisfactory for the six year
level as well, though the problem it presents is apparently much
less difficult than the Witmer Cylinders. Two and six tenths per
cent of the five hundred first grade children examined failed to
complete the test in five minutes on the first trial. There were no
failures on the second trial. It was suggested by Dr Witmer that
the time limit should be lessened to one hundred seconds, in which
* Young, Herman H. The Witmer Formboard, Psychological Clinic,
1916, Vol. 10, No. 4.
TEE SIX YEAR OLD PERFORMANCE LEVEL 273

case there would be 10 per cent of failures on the first trial, and
2.6 per cent on the second trial. The shortening of the time to one
hundred seconds would be a distinct advantage to the clinician
from the point of view of the time necessary to complete an examination. The percentage of failure, although increased, is not large
enough to distort the results and make the procedure unsatisfactory.
Of the eleven blocks to be replaced, only four present specifically any marked difficulty to the competent first grade child.
These are the equilateral and isosceles triangles, and the diamond
and oblong hexagon. The two triangular blocks are placed next
to each other, so that they present a more striking difficulty than
if they were further apart. Placed further apart, they might be
solved entirely by chance. As it is, the particularization of this
part of the board, with the spaces in juxtaposition, must include
one as well as the other. The replacing of these triangles, therefore, requires a real discrimination. An error in this discrimination may not be a stupid error, but may be made because the child
is more impressed by the similarities of these blocks than by their
differences. It is believed by some psychologists that the perception of similarities is a higher intellectual operation than the
perception of differences. The arrangement in the Biiiet series of
the questions of differences at the seven year level and of likenesses
at the eight year level is based on this theory. The hexagon and
the diamond are placed one below the other, and present the same
problem of discrimination. Once having made the error, however,
since the board is self corrective, the majority of cases have no
trouble in replacing the blocks correctly. The feeling of satisfaction
displayed by the children on the successful completion of the Formboard test convinced the examiners of the wisdom of its selection;
not only as an opportunity to observe performance, to judge of
muscular co-ordination and control, discrimination, distribution of
attention, efficiency and trainability, but as a valuable adjunct to
that delicate adjustment called co-operation. The test is easy for
competent first grade children?perhaps too easy to be a real test
of intelligence?but with most young children success is a stimulus
to further satisfactory performance.

As in Dr Young's investigation there is a slight sex difference
in favor of the boys in each decile. Of the total, male and female,
4.6 per cent complete the test in less than thirty seconds on the first
trial, and 1.6 per cent complete it in less than twenty seconds on
the second trial. These percentages might be considered to represent the really superior performances as in contrast to the percentages of failures as truly inferior.

Cylinders

With the Witmer Cylinders, a six year level test, the percentage
of failure on the first trial proved to be 47.6 per cent, or nearly
50 per cent, as was to be expected. On the second trial the failures
dropped to 12 per cent. Here is a test which presents an adequate
problem for six year level intelligence. The eighteen rather finely
graduated cylinders differ in both diameter and height. A marked
degree of analytic concentration of attention or discrimination is
required if they are to be replaced correctly in five minutes. As
Paschal5 points out in his standardization, this test demands distribution of attention to a greater degree than any other test
standardized at the present time. The analytic diagnosis sheet
includes almost no item on which a judgment cannot be made from
observation of two performances on the Cylinder test. From the
qualitative point of view, therefore, this test was proved invaluable.
The aspect of the differences of performance displayed is impossible
to present in this report. In each examiner's mind, however, the
qualitative aspect far outweighed any quantitative score, as far as
individual diagnosis was concerned. A striking characteristic of
these first grade children is their slow rate of discharge. They have
apparently no concept of speed. They become either stubborn, or
entirely distracted by over urging to hurry. . As has been noted in
previous use of the test, the method of solution varies with age.
The younger children often increase the time taken by attempting
to put the smaller blocks away first. In many cases these little
children devote their attention to one recess at a time, trying block
after block and discarding them until the correct block is found.
The older child is more likely to pick up a cylinder and inspect the
various recesses until he finds the correct one, or replace the cylinder
by a series of trials and errors. The problem of the first trial is,
"How shall I fit these blocks into their places?" The problem of
the second trial is, '' How shall I fit these blocks in more quickly and
with less trouble?" Ten and four tenths per cent failed to solve the
5 Paschal, F. C. The Witmer Cylinders. Hershey Press Co., Hershey,
Pa., 1918.

test successfully on either trial. Of these failures 50 per cent were
boys and 50 per cent were girls. One and six tenths per cent solved
the problem on the first trial and failed on the second trial. This
figure indicates an element of chance in its solution as well as that
of other performance tests, although the percentage is small.
There is again a marked sex difference in favor of the boys, as
Paschal notes in his standardization. He explains this on the basis
of a difference in attitude and poise between the male and female,
which sets a different problem. Analytically, the test is by far the
most enlightening of the performance problems. Should it be
necessary to make use of only one mechanical test at this age level,
the Cylinders would prove of highest diagnostic value.

Maze

The Young's Slot Maze A test contributed one type of result
which neither of the above performance tests furnished so conclusively: a marked sex difference. Dr Young,6 in his preliminary
standardization of the test, noted this difference, a clear-cut superiority on the part of the boys. The statistics of this investigation
confirm his findings. In the decile divisions, the score of the boys
is higher in every division than that of the girls. A total of 11 per
cent failed on the first trial; of these 72.8 per cent were girls, and
only 27.2 per cent were boys; 7.6 per cent of the total group failed
on a second trial; of these 68.4 per cent were girls, and 31.6 per
cent were boys. A total of 4 per cent failed on both trials of the
Maze; 75 per cent of these were girls, and 25 per cent boys.
Aside from this marked sex difference of which Dr Young felt
he could make no satisfactory interpretation, the Maze test revealed
nothing which the other two mechanical puzzles did not show. The
construction of the test with its little sailor boy waiting for his toj
shoe is undoubtedly attractive and stimulating to a child's imagination. This might almost be considered a fault in dealing with first
grade children. It is difficult at times to determine whether the
subject is truly unable to solve the test, or whether he has merely
discovered in the shoe, the boy, and the devious path, a new plaything which he is reluctant to give up. He pushes the shoe into all
the blind alleys, goes back to the beginning, and repeats the same
Procrastination. There is a certain sphinx-like quality about chil8 Young, Herman H. Slot Maze A, Psychological Clinic, Vol. XIV,
N?s. 3 and 4.

dren of this age which renders uncertain the discrimination between
this play spirit and real inability to grasp the problem. Children
from four to eight years are, in the main, quite self-sufficient. They
have resources within themselves. They present an inscrutable exterior, which reveals nothing of the content of their minds. Too
much prodding or urging to complete a test or answer a question
makes many children retreat into their shells, or, at the other extreme, produces a confused and frightened excitement.
The method of solution of the test varies greatly with different
children. The girls are prone to go a certain distance successfully,
run into a blind alley, and then retreat to the beginning of the
Maze for a fresh start. Dr Witmer suggests that this difference in
method of attack is due to the feminine training which leads to a
return home in the face of any encountered difficulty. One might
carry this still further. The Maze, in a mild way, represents a
hazard which requires a certain spirit of adventure to surmount.
Boys prove to have this spirit of adventure but girls, trained to a
sense of caution which social usage has made necessary, are reluctant to push ahead without turning back to consider. The
poorer grade of children, both boys and girls, run into a blind alley
and are often satisfied to try for several minutes to force the shoe
through the solid wood to another slot. The test takes an appreciable amount of time to give; 28.8 per cent of the children took
three minutes or more to complete it the first time, and 18.2 per
cent took three minutes or over on the second trial. The Maze
gives an excellent opportunity to observe, according to Young,
"how long it takes the child to learn how to solve the problem of
delivering the shoe." "The second trial decrease in time is not the
result of increased efficiency in the physical manipulation of the
test." Dr Young made no attempt to teach the child the solution
of the Maze test after failure on the first trial. Our method of
teaching was entirely an experiment, tried without consultation
with the maker of the test. Seventeen per cent failed on the first
trial, and this percentage was reduced to 6.8 per cent on the second
trial by the method of teaching used, even though the latter seemed
rather difficult and left much to be desired. In many cases a
longer time was required for the second trial. This was not always
due to the fact that the first solution was pure chance. It was
often the result of the subject's seeking to discover some shorter
way to deliver the shoe than by the tortuous path traveled on the
first trial.

On the whole, the boys do better with the performance tests
than do the girls. Variation in age among first grade children
seems to have no bearing on successful solution of the problem.
The child's initial interest in the tests as games frequently makes
him inattentive to the directions, when they are being given to him.
Often he catches only one phrase of them, and perhaps, for this
reason, takes longer for the solution. The type of material represented by the Formboards is sufficiently unfamiliar to arouse the
curiosity of any normally responsive child.

Memory Span

As previously stated, four forms of the memory span test were
employed: the audito-vocal digit span, the visuo-vocal digit span,
the reverse and the learning spans. The frequency mode for the
auditory span was five digits, and for the visual span, four. In the
case of adults, the visual span is usually one higher than the
auditory. These first grade children are not so familiar with
numbers. The mere mechanics of reading and naming the numbers involve additional mental effort. This seems to be the only
explanation for the consistent result of an auditory span of one
more digit than the visual span. Young children are accustomed
to learning almost entirely through auditory and motor training.
The curriculum of most public schools is so arranged that until
the third grade or above, the major part of the- material given to
the children is presented in an auditory or kinajsthetic fashion.
The auditory span provides a speedy though somewhat rough
diagnostic measure. As Learning7 found with her group at the
fifteen year level, a high memory span is not always of the same
diagnostic significance. The high score may be due to "special
facility in using language, to echolalia, to the grouping of digits,
or unusually good visual or auditory imagery." In the six year
level group, a memory span of less than four has been considered
previously a marked indication of real mental defectiveness. Three
and eight tenths per cent of the children tested in this investigation
bad a span of three. None fell below three, except one little Italian
boy, who was so negativistic that it was impossible to get him to
give any span. The examiners were unwilling to call these children with a span of 3, feeble-minded. Ranged beside the rest of
the group, however, they do appear inferior or deficient. They
are not. always deficient in every test, but if a composite score
were to be made on all the tests, this group would fall into the
lower end of the distribution. It may be said, therefore, that an
auditory span of three given by a first grade child should make
the clinician suspect present or future retardation. In some cases,
of course, general poor physical tone may account for poor performances. Many of these children are of a physically infantile
type. The memory span test, acording to Humpstone,8 explores
associability. Associability refers to the " number of discrete perceptions associated in a single act of attention, and the combination
of the associated component parts of a single perception."9 From
the results, it is evident that it is necessary for a child to be able to
associate four or more discrete perceptions in a single act of attention in order to make satisfactory progress in school. For instance,
in learning to spell the word "play"?the child with a span of
only three must hear the letters repeated a number of times until
his learning span is reached, in order to grasp the four letters and
associate them. More repetitions will then be necessary in order
that he may retain permanently the "associated component parts."
This means that this child will always require more drill and more
time to learn than the child with a longer span.

The use of the reverse span proved little except that the concept of "reverse" was too difficult for such young children. Fortytwo and four tenths per cent of the children failed to give any
reverse span. A high reverse span did seem to signify a higher
intellectual level. It is more important at this age level than at an
older one, where the subject may be shrewd enough to know how to
"beat the game." The inability to give a reverse span did not necessarily denote a lack of intellectual development. The importance
of this span is, therefore, a positive rather than a negative matter.
The learning span?the number of repetitions necessary to
increase the auditory span one digit?brought very interesting results. Twenty-six and four tenths per cent failed to increase their
span after ten repetitions. To some extent this might be said to
show the constancy of the auditory memory span at this level and
age. On the other hand, it is more likely that it denotes a low
degree of trainability on the part of these children. Fifty-six and
8 Humpstone, H. J. Some Aspects of the Memory Span?a Study in
Associability. Psychological Clinic Press, Philadelphia, Pa., 1917.
8 Witmer, Lightner. Analytical Psychology. Ginn and Company.
six tenths per cent raised the span one digit on from two to six
repetitions. This gives a fair index of trainability for the group.
In giving this test we noted that little children quickly became
discouraged when they found that they were not succeeding in what
was asked of them. The greatest tact had to be exercised to encourage them to persist. The examiners felt that many children
failed because, after five or more repetitions, they really abandoned
all effort to succeed. First grade children possess little of the competitive spirit and cannot be roused on this score like older children.
The results of the four memory span tests confirm other investigations, in that no appreciable sex difference appears. The
length of the span in any of the tests seems somewhat dependent
on chronological age as well as mental development. If the six year
level may be considered the level of congenital competency then the
endowment of the six year old is the nucleus of all further development. "What seems to be increased capacity is nothing more than
proficiency, depending on the ability to organize and retain. It
is possible that the modal span of four to five obtained from children of the six year level is the true span, and the higher spans
secured from older children and adults are the result merely of
grouping or organization, and not a true span.

Binet Test

The starred tests of the Terman Revision of the Binet-Simon
series were used for two reasons: first, for the benefit of the school
authorities, to whom we sent reports; second, from the standpoint
of the social and environmental picture which they provide as a
background for qualitative judgments. The test is long and tedious to give, because of the number of questions and the slowness
with which young children respond. However, it does supply an
opportunity for several minutes' conversation with a child, which
serve to alter or confirm the preliminary diagnosis, which the
other tests furnish. As Dr Learning points out, a diagnosis based
on the Binet intelligence quotient alone is unwise and unjust.
Language ability is an overwhelming factor in success with the
tests. A high vocabulary score will carry the child to higher levels
and make it possible for him to try tests which he would not otherwise reach. A low vocabulary score, on the other hand, often
makes it necessary to slide down to a younger level for the basal
age. Not only is facility in the use of language necessary, but good
language comprehension is the basis of the whole series. A child
whose general level of competency is otherwise only mediocre often
scores a high intelligence quotient because his home training has
provided him with the sort of information necessary to answer the
majority of the Binet questions. The child of foreign born and nonEnglish speaking parents may present a much better general picture, and attain only a low intelligence quotient because of this
very lack of training, and not a lack of mental ability. However,
because of the fact that it does bring out these differences in social
background, training and language equipment, the series is a
valuable part of the array of tests.

Terman emphasizes the fact that the concept of mental age
does not mean that every normal individual acquires a certain
mental age at a corresponding chronological age. There is wide
variation among individuals. Though few of the children in this
investigation were weighed and measured, and only estimates of
physiological age were made, yet the examiners all felt that the
growth index of the subjects influenced their mental ages. Miss
Jones' results with her superior group seem to confirm this impression. The looseness of the term "six year level" is evident
from the range of chronological age covered?the youngest child
is four years eight months old, the oldest eleven years. The lowest
mental age is three years six months, and the highest ten years.
These results differ from Terman's, which showed a wider variation
of mental than of chronological age. The intelligence quotient range
is from 49 to 160. Sixty-five and four tenths per cent of the children examined obtained intelligence quotients of 100 or more. Only
1.8 per cent had an intelligence quotient of 70 or less, which Terman
defines as denotative of feeble-mindedness. This is contrary to
Dr Learning's results?she found her range of intelligence quotients
low. Our group shows a greater scattering; the intelligence quotients falling lower and going higher, 49-160, as opposed to her
results, 50-147. The explanation of their difference is clear. At
a younger age, the child has more opportunity for a high score, because the tests which he may try above his chronological age cover
a greater range. The fifteen year old has no tests above the eighteen
year or superior adult level open to him. With the starred series no
test of memory span appears until the nine year level, while at the
twelve, sixteen and eighteen year levels the forward or reverse spans.
or both, are tested. A specific deficiency in memory span is, therefore, not likely to lower the younger child's intelligence quotient.
In giving the Binet series, four substitutions of tests were
made. At the five year level definition of words (test 4) was used
instead of discrimination of weights (test 1). At year nine making
change (test 3) was substituted for discrimination of weights (test
2). This change was made because previous investigations had
demonstrated the fact that weights are a difficult piece of apparatus
to keep. They disappear frequently and need numerous replacements. At the five year level the child was asked his age instead
of giving the execution of three consecutive commands. This was
necessary because of the number of examiners working in the same
room. The distraction caused by one of the subjects walking about
the room to execute the commands made the giving of the tests
impossible. At the ten year level memory span, an alternate for
the sixty word test (test 6), was substituted as a time saving device.
Aside from these four changes the regular starred tests of the Terman Revision were used.

RESULTS ON INDIVIDUAL BINET TESTS

Age Plus Minus
^el 1 2 3 4 Test No. 12 3
IV
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XII
6 5 5 5 No. of cases 0 111
1 3 4 5 Test No. 13 4 5
59 58 57 58 No. of cases 12 4 1
2 3 4 6 Test No. 2 3 4 6
127 126 137 119 No. of cases 22 23 10 28
1 2 3 4 Test No. . 1 2 3 4
300 265 288 266 No. of cases 37 70 40 61
1 2 5 6 Test No. 12 5 6
"347 375 305 260 No. of cases 121 100 173 215
2 3 4 6 Test No. 2 3 4 6
"145 331 242 94 No. of cases 307 132 2I6 354
1 3 4 5 Test No. 13 4 5
28 29 39 47 No. of cases 325 306 312 313
1 2 5 6 Test No. 12 5 6
5 8 15 35 No. of cases 90 88 86 48
1 4 5 6 7 8 Test No. 1 4 5 6 7 8
0 0 1 2 4 2 No. of cases 3 22 21 17 19 6

ANALYSIS OF BINET TESTS
The results of an analysis of the individual Binet tests provide
some interesting data. The score of the majority of tests falls between six and eight years in the series. On either side of these
limits, there is only a scattering of results.

Year Six

At the six year level the most interesting fact observed is the
large balance on the plus side, only a small minority failing in any
of the tests. At this age level, in distinguishing the right from the
left, 89 per cent of the children given this test passed it successfully. However, only 65.8 per cent of the children in the investigation attempted it. Terman10 says that the distinction between right
and left "has a certain inherent and more or less mysterious difficulty." The group tested has a practical background and had
evidently mastered this distinction early, possibly in connection
with games or certain school activities. Test 2, finding omissions in
pictures, proved to be the most difficult at this level. The pictures
in themselves are open to criticism. The drawings are crude. The
child undoubtedly does not have a "perceptual familiarity" with
human forms of this sort. Some of the answers to the test were
amusing as indicative of the child's experience. A number of the
children remarked that the lady with no eyes had something wrong
with her face because it lacked powder and rouge. Other children
said that the lady with no arms was not dressed, the gown in the
picture being of such an old style that the children found it totally
unfamiliar. Test 3, counting of thirteen pennies, was next in simplicity to the discrimination of right and left. Again, the practical
background of these children has made them familiar with the
handling of pennies, and the necessity for rendering account of
money "spent at the store." Test 4, comprehension, was particularly significant in demonstrating the child's social orientation,
(a) "What is the thing to do if it is raining when you start to
school?" Our most common answer was "Run." Terman says
that '4 this answer may reasonably be scored plus, if it can be ascertained that the child is accustomed to meet the situation in this
way. The social status of the majority of our group convinced
10 Terman, Louis M. Measurement of Intelligence. Stanford Revision
and Extension of the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale. Houghton Mifllin Co.,
1916.

THE SIX YEAR OLD PERFORMANCE LEVEL 283

us that the most frequent answer was an intelligent response. Some
children replied with the special conditions imposed upon them at
the school; such as, "Go to the basement and leave my umbrella.''
(b) "What is the thing to do if you find that your house is on
fire?" The answers given to this question were not unusual; the
most common correct reply was "Call the firemen"; the most
common incorrect reply was "Cry." (c) "What is the thing to
do if you are going some where and miss your car 1'' The correct
answer, "Wait for another," was commonly given. One of the
more modern means of meeting the situation was the cool response,
"Call a taxi." Oddly enough, this remark was not made by a
private school child of well-to-do parents but by the son of a garage
mechanic. Many children said incorrectly, "Go home again," or
"Get lost."

Year Seven

At the seven year level approximately 75 per cent of those
given the test answered correctly the number of fingers on each
hand and both hands together. Terman believes that this throws
light on the child's spontaneous interest in numbers. The most
common failure is due to the subject's counting his fingers instead
of answering at once. Test 2, description of pictures, is an interesting one as a qualitative differentiation of imagination as well
as of home training, (a) The Dutch Home, for instance, brings
from the children of a low social order some such description as
this: the little girl is crying; she wanted to go out and her mother
hit her because she was mad;?or, the little girl is crying because
she is hungry and they have nothing to eat but bread, (b) The
River Scene was apparently less stimulating. Again, however,
surroundings to which they are accustomed influence the answers.
Some children had never seen a canoe, and knew nothing whatever
of Indians. One or two assumed that the "lady" was out with her
"boy friend," and being slightly frightened, the gentleman was
gallantly protecting her. (c) The Post Office picture brought a
number of interpretations, not mere descriptions. One child suggested that it was war time and that the men were reading about
a brave deed of one of the boys from the town. Frequently the
answer was: '1 They are reading the comics.'' The elaboration of
description varied widely with different children. It was not always those of superior competency who answered the questions
most satisfactorily. Test 5, the giving of differences, showed 60 per
cent correct. This test is highly significant when compared with
test 4 at the eight year level, the perception of similarities. A little
over 50 per cent answered these questions correctly. Four hundred
seventy-eight children were asked to give differences, and 458 to
give similarities. The perception of differences is generally conceded to be a simpler operation than the perception of likenesses.
E. Claparede says in an article "La Conscience de la Ressemblance
et la Difference chez 1'Enfant" that the child has only a small number of reactions. Our modes of action are infinitely less diverse
than our modes of feeling; thus a crowd of distinct objects will
raise analogous reactions. It is the shock between the too general
reactions and individual character of things which causes feelings
of difference. The child has more chances of being shocked by
unrecognized differences than by resemblances. The spontaneous
discovery of resemblances seems to offer more difficulty. M. Claparede ends by saying that that which responds to no need is not
perceived. Test 6, drawing of the diamond, was given to all the
children, regardless of whether or not they reached this age level
of the Binet test. Somewhat over 50 per cent of those given this
test as a part of the Binet series, passed it successfully.

Year Eight

The eight year level, test 2, counting backwards from 20 to 1,
proved difficult for about 53 per cent. This test appears to explore
training and not native ability in any sense. Terman regards it
as one of attention or prolonged thought control. If such be the
case, the percentage of failure could be explained by the high distractability of first grade children. Test 3, comprehension, again
fits in another portion of the sociological picture, (a) "What's the
thing for you to do when you have broken something which belongs
to some one else?" The majority of the children made the correct
suggestion of restitution or apology; the higher social class suggested apology more frequently, while the lower social strata recognized the old law of "an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,"
now the code of the streets. A great many of the colored children
answered "run," an instinctive expression of generations of such
training. A number of children answered "Go to jail," or "Get
locked up." Very few suggested mere confession, (b) "What is
the thing for you to do, when you are on the way to school and
notice that you are in danger of being tardy?" The word "late"
was substituted for "tardy." The answers to this question were
varied. Some children said, "Go home," and explained that lateness was marked in the same way as absence. A return home was
therefore an intelligent method of meeting the situation. Others
suggested getting in the '' late line''; some failing to get the exact
shade of the question, suggested going to the office for an excuse.
The predominant correct answer was "Run." (c) "What's the
thing for you to do if a playmate hits you without meaning to do
it?" Social training had a marked influence on the answers to
this question. The doctrine of the streets dictated, "Hit him
back." In some neighborhoods the instinctive defense reaction is
intelligent for purposes of self preservation, since hesitation might
often mean annihilation. The suggestion of pardoning the playmate was infrequent; the usual correct response was, "Do nothing,
go on playing." Test 6, the vocabulary, proved to be another
valuable qualitative test, and one which, according to Terman, explores the range of ideas.

Binet Vocabulary Analysis
No vocabulary?106 children
Gown   310 Copper   59 Ramble   0
Tap   209 Curse   236 Civil   1
Scorch   90 Pork   238 Insure   31
Puddle   288 Outward   38 Nerve   59
Envelope   348 Southern   12 Juggler   3
Rule   358 Lecture   14 Regard   0
Health   192 Dungeon   6 Stave   0
Eyelash   269 Skill   1 Brunette   2
Twenty-one and two-tenths per cent of the children were not
tested on vocabulary: i. e., their success did not carry them so high
in the series. The majority of children knew the word gown,
defining it most frequently as "something you wear to bed, a
nightgown." A common error was its definition as gallon.
Tap was apparently less well known. The chief correct association was with the game, "Tap on the finger." Scorch was a comparatively strange word, and was frequently misunderstood as
"squirt." Puddle was familiar. The failures occurred chiefly
among children in the congested downtown sections where puddles
seem to be rare. Envelope was well known, treading close upon
rule, which received the greatest number of correct definitions. The
meaning given for rule was an evidence of the specific training in
the first grade, "something to draw lines with," or "to measure
with." Only rarely was the more mature and abstract definition
of rule as a pattern of conduct given. Health, demonstrated the
effect of school influence in such definitions as "to be clean, to
drink milk and be fat, to brush your teeth every day." About
67 per cent knew the word eyelash. Of the first ten words, copper
was the least known. The only correct answers were either "pennies" or "wire." Curse was one of the words which was a part
of the vocabulary of the child of lower social status. Its definition
was usually "a bad word" or a "dirty word," but it often carried
with it additional explanations, which were enlightening or amusing. "The devil will get you if you curse" or "the priest will
scold you if you say that." Often a child did not realize what
was asked, but remained virtuously silent, believing that he was
being told to give an example. Some of the more bold even went
so far as to supply the example. Pork was familiar as a common
article of food. Such words as southern, lecture, dungeon, skill
and civil were rarely known, and ramble had no associations.
Oddly, insure was correctly defined by a number of children who
were accustomed either to automobile insurance, or to the monthly
visits of the insurance man. A slightly larger number of children
knew the word nerve, although the majority of their definitions
received only half credit, since the slang meaning was most common. A number attempted to define brunette. They associated it
correctly with coloring, but were uncertain as to whether it was
light or dark. There were no correct answers beyond the first
twenty-four words. This scattering is significant, however, since
it extends to double the number expected at the eight year level.
Terman says: "We have not found one (English speaking child)
testing significantly above age, who had a significantly low vocabulary; and correspondingly, those who test much below age never
have a high vocabulary." This confirms the idea that the Binet
series is largely dependent on facility in the use and comprehension
of language. The quality of the definitions give is widely diverse.
Chronological age apparently has some bearing on the type of definition ; the younger child usually confines his meanings to those of
concrete use. Guesses are often hazarded in case of ignorance.
Twenty and nine-tenths per cent of those given the vocabulary test
passed it successfully.

Year Nine and Year Ten
At the nine year level, the ratio of success to failure in all the
tests is practically in inverse order to that of the six year level.
At the ten year level, the number of successes with test 6, the
memory span, is dependent upon the fact that memory span may
develop irrespective of experience. Above this level the few correct responses mean little except in consideration of the individual
case.

RESULTS

The results of this investigation are presented statistically in
a series of standard tables which are a part of the Witmer Diagnostic Standards. The data were first arranged in rank order
distribution and divided into quintiles similar to those formulated
by Dr Learning in her investigation of " Tests and Norms at the
Fifteen Year Level." It was later discovered that more accurate
diagnostic values could be secured from more finely graduated
standards. The material was then deciled, each decile containing
fifty subjects of the total group. For the comparatively limited
number included in the investigation, any smaller division, such
as percentiling, could have been of no further enlightenment. In
addition to the deciles including the whole group, other tables were
made of the males and females separately These again were
divided into decile limits. The rank order distributions of all the
results have been made, ranging from the lowest to the highest
value. The first decile, therefore, always includes the lowest numerical value, irrespective of whether this is the highest or the
lowest score. All of the five hundred cases examined have been
included in the tables without reference to a diagnosis of normality.
This is done on the supposition that in order to establish norms
or standards for first grade children (the six year level) we must
include in the group all those who are members of the group without any deliberately selective process. Our preliminary norms are,
therefore, based on a six year standard of human competency, with
no attempt to establish a six year standard of normal competency.
The tables as described are presented as purely statistical and noninterpretative. In addition to this quantitative presentation, the
tables have been rearranged in a qualitative scale for diagnostic
purposes. It is generally accepted that with the performance tests
preference is given to a low score. The child who completes the
test in the shortest time is said to have given the best performance.
On the other hand, the child who secures the highest intelligence
quotient, the highest mental age, and highest memory span, is
given the preference. The deciles have been renumbered according
to these preferred patterns, the tenth decile always including the
best scores, and the first decile the most inferior. The median, the
maximum, and the minimum score and the 60 per cent mode have
also been presented for each test. All those who have obtained a
given score have been gathered into one group; the percentage
of the whole which this group represents has then been determined.
This percentage is given, accompanied by the percentage to which
it is superior, and that to which it is inferior. For instance, 3.8
per cent of the children tested secured an auditory span of three,
which was the lowest span given; this could then be expressed in
the formula 3.8 per cent superior to 0, and inferior to 96.2 per
cent. This is in accordance with the theory of Dr Witmer, that
such percentage formulas make possible more accurate diagnosis
in comparing any individual to the range of human competency.
In a preliminary statistical study of these results a composite
score on all the tests, called a proficiency rating, was made for each
child. Every test was arbitrarily assigned the same value. The
results were arranged in rank order distribution and quintiled.
Each individual's quintile rating in every test was added together
and divided by the number of tests given. The figure obtained was
considered the child's proficiency rating. These ratings were then
plotted on a graph, and it is interesting to know that the result
was a normal curve of distribution. The procedure was abandoned
as unsatisfactory for a number of reasons. In the first place, it is
certain that all the tests of the clinical examination are not of
equal difficulty, and since they are not, they should be assigned a
proportionate value. There is then the difficulty of determining
to which test the highest value should be given. In the second
place, since the average score is not a real value but merely the
product of an arithmetical process, it is improbable that it provides
a really valuable index to the child's general proficiency. In truth,
the purpose of the psychologist is to devise a means of determining
special abilities and defects. Why then, except on the basis of
interest, should we defeat this end by furnishing a composite score
which connotes none of the particularities of the child?
The whole statistical presentation of results is prepared for
clinical use and is, therefore, simplified and concentrated in such
a manner as to be as practical and convenient as possible.

CONCLUSIONS

I. The battery of tests selected requires too much time for
each examination. The tests as a group, however, proved fairly
successful as a means of securing a clinical picture of each child.
The Young's Slot Maze A might be dropped from the performance
tests most easily, if greater efficiency in testing is to be achieved.
The reverse memory span is of doubtful value at this age level. A
satisfactory school proficiency test with a definite means of scoring
is needed for any further investigation.

II. The judgment of a first grade child's performance is
more significant when based on a qualitative estimate than on a
mere quantitative score. Young children have no idea of striving for
efficiency, and are not particularly roused by the competitive spirit.
III. First grade children are far from a homogeneous group.
They vary as to chronological age, physiological age, mental development, social and pedagogical proficiency. The variation among
first grade children is wider and more conspicuous than among
older children, because the former are not yet so thoroughly conformed to the social pattern. The environment and home training
of the individual child affect his test results to a marked degree
at this age level. His physical condition and his social orientation
are both factors in success. A foreign language spoken in the home
apparently influences the superiority of any child in all but the
performance tests.

IV. The younger the child the more difficult is a final diagnosis of his mental status. His performance may be influenced by
shyness, fright, or some whimsicality of mood.

V. All children in the first grade may be rated on the six
year standard of human competency from the most inferior to the
most superior. In order to establish a scale of six year normal
competency, more cases must be examined. The minimum or least
amount of competency necessary for a diagnosis of normality can
be designated clearly only after an investigation of the range of
infant competency.

VI. Considering eight years as the maximum age permitted
for entrance into first grade, the percentage of over-ageness in this
group of 500 children is 8.6 per cent. The investigators feel convinced that the examination of all children entering the first grade
would be of the greatest possible value for the efficiency of any
school system. This age level is a satisfactory one for the analysis
of the competency necessary for normal academic progress.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
-------------

Abramson, J. ReCherclies sur les Fonctions Mentales de 1'Enfant a l'Age
Scolaire. Annee Psychol., 1922, 20, 184-220.
Baldwin, B. T. The Relation between Mental and Physical Growth. J. of
Educ. Psychol., 1922, 13, 193-203.
Claparede, E. La Conscience de la Ressemblance et la Difference chez l'enfant. Arch, de Psychol., 1919, 17, 325-334.
Drever, J. The Vocabulary of a Free Kindergarten Child. J. of Exper. Ped.,
1919, 5, 28-37.
Gesell, A. A Clinical Psychology of Pre-School Children. Psych. Bull.,
1923, 20, 104.
Humpstone, H. J. The Analytical Diagnosis, Psych. Clinic, 1919, 12, 171173.
Humpstone, H. J. Some Aspects of the Memory Span?A Study in Associability. Psych. Clinic Press, Philadelphia, Pa., 1917.
Ide, G. G. The Educability Level. Psych. Clinic, 1919, 13, 179-195.
Ide, G. G. The Educabiilty Level of Five Year Old Children. Psych. Clinic,
1920, 13, 146-172.
Leaking, R. E. Tests and Norms for Vocational Guidance at the Fifteen
Year Old Performance Level. Psych. Clinic, 1923, 14, No. 7.
MacCarthy, F. H. The Healthy Child from Two to Seven. New York:
Macmillan, 1922.
Pressey, L. W. Influence of Inadequate Schooling and Poor Environment
upon Results with Tests of Intelligence. Jour, of Appl. Psych., 1920,
4, 91-96.
Paschal, F. C. The JVitmer Cylinders. Hersliey Press Co., Hershey, Pa.,
1918.
Terman, L. M. Measurement of Intelligence. Houghton Mifflin Co., 1916.
Terman, L. M. The Intelligence of School Children. Houghton Mifflin Co.,
1919.
Town, C. H. Analytic Study of a Group of Five and Six Year Old Children.
University of Iowa Studies in Child Welfare, 1921, I, No. 4.
Whipple, G. M. Manual of Mental and Physical Tests. Warwick and York,
Inc., 1914.
Witmer, L. The Relation of Intelligence to Efficiency. Psych. Clinic, 1915,
9, 61.
Witmer, L. Performance and Success. Psycii. Clinic, 1919, 12, 145.
Witmer, L. The Problem of Educability. Psych. Clinic, 1919, 12, 174.
Witmer, L. Efficiency and Other Factors of Success. Psych. Clinic, 1919,
12, 241.
Witmer, L. The Analytical Diagnosis. Psych. Clinic, 1922, 14, 129.
Witmer, L. Intelligence?A Definition. Psych. Clinic, 1922, 14, 65-67.
Young, H. H. Slot Maze A. Psych. Clinic, 1922, 14, 73-82.
Young, H. H. The Witmer Formboard, Psych. Clinic, 1916, 10, No. 4.
For excellent full bibliography see General Review: Mental Development: B. T. Baldwin, 665-683, Psych. Bulletin, Vol. 20, No. 12, 1923.
THE SIX YEAR OLD PERFORMANCE LEVEL 291
PERCENTAGE TABLES OF SUPERIORITY AND INFERIORITY
Formboakd
First Trial
Seconds Percentage Percentage Percentage
20 ? 30   4.6 < 0 > 05.4
30 ? 70   72.4 < 4.6 > 23.0
70 ? 110   14.0 < 77.0 > 9.0
110 ? 150   3.2 < 91.0 > 5.8
150 ? 190   2.0 < 94.2 > 3.8
190 ? DNC   1.2 < 96.2 > 2.6
DNC   2.6 < 97.4 > 0
Minimum 21 seconds.
Maximum 283 seconds plus 13 failures.
Median 49 seconds.
60% Mode 35-76 seconds.
Forhboard
Second Trial
Seconds Percentage Percentage Percentage
15 ? 20   1.6 < 0 > 98.4
20 ? 60   91.4 < 1-6 > 7.0
60 ? 100   4.4 < 93.0 > 2.6
100 ? 140   1.6 < 97.4 > 1-0
140 ? 259   1.0 < 99.0 > 0
Minimum 15 seconds.
Maximum 259 seconds.
Median 35 seconds.
60% Mode 27-48 seconds.
Cylinders
First Trial
Seconds Percentage Percentage Percentage
20 ? 50  8 < 0 > 98-2
50 ? 90   4.8 < -8 > 94-4
90 ? 130   8.8 < 5.6 > 85.6
130 ? 170   12.0 < 14.4 > 73.6
170 ? 210   10.2 < 26.4 > 63.4
210 ? 250   8.4 < 36.6 > 55.0
250 ? 280   5.0 < 45.0 > 50.0
280 ? 290   1.4 < 50.0 > 48.6
290 ? DNC   1.0 < 51.4 > 47.6
DNC   47.6 < 52.47 > 0
Minimum 21 seconds.
Maximum 300 seconds plus 238 failures.
Median 278 seconds.
60% Mode 146-DNC.
292 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Cylinders
Second Trial
Seconds Percentage Percentage Percentage
20 ? 40  8 < 0 > 98.2
40 ? 80   13.0 < .8 > 86.2
80 ? 120   27.6 < 13.8 > 58.6
120 ? 160   19.0 < 41.4 > 39.6
160 ? 200   11.2 < 60.4 > 28.4
200 ? 240   6.8 < 67.2 > 21.6
240 ? 280   5.0 < 78.4 > 16.6
280 ? 290   1.6 < 83.4 > 15.0
290 ? DNC   3.0 < 85.0 > 12.0
DNC   12.0 < 88.0 > 0
Minimum 25 seconds.
Maximum 300 seconds plus 60 failures.
Median 135 seconds.
60% Mode 90-250 seconds.
Maze A
First Trial
Seconds Percentage Percentage Percentage
18?30   5.2 < 0 > 94.8
30 ? 70   30.0 < 5.2 > 64.8
70 ? 110   19.6 < 35.2 > 45.2
110 ? 150   10.6 < 54.8 > 34.6
150 ? 190   6.8 < 65.4 > 27.8
190 ? 230   5.4 < 72.2 > 22.4
230 ? 270   2.3 < 77.6 > 19.2
270 ? DNC   2.2 < 80 8 > 17.0
DNC   17.0 < 83.0 > 0
Minimum 18 seconds.
Maximum 300 seconds plus 85 failures.
Median 95 seconds.
60% Mode 48-255 seconds.
Maze
Second Trial
Seconds Percentage Percentage Percentage
12 ? 20   6.0 < 0 > 94.0
20 ? 60   48.4 < 6.0 > 45.6
60 ? 100   13.2 < 54.4 > 32.4
100 ? 140   9.0 < 67.6 > 23.4
140 ? 180   4.4 < 76.6 > 19.0
180 ? 220   4.8 < 81.0 > 14.2
THE SIX YEAR OLD PERFORMANCE LEVEL 293
220 ? 260   3.6 < 85.8 > 1?-6
260 ? DNC   3.0 < 89.4 > 7.6
DNC   7.6 < 92.4 > 0
Minimum 12 seconds.
Maximum 300 seconds plus 38 failures.
Median 50 seconds.
60% Mode 26-170 seconds.
Memory Span
Auditory
Digits Percentage Percentage Percentage
3 .   3.8 > 0 < 96.2
4 .... 29.4 > 3.8 < 66.8
5   41.4 > 33.2 < 25.4
6 15.8 > 74.6 < 9.6
7 7.8 > 90.4 < 1,8
8  1.6 > 98.2 < -2
9   .2 > 99.8 < 0
Minimum (0) 3
Maximum 9
Median 5
60% Mode 4-6
Memory Span
Visual Span
Digits Percentage Percentage Percentage
F ... ,   17.0 > 0 < 83-?
2   .2 > 17.0 < 82.8
J  '. 6.2 > 17.2 < 76.6
4 .............................. 31.2 > 23.4 < 45.4
5   30.4 > 54.6 < 15-?
6   11.0 > 85.0 < 4.0
7   2.8 > 96.0 <
8 ... 1.0 > 98.2 < -2
9  2 > 99.8 < 0
Minimum 2 digits plus 85 failures.
Maximum 9 digits.
Median 4 digits.
60% Mode 3-5 digits.
Memory Span
Reverse Span
Digits Percentage Percentage Percentage
0   42.4 > 0 < 57-<J
2 .     18.8 > 42.4 < 38.8
294 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
3   31.0 > G1.2 < 7.8
4   7.2 > 92.2 < .6
5  6 > 99.4 < 0
Minimum 2 plus 212 failures.
Maximum 5
Median 2
60% Mode 0?3
Memory Span
Learning Span
Kepetitions Percentage Percentage Percentage
2   10.6 < 0 > 89.4
3   13.6 < 10.6 > 75.8
4   11.6 < 24.2 > 64.2
5   12.6 < 35.8 > 51.6
6   10.2 < 48.4 > 41.4
7   4.4 < 58.6 > 37.0
8   4.2 < 63.0 > 32.8
9   3.6 < 67.2 > 29.2
10   2.8 < 70.8 > 26.4
F   26.4 < 73.6 > 0
Minimum 2
Maximum 10 plus 133 failures.
Median 6
60% Mode 3-F
Binet Tests
Chronological Age
Yrs. and Mos. Percentage Percentage Percentage
4-8  2 < 0 > 99.8
5-0: 6-0   9.6 < .2 > 90.2
6-0: 7-0   58.0 < 9.8 > 32.2
7-0: 8-0   22.0 < 67.8 > 10.2
8-0: 9-0   8.2 < 89.8 > 2.0
9-0:10-0   1.2 < 98.0 > .8
10-0:11-0  6 < 99.2 > .2
11-0  2 < 99.8 > .0
Minimum 4-8
Maximum 11-0
Median 6-7
60% Mode 6-1:7-4
Binet Test
Mental Age
Yrs. and Mos. Percentage Percentage Percentage
3-6: 5~?   1.8 > 0 < 98.2
5-0: 6-0   6.8 > 1.8 < 91.4
6-?: 7~?   32.2 > 8.6 < 59.2
T1IE SIX YEAR OLD PERFORMANCE LEVEL 295
7-0: 8-0   43-8 >
8-0: 9-0   13-8 >
40.8 < I5-4
97.6 < 1-6
9-0:10-0   !-6 > 98-4
Minimum 3-6
Maximum 10-0
Median 7-0
60% Mode 6-6:7-9
Binet Test
Intelligence Quotient
L 0 Percentage Percentage Percentage
16 > 0 < 98.4
58 > 1,6 92,6
80 ? 90   1L2 >
90 ? 100   16-? >
100?110
40 ? 70
70 ? 80
110 ? 120
120 ? 130
130 ? 140
140 - 150   - > 99.6 < -2
26.6 >
21.6 >
12.8 >
2.6 >
1.4 >
7.4 < 81.4
28.6 < 65.4
S4.6 < 38-8
61.2 < 17-2
82.8 < 4A
95.6 < I*8
98.2 < A
150 ? 160
160
.2
.2 >
99.8 < 0
Minimum 49.4
Maximum 160.0
Median 105.4
60% Mode 90.6-117.6
NON-INTERPRETIVE
Formboard
First Trial
Time in Seconds
STATISTICAL TABLES-DECILE DIVISIONS
Total
I. 21 ? 31
II. 31 ? 35
Male Female
27 ? 33 21 - 32
33 -37 32 - 35
,7 40 35 ? 40
m. 35 40 37 - 40 ^ ^
4'J_43 tr~~To 45-49
V. 43 ? 47 46 ? 50 _ 55
V1* 48_ 53 55 "S 55-60
VII. 53 - 60 55 - 61 60_76
via. 60 - 75 62 80 ^ _uo
IX' 75-95 uo-DNO 103-DNC
X. 95 ?DNC 110?DJNO
296 TEE PSYCEOLOGICAL CLINIC
Formboard
Second Trial
Male Female Total
I. 15 ? 24 16 ? 25 15 ? 24
11. 24 ? 26 25 ? 27 25 ? 27
III. 26 ? 30 27 ? 30 27 ? 30
IV. 30 ? 32 30 ? 33 30 ? 32
V. 32 ? 35 33 ? 37 32 ? 35
VI. 35 ? 37 37 ? 40 35 ? 39
VII. 38 ? 41 40 ? 45 39 ? 43
VIII. 41 ? 46 45 ? 49 43 ? 48
IX. 47 ? 60 50 ? 60 49 ? 59
X. 60 ?232 60 ?259 59 ?259
Cylinders
First Trial
Time in Seconds
Male Female Total
1. 43 ? 105 21 ? 105 21 ? 112
II. 105 ? 131 128 ? 163 112 ? 145
III. 131 ? 158 165 ? 207 146 ? 182
IV. 163 ? 200 208 ? 250 184 ? 225
V. 200 ? 242 255 ?DNC 225 ? 278
VI. 245 ?DNC DNC?DNC 278 ?DNC
VII. DNC?DNC DNC?DNC DNC?DNC
VIII. DNC?DNC DNC?DNC DNC?DNC
IX. DNC?DNC DNC?DNC DNC?DNC
X. DNC?DNC DNC?DNC DNC?DNC
Cylinders
Second Trial
Male Female Total
I. 25 ? 68 36 ? 72 25 ? 70
II. 70 ? 87 72 ? 90 71 ? 90
III. 89 ? 97 90 ? 106 90 ? 102
IV. 98 ? 112 107 ? 120 102 ? 117
V. 113 ? 132 120 ? 137 118 ? 135
VI. 132 ? 158 137 ? 159 135 ? 157
VII. 160 ? 185 160 ? 196 158 ? 190
VIII. 190 ? 255 200 ? 255 192 ? 250
IX. 260 ?DNC 255 ?DNC 255 ?DNC
X. DNC?DNC DNC?DNC DNC?DNC
TEE SIX YEAR OLD PERFORMANCE LEVEL 297
Maze A
First Trial.
Time in Seconds
Male Female Total
I. 19 ? 31 18 ? 45 18 ? 36
II. 32 ? 40 45 ? 59 36 ? 47
III. 40 ? 50 60 ? 80 48 ? 60
IV. 50 ? 61 80 ? 95 60 ? 80
V. 62 ? 80 96 ? 130 80 ? 95
VI. 80 ? 96 130 ? 185 95 ? 125
VII. 96 ? 120 185 ? 262 125 170
VIII. 120 ? 165 267 ?DNC 170 ? 255
IX. 167 ? 260 DNC?DNC 257 DNC
X. 299 ?DNC DNC?DNC DNC DNC
Maze A
Second Trial
Male Female TotaI
I. 12 ? 20 13 ? 24 12 ? 21
II. 20 ? 24 25 ? 30 21
III. 24 ? 26 30 ? 40 -6
IV* 26 - 31 t?~ f6 38 - 50
V. 31 ? 37 55 - 76 _
VI. 37 ? 48 76 ? 105 50
VII. 48 - 75 105 - 150 75 ^
VIII. 75 ? 120 150 ? 208 110
IX. 120 ? 210 209 ?DNC 170
X. 210 ?DNC DNC?DNC 27
Memory Span
Audito?Vocal Span
Digits
-n Total
Male Female
1. (o) 3 - 4 3-4 (0) ! Z 1
II. 4 ? 4 4 ? 4
III. 4 ? 4 4 ? 4
IV. 4 ? 5 4 ? 5
V. 5 ? 5 5 ? 5
VI. 5 ? 5 5 ? 5
VII. 5 ? 6 5 ? 5
VIII. 6 ? 6 5 ? 6
IX. 6 ? 6 6 ? 7
X. 6?8 7?9
4 ? 4
4 ? 4
4 ? 5
5 ? 5
5 ? 5
5 ? 5
5 ? 6
6 ? 6
6 ? 9
298 TEE PSYCEOLOGICAL CLINIC
Memory Span
Visual Span
Digits
Male Female Total
I. 0 ? 0 0 ? 0 0 ? 0
II. 0 ? 3 0 ? 3 0 ? 3
III. 3 ? 4 3 ? 4 3 ? 4
IV. 4 ? 4 4 ? 4 4 ? 4
V. 4 ? 4 4 ? 4 4 ? 4
VI. 4 ? 5 4 ? 5 4 ? 5
VII. 5 ? 5 5 ? 5 5 ? 5
VIII. 5 ? 5 5 ? 5 5 ? 5
IX. 5 ? 6 5 ? 6 5 ? 6
X. 6 ? 9 6 ? 8 6 ? 9
Memory Span
Reverse Span
Digits
Male Female Total
I. 0 ? 0 0 ? 0 0 ? 0
II. 0 ? 0 0 ? 0 0 ? 0
III. 0 ? 0 0 ? 0 0 ? 0
IV. 0 ? 0 0 ? 0 0 ? 0
V. 0 ? 2 0 ? 2 0 ? 2
VI. 2 ? 2 2 ? 3 2 ? 2
VII. 2 ? 3 3 ? 3 2 ? 3
VIII. 3 ? 3 3 ? 3 3 ? 3
IX. 3 ? 3 3 ? 3 3 ? 3
X. 3 ? 5 3 ? 5 3 ? 5
Memory Span
Learning Span
Repetitions
Male Female Total
I. 2 ? 2 2 ? 2 2 ? 2
II. 2 ? 3 3 ? 3 2 ? 3
III. 3 ? 4 3 ? 4 3 ? 4
IV. 4 ? 5 4 ? 5 4 ? 5
V. 5 ? 6 5 ? 6 5 ? 6
VI. 6 ? 7 6 ? 7 6 ? 7
VII. 7 ? 9 7 ?10 7 ?10
VIII. 9 ? F 10?F 9?F
IX. F? F F ? F F ? F
X. F? F F ?F F ?F
THE SIX YEAR OLD PERFORMANCE LEVEL 299
IV
v.
Binet Tests
Chronological Age
Years and Months
Male Female
1. 4? 8 : 5?11 5? 8
11. 5?11 : 6? 1 6? 0
III. 6?1:6?3 6?2
IV. 6? 3:6?5 6?4
V. (j? 5:6?8 6?5
VI. 6? 8 : 6?10 6? 7
Vll. 6?10 : 7? 2 6?9
Vlll. 7? 2 : 7?6 6?11
IX. 7?7:8?0 7?3
X. 8? 0 : 10? 3 7?9
6? 4
6? 5
7? 3
7? 9
11? 0
Mental Age
Years and Months
IV. 6--9 : 7?0 6? 6
V. 7?0 : 7?3 6? 9
VI. 7?3 : 7?6 7? 0
Vll. 7?6 : 7?6 7? 3
Vlll. 7?6 : 7?9 7? 6
IX. 7?9 : 8?3 7? 9
X. 8?3 : 9?4 8? 0
7? 3
7? 6
7? 9
Intelligence Quotient
Male Female
Total
6? 0 4? 8 : 6 0
6? 2 ^? 0 : 6 1
6? 1 : 6? 4
6? 4 : 6? 5
6  7 6? 5 : 6? 7
6? 9 6? 7 : 6?10
g 11 6?10 : 7 0
7? 0 : 7?4
7? 4 : 8? 0
s? 0 : 11? 0
Male Female
1. 3?6 : 6?0 4? 0 : 6?0
11. 6?0 : 6?3 6? 0
111. 6?6 : 6?9 6? 6
6?5 6?0
6?6 6?6
6?9 6?9
7?0 6?9
8? 0 <
10? 0
7? 0
7- 3
7? 6
7? 9
I? 0
Total
6? 0
6? 6
6? 9
6? 9
7? 0
7? 3
7? 6
7? 9
8? 0
10? 0
Total
49.4 ? 82.5
I. 49.4 ? 82.5 54.5 ? 81.? g(U
II. 82.8 - 90.3 81.8 - 9 - ^ 96-8
111. 90.4 - 97.8 9" ; 97.4-101.4
97.9 _ 102.1 95.7 - 101.2 ^ ^
.. 102.2 - 105.6 1M-2 ? 1?. 10M _ 109.4
VI. 105.6 - 109.4 ^4-M- m4 _ 113.5
VII. 109.7-113.4 113.5 ? 117.0
'111. 113.5-116.8 24 3 117.5 - 123.3
IX. 117.5 - 123.2 17.7 - 12 - 124.2 - 160.0
V 192 7 ? 147.7 124.3 10U.U
Drawing tiie Diamond
Total
278 plus
222 minus
Male
155 plus
101 minus
Female
123 plus
121 minus
