The Superior Child
===================

A Series of Case Studies.
By Alice M. Jones, A.M.,
University of Pennsylvania.
In the two preceding issues of the Psychological Clinic I
have presented case studies of children chosen from my Superior
Group. The first group of cases was selected on the single factor of
a high Intelligence Quotient, the second, upon general superiority
combined with some talent in the field of literary production. The
present group is closely related to the latter, in that the criteria of
selection are two?general intellectual superiority existing in com-
bination with musical ability.
These children are not of the type who are known in the litera-
ture as "musical prodigies." In every case, however, they have
been designated by persons whose musical judgment is supposedly
sound (teachers and head masters of the conservatories of music in
which they are working) as having most unusual ability. We have
011 record in this clinic one or two cases of more striking precocity
in musical development, but when the factor of general intellectual
superiority is made a criterion of selection, they are not acceptable
candidates for this group.
I tried to indicate clearly in my preceding article that it is at
best hazardous to make any prediction of future productivity in
in any artistic field when we arc dealing with young, especially with
pre-adolescent, boys and girls. The age range in this particular
group is from eleven to fourteen years. Three of these children are
already post-pubescent; I therefore believe that it is reasonably
safe to predict that their musical interest will be a lasting one, per-
haps the most significant factor in their future. In the fourth
case (a girl of eleven years) the musical interest is already so intense
that it seems scarcely probable that it can be other than lasting.
The persistence of music as a significant factor in their lives seems
all the more probable in that all these children possess to a marked
degree the creative impulse, and spend many hours in improvising.
Joseph, aged twelve years and ten months, is of Italian parent-
age, and has the beautiful brown eyes and ingratiating manner of
(130)
THE SUPERIOR CHILD. 131
his race. His attainments seem all the more remarkable when
viewed in the light of his heredity and the social and environmental
handicaps of his early childhood.
Both parents were born in Italy, and have never learned more
English than that required for their most primitive needs in an
alien, rural community. The father is a day-laborer, and is incapac-
itated for any adequate support of his family by chronic rheumatism.
The mother is of a very excitable nervous temperament, rather
unintelligent, but sympathetic. It is probable that Joseph's ambi-
tion is fostered by her, rather than by the father. There are seven
children, of whom Joseph is the oldest. The family "gets along"
with casual financial aid from a local social organization.
Joseph represents a situation which crops out persistently and
irrepressibly in imaginative literature, but which occurs with relative
rarity, I am inclined to believe, in the work-a-day world. He is the
gifted child, of striking intellectual superiority, produced at a very
inferior environmental level. Unfortunately, it is impossible to
gain any adequate information as to this boy's heredity further
back than the present generation. Whether this child is a biological
"sport" or whether his ability may be a legacy from some gifted
ancestor, it is impossible to determine.
As usual in cases of this sort, it was the school which discovered
Joseph, and which led Joseph to find himself. Although he was
handicapped from the start with an inferior language equipment
and with complete cultural starvation in the home, the boy's unusual
intelligence led to unusual interest and pains on the part of his
teachers. Books are an unknown quantity in the world in which
Joseph eats and sleeps and calls his home, but the boy, now in the
eighth grade in school, told the examiner very seriously that Dickens
and Shakespeare are his favorite authors. He loves to read all sorts
of books, but especially those where the major interest is either
historical or scientific. Moreover, he is not the sponge type, absorb-
ing only the ideas of other men; he gives his imagination free rein
in writing stories of his own, and has even tried his hand at verses.
Joseph's academic record is clear. He entered school at six
years, has repeated no grades, skipped twice, and has a consistent
average of "E," which is excellent. He is popular with other chil-
dren, is a leader among the boys at school, and is interested in athlet-
ics, although not heavy enough for teams. (He is not below his
age norms for height and weight, but just at the maximum for his
own age level; most boys in his school grade, however, are older
and taller than Joseph, who has the lithe strength characteristic of
his race.) The boy has unusual poise and general social orientation,
132 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
is self-confident, realizes that lie is above average, but shows no
objectionable superiority-consciousness. Indeed, in view of the
special attention which he has always received, and in view of the
unfortunate social and environmental factors, the boy's balance is
remarkable.
On the psychological examination, Joseph's scores are con-
sistently good. On the performance tests he showed excellent co-
ordination and good intelligence, and his time scores, although not
remarkable, were well within the limits for the Superior Group.
His memory span is eight digits for both auditory and visual-vocal
presentation, and he gives seven digits reversed. On the Binet Test
his mental age is eighteen years, one and one-half months, which
gives him an Intelligence Quotient of 141.2. His Intelligence Quo-
tient would have been several points higher, had it not been for
vocabulary, where he scored only 56. This relatively low vocabulary
(for a superior child of his age) is, of course, a factor of the initial
language handicap, which it will require years to overcome. Had
his vocabulary score been 76, he would have passed every test in
the starred Terman Revision. On the results of this examination
alone, there is no question that both from the quality of his responses
and the actual scores obtained, this boy must be included as a mem-
ber of the Superior Group.
In so far as talent is concerned, Joseph must have been born
under some preternaturally auspicious constellation. The urge to
create is strong within him, and it matters little in what field it finds
expression. I have already noted that he writes stories and verses.
For several years he has been "fiddling" (improvising for the most
part) and he has had some inferior teaching at the hands of a local
music-master. Last year, however, he was given a try-out at one
of our best conservatories of music, and he is reported to be most
unusual in musical ability. He has been taken on by the school
(which is not a philanthropic organization) for free lessons. This,
in itself, gives some indication of their judgment of his worth. The
boy is truly in love with his violin, and has dreams of becoming a
concert violinist.
One would think that such an artistic equipment was enough
for one small boy, but in addition to this, Joseph is said by his teachers
to draw remarkably well. He has had no special training in this
field, but he amuses himself with making copies of drawings and
cartoons. After the examination, when the boy told me about his
interest in drawing, I jokingly told him to make a copy of Binet
Picture I (the Dutch Home) and in a few seconds, with little effort,
he produced an entirely recognizable semblance of the mother, the
THE SUPERIOR CHILD. 133
crying child, and the cat. There seems little doubt that, with
proper training, he could produce very creditable work in this
field.
Joseph is not certain himself which will prove to be the domi-
nant talent, music or drawing, and he cherishes a secondary ambition
to become an illustrator or a cartoonist. The probability is that he
will continue to be a producer in both fields, and in the literary field
as well. Perhaps he will subordinate the other two to musical
composition, in which ability to visualize and to verbalize must
surely be of some significance.
The timely assistance of a social organization will make it
possible for Joseph to go on to high school, and then to specialize in
the direction of what proves to be his dominant talent. It was to
determine the advisability of such assistance that the boy was
brought to the Psychological Clinic. There was no question in my
mind about recommending such assistance; it is my opinion that
any expenditure made by society in training boys such as this one,
will be repaid a thousand-fold.
Marlyn, aged fourteen years seven months, was discoveied for
this study in a contemporaneous investigation of three hundred
high school boys in this city. His scores on the tests given at the
school were so exceptionally good that he was referred to me for a
supplementary examination. It has been more than a year since
I saw Marlyn, and our interview lasted less than an hour, but the
boy made an indelible impression upon my memory. He was a
tall, handsome lad, who would be estimated, at a casual glance,
as seventeen or eighteen years of age. He showed the poise and
general social orientation of the college senior. If he had ever
passed through that unfortunate stage known as "hobble-de-hoy,
it was long since, and the battle had left neither dent nor scar upon
the polished surface of his personality. I was constantly tempted
to look at the record sheet before me to retain the proper orientation
regarding his age.
On the performance tests, Marlyn was the type which we call
a "wizard." Working with both hands, and with extraordinarily
rapid distribution of attention, he completed all the tests given in
an extremely short time. He made no false moves. A particularly
difficult test, known as the Marvin Pyramid, devised in this labora-
tory, but not standardized, was solved the first time in five seconds,
and on the second trial in two seconds. The solution did not appear
to be accidental.
134 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
His memory span for digits was 10 on both auditory and visual
presentation, and he was able to reverse 7 with ease. He was able
to repeat thirty-two syllables in a sentence. He gave an excellent
reproduction of both paragraphs at the Superior Adult level in the
Binet folder. His basal age level was the Superior Adult, which
gave him an Intelligence Quotient of 133.7, the maximum possible
for his age. (In cases like this we wish for tests at a higher intel-
lectual level.) His vocabulary score was 88, the highest which I
have encountered in any high school child. His definitions were
qualitatively excellent. His verbal reactions were as quick and
clear-cut as was his motor rate of discharge.
At the time of the examination Marlyn was a high sophomore
in high school, taking the academic course and doing altogether
satisfactory, although not brilliant work. In spite of his unusual
poise, he was in no sense a prig. lie had the normal number of
interests, both social and athletic. He was well liked by the boys,
but not too popular. He was fond of reading, and reported that he
read approximately three books a week in addition to his school
work, his other outside activities, and his practising.
His instrument is the violin. He is not the "boy-genius"
type. He has had, however, four years of lessons, with the conse-
quent heavy toll of practice, and his violin is one of the primary
factors in his life. He has done no concert work as yet, but is on
the high road to a career. He feels relatively sure that he will,
eventually, find his career in music. This point is not, however,
definitely decided. Marlyn realizes fully the advantages which
accompany a large income. He has a strong practical tendency
which leads him to desire the assurance which such an income gives.
There is some conflict within him as to whether he shall choose the
lucrative but somewhat prosaic occupation of stock broker, or
become a musician. Before he makes his final decision, he plans to
go through college and acquire his background in the liberal arts.
Since, at his present rate of progress, he will have finished college at
twenty, this seems a wise course.
No matter what the final outcome in his life may be, I am
convinced that this boy has talent, and that, should he decide upon
an artistic career, in view of his general intellectual superiority, the
prognosis for success is excellent.
Stephanie, aged eleven years three months, was brought to
the Clinic by her older sister, not because of her intellectual superior-
ity, but because of the marked talent which she displays in music.
THE SUPERIOR CHILD. 135
The child is of Russian (Ukraniaii) parentage, and conies from a
relatively high social stratum, her father being a physician. She
is not physically prepossessing, and is noteworthy in this group of
superior children, in that she is not above her age norms in height
and weight. She is reserved, and in view of her relatively complex
ideational processes, seems strangely lacking in vivacity. If she
does not "blossom out" during her adolescence, she will not be
unusually noteworthy as a personality.
On the psychological examination her scores, although not
remarkable, are sufficiently high to place her within the Superior
Group. Her work on the performance tests showed very fine
coordinations, good intelligence, and excellent trainability. Her
rate of movement was not unusually rapid, but the qualitative
aspects of her performances compensated for her merely median
time scores. On the three written tests her scores are consistently
excellent. She finished all but one paragraph on the Monroe Silent
Reading Test, and made no error in comprehension. Her arith-
metic score was perfect, and she made three slight errors in the
Hard Directions Test. On the Binet, her basal age level was twelve
years, her mental age, sixteen years one and one-half months, and
her Intelligence Quotient 143.3. Her vocabulary level was fourteen
years.
Academically, this child is not accelerated. Indeed, inasmuch
as she did not enter school until she was seven, she is now actually
a year retarded in school work. The school has suggested incidental
promotion upon several occasions, but the parents have been unwill-
ing to permit it. The indications given by the psychological exam-
ination, however, are that Stephanie is well able to do the work
of a higher grade after a minimum period of adjustment, and I can
see no reason why she should be held back. She has never, in all
her school career, made an average of less than "9." This is in
spite of the fact that her major interest and her greatest expenditure
of effort has been in a field entirely outside the school. For even a
casual acquaintance would soon realize that her life centers in her
piano.
Unlike most children of a relatively high intellectual level,
Stephanie is not a great reader. She reports that she rarely reads
an entire book in the course of any single week. Her literary interests
are rather immature; she still finds fairy tales the most attractive
form of reading. She does, however, write little imaginative sketches,
and occasionally devises the words for some simple little melody
which she has improvised.
136 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
It is the piano, however, which is the core of this child's exist-
ence. She has been taking lessons for five years, and has made
exceedingly rapid progress. She is very well thought of at the
conservatory where she is studying. At home, it is almost impos-
sible to tear her away from the piano. Although she does not
neglect the drudgery of practice, her greatest delight is in improvis-
ing. Here again we find the creative urge which marks the differ-
ence between the mere technician and the originator in the artistic
field.
David, aged thirteen years two months, has already acquired
all the superficial mannerisms of the musician. He is Russian
Jewish, of a physical type which is relatively uncommon, flaming
red-gold hair, which he flings back in long and rippling waves with
the true musician's gesture, and clear, bluish-white skin, flushed
with a bright rose (the skin which is found only in combination
with red hair). His hands are long and dazzlingly white; the
fingers are delicate yet strong?typical musicians' hands. Already
David has learned the fascination which such hands can exert, and
he uses them in conversation to the best possible advantage.
Like Marlyn, David was discovered in the survey of high school
boys in this city, and was referred to me because of exceptionally
good scores. Nothing was known to the previous examiner about
his musical ability; he was selected entirely upon the basis of test
results. His reactions to the performance tests were quick, intelli-
gent, and clear-cut. His memory span was 9 (visual-verbal) and
10 (auditory) presentation. He reversed seven digits with ease,
and was able to give thirty syllables in a sentence. His scores on
all the written tests were perfect. On the Binet test, his basal age
level was that of the Superior Adult, which gave him an Intelligence
Quotient of 148. This Intelligence Quotient is, in itself, sufficient
basis for admission into the Superior Group.
In school David is a high freshman. His academic work
is good but not remarkable. His best subjects are Science and
English Composition. He is an omnivorous reader. He volunteered
tlie information that he likes to read poetry, if it has both rhyme
and rhythm, but that he "hates free verse." He, himself, has
succeeded in having some of his own poems published in the daily
papers here.
In personality David is striking rather than attractive. He
is very much a "person." He has a very well-marked sense of
superiority, which is, after all, not surprising.
THE SUPERIOR CHILD. 137
From his earliest childhood this boy has been brought up in
an atmosphere where music is exalted. The boy's older brother is?
a pianist, and has already won a medal for original composition.
This same brother has been conducting a small orchestra, but is
now about to go to Europe to study. David has had, since he was
a small boy, a consuming desire to become the conductor of a great
orchestra. One of his favorite pastimes as a young child was to
stand before the Victrola with his brother's baton, and "conduct"
the records. This was not the merely imitative stage through
which many small boys pass; it was the beginning expression of
what has developed into the boy's dominant trend.
David's instrument is the 'cello. He has had lessons for only
three years, but already has a manager, and is doing solo and concert
work. After he has finished high school he will concentrate defi-
nitely on his musical training. He, too, has unusual ability in
improvising. With his general intellectual superiority, failure in
his chosen field seems relatively improbable.
All the children in this test can claim a rating oi superior when
judged only on the basis of the psychological examination. All
of them also possess at least one marked talent, that of music, and
most of them have one or more subordinate talents. All have the
creative impulse which leads to origination. It is to such children
we must look for our potential "genius" group.
