The Relation of Mental to Physical Growth
==========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1923, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XV, No. 5 January, 1924

By William Filler Lutz, A.M. y
University of Pennsylvania.
This paper is the result of an investigation ot the relation between
physical and mental growth on more than a hundred boys who
were given an intelligence examination (Binet, Cylinders, Auditory
and Visual Memory Span), combined with a very complete physical
examination, including blood pressure and pulse readings, and, on
the suggestion of the physician under whom I was woiking, an
estimation of physiological age. The full examination took about
an hour and a half, but often, to avoid fatigue, the physical exam-
ination was given on one day and the mental on another. On
reviewing the data obtained, I think the time was well spent in
this small but intensive study, as the results are in agreement with
previous investigations in this line, and also because they are, I
think, the first in which an intelligence examination by an appro\ed
scale and a physical examination of such detail have been made on
so many boys of these ages.
Dr. J. H. IvIcCurdy1 at Clark University did some work in
correlating physical and mental growth, but as his "Intelligence
rating was more a scholarship rating based on school grades and
by different teachers with different standards, it does not give a
definite or standard grade for the estimation of intelligence. In
his work, the items studied were heart rate, blood pressure, pubes-
cence, height, weight, strength, lung capacity, and scholarship. 1
have used the same items with the exception of strength tests.
In the matter of height-weight, this study is in agreement with
that of other observers?that a high percentage of those superior
in height-weight indices are also superior in intelligence; that weight
alone is a less positive factor, for the over-weight boy is not usually
over-weight mental^; that in chest capacity there is the same
agreement, in that nearly all the boys of superior intelligence had a
chest capacity above the average.
1 McCurdy, J. H. "Physical Efficiency Tests During Adolcsccncc." Reprinted from the Transactions of
the loth International Congress on Hygiene and Demography.
126 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The investigation of systolic blood pressure and intelligence
is not so clear; so many factors must be taken into consideration?
nervousness, fatigue, physical condition and also the fact that blood
pressure in boys is greatly influenced by physiological age, the
normal pressure in the various stages of pubescence having a con-
siderable range?in P 1 (beginning of pubescence) from 94 to 108;
in P 2 (mid-pubescence) from 100 to 128; in P 3 (post-pubescence)
from 96 to 118, although there is considerable variation even here;
there was evident a gradual but not an abrupt rise of blood pressure
in pubescence. As a general rule, the duller boys ran a lower systolic
blood pressure at the corresponding physiological age than the boys
of the superior intelligence group, which agrees with the small
amount of previous work in this field. McCurdy says:1 "It may
be noted, however, in a few cases, that a high rate, a large variation
in heart rate in changing from the horizontal to the standing posi-
tion, and also a low blood pressure, went with poor scholarship."
Very little work has been done in this line, but it seems a very reason-
able hypothesis to assume that the activity of the central nervous
system operating on its highest level (Hughlings-Jackson's three-
level theory2 of intellectual activity is not uninfluenced by the force
and rate of the blood supply. "The higher centers are built upon
the lower ones; intelligence and morality are related to the physical
integrity of the lower centers."3
As the result of the observation of blood pressure in 2300 cases,
Dr. Judson and Dr. Nicholson4 state that "Systolic blood pressure
varies from 91 mm. in the 4th year to 105.5 in the 14th year; the
widest variations are from 10th to 14th year, with a rapid elevation
in 14th year during adolescence," and, "Blood pressure readings
will furnish a means of determining physical tone of a large number
of children who are below par but have no demonstrable pathological
lesion."
It may also give an index of mental tone, especially in alertness
and dullness as related to normal, bright and dull types.
Dr. Faught5 makes this observation which is probably of diag-
nostic value both in mental and physical fields?"Essential Hypo-
tension: occasionally there are cases which seem to have a con-
stitutionally low blood pressure. These cases show no definite
signs of disease and no discoverable cause can be assigned for this
1 McCurdy, J. H. "Adolescent Changes in Heart Rate and Blood Pressure," p. 10. (Thesis Presented at
Clark University, Worcester, Mass., June, 1909, in partial fulfillment of the requirements for Master's Degree.)
2 The Three Level Theory. Journal of Mental Science, 1887-1888, XXXIII, pp. 25-28.
! McCurdy, J. H. Op. cit., p. 3.
* Judson and Nicholson. American Journal Diseases of Children, VIII, 1914, p. 267.
5 F. A. Faught, M.D. "Blood Pressure from the Clinical Standpoint." 1914.
RELATION OF MENTAL TO PHYSICAL GROWTH. 127
condition, though sometimes it may develop later that this state
was in reality an early sign of tuberculous infection. Such individuals
are frequently unequal to any particular ejjort either mental or physical.
This is in agreement with the suggestion advanced in this paper
that the "dull" group has usually a blood pressure below the average
for their age.
The investigation of physiological age seemed to yield more
definite results. That there is a direct relation between physiological
age and mental growth has been suggested by several investigators,
but very little work has been done and few positive statements are
to be found. Baldwin1 says, " Physiological age is, the writer believes,
directly correlated with stages of mental maturation," and, ''another
experimental study just completed shows that the mental age of
the individual bears a direct relationship to the physiological age as
indicated by height and weight. The results show that at each
chronological age the physiologically accelerated bo\s and giils
have a higher mental age than those of the average 01 below the
average physiological age."
Dr. C. Ward Crampton2 says, "Earlier pubescence favors good
scholarship; later pubescence, poorer scholarship. Irving King
says " over-age individuals in all the three physiological stages aie
inferior to those of normal growth." The results of this investiga-
gation show, to remarkable degree, that almost all the earlier pubes-
cent group were of superior intelligence type with Intelligence
Quotients ranging from 110 to 169; that those who may be called
"Dull"?I. Q. under 90?had a retarded pubescence; in the normal
?90-109 Intelligence Group?the pubescence was as a rule normal
In the normal group, pubescence begins at 13.5 years, and
post-pubescence at 15.5-16. (Godin4 states that the average
time from P-l to P-3 is about 18 months.) In the dull group, pubes-
cence starts at 14.5, but none of this group have reached post-
pubescence at 15 years, and some not at 17 years.
In the Superior Group, pubescence had begun in the majority
of cases at 12.5, and had been, or would have been completed at
13-13.5?apparently 4 to 6 months less time is taken in maturing
in this group than in the others. So that in this group ot 100 average
boys, taken as they come, from different social groups but all oi
American parentage and medically in good health, post-pubescence
1 Baldwin, Bird T. " The Physical Growth of Children from Birth to Maturity." University of Iowa Studies
in Child Welfare. Vol. I, No. 1. June, 1921.
2 Crampton, C. W. "The Influence of Physiological Age Upon Scholarship." The Psychological Clinic,
Vol. I, 1907, pp. 115-120.
8 King, Irving. "Physiological Age and School Standing." The Psychological Clinic, Vol. VII, 1914,
PP. 222-229.
4 Godin, P. Recherches anthroporactriquep sur la Croissance, Paris, 1902, pp. 180-197.
128 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
is reached as follows: in the average (normal) intelligence group
at 15; in the inferior group at 16, and in the mentally superior
group at 12.9 to 13 years.
This is in agreement with the views advanced by Crampton
and Baldwin, who have done the most, and almost the onfy work
in this line, that early pubescence favors good scholarship, and later
pubescence, poorer scholarship, and that the over-age individuals
in all three stages of Physiological Growth are inferior to those of
normal growth; that superiority in height-weTght and lung capacity
are directly favorable to mental growth and school efficiency, so
that a sound mind is most likely to be found in a sound body.
Binet says that native intelligence appears to improve but
little after the age of 15 or 10?" although the location of this point
is not exactl}'- known." May not this point be the establishment of
physiological maturity? At this time the whole endocrine system
is functioning. May not the full establishment of this system be
necessary for the attaining of the maximum level of individual
intelligence? Basic intelligence then is established with the attain-
ment of adult endocrine function, the chronological time of which
varies with the individual, and cannot be fixed at a definite chrono-
logical age. Therefore, in adolescence, before a definite diagnosis
of mental retardation be made, the physiological age of the individual
should be established; for it is possible for a child to be of normal
mental growth for his phj^siological age, and yet fall short of the
mental age required by the tests for his age in years. In such cases
of late physiological growth, a final statement of mental age must
await physiological maturity. Dr. Crampton1 says, "We cannot tell
from the number of years which the individual has lived what stage
of development he may be in. The pedagogical and chronological
age based upon it do not give us trustworthy information. The
change from an asexual to a sexual life may occur at any age from
0 to 20, and when it does occur the changes are profound. In the
short space of six months the child becomes a man or woman. New
mental abilities appear while others disappear. At this time the
most important epoch in life, second only in significance to birth,
the child commences a period which can only be likened to an explo-
sion of growth and development. After a variable length of time,
a year or year and a half, a slowing down process arises and the
mind and body proceed with a period of ripening that we call
adolescence."
If these facts be definitely established by farther investigulions
i"The Significance of Physiological Age in Education." Transactions of the 15th International Congress
on Hygiene and Demography. 1912, p. 225.
RELATION OF MENTAL TO PHYSICAL GROWTH. 129
which are on the way, it would clearly indicate that those factors
which tend to bring about early maturity should be more clearly
established with their relations to physical and mental vigor. In
the educational field, it would indicate, as Baldwin1 well says, "that
tall healthy children of accelerated physiological age be encouraged
to proceed as rapidly as possible within the limits of thoroughness
and endurance through school, and that the small, short, under-
height children of retarded physiological development be detained
longer in the normal and lower grades, doing supplementary work,
maybe, since such children are as a rule immature mentally, although
in some instances precocious in superficial brightness."
A brief summary of the results of the mental and physical
examinations of the 100 boys who form the basis of this paper is
appended.

SUMMARY OF RESULTS.
Dull. Normal. Bright.
Physiologically accelerated  0 10% 62%
Systolic blood pressure above average for physiological age  0 19% 41%
Average systolic blood pressure  95.5 mm. 104 mm. 108 mm.
1 Baldwin, Bird T. "Physical Growth and School Process." U. S. Bureau of Education, Bulletin No. 10,
1914.
