James
======

A Study of a Post-Encephalitic Child.
By Rose Wimenitz,
University of Pennsylvania.
It was Friday morning. James had come for his lesson and
was waiting for his teacher to call him. Sprawled out carelessly on
a chair, he was the very picture of dejection. His small head was
hanging, an obstreperous tuft of the coarse, sandy hair standing
defiantly upright on the crown of it; his complexion was sallow and
pasty, and not in any way enhanced by a sparse scattering of tiny
yellow freckles, plainly visible at close view; his generous mouth
drooped, like his head, the lips pale, but firmly closed. In his small
faded blue eyes, set just a little too closely together, there was no
spark or twinkle, no vivacity or intelligence; but there was determination in his chin, despite just a suggestion of femininity in its
tendency to recede; yet withal his expression bespoke nothing in
particular. Never a whimper escaped him, never a sign of ill-humor
at having to wait. He seemed quite content to sit there indefinitely,
scrutinizing the floor or his shoes.
James was always very neat in cheap but scrupulously clean
clothes, yet he had a rather slovenly appearance. His clothes never
seemed quite to belong to him. Something was always awry. His
feet, especially, were very awkward, and hung like dead lead weights
on thin bean-poles of legs. There was nothing healthy in his appearance. Beside him sat his mother, a well-built, somewhat plump
woman of about thirty-five, with a kindly face and quiet, patient
air?too patient to dispel a suspicion of something bovine in her
make-up, but not at all displeasing to the eye or judgment. Griselda
and her son, was the inevitable mental comment of the spectator,
waiting for the call of Fate, in the guise of the teacher.
''All right, James; you may come in now."
At the sound of these words James lifted his head. A light of
something resembling understanding come into the pale eyes, already
so seemingly weary of life. He smiled; and his face resumed the
blank, wooden expression as he slid off the chair and shambled toward
the door, as if the matter of walking required infinite energy.
Such was James. He had been referred to the Psychological
Clinic by the family physician, to whom he had been brought by his
(144)
JAMES. 145
mother, who could not see why James should have been placed in a
special class. Ever since he had had a bad attack of influenza, with
frequent hemorrhages from the nose, he had not been able to get
along in school. Both his work and conduct in school had been so
poor that he was finally placed in an orthogenic-backward class. He
did not like this class. He did not like either his teacher or his
associates. He was anxious to be placed in his regular grade that
is, the regular second grade.
James was nine years four months of age when he first came to
be examined, and his pedagogical history was not very hopeful.
Nevertheless, he came through the examination surprisingly well.
He passed all the tests, not very well, but fairly well, showing some
degree of trainabilit}r. He showed some trouble with analytic concentration of attention, in his work with the Witmer I ormboard,
and gave a very stupid performance with the Dearborn Formboard,
but he passed the tests within the specified time limits. In his
work with the Witmer Cylinders, when asked to hurry, he did not
lose his self-control, but failed to respond, and his memory span was
found to be slightly deficient, being a very uncertain 5, both auditory
and visual. In his reading, however, he showed excellent proficiency,
which enabled him to pass the Terman revision of the Binet mental
test with a score of 100.3 and a mental age of nine years eight months
four months above his chronological age. 1 his was very surprising, when his pedagogical history and personal appearance are considered. According to this, James should be diagnosed as Normal,
yet there was obviously something wrong with him. It required no
specialist to show this. Consequently, diagnosis in his case was
deferred, with a brief notation that the picture he presented at the
time of examination was greatly suggestive of pre-senile deterioration; and clinic teaching was recommended to determine his educability and retention.
And so James came regularly every Friday morning for a period
of about four months. In his lessons he displayed several peculiarities, of which the most noticeable was a habit of stopping suddenly
in the midst of his work, as if his blood had congealed and left him
in the exact position in which it then was?his arm raised above his
paper, his pencil in his hand in position for writing, but no movement whatever. With his pencil in this extraordinary position, he
would nod incessantly over his work, much in the manner of an old
man in his dotage; then he would come to with a start, and resume
his work?but he no longer remembered anything he had been doing
before. He did not even recognize a problem he had been working
on only a few minutes previously and it was then necessary to begin
146 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
all over again from the very beginning. These lapses of memory
(which is the only explanation his teacher could give for this display)
occurred several times in the course of a one-hour lesson, the frequency depending very largely upon his state of health and degree
of fatigue. His fatiguability was unusually great; after half an hour's
work in the clinic, at work which should not have taxed him at all,
he became so tired as to make all further work with him absolutely
useless. Any questions put to him at such a time would bring forth
answers showing a state of complete confusion. It was further
noticeable that his confusional states were very much aggravated
when James was working with arithmetic or spelling involving words
of more than one syllable. In his reading he showed remarkably
good proficiency. He could read a story once, with an understanding quite good for a normal child of his age. He could paraphrase
the story and then write it out in such a manner as to show that
he not only knew, but appreciated what he had read. His grammar
was atrocious but that is not surprising. The puzzling point was
that he could read, understand and retain anything in the way of
reading matter, but became hopelessly confused with his arithmetic and never could learn anything at all in it. He was accordingly recommended to the Neuro-psychiatric clinic of the Philadelphia
General Hospital, for examination to discover the cause of his confusional states.
The report of this examination showed some very interesting
statements. He was found to be poorly developed and undernourished. It was stated that he showed marked emotional instability and his case was diagnosed as probably post-encephalitis,
following influenza. The poor state of his health and the possibility
of post-encephalitis accounted entirely for the ease with which he
became fatigued; but there was nothing in his behavior in the clinic,
during his lessons, that might suggest emotional instability. In
fact, James was always very docile, very obedient, very patient,
even when, in the early days, his teacher tried to reprimand him,
gently, into concentrating 011 his arithmetic. Certainly, James
presented no disciplinary problem whatever.
The work with James continued, with a few periods of absence,
from February to May, during which time he had succeeded in learning very little indeed, although he put forth genuine effort. It seemed
that he had excellent use of the material he had learned before he had
had influenza, but that it was impossible for him to retain anything
new. At times he seemed to understand what he was doing?and
then he would have a lapse of memory and all that he knew would
disappear. In almost four months of comparatively regular teachJAMES. 147
ing, he did not learn to make change for a problem such as the following: If you were given 25 cents and sent to the store to buy apples
for 5 cents and sugar for 10 cents, how much change would you
bring home? If given a long enough time, he could finally arrive
at the answer, after a terrific struggle and much confusion. If he
could only have remembered what he was doing long enough to complete the problem, he might have been able to learn the process;
but the veiy processes of addition and subtraction were causes oi
the utmost confusion to him, especially subtraction; and their use
in correlation naturally assumed greater proportions and complexity than was necessary. The same kind of confusion was displayed when a word of more than one syllable was put before him
to spell.
At times he would become quite talkative and talk in a very
sensible manner?so sensible, in fact, as to make one wonder if
there really was anything wrong with the boy. He always talked
about his family?what his father did, what his sister eained and the
increase she had just received, and the latest happenings with his
other sister, who was crippled. A visit to his home in Kensington
explained much of his prattling. James comes ot a ' poor family
a workingman's family. The house is a tiny, ramshackle affair,
but kept immaculately clean and neat. His father has a milk route
and he has a sister who works in a factory. These are the sources
of support for the family. The other sister has osteomyelitis of one
leg and is in a home for cripples in Atlantic City. James is the
oldest boy and has one younger brother, who is, to all appearances,
a normal child. He also has an old grandmother, who is constantly
bewailing James' condition, and who insists that James knows he
will never amount to anything. James' mother reported that he
wanted very badly to be taken out of the special class and that he
had a reputation for tormenting the other children in his class. He
never protested against going to school, however, and was more than
willing to go to the Psychological Clinic for his lesson on Friday.
He felt, as did his mother and grandmother, that this would eventually lead to his being placed in a regular second grade. They were
very anxious about the boy and very willing to co-operate. The
wholesomeness of the atmosphere in little house spoke very favorably
for James' chance of improvement at home?at least, in the way ol
affording no obstacle.
Early in May, as a result of his second Neuro-psychiatric examination, James was diagnosed positively as a case of Post-encephalitis
and sent to the same home in Atlantic City where his sister is. Since
he was so easily fatigued and showed so little retainability with new
148 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
material, a life in the school-room would avail him very little. The
school authorities immediately acceded to the request that lie be
excused from school indefinitely so that he could build up physically
by leading a life in the open air. The clinic work was therefore
closed; and James passed on to another experiment. . . .
What are the prospects for a boy like James? If you were his
parent, what would you do with him? He never had much, to begin
with, in the way of personality. He evidently inherited his mother's
rather apathetic disposition as well as her capacity for patience, and
his general picture must have been, at best, nondescript. Nevertheless, he must have been at least as alert, mentally, as any ordinary
six~3rear old, judging from the clearness of his reasoning during his
short periods of lucidity and his proficiency in reading. Postencephalitics are either emotionally unstable or depressed. James'
one display of noisiness and tearfulness, at the time of his first
neuro-psychiatric examination, and his reputed habit of tormenting
the children in his class in school might put him into the emotionally
unstable group; but his customary appearance leans more in the
direction of depression. His great fatigability is also typical of
his condition, and it may be that his states of confusion are due to
no more than excessive fatigue. In this event, improvement of his
physical condition would likewise improve or correct this defect and
he might even be able to retain new material in an acceptable manner.
In this case, he could be made into a normal citizen, although there
is no evidence to lead one to believe that he would ever have achieved
intellectual attainments, even under the most favorable of conditions.
If, however, his lapses of memory and confusional states are due to
some defect in the brain itself, he will have a well-nigh unsurmountable task before him in trying to cope with society in a manner
sufficient to earn him his bread and butter. What, then, is the
prognosis in this case? Is he a normal child temporarily handicapped
by a physical defect or a child with a damaged brain? And, in either
case, since he is decidedly backward on the educational scale, must
the stamp of imbecility be placed upon him?
