"What are Little boys Made of?"
===============================

By Ellen M. Jarden,
University of Pennsijlvania.
I never asked Herbert that question, but had I done so, I feel
sure that he would have slid down in his clothes till his collar crawled
up over his ears like a snail's shell, then violently shaken his head.
He always did this if he did not want to bother to think of an answer.
When he realty did not know the answer, and knew he had the right
not to know it, he gave me a straight "Dunno." But if he thought
it was a question to which I would say, "Oh, Herbert, you surely
know that!" Or if I in any way appealed to his sense of humor, ho
turned himself into a shell fish. And I would be forced to hold his
shell open with more words and explanations, until he could come
out again and decide that he did know that "y" went down and
"h" went up. It was not that Herbert, aged thirteen and in the
fourth grade, seriously had to consider the relative positions of
the parts that extend from these two letters. No, the problem was
a weightier one than that. The point that troubled him was whether
he was going to initiate me into his secrets, and let me know that
he was aware of such a slight and insignificant matter. For Herbert
considered reading an art too trivial for his attention.
And why should Herbert want to read, when the world is so
full of other things for him to do? But Herbert did not care for the
other things either.
"But," I said to him, "you want to read the titles when you
go to the movies."
Herbert shook his head. "I don't go very often."
Under ordinary circumstances I would have congratulated
myself on discovering one of a species I thought extinct. But as
it was I was forced to discard what had promised to be a potent goad.
"Do you like baseball stories, Herbert?"
"Some."
"Do you want to be a carpenter like your father?"
"Not much."
There was but one question remaining, "What do you like?"
Herbert shifted as if I had pointed a gun at him. "Aw?I like
mechanics."
At last, one shot had gone home. "Then wouldn't you like to
read about engines, and learn how to build them?"
(138)
"WHAT ARE LITTLE BOYS MADE OF?" 139
"Not as mucli as I'd like to drive a car."
I realized I was defeated. Nothing in Herbert's life seemed to
be touched by literature. But even though I had found no break
in his defence, I had discovered two things "boys are made of."
One is reticence about themselves and what they know. Another
is an ambition, foreign to us, perhaps, but strong in them, and this
ambition they follow blindly.
In these, and in other respects of appearance and character,
Herbert was plain boy. His clothes did not indicate that he came
from a poor family. They were ordinary in color, and clean. On
the contrary, his hands were unnatural in color, and dirty. His
face, at times, was distinguished by gashes and cuts. Otherwise it
was so sunburned I could not tell whether the complexion was
healthy or sickly. His cap shaded his features almost entirely,
even when he stuffed it with paper to keep it off his nose. He once
showed me a silver pencil he had found on the street. Of this he
seemed to be very proud. When I had assigned him a lesson he
pulled a paper, greatly crumpled, from his pocket. Nothing else
came out with it, but I could imagine grime and bacon fat dripping
from it. He had an amiable disposition; I never saw him aroused
by anything. But he occasionally evidenced a sense of humor.
One day we sounded "skinny." It took us almost half an hour.
To my surprise, when the word in all its beauty and significance
burst upon Herbert, he did not frown at me, nor hasten on, but
laughed. He almost giggled, and repeated the word again and
again. It served as a humorous touchstone for the rest of the lesson.
One quality in Herbert seemed typical. He slouched, physically and mentally. He did not brace his shoulders and meet the
world, but slid around the corners of life. He did not do anything
vigorously, but ate a bit and played in the dirt a bit, "a little scrubbed
boy."
However, this was only part of a clue why Herbert could not?
or did a still small voice whisper "would not"?read. I turned to
the tests and the examination for assistance. Herbert is the oldest
of five children. A brother and sister, respective^ one and two
years younger, are in the Fourth Grade with Herbert. Billy, aged
six, is in the Second Grade. Herbert has been through a fairly
complete roll of diseases and fractures, which may account for his
repeating the third and fourth years in school. Up to this year he
attended a parochial school. His mother thought he did not learn
because the school was overcrowded, so this year he was sent to the
public school. The report is he is doing better. However, the
change had been too recent at the time of the examination to tell
140 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
whether the difficulty was in the instruction or inherent in
the boy.
He told me that he liked the performance tests, and he did
well in them. He did the Witmer Formboard in 34, 21, and 14
seconds, in the respective trials. The comment is "Good discrimination." This is particularly significant. In his reading I had
found it greatly otherwise. Now it became fairly evident it was a
matter of interest. In the cylinders, completed in 97 and 41 seconds,
he made two errors the first time, but corrected them. Healy B
was solved in 58 seconds the first time, but the time was reduced
to 25 seconds on the second trial. There were two things in the
tests that were suggestive of a possible imagery defect. He needed
three exposures for the double chevron, and took 60 seconds to do
the Healy A the second trial, although he had done it in 56 at first.
Two months later I followed this up, and tested Herbert on the
stripe and double stripe. Before he did these, he made the double
chevron for me from memory, and his time in my two tests was 35
and 50 seconds. I concluded therefore, that the difficulty was in
poor attention, of which Herbert was at times guilty.
In the Binet tests he did not do so well. This was to be expected,
for here language is needed rather than intelligence. His basal age
was ten. He fell down on vocabulary and failed the dissected
sentences, which he could not read. Altogether he made 11, and
an I. Q. of 83.5. This is not so significant when it is considered
that he only has Fourth Grade school proficiency, which means
that his language ability does not exceed that of a modal nine year old.
His mother had brought him to the clinic, and was designated
on our record "housewife." So I went to see what influence she
had on Herbert. I ploughed across a muddy stretch, where they
were cutting a road, and came to Herbert's street. Two-story
brick houses marched neatly down each side. Herbert's house
was one of those that had glass porches. After I rang the bell some
moving about took place inside. During this time I observed the
untidy porch, where a broken kiddy car held the center of the stage.
At length a little girl opened the door. Pier hair was uncombed.
She had almost scuffed her shoes to shreds. Her dress was both
ragged and dirty. However, she gave me a friendly smile when I
asked for her mother, and showed me into the sitting-room. From
the parts of the rug that still bordered the holes, I could guess it had
been rather gaudy than rich. Almost all the varnish had rubbed
off the floor. The furniture split and gaped. Yet around the room
stood various ornaments and pictures more or less expensive, while
in the dining-room beyond I could see a beautiful fern.
"WHAT ARE LITTLE BOYS MADE OF?" 141
The mother came in and greeted me. She held a pair of
trousers which she was mending in one hand, and a sticky baby
clung to the other. When she heard who I was she called Herbert.
He clattered down stairs, gave me an embarrassed grin and sank
into the nearest chair, which gave a doleful squeak. His mother
corrected him for this at intervals during her conversation with me.
She opened her heart to me.
"I don't see why Herbert can't read. The other children can.
I thought it was his school. It was so crowded. The day I was
there I just seen he couldn't learn anything. But when I took him
away he told me it was his own fault he didn't learn. 'Mother,' he
said, 'it isn't sister's fault. She was all right. I just wouldn't
learn myself.' (Have you had your breakfast, Charles?) Well,
anyway he's working harder now. He wants to get a nine this
month. He likes his teacher too."
Here I managed to insert a question as to why Herbert had been
absent several weeks.
"Oh, Herbert felt so bad about that. It was my fault. You
see, I was making a coat for Sarah here, and my sister had promised
to help me. So I went out there the day Herbert was to go back
to the clinic, and I forgot to remind him. lhen he was scared to
go back. Don't do that, son."
The chair had protested again.
At this point Sarah, who had left the room, re-entered with
the coat in question, and also a hat and dress. When she had put
the outer garments on I was amazed at the transformation. I
could not ask for a brighter, more attractive looking child. She was
almost a fairy-tale princess in the slovenly room. When I had
sufficiently admired the clothes, and she had departed to put them
away, I asked the mother how she helped Herbert with his reading.
She told me that she had him read aloud to her, much as he disliked it. She then enlarged on Herbert's ability to fix locks and
the vacuum sweeper. Herbert accompanied these tales with fidgetings and broad grins.
When I left I decided that although Herbert's home conditions
were not ideal, they were encouraging. His mother was evidently
doing her best to help him, even though she lacked all notions of
pedagogy.
However, this defect in his mother was, I think, a drawback
to Herbert's progress. I tried to tell her what elements she should
remind him of, and what errors she should guard against, but I
lound it was, to her, so much "buzz." This was rather serious, if
Herbert practiced wrong reading with her. He had not learned
142 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
thoroughly, and his mixed elements enabled him to read some hard
"words and stumble over easy ones. If he saw a word he knew in
combination, it meant nothing to him. He knew words, yet had
3io idea how or why he knew them. He frequently got words by
spelling them, when he did not recognize them as they stood. Phonics
seemed almost impossible for him. When he came to a new word
he sounded it according to the na?nes of the letters. He was unable
to transfer the same construction from one word to another, or the
same sound from one group of letters to another. It took him
almost an hour to learn that wood and would were alike, in pronunciation. His memory was retentive when properly motivated,
but his attention was so poor and mechanical that it was difficult
at times to tell whether he understood or was merely a well-behaved
parrot. When he read without supervision he slipped over words
and was very inaccurate. This was where I doubted the wisdom
of his mother's assistance. When he read in school he was watched.
But at home he could read anything, and pile more bad habits on
top of the ones that had already proved his undoing.
I had almost decided to abandon the phonic method with
Herbert when he suddenly showed improvement. He had not
seemed to understand the idea at all. Then he began to be able to
build words from sounds. He worked hard for several lessons, and
when he left me, although he was not proficient, he knew what to
do. He had particular difficulty with w, which he called d, and y
which he called w. This, it seemed to me, pointed very definitely
to early lack of training. When will schools and parents learn that
first observations and earliest teachings are of paramount importance, and not accept the common fallacy: "This school is good
enough while he is young. We will send him to a better one later!"
I could not but enjoy the subtlety of Herbert's method in
approaching his task. He never read beyond the first letter of a
word until his imagination was exhausted. If he had only acquired
a vocabulary, he could have discarded reading entirely. His peculiar
ability lay in inventing different meanings for the same sentence.
His sentences were always meaningful, and he usually comprehended
what he read. To be sure, when I held him strictly to all errors, we
might have stood for a scene in Shakespeare:
Polonius: What do you read, my lord?
Hamlet: Words, words, words.
But when he tripped it on the fantastic toe of his own interpretation, he leaped from a hawk to a handsaw, with scarcely a
period between.
"WHAT ARE LITTLE BOYS MADE OFi" 143
When I told Herbert that he had improved so much he would
not have to come any more, he did not seem overjoyed. I enlarged
upon his good work, and assured him if he kept it up he would soon
be reading well.
Herbert stuck out his chin: "Nobody can't teach me to read,
because I don't want to learn."
Ah, Herbert, you have diagnosed the case. It is useless to
explain that the reason you do not like it is because your training
formed wrong habits, which are harder to break every year. The
trouble is with us now, and explanations do not help. The solution
lies in Herbert's own will to forge ahead, until the day when he
wakes up to the world that reading opens to him.
