The Primary School and Wood Reports
====================================

36 MENTAL WELFARE
By }. EWART SMART, M.C., M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D.
Introduction
Up to comparatively recent times, one can safely affirm that the educa-
tional system of our country has greatly favoured the " clever " child. He has
made the reputation of his primary school by displaying his ability in leaving
it at ii plus to participate in another and better conditioned school system,
constituted specially for his kind, on a scale designed to develop his capacities
and spur him on to greater efforts. Public opinion has consistently suffered
and still suffers from an obsession of the " clever " child complex, a statement
amply borne out by its attitude towards the bill proposing to round off the
Hadow Report by raising the school leaving age to 15. No one of any account
desires to limit the opportunities for the development of the capacity of the
clever child, if anvthing, it is recognised that there is need for an extension of
the present facilities; no country can afford to sacrifice its most valuable capital
asset, but, on the other hand, no country has a right to neglect its main stay,
its average child, neither is it justified in allowing the problem of its sub-
normal child to go by default.
The Wood Report
The publication of the Wood Report revealed a most alarming state of
affairs whose significance and implications have not yet been fully grasped by
the country as a whole. We are told that for 33,000 ascertained educable
mentallv defective children in England and Wales the total Special School
accommodation available consists of 1,800 places in Residential Schools and
some 15,000.places in Day Schools; accommodation sufficient for half the
children ascertained. But this is only half the story; the total number of
children between the ages of 7 and 16 who are mentally defective within the
meaning of Section 55 of the Education Act of 1921 is estimated to be approx-
imately 105,000, i.e., more than 3 times the number actually ascertained and
certified. It is unnecessary to dwell upon the estimated numbers of low-grade
children, and adult defectives, except to state that the total number of persons
of all ages who are mentally defective is at least 300,000, i.e., an incidence of
8 per 1,000 of the total population. When it is understood that most of these
feeble-minded children (i.e., of ratios 50 to 80) are in attendance at Public
Elementary Schools and that for various reasons any material increase in the
provision of special school accommodation is very unlikely, the contention,
advanced by the Wood Report, that the present system has broken down, and
needs a radical change, can easily be sustained.
Whilst emphasising the importance of the problem of the ascertained
feeble-minded, there is another aspect which demands thorough investigation,
MENTAL WELFARE
37
namely, that of the dull and backward children, of whom there are estimated
to be 300,000 between the ages of 7 and 15. Grouped with the feeble-minded,
i.e., taking all children with a mental ratio above 50 and below 85, it is found
that special educational facilities need to be provided for at least 10% of the
normal school population.
The Wood Report recommends inter alia
(a) That this 10% retarded group shall be regarded as a single educa-
tional and administrative unit and shall be provided with an appropriate type
of education.
(b) That the children in this group, with certain exceptions, shall be
provided within the Public Elementary system and that the school organiza-
tion shall be modified accordingly.
(c) That the break at 11 shall operate, and separate classes, departments
or schools shall be established, depending upon the degree of retardation and
the number of defective children in the area.
The Primary School Report
In surveying the problem of the retarded child the Primary School Report
directs attention to an interesting psychological result, i.e., that as regards in-
nate mental capacity, the differences between individual children increase
almost in direct proportion to their age?a child backward by one year at the
age of 5 will probably be backward by 2 years at 10 and 3 years at 15.
The Primary School Report then proceeds to differentiate between
mentally defective children and children whose mental development is re-
tarded in a greater or lesser degree, pointing out the suggestions contained in
the Wood Report that children with mental ratios below 50 should in future
be considered Mentally Defective, whilst those with mental ratios from 50 to
80 should be regarded as " retarded children."
Another interesting and yet striking factor revealed, is that rather less
than half of the dull and backward children have been retarded through
accidental causes such as illness or compulsory absence from school, the
remainder being innately dull.
After enumerating the main causes of mental retardation (causes which
should receive the special attention and investigataion of L.E.A.'s) the Primary
School Report refers to the importance of establishing close liaison between
head teachers and the school medical service with a view to early detection
and where possible, removal of the causes of retardation.
The Report agrees with the recommendations of the Wood Report in
connection: ?
(a) With the provision of Special Schools, where possible, for more
retarded children.
S3 MENTAL WELFARE
(b) With the abolition of the Medical Certificate and the substitution
therefor of administrative safeguards for the enforcement of school attendance.
(c) With the close relationship of the Special School to the general
educational system, while preserving the freedom to provide for the educational
requirements of particular types of children.
With regard to " less retarded " children the Report recommends that
" less retarded " children should be recognised as requiring special attention
between the ages of 7 and 11, that the classes specially organised for this pur-
pose should be small, and further states (p. 142) " that these children will be
retained within the Primary School itself!
In the Wood Report, however (p. 139), separate special schools arc sug-
gested for these children in areas of population of 200,000 and upwards.
With regard to the training of teachers for classes of retarded children,
the Primary School Report again follows closely upon the lines of the Wood
Report by advocating the attendance of teachers at supplementary courses
imposed upon the foundations of training, the Wood Report suggesting the
solution via supplementary courses and quoting the experience of the
C.A.M.W. in favour.
Briefly, therefore, within the ambit of its term of reference, the Primary
School Report endorses to a large extent the main policy outlined in the
Wood Report as applied to the children in the Mental Ratio groups of from
50 to 80.
Grading
The Report might with advantage have discussed in greater detail the
merits and demerits of organisations based upon a system of larger junior
schools. Reference is made on page 78 to the satisfactory results achieved in
a mixed department containing some 450 children between the ages of 7 and
11 and to the potentialities of a triple track system of organisation.
The success or otherwise of providing adequate educational facilities for
certain types of retarded children, especially the dull and backward type,
indubitably depends upon the degree to which grading can be undertaken, and
to this end the larger the school the better.
Hence, in reorganising the school system, the L.E.A.'s should, where
possible, transfer children to large junior schools and further, endeavour to
organise separate schools for girls and boys. There will then be no necessity
for variations in curriculum, e.g., needlework, handwork, physical exercises
and games, etc.
For example, in the writer's own area, a large junior girls' school has
about 200 children in the 10 to 11 age group, divided into 5 classes, A, B, C,
D and E, with a curricula in each class shading from that practically biased,
for the retarded sub-normal E class, to that of a more academic type in the
MENTAL WELFARE 39
super-normal A class, the ascertained, certified type having been previously
transferred to a special school in the centre of the town. This experiment is
being watched with great interest and so far has been regarded with a large
measure of satisfaction by parents, teachers and the L.E.A.
Conclusion
The Primary School Report has undoubtedly performed a national service
by re-stating, in clear and concise terms, the immensity of the problem of the
retarded child. The result, it is hoped, will be to focus greater attention
upon the recommendations contained in the Wood Report and to spur into
action those who are primarily responsible for the education of these unfor-
tunate children.
