The Diagnosis of Mental Deficiency
====================================

MENTAL WELFARE 21
Book Reviews *32 Abstracts
. By
Henry Herd, M.D.(LoncL). Hodder &
Stoughton. 1930. pp. x and 272. 8vo.
12/6 net.
This little work is designed to serve as a
guide to practitioners, school medical officers
atld others in the recognition of those mentally
defective individuals who may need to be dealt
^ith under the provisions of the Education
or the Mental Deficiency Act, an aim
!y ch the author has kept in the foreground
hroughout. Starting off from the definition of
mental deficiency as a " condition of arrested
or incomplete development of mind," he in-
quires how this is to be estimated; " clearly,"
((r- Herd states, "we must recognise defectives
u by their mental 'fruits' their psychological
,, resPonse to stimuli, their reaction to stresses
t( ?f environment, as practical diagnosticians
f( We are less concerned with the ultimate
<i ;?asis of the deficiency, whether that be a
(( ,ailure in structural cerebral development or
ln endocrine efficiency." He therefore be-
^ns by a discussion of mental processes as
plewf^ in the light of the older and newer
sychologies, passing on to a detailed consid-
int!?11 men^a^ development of the child
sin ? decade ?f life- This is necessary
fo CC ^ *S only comparison with the per-
anrm.ances of the great majority that those of
ofy dividual can be said to indicate the lack
p lllaturity or of such reasonably to be ex-
ino rectitude as would justify a diagnosis of
be 0rn]?le*e mental development. There might
^ a foilure in either of the three generally
ces^ ^ divisions into which the mental pro-
tiv^ are classified, the cognitive, the affec-
? ?r the conative, but usually the defect is
mem1 -iaH~round character. On the tempera-
stabK. -s^e ^e subject may be stable or un-
em ln the former case the instincts and
g00dl0ns may weak or the control relatively
' ln ^e latter relatively strong emotions
?V-ercorne a weak control. So far as cog-
Sener concerned the fundamental defect is
si(je f rather than specific and on the conative
a laol- fCt *s ^ue ^ilure of concentration,
great"-0 enerSy and purpose. The latter is of
Weak ^Portance for, as Dr. Herd stresses, a
a Uorrn'^ a serious hindrance even in
a lndividual, in a defective with a sub-
normal intelligence it hinders the growth of
even the modicum that is present and the
result is a social misfit.
In five chapters mainly devoted to diag-
nosis Dr. Herd discusses first the history and
physical appearances, not as being of prime
import but because they are often the first
points brought to the notice of the certifying
officer while the child is settling down, and
then general and specific tests of intelligence
and temperament. He draws attention to the
value of a wide range of performance tests and
to the limitations of the Binet scale. Here it
is interesting to note the gradual change of
orientation. Tests have always been needed
since the days when evidence of defect had to
be given for legal procedure and some in com-
mon use were equally well-known in Plantag-
enet or Tudor times, the difficulty was their
lack of standardisation. Tests now found
suitable to one of the age of five or six might
be given to an adolescent or adult who received
undue credit for success, while on another
occasion a younger person was deemed to fail
when asked something now known to be quite
beyond the normal range of powers or know-
ledge for his years. Binet's scale was so well
adapted and so successful that for some years
it checked all efforts at standardising other
lines of testing and led many to think that a
simple procedure, a real litmus test of uni-
versal applicability, had been found. The scale
was the more welcome at the start as it simpli-
fied the giving of evidence to courts which are
notoriously given to regarding the intellect as
the sole property or at least as the predominant
of mind. It is doubtful if many certifying
officers who had to deal with adults ever took
that view and it is well to call a halt and bring
the investigation back to a survey of the whole
child. Yet care must be taken to keep the
pendulum from swinging too far on the other
side when attention might be devoted equally
exclusively to the affective mechanisms. All
tests must be considered in the light of the
history, opportunities and interests of the
subject and while it must never be forgotten
that the certifying officer has no right to
assume that the examinee is putting forth his
best efforts it must equally be remembered
that if a child really tries at all he usually does
his best?in this respect he differs to some ex-
tent from many adults. Dr. Herd gives much
wise advice on the technique of examinations
22 MENTAL WELFARE
from this angle and will generally be held to
hold the scales of the balance truly, as he says
judgment must be based on the " ensemble "
?history, observations, tests, intelligence and
educational and social traits. Where there is
a backward class he recommends a limited
period of observation of a child therein as the
best diagnostic measure; advice with which all
school medical officers will agree. Where there
is no such class, as he says, the certifying
officer sits on a very real fence of decision as
his subject sits on the imaginary fence between
the dull and the defective. He has to decide
between the stigma or supposed stigma on the
one hand and leaving the child to probable
idleness and the growth of inferiority com-
plexes and grudges in the ordinary school. He
agrees that a backward class may be very
suitable as an educational medium for the
high-grade defective and that there are grave
objections to mixing cases of that type with
the lower grades who constitute the majority
in the present day special schools, and appears
to agree with the Wood Report that the lower
grades should be weeded out to occupation
centres and come under the purview of the
Mental Deficiency Committee even if, for the
sake of efficiency, these centres be run by the
Education department.
In dealing with moral deficiency Dr. Herd
falls in line with those who say that the so-
called moral defective of the Act is an unstable
feebleminded person and that it would have
been better if the class were retained at all to
have defined the mental defect as being shown
by strong vicious and criminal propensities.
He gives good descriptions of the type of moral
defectives who are characterised by weakness
in the social instinct and of altruistic senti-
ments but with strong self impulses. He looks
forward to a time when the budding moral
defective can be fully investigated in a child
guidance centre before the powerful action of
habit has been added to the difficulties arising
from lack of affective and conative balance.
A short legal section sets out the action
which has to be taken by school medical
officers and certifying officers generally in
making suitable provision for defectives who
come to their notice and gives hints on the
selection of the best modes of action whether
by supervision, guardianship, institutional
care or special schooling. In one point he
makes a rather surprising statement with re-
gard to action to be taken in a petty sessional
court in a school attendance case. " It should
be noted that no certificate from the parents'
own doctor, and no opinion expressed by any
other person regarding thg child's mentality
can be allowed to influence the Court's decision
in a disputed case." If by this Dr. Herd means
only that the local education authority might
require the parents' practitioner to be called
as a witness this would be in accordance with
current practice; if, however, he means that
the parent cannot call his own practitioner to
give opposing evidence it would seem to be
contrary to the general course of law by which
all relevant evidence must be placed before a
court of justice. Most people would hold the
word give means present or you have the
position that technical evidence can only be
opnosed by a layman.
In a future edition Dr. Herd should certainly
give a reference to the case on which he bases
this statement, which if correct would much
facilitate the work or the school medical
officer. It is the usual practice, in the south at
least, to admit any opposing medical evidence
and the case of Rex v. de Grey in the High
Court which has usually been taken to indicate
the law only determined that in a case in which
the evidence of defect was not in dispute the
magistrate must accept the statutory certifi-
cate of defect and not make an examination
for himself of the child before him. It is also
the practice in the south for the court to refer
a case of doubt to the Board of Education; if
the court is not in doubt it would seem there
is no right of appeal to the Board in law.
This book will be welcomed by school med-
ical officers, generally as a useful chart to
rather intricate waters.
F.C.S.
Mental Aspects of Stammering. By C. S.
Bluemel, M.A., M.D., L.R.C.P.(Lond.),
M.R.C.S. Bailli?re, Tindall & Cox, 1930.
Price 11/6 net.
This book, written by an American phys-
ician of some standing, deals with the medical
and psychological aspects of stammering. The
author has already done much work on this
subject and may be said to be a pioneer in a
country where there are over a million stam-
merers. His methods, as he himself says, are
not infallible, but they are designed to help
MENTAL WELFARE 23
children and, to a certain degree, adults.
. In the main the book leaves one with the
^npression of having skimmed the surface of
j-he subject only. Dr. Bluemel has left the
depths untouched. He omits any reference to
hereditary influences; devotes a few lines only
to the all-important subject of environment,
and leads one to suppose that the primary
causal factors are those which, in London, are
regarded as secondary or determining causes
oi stammer.
' This capriciousness of stammering is
sufficient evidence in itself to show that the
lrnPediment does not result from physical dis-
ease ?f the speech organs, for no physical defect
could appear and vanish in this manner in
?sP?nse to external influences. In reality,
ere is no disturbance in the physical mechan-
sm of speech; the disturbance lies in the
Cental mechanism. Stammering is an impedi-
ment of thought." While agreeing with this
atenient one wishes it had been further
?d, orated. It is interesting to find that Dr.
thUeme^' althouSh still holding to his original
e?ry ?f transient auditory amnesia as a
thUSC stammering, now states that, " By
eve ?Se of synonyms, circumlocutions and
asions, the stammerer frequently succeeds
concealing his difficulty altogether."
s ? au^or makes some very pertinent ob-
ernV?tl0.ns on the psychoneuroses, especially
ac P^asizing that the diagnoses should not be
pei.Usatory, nor should they be interpreted by
t00S0- lacking medical knowledge. I agree
stud su^ect ?f spasm deserves further
?eti J' n?^ only from the point of view of
?8y but also from that of treatment.
illiKt ^a-rt w^ich contains some excellent
trainiratl0nsj Dr. Bluemel deals with "Thought
Here^k ES basis ?f speech correction."
his m author gives a detailed account of
an jnoe ^ods. Treatment is regulated through
of Ca&fni0US ari*angement of signals by means
" ston Mne*s anc^ clickers, which are used to
help fn<? " start " the pupil. I cannot
^e ant"*1Bering whether, in a nervous patient,
crease i1?1^a^on of such a signal may not in-
in " t ls n}uscular tension, rather than result
s?metifn^Ul^Z^n8 ^is mind." Relaxation must
Dr. Bluoi i ndifficult in such circumstnces;
" a niinC1-riC ^owever, regards relaxation as
c?rrecti r anc^ no* a mai?r principle of speech
adults''' Its benefit is largely limited to
The kindergarten methods are good; nursery
rhymes, sung and recited, story-telling and
language games are employed, and " despite
the rigid discipline of thought, the children
themselves are not repressed. Spontaneity is
allowed, especially when the transition has
been made from group work to individual
speech. If spontaneity becomes too marked,
the class can be tranquilized by a few moments
silence. The children can also be quieted by
the game of going to sleep. They close their
eyes, fold their hands, and droop their heads.
In a few moments they are allowed to ' wake '
and the work proceeds with the class under
control."
The grade school children gradually acquire
confidence in reading by various " group "
methods and by individual reading with the
instructor, whose help is gradually withdrawn
as the child becomes more self-assured. Silent
reading leads step by step to reading aloud;
conversational sentences are built up in the
same way. Oral games, narratives and dis-
cussions are indulged in when spontaneous
speech has been established. " The principles
of speech correction are substantially the same
with adults as with children. The basis of
therapy is thought training. The training co-
ordinates the mind, and the mind co-ordinates
the speech." Adult pupils are blindfolded to
enable them to concentrate on thought when
addressing the group; they practise with tele-
phones and dictaphones, and " with the con-
sent of the pupil, a punitive electric shock is
given to check careless habits of speech." Can
this be good for the patient's nervous system ?
" The atmosphere should be one of inform-
ality and ease, and no circumstances should
weaken the stammerer's confidence." " The
instructor's manner should be tranquil." "No
child was ever cured of stammering by the
simple expedient of taking lessons," and Dr.
Bluemel emphasizes the importance of the
home influence. He insists that parental help
and co-operation are essential, and that the
child must be protected from undue excite-
ment and fatigue. But, " With an early case
of stammering the treatment should consist
solely of bed rest and the administration of
sedatives." Few authorities would agree that
Luminal is the sedative of choice for stam-
merers, even if drugs were ever needed for
their disorder.
In conclusion, " Much work remains to be
24 MENTAL WELFARE
done in the field of speech correction." Re-
search into the cause of stammering, its treat-
ment, and into the methods already available,
are of the highest importance. There is much
in this book to interest those who desire know-
ledge of one of the most fascinating psycho-
logical problems of the day. There is a good
index.
A.R.
Annual Report of the London County
Council for 1929. Part III. Public Health.
P. S. King & Son. 2/6 net.
This Report, which incorporates that of the
School Medical Officer, contains the usual in-
teresting statistics which appear annually in
the London County Council's Reports. These
Statistics deal chiefly with the incidence of
Infectious Diseases, Tuberculosis, and with
the administration of the various Acts relating
to public health.
The number of cases dealt with by the
Council under the Mental Deficiency Acts
amounted to 5,560. Of these, 3,191 were in
institutions, 74 were under Guardianship,
2,276 were under supervision and 19 were
in places of safety awaiting action. Referring
to an analysis of these cases the Report points
out that it is interesting to note the higher pro-
portion of cases of secondary amentia in those
of lower mental status. Of the idiots, approx-
imately 27% were instances of primary
amentia and in 73% the deficiency was due to
conditions arising in the course of the pre- or
post-natal life of the individual. Dr. Shrubsall
has analysed the family histories of 1,360 cases
and has found that in only 129 cases (that is
approximately 9.5%) one or more of the
brothers and sisters were also mentally defec-
tive. Dr. Shrubsall states that " in one in-
stance five brothers and sisters of a defective
individual had won scholarships and in another
case two brothers had done so; both of these
defectives were samples of simple primary
amentia." It is remarkable that the fre-
quency with which other children in the
family were affected varied inversely with the
grade of defect; that is, the feeble-minded had
defective siblings in 11.6%, imbeciles in 5.7%
and idiots only in 4.3%.
An account is also given in this Report of
an investigation carried out by Dr. Carleton
Williams into the question of the direct trans-
mission of defect. The mentality of the parents
of 100 children who were admitted to Special
(M.D.) Schools was classified under the follow-
ing headings:?superior, average, inferior,
unstable and mentally defective. The results
of his investigation were as follows: ?-
superior 15, average 45, inferior 28, unstable
8, mentally defective 4. An independent in-
vestigation into 66 families of which a head-
mistress of an M.D. School had accurate
knowledge gave figures which tallied very
closely with those of Dr. Carleton Williams.
Dr. Letitia Fairfield has tabulated the data
available as to the after-careers of children
who had been deemed ineducable during
school age, as recorded by the London Assoc-
iation for Mental Welfare. Out of the 1,155
such imbeciles now under supervision, 41 were
found to be in more or less regular employ-
ment. Fifteen of them earn between 10/- and
30/- weekly in food and wages and thirteen
earn 30/- to 35/- or the equivalent. Only a
very few are in occupations indicating any in-
itiative or intellectual capacity beyond the
grade to which they had been allotted and
practically all of them had some kind and
stable relative in the home to shield them from
full adult responsibility in the management of
their lives. Dr. Fairfield draws attention to
one or two interesting points arising from this
brief study. It shows the accuracy of prog-
nosis in childhood by means of tests and
school observation, for of those certified im-
beciles 97% were not fit for industrial occupa-
tion of any kind. "It may further be suggested
that the exclusion of the really low-grade im-
becile from special schools is no hardship and
operates equitably. Children of this grade
have more to gain from the ' socialising
training of an Occupation Centre type than by
any more formal education. Experience tends
to confirm the opinion expressed in the Wood
Report that an intelligence quotient of
should, generally speaking, be the lower lim^
for the special school child and that those
below that level should be relegated to occupa-
tion centres in their own interests and in that
of the higher grade child."
The Health of the School Child. Annual
Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the
Board of Education for the Year 1929. H-^*
Stationery Office. 1930. 2/- net.
The form of this Report is somewhat dif?e1'
ent from that which has been adopted in the
MENTAL WELFARE 25
Past. The four main Chapters deal with a
general survey of the principal branches of
|ne School Medical Service and statistical
ables and a series of Chapters dealing with
special subjects are relegated to the Appendix.
n this form the Report is, perhaps, more
^tractive to the casual reader.
Special effort has been made in the past
ur?e l?cal authorities, school medical
officers and teachers to provide school children
With adequate instruction in personal hygiene.
*r George Newman is of the opinion that three
hings are needed in this respect; first the
re.c?gnition that health education is something
ider than elementary physiology and should
embrace the life of the citizen at home and at
^?rk; secondly the acceptance of health educa-
]?n as a fundamental and integral part of the
cUrriculum, and thirdly the working-out of
a?y*? adapted to suit the curriculum, type
1. circumstances of each school. Informa-
i?n gained from 3,133 returns from schools
? as shown that at the moment health teaching
very unevenly given.
is ? secti?n on Exceptional Children it
Qf Pointed out that the complete ascertainment
of children depends on the co-operation
do school teacher, the school attendance
Partment, health visitors, school nurses and
others ?f voluntary committees with the
r ?ol Medical Officer. The number of child-
fed ascertained in 1929 as mentally defective
m^ca.ble)_amounted to 32,775, and the accom-
to iff cl0n Special Schools for these children
or fl 6; Inall> 28,598 were attending schools
ic ? institutions. Reports of School Med-
the 1? rs indicate that the publication of
Comport of the Joint Mental Deficiency
lem ^as stimulated interest in the prob-
for making special educational provision
tions efretar(lecl child. "The recommenda-
criti'0-?: i ^e. Committee were discussed and
In with discrimination in many areas.
rai.n areas an attempt to make provision
may C es recommended by the Committee
A n?er^e as time and circumstances allow."
subie , aPter of the Appendix is devoted to the
iritere t ^ursery Schools in which keen
year s has been displayed during the past
orty such schools have now received
recognition and plans have been approved for
an additional 12 schools. The cost of building,
equipment, etc., must naturally vary with a
number of factors involved, but an average
cost per place may be said to be about ?30.
The most successful method of staffing such
schools is found to be the appointment of one
or two qualified teachers (according to the
numbers of children in attendance) assisted by
less highly qualified assistants, as certain parts
of nursery school management can usefully be
performed by students who wish to increase
their experience in the care of children.
Amongst the chapters in the Appendix there
is an interesting review of the history of the
development of the School Medical Service
since its inauguration in 1907.
Psychopathology. By J. Ernest Nicole,
L.M.S.S.A., D.P.M. With a Foreword by
W. H. B. Stoddart, M.D., B.S., F.R.C.P.
Bailliere Tindall and Cox. 1930. 10/6.
Dr. Nicole has in this book attempted a brief
summary of the principal schools of psycho-
pathology as they are known by translated
works and otherwise in this country, and has,
on the whole, succeeded well. The chapter on
Freud's theories and the subsequent chapter
principally on the Freudian conception of the
ego are specially good for the condensation of a
difficult subject. Clearly the author hasnotonly
read about Freud but has also discussed his
views at length with others. The Chapters on
Adler and Jung are also neatly condensed and
these chapters form the most useful part of the
book. Not many persons would regard Kempf
and Berman's views as worthy of a chapter to
themselves besides these others. Watson's real
contribution to psychology (his methods of ex-
periment and observation) is missed and the
account of The " Biochemical approaches "
does not profess to be more than a summary.
As a purely literary and uncritical symposium
of such modern views as are available to the
English reader the book is useful, and the
chapters on the most popular schools are well
done.
R.D.G.
