The Use and Abuse of Mental Tests
==================================

:Author: A. Carleton Williams, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H.

Eminent authorities are quoted as saying that mental tests are unnecessary
with low grade defectives and of little value with high grade cases, and also
that the opinion of an expert after a few minutes' observation and conversa-
tion is of greater value than the records of a series of tests conducted by a tyro
who judges by results only.

These statements contain a profound truth, but taken apart from their
context, they are sometimes misinterpreted as meaning that mental tests are
almost useless.

The first dictum might be compared with the analogy of the stethoscope.
It is perfectly true that sometimes the ravages of tubercular disease are so ob-
vious that no instrument is needed to detect them, while in very early cases,
stethoscopic examination may yield no evidence, though bacteriological
methods may make the diagnosis unmistakable. Moreover, there are occasions
when the stethoscope reveals nothing definitely abnormal while general obser-
vation shows that the patient is seriously ill, and in fact these are only too often
the cases where the progress of the disease is particularly disastrous.

In spite of all this, no one would discard the stethoscope in dealing with
diseases of the chest; and similarly no one should neglect mental tests in dealing
with defectives.

It is often urged that the all important matter in mental deficiency is the
conduct. A man needs to be dealt with not because he cannot count back from
20 to i, but because he is inefficient socially. This statement again is true in
itself, but unless the certifying officer has the misfortune to be an employer or
close relative of the alleged defective, he can seldom see much of the conduct
for himself, and most of the evidence as to behaviour must be second-hand and
sometimes little better than hearsay.

Social inefficiency is the important manifestation of defect. For definite
proof that it is due to intrinsic mental deficiency, it is necessary to employ
scientific methods of first-hand mental observation. Without them there have
been such absurdities committed as the diagnosis of a girl as mentally defective
because her conduct was reported to be grossly immoral, and on examination
she was found to have a mis-shapen ear.

Experience has shown the value of serial mental tests. The mental ages
are only part of the information obtainable, but even they have been proved by
Goddard and others to have a remarkably close correlation to practical cap-
acity, and this has been shown also by Tylor Fox at Lingfield even with patients
whose efficiency is complicated by epilepsy. (British Journal of Psychology,
T924-)
In the great majority of ordinary cases, the use of mental tests is essential
for the recognition of defect. In the low grade cases in which the defect can
be recognised without them, they are of great value both for classification and
for the selection of appropriate training.

The term " imbecile " may be used by two medical men of high stand-
ing with extremely different connotations, whereas if to the designation is
added the statement that the defective has a mental age of 5, the description is
more exact and of much greater practical value. This was, in fact, one of the
reasons which originally led Binet to devise his series of tests.

For the higher grades, some of the tests and especially those depending
on academic attainments, may be less appropriate, but those that measure plan-
ning, foresight and power of self-criticism are essential aids to a correct
diagnosis.

Then again, for all grades, when certification is undertaken, the examiner
must cite facts observed by himself, not only because the law insists upon it,
but also because to depend on the statements of others which may be biassed
or gravely inaccurate, would be ethically wrong. How unreliable such evidence
can be is amazing, and is only known to those who have frequently experienced
the perversions of parents and others anxious to get rid of a child that is for
some reason a discredit to them.

The objector may admit that definite criteria are needed for accurate
diagnosis, classification and certification, but still doubt whether an exper-
ienced doctor needs to use these monotonous standardised problems and ques-
tions. To this objection the answer is two-fold : ?first that it is extraordinarily
difficult to know at what level a new test is appropriate and how far the stan-
dards are constant: for example, the age at which non-defectives learn to tell
the time may vary by 5 years or more?and secondly, that it is particularly the
experienced worker who by the repeated application of the same tests, learns
the most from the nature of the responses given to them.

THE ABUSE OF TESTS
--------------------

If then mental tests are so reliable, why are they not all sufficient and why
need they be carried out by specialist medical men themselves? It is known
that for comparisons between various groups of normal children, accuracy has
been obtained by relatively untrained workers, provided that they adhere
strictly to the rules and conditions laid down for their guidance. It is thought
sometimes that it would be satisfactory for testing to be carried out by " field
workers " and then for the records to be submitted to an expert who could
base his diagnosis upon them. It is a little unfortunate that, as yet, the selec-
tion and application of tests for the diagnosis of mental deficiency has not been
more distinguished from their use for measuring the intelligence of normal
children. Yet these two functions ought to receive separate consideration.
Burt (Mental and Scholastic Tests) has some valuable notes, which have
not received the attention they merit, on the tests that are particularly diag-
nostic of mental defect. His comparisons are based on the differences observed
in the results when the tests are applied to ordinary schools and to special
(M.D.) schools respectively.

The differences cited were found in those whose mental defect showed
itself in lack of capacity for education, rather than social inefficiency. In my
own work I have learnt to attach special importance to questions calling for
reasoning power, and to problems of a non-verbal type, such as the 5 weights,
the Healy A and the ball and field; and to consider as less significant for diag-
nosis, some tests such as the rote repetition of digits, the reproduction of designs
and the description of pictures; though these tests have their own uses.
Then again, the method of applying the tests should be modified. For
exact comparisons of normal children it is essential to adhere rigidly to the
conditions laid down, including the time limits. In the diagnosis of mental
defect however, though these rules mav be maintained for the purpose of estim-
atlng the mental age, vet much additional knowledge is obtained by the sub-
Sequent introduction of modifications. For example, if a child of ten counts
*3 objects by rote successfully, but fails to count out 13 objects from a heap,
Particularly if it goes on counting, 13, 14?till the heap is exhausted, its action
ls specially suggestive of mental defect.

Similarly, a parrot-like repetition of the months may be accomplished by
a feeble-minded child but he has much more difficulty in giving the checks,
i.e., the month before August and so on.
The qualitative differences between the mentality of the normal and the
defective, though not easy to define, are very real and important; to ignore
them and to use mental ages like a yard measure or the bed of Procrustes is
ridiculous.

American Psychologists at one time suggested that all persons with a
mental age of less than 12 were probably morons, that is, high grade defectives,
but the investigation of the intelligence of recruits for the United States Army
showed that something like one-third of the adult male population of America
would, under such an assumption, be held to be defective.

Again, in a large proportion of the cases in which mental inefficiency
is suggested, there are complicating factors which make a mechanical type of
measurement entirely fallacious. For the deaf it is necessary to employ a special
series of tests, the non-verbal type (see Mental Welfare, October, 1926). With
the blind, many tests are obviously inapplicable and others need careful mod-
ification; while with those suffering from cerebral paralvses, not only must
some allowances be made, but also a broad view must be taken involving the
application of medical knowledge and special experience. For example, a
diplegic child may have a superficial brightness and a fair mental age but show
strain and fatigue during the examination, indicating that mental effort can-
not be maintained for lone, and that his real capacity for education, training
or emolovment is very slight. With severe neuroses or early psychoses, the
inapplicability of hard and fast methods is evident; a broad judgment founded
on a knowledge of nervous and mental abnormalities is vital.

Malingerers may purposely simulate an inferiority of intelligence which,
if accented as real, may lead to unfortunate results. For example, a delinquent
trying to escane punishment maintained such an attitude of stupidity that he
was actually sent to an institution for defectives. But when he found that he
had exchano-ed the orospect of a few weeks in prison for a more lasting loss of
libertv. he demanded an interview with the medical officer in charge and told
him the correct answers to all the questions which he had previously pretended
to be unable to answer. By good fortune this incident did not befall the
present writer, but it might happen to any one not on the alert for it. The
tests themselves suggest means for its detection, since the fraudulent examinee,
not knowing the standards, would fail to solve some easy problems while suc-
ceeding with others of much greater difficulty.

In the so-called " conduct " cases particularly, the mental age is very far
from an absolute criterion. On this basis alone it is not safe to certify those
reaching the 9 year old level, but with an absolutely reliable record of in-
efficiency confirmed by the subject's own story and the insight afforded into
his mental outlook, it is quite common to find certification justified at higher
levels. When, however, there appears to be good general intelligence as
shown by tests, coupled with alleged unreasonable conduct, the whole case
must be considered with particular care. It may be that the intelligence is
rather superficial and that the real deficiency will be revealed only by those
tests that estimate qualities such as lack of judgment and foresight. Or on the
other hand, it may be that the report of conduct is misleading and the behaviour
explicable on other grounds than mental deficiency. An expert examiner who
was asked how he could assert that a boy who showed a wild and " irrational "
dislike of his father, was not mentally defective, answered that he had the
advantage of knowing both the boy and the father.

To sum up, it may be said that mental tests form an invaluable means of
the direct ascertainment of mental capacity but they must be used with judg-
ment; the nature of the responses as well as the results should be observed and
interpreted by those who possess sound medical and psychological knowledge,
and the findings must be co-ordinated with every other kind of evidence
that is available.
