Oxford Group Intelligence Test. For ages 11-14 years
======================================================

:Type: Book Reviews & Abstracts Devised 
:Author: G. Perrie Wil liams, M.A.D.Litt. Harrap. Price 6d.
A set of five tests for normal children:

U) verbal classification, (ii) number series com-
pletion, (iii) verbal analysis, (iv) rhythm com-
pletion, (v) a new form of non-verbal test.
(Jf these, the first four types of test have a
0llg experimental history behind them. The
analysis and classification tests are now gener-
^ *y recognised as two of the most valuable
0rms of verbal test. Dr. Perrie Williams'
*th test is novel and ingenious. An intro-
spective consideration of this test would seem
0 s^ggest that achievement in it would be
?Hsiderably affected by differences in steadi-
ess ?f application, persistence in search,
ethods of solving and other individual differ-
nces of a non-intellective kind. It is, how-
er> an interesting contribution and may
J^ve to correlate sufficiently highly with other
ensures of intelligence to establish itself as
Useful member in a series of tests.

C.A.S.
Mental Defective. By Richard J. A.
?erry, M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.S.E., and R. G.
??rdon, M.D., D.Sc., F.R.P.E. London.
egan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd.
^rice 8/6 net. 1931.

bool!^S ^ a Pleasantly written and attractive
^on *' several original ideas and terms.
then? ^e however, do not commend
trjb ^e^Ves. For instance, it does not con-
ies e to a clear conception of Mental Defic-
H?rrJ to apply the term " unsane," both to the
s0ll ? baby and the mentally defective per-
0r they are never in the same category.
the t ? r any justification for applying
he^rf1 " microcePlially " to a different form
Wit^ 5 to that which has long been associated
?f taf Wor<^> especially when the method
^ety ^e measurements required for the
PriSejla^nosis are not described. We are sur-
Cretin at statement on page 118 that " the
? rarel' Un^ess recognised very early indeed, is
CUre(V " and would ask where there
On recor(l of a cretin that was cured ?
355 Cr?a?e ^30 the statement is made that of
lnals examined by one of the authors
in a prison in Australia " 80 per cent, were at
microcephalic levels." This is an extraordin-
ary finding. Recent authoritative investiga-
tions in this country place only three to five
per cent, of prisoners in the mentally defec-
tive group. The authors' figures accord with
the records on page 20, the first of which states
that " Binet tests in an Illinois reformatory of
girls committed for immorality, showed 97 per
cent, of them to be feeble-minded." This is
more than three times the percentage found by
experts in this country. The name of the
Illinois investigator is not given. Such big
figures are in harmony with the writers' sug-
gestion that the eight per thousand incidence
of mental defectives in our population recorded
by the Joint Committee of the Board of Con-
trol and the Board of Education in 1929 "may
not improbably be 15 to 20 per cent., not per
thousand." The larger figures suggested by
the writers may be partly due to ignoring
difficult cases who require a change of environ-
ment, or Guidance, or Psychological treat-
ment, or who are suffering from latent Tox-
aemia, a condition to which they attach little
importance. The menace of the Mentally De-
fective is serious, but the authors' obvious
purpose to drive this home will not be achieved
by sweeping into the net a large number of
cases that can not only be better classified in
other terms, but may be cured by appropriate
treatment, a result the authors rightly admit
to be impossible with the Mental Defective.

The Seventeenth Annual Report of the
Board of Control for the year 1930. H.M.
Stationery Office. Part I, 2/-; Part II, 6/6.
The introductory paragraphs of the Board's
Report for 1929 examined certain aspects of
the Mental Treatment Act, particularly with
reference to early mental treatment; this year's
Report gives an excellent summary of the op-
portunities for development of the mental
health service which this Act affords, such as
the extension of facilities for early treatment,
the increased powers of Local Authorities with
regard to after-care and research, the alteration
in status of the rate-aided patient and so on.
As the Board points out, it is too early yet
to feel to any considerable extent the effects
of these far reaching changes and an enquiry
as to the progress made up to the end of Feb-
ruary in the provision for out-patients, volun-
tary and temporary, showed, as might be
expected, very unequal results in different
areas. The development of out-patient clinics
is, however, most gratifying and the Board
comments on the satisfactory co-operation be-
tween the staff of clinics held at voluntary
hospitals and the Superintendents of the men-
tal hospitals. The Board also urges that teach-
ing hospitals should be encouraged to admit
voluntary patients in the earliest stages in
order that students may have the opportunity
of seeing cases not only in an advanced or
chronic condition but also in the early phases
of mental disorder.

In accordance with the provisions of the
Mental Treatment Act the constitution of the
Board was revised from 1st January, 1931, and
now consists of five Senior Commissioners and
eleven Commissioners.

Since the publication of the last Report
three new Institutions for defectives have been
opened, including Hensol Castle, Glamorgan,
and Stallington Hall, Staffs. In addition to
these a steadily increasing number of Local
Authorities have acquired or are seeking to
acquire estates with the object of establishing
colonies. Up to the present time 39 estates
have been acquired for this purpose, and
should ultimately serve the needs of 74 Author-
ities. Some Local Authorities have appropri-
ated Public Assistance Institutions for the ex-
clusive use of their mental deficiency service
and it is hoped that this will lead to better
classification and to more suitable conditions
than have formerly been possible in a mixed
Institution.

The Board expresses regret that Occupa-
tion and Industrial Centres are not being
more rapidly developed as they have proved
to be an inexpensive and efficient way of meet-
ing the needs of cases who are being looked
after at home or who are suitable for placing
out on licence or under Guardianship from
Institutions. "It is not generally recognised,"
the Board states, " that all defectives, apart
from the lowest grade idiots, benefit from
training and that occupation and paid employ-
ment, to which training may lead, is the most
important factor in fitting them to take some
part in community life. Without training or
occupation even well-behaved defectives living
in good homes are liable to degenerate into a
condition which calls for institutional treat-
ment. It is hardly too much to say that every
place in a centre which is regularly filled
means a bed saved for the time being in an
Institution."

There are now 171 Day Centres, of which
have been established by Local Authorities
and 161 by Voluntary Associations. Horne
Teaching schemes are now in operation in
three areas. In one area out of 41 defectives
who are being trained in their homes 16 are
doing some kind of paid work and a general
improvement in alertness and response has
been found in all cases. The Report gives
statistics of the numbers in attendance at Occu-
pation Centres, the number of sessions, etc->
and some account of the training. In discuss-
ing the stalling and the necessary qualification5
for Supervisors of Centres the Board recom-
mends in large areas the appointment of aj1
experienced general supervisor who will vis1*
the Centres in turn, train the inexperienced
supervisors, introduce new methods and ge?'
erally lead and organise the work.

The total number of cases under Guardian'
ship for whom the Local Authority were reS'
ponsible on 1st January, 1931, was 1,832, ^
increase of 306 cases during the year as con1'
pared with an increase of 188 cases during the
year 1929. It is a matter of regret, however*
that some mental defectives have been place
out under Guardianship who are quite unsui*'
able for that form of care and the Board poin^5
out the necessity for extreme care both in t&,
choice of cases and also in the selection 0
Guardians.

An analysis of 300 cases on licence from ^
stitutions shows that 178 of these are efl1
ployed. Of 103 women, 80 are employed 1
domestic work living in, and 23 employed 1
work living out. Taking 5/- a week P1.?
board and lodging or 20/- a week "living <>v
as being a " self-supporting " wage, it
been found that 73 of the women and 37 of t ^
men on licence can be considered as se
supporting. The Board considers that
practice of sending defectives out on l}ceni0
is proving a success, but draws attention
the danger of discharging these cases bet
the condition of the defective and the envtf
ment warrant it.

The question of the marriage of defect1 .
and of sterilisation has again been consider^
The Board once more strongly recomine
that the marriage of defectives under
should be prohibited. With regard to Ster1
tion the Board states, " Whether the State
should go further and should, as many urge,
hmit the danger by legalising sterilisation is
a far more difficult question. We recognise
that the question deserves, as we hope it will
Receive, close and scientific study. But, as we
have pointed out in previous Reports, the nec-
essary data are not yet available to enable any
considered judgment to be formed of the
social and physical consequences of such legis-
ation .... In the present state of our know-
eoge we should not be justified in recom-
mending the Government to introduce
pgislation, even of the most cautious and
United character, which would inevitably
Provoke strong opposition from many bodies,
?n religious or other grounds, for the sake of
^vantages which may be arguable in theory,
ut which have not yet been demonstrated in
Practice."

The Report is concluded with a review of
^search carried out in Mental Hospitals and
? tention is called to the Supplement (Part II)
ft which two communications, one from Car-
. and one from Wadsley (Sheffield) deal
Vlth the subject of Out-Patient Clinics.
Methods of Choosing a Career. By F. M.
h-arle, Med., B.Sc. George G. Harrap &
^?- London. 1931. Price 12/6.
r ^hile the value of vocational guidance is
t, c?Snized to some extent in this country,
J?*are many who still argue that the youth
0 takes the first job he can get " is as
^o-ssful as his neighbour, whose career is
TivCarefully planned and supervised.
Util k??k is a record of an investigation?
, -taken by the National Institute of In-
to ,ri- Psychology?the object of which was
to lS?mate the real value of vocational advice
a cl S anc^ about to leave school. It is
an<i detailed account of work, begun
Jul, summer of 1925 and concluded in
1929.

Care e exPeriment consisted of a study of the
Was i* ^'^00 children, whose intelligence
ranp-S !^^tly below average, and whose homes
erat ] ^r?m " moderately good " to " mod-
as th ^,P?or-" Half of these children, known
?ffered . c?ntrol group," took the first job that
enCe? rtself (usually at school leaving confer-
half ?r a family friend), while the other
ere advised by vocational psychologists
as to the type of work in which success seemed
most certain.

The method of advising this latter half may
appear at first-sight, unnecessarily elaborate.
It involves a lengthy study, and the drafting of
a "case-history" for each child. But attempts
to give vocational guidance on a briefer study
of an individual's make-up have proved un-
reliable. Each pupil's abilities?general,
mechanical, manual, etc.?are primarily as-
sessed, by specially devised and standardized
tests. Physical and environmental conditions,
teachers' reports, and temperamental charac-
teristics are likewise considered. Thus, child-
ren can be classified broadly into three main
types?" those suited to work with books,
with people or with things."

The psychologist must have a knowledge of
the various local industries, and of the qual-
ities essential for success in each of these.
This has led to the scientific analysis of most
industries, and the broad classification of posts
into the following types?mental, social and
manual work. This last type is sub-divided
into skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled labour.
The latter half of the book deals with the
Institute's " follow-up " of each child's
career, and with a comparison of the success
of the advised and of the " control " groups.
The details here are rather tedious. Only the
statistician will be interested in the actual
tabulation of results, but the average reader
will follow the summing-up sufficiently with-
out over-burdening his mind with a study of
the figures.

" Methods of Choosing a Career " should
appeal to the educationist, the employer, and
the parent. The author has carefully avoided
the use of technical language, and the reader
will be impressed by his unprejudiced attitude
of mind. There is no attempt to over-estimate
the value of vocational guidance, or to under-
estimate the advice of the teacher and the
employment-officer. The limitations of the in-
vestigators' methods, and the difficulties of
the experiment are not minimized in the least,
and the Institute's disappointment that so few
of the children followed its advice is frankly
admitted.

Whilst establishing its advantages, the
author would not delude himself or others
that vocational guidance will eliminate the
problem of " the square peg in the round
hole." But he claims that its more frequent
94 MENTAL WELFARE
use would place in the hands of the adoles-
cent " a chart by which to steer his ship on
the sea of life."

A.D.P.
Brain, Mind, and the External Signs of
Intelligence. By Bernard Hollander, M.D.
George Allen and Unwin. London. 1931.
Pp. 288. 12s. 6d.

The aim of this book is to present a critical
survey of the views of many authorities, to
shew that whereas other branches of medical
science have made great advances during the
past hundred years the physiology of the brain
presents such difficulties that our knowledge of
mental functions is still obscure.

We are informed that it was by the obser-
vation of living heads that the author dis-
covered thirty years ago that a large number
of feeble-minded children, though of normal
parentage, were mentally deficient in conse-
quence of injuries to their brain at birth as a
result of difficult labour, having malformed
heads, or bearing the marks of badly applied
forceps. We are also told that if we never
look at the outline of a living head an import-
ant aid to diagnosis in mental deficiency is
lost to us apart from other practical uses, and
that while mental tests practised so extensively
in our elementary schools are undoubtedly ex-
cellent they would gain still more in value if
in addition any exceptional shape of the head
were taken notice of.

The difficulties of many certifying medical
officers and medical witnesses in the criminal
courts would be relieved if the diagnosis of
feeble-mindedness as defined by statute could
receive reliable assistance from such observa-
tions. Many of us are acquainted with men
the outlines of whose malformed heads are ob-
vious by reason of baldness, but who are
capable and intelligent citizens and shew no
evidence of mental defect.

The author emphasizes the fact that he bases
the deductions in his book on clinical evidence.
He alleges that too much has been made of the
experimental and histological investigations
into the functions of the brain, and protests
against what he declares is the exaggerated
estimation of laboratory work to which all
those who are engaged in it are hailed as scien-
tists, and none others, are considered to
deserve the name or merit serious attention.
The reviewer suggests that in fact just tribute
is paid to the scientific clinician no less than
to the unbiassed laboratory worker, and that
in regard to the subject with which this Jour-
nal is concerned, the clinician occupies the
foremost place at the present time.

Dr. Hollander states that there is no dis-
tinctively criminal type of head. One wonders
why Dr. Goring's elaborate and well-known
study " The English Convict " receives no
mention in this connection, having regard to
the extensive and numerous quotations from
very many writers which appear throughout
the book.

The author concludes that the external man-
ifestations of conduct are dependent upon local
development of the cerebral cortex and that
this influences the shape of the head : that the
frontal lobes are destined for intellectual pr?'
cesses, the occipital lobes for love; the parietal
for fear; and the temporal lobes for anger:
that lesions of the frontal lobes give rise to a
a feeling of joy and self-satisfaction, incessant
enterprise and a rapid flow of thought: that
lesions of the parieto-occipital area, generally'
give rise to low spirits, apprehensiveness, sell'
depreciation, depression, lack of initiative*
slowness of ideas, and often a tendency t?
suicide; and lesions of the lower temporal area
to irritation, resentment, anger, agressiveness>
violence, and language in accordance with ana
restricted to these feelings, and often, also, t?
a tendency to epilepsy and homicide.

Many of the author's assertions are provoca'
tive, presumably with set purpose, for we a*"e
told that it is not the author's wish that any
thing contained in the book should be takeIJ
for granted, and that it was written solely *?j
the purpose of giving an impetus to a genef^
inquiry into the whole problem of brain func
tions on new lines.

The book is well printed and well illustrate
with a copious bibliography. jT
W->T>
