Article 3
=========

:Author: Noel H. M. Burke, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.M.

(Senior Assistant Medical Officer, The Fountain Mental Hospital)
There is room for much controversy over the causation and mechanism
of some of the mental diseases, and one can take sides with the believers in
psychogenesis or with the exponents of toxic absorption from teeth or intestines.
There can be little doubt, on the other hand, that Mental Deficiency depends
essentially on a limited functional capacity of the brain structures. This may
be due to the lack of some controlling chemical substance, as in cretinism, or
to injury to cells which were previously healthy and normal in structure, as
in meningitis, encephalitis, or cases of long and difficult labour. These are
examples of secondary Amentia, and constitute, on present evidence, some
2o% of all aments. The condition might more logically be called by some
such name as infantile dementia, to stress the fact that it is a brain that was
inherently normal which is now at fault.

The remainder of defectives are primary aments, and their weakness
is due to structural deficiency in the brain cortex. For all types of deficiency,
therefore, it may be laid down that the condition is purely and definitely a
bodily one in its mechanism and genesis, and that the essential seat of disorder
is in the brain cortex.

Much work has been done on this nuclear subject in the pathogenesis
of Mental Deficiency, and its result may be compressed into a statement that
gross or minute abnormality of structure can be found in the brain of every
defective.

With regard to the secondary group of aments, the pathology of each
case is fairly obvious when the particular cause is remembered. In the primary
group there is more or less massive structural anomaly} involving whole con-
volutions, lobes or even hemispheres, in a few idiots and particularly in the
Microcephalics.

The majority of defectives, however, show anomaly on a finer scale, so
that the brain is small and light and of simple convolutional pattern, while
microscopical examination shows that the cortical cells are poor in number,
poor in structure and often disorderly in arrangement. In either case, the
essential nature of the anomaly is imperfection, imperfection of progress and
development, so that at no date have the brain elements reached their normal
stage of structural adequacy. This contitutes the one fundamental condition
in the pathology of all primary mental deficiency, the true Amentia, but a
similar imperfection may be perceived in many cases to involve structures and
organs other than the brain. It is not unprofitable to study this wider physical
aspect of Mental Deficiency, for to do so, while interesting in itself, may just
possibly throw some more general light on the subject of mental deficiency
as a whole and on its causation in particular.

In general structure, whether measured by height or girth or weight, the
average defective is inferior to the average member of his race. The lowest
actual measures and the lowest average in a large series were each achieved
by the mentally defective. In this respect, to arrive in the midst of a colony
of defectives gives the same impression as to arrive at the Gare du Nord in
Paris, where the inhabitants appear to be so much smaller than the people one
has left behind either in England or at Calais. To put this point in another
way, it may be said that the defective child who comes for examination is
probably two years older than he looks.

But other visual impressions are produced on confronting a group of
defectives: the facial expression, the gait and gestures and the general bearing
catch the eye. These often show quite distinctive characteristics, but it is not
so easy to explain all of them on grounds of imperfect anatomical structure.
They are so much functions of habit, and particularly of habitual attitudes of
mind, that they should be regarded more as the reflections of such imper-
fection than as the direct signs of the imperfection itself.

If we now examine the defective patients more minutely and take detail
by detail, we find a number of matters of interest which were fully described,
from another point of view, in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine
for February, 1931.

In the records of a series of 2,476 low grade defectives under the age of
16 years, some 200 abnormalities of structure were mentioned, as shown in
the following table: ?
TABLE A?" Stigmata " Recorded in Series A
Total
Eye conditions   15 cataract, 14 deformities, etc. (2 coloboma,
2 glaucoma), 30 blind   59
Ear conditions   asymmetry 34, " deformed " 5, accessory
auricle 1   40
Face conditions  asymmetry 7, " foetal " 1, hypertelorism 2,
deformed nose 1   11
Head   asymmetry 5   5
Hare-lip     2
Cleft Palate   partial 4, degree not specified 7   11
Teeth   double row 2, absent incisor 1, other ir-
regularities unlisted   3
Accessory nipple ... 1 right, 1 left   2
Heart conditions ... patent foramen ovale 3, congenital heart 21 24
Hermaphroditism ... hypospadias 1 ...     1
Congenitally short leg ... right 1   1
Precocity (? pituitary)... 2   2
Nsevus   2 (nsevoid amentia)  2
Ichthyosis   3   3
Spina bifida   with hydrocephaly 2, with paralysis 1, others 2 5
Meningocele   3   3
Hand conditions ... web 1-2 fingers, 2-3 fingers (2 cases), not speci-
fied 3, 6th finger or extra thumb 2,
4 fingers too large 1, congenitally con-
tracted fingers 1   10
Foot conditions ... web 2-3 toes (4), 3-4 toes (2), 4-5 toes (2), un-
specified 4, " deformed toes " 2, deformed
foot 1, small toes 1, 3 toes incomplete 1 17
The corresponding list for another series of 583 cases, who were especially
examined in the search for such conditions, follows: ?
TABLE B?" Stigmata " Recorded in Series B
Total
Eye conditions   congenital cataract 2, blind 4, optic atrophy 1 7
Ear conditions   asymmetry 5, deformed 1, accessory auricle 2 8
Face conditions  asymmetry 6, deformed 1, hypertelorism, with
or without epicanthus 31. Epicanthus 10 48
Head   asymmetry 1   1
Hare-lip   1   1
Palate   partial cleft 3   3
Accessory nipple ... 2 right, 2 left   4
Heart   " congenital heart "2   2
Hermaphroditism ... 1   1
Nsevus   naevoid amentia 2  2
Albino   1   1
Hand conditions ... webbed fingers 2, deformed thumb 2, index 1,
deformed hands 1, 6th finger 1, small
finger 1, synostosis of metacarpals 1 ... 8
l'oot conditions  webbed toes 5, long or short toes 15, deformed
foot 1, 6th toe 1   22

In a number of these conditions there is evidence of imperfection of
structural development localised to the respective organs or parts. Coloboma,
?r instance, is the persistence of a cleft formed during the development of
e eye, which should be closed by a process that is normally completed by the
th week of intra-uterine life. Similar processes unite the two sides of the
growing palate and of the growing lip at the same age. Failure of union
etween the sides of the back occurs much later in the case of spina bifida,
where the bony arch of the spinal canal should be formed during the 3rd
month, and of meningocele where the gap between portions of the occipital
bones should close at about the time of birth.

In the heart, again, the foramen ovale gives a normal communication
between the right and left auricles during pre-natal life, but should be
occluded as a result of the new conditions established at birth, when respira-
tion by the lungs replaces aeration of the foetal blood by the placenta. Closure
of this foramen may be delayed or incomplete, but this failure is thought to
be unduly common in Mongolian defectives.

In a somewhat similar category is delay in the onset of puberty which is
noted in many cases of amentia, menstruation not appearing until 14, 15 or
even 17 years in a large proportion of the female patients. This physiological
delay depends on an imperfection of the underlying structure of the endocrine
glands. It is not so easy to give an accurate date to the appearance of puberty
in the male, but the following points are of great interest and of considerable
significance.

In the records of 128 consecutive cases of defective boys under 16 of whom
the facts were precisely stated, both testicles were undescended in 63 and one
testicle was undescended in each of a further two. In this series every age was
represented from 4 to 15, and instances of this imperfection appeared at each
age. The distribution, however, was not a chance scattering but was related
to the age in such a way that 66.6% of those from 4 to 8 years old showed this
mark of imperfection, while it was found in only 25% of the remaining cases
in the older group. The general inference from these figures is that undescent
of the testicle is present in two-thirds of all male defectives when born, that
late descent occurs in some, but that the process is never completed in a quarter
of the total.

Now it is not justifiable to propound a general rule on a series of 128
cases, but the. figures are large enough and definite enough to suggest very
serious consideration. If these findings be confirmed by further observations
the gates are opened on certain paths of thought. The testicles should be fully
descended at birth, if not a month earlier. Up to about the 7th year of life
non-descent may be regarded as being merely delayed, but after that age its
absence from the scrotum must be regarded (according to Mr. E. H. Corner
in the Practitioner's Surgery) as permanent.

Whether delayed or permanent in non-descent, such a testicle is found
to be imperfect in structure and in capacity, and it is unlikely to reach an
adequate maturity. The imperfectly descended testicle may have an internal
secretion, but it is rarely spermatogenic, and then only for 3 or 4 years from
about 20 to 23.

Is this set of facts to be regarded, from the aspect of causation, as evidence
of a general failing of biological quality in mental defectives and as a natural
method of automatic extinction of an inferior strain ? And, from the point of
view of social treatment, do these facts demand consideration in discussion of
the problem of legalised sterilisation?

The group of conditions so far considered appears to be a homo-geneous
one and to carry on the simple idea of imperfection in localised sites. Yet it
is not at all so simple, for there is much reason to assign to spina bifida and
to hare-lip causes other than inherent developmental imperfection. Spina
bifida can be produced experimentally, in suitable species, by treatment of the
developing embryo, and its non-artificial production has been ascribed to the
effect of morbid conditions of intra-uterine environment rather than to con-
ditions inherent in the developing cells. If such an explanation be true, and
if it be true in every case, then cleft palate and similar conditions cannot be
regarded as evidences of such impaired biological quality as is assumed in the
primary amentias.

In so far, however, as there is a tendency for such things to be familial
there must be some familial cause, and possibly it is to be found in an inherit-
able quality affecting the physiology of gestation.

This is at present no more than pure speculation; too many of the factors
are unknown, but such speculations may act as sign-posts in the search for
knowledge.

It must be borne in mind, however, that the evidence of the present
investigation, and of previous observations, shows little correlation between
the incidence of mental deficiency and of hare-lip and cleft palate, so rules
that apply to the two latter do not necessarily hold for the former. In the
case of undescended testicle the correlation appears to be quite a definite one,
as has been shown above, and tentative inferences are justified.

Another type of anomaly which appears to have a definite, though less
Marked, proportional incidence, is syndactyly or webbing of fingers or toes.
As this condition is normal at the 7th week of intra-uterine life its persistence
may be explained as an arrest of development, but we are now led towards
another class of anomalies which appears to be characterised by aberrance or
distortion of development rather than by simple imperfection. It is difficult
to draw a complete division between syndactyly and polydactyly, or to ex-
clude from the group the cases of undue largeness or smallness of individual
digits, and other similar anomalies, for there is a tendency for these to occur
together. It has been suggested that there is some controlling factor in develop-
ment which governs ordered growth in the extremities. This view has been
put forward by several observers who approached the matter from the stand-
points of different kinds of observation.

Before attaching too much importance to developmental physical anom-
alies, whether of aberrance or of imperfection, as evidence on the nature of
Cental deficiency, it is necessary to return to the question of the degree of
correlation between the two, and this is remarkably difficult. In the larger of
series referred to only 8.2% showed these anomalies, while the smaller
and more carefully examined group showed 19.5%. There appear to be no
observations on normal children that are quite commensurate, but scattered
gures are to be found for various individual conditions. These are shown
0ri a percentage basis in the following table, the normal figures being from
various sources, and quoted by Dr. Tredgold or by Sir Arthur Keith. The
Egyptian and African figures, interesting for comparison, are quoted in a
paper by Dr. Hugh Stannus.

TABLE C.
Normal Egypt & Africa Series A Series B
Abnormal ears   34-44 ? 1.61 1.37
Auricular fistula   0.6 4.6 ? ?
Auricular appendage ... 0.66 ? 0.04 0.34
Hare Lip   ? 0.15
0.04 0.08 0.17
Cleft Palate  0.062 ? 0.083 0.68
Polydactyly   ? 0.016
0.05 ? 0.34

The entries in the " normal " column are a small reward for a fairly
wide search through the literature, and study of the table shows how little real
information is still available and how impossible it is to argue from these
meagre data.

The only general conclusion that seems to be justified is that there is little
support for the common idea that there is a close relationship between so-called
Stigmata of Degeneration and Mental Deficiency as a whole.

There is no doubt that an examination made for the purpose of finding
these things is more productive than a simple routine examination, and the
" B " Series may be taken therefore as giving the true maximum figure at a
little under 20%. 7'his is probably a higher ratio than is to be found in the
average population but certainty is at present lacking, and any inferences
based on the theories of a relationship between mental deficiency and this sort
of localised physical deficiency must be made with full reserve.

The theory has been used very largely as an aid to diagnosis between
primary and secondary deficiency, and between deficiency and other conditions
that give an impaired mental performance difficult to distinguish from true
mental defect. This method is probably justifiable, but it should be relied on
only to a very limited extent, and should be given weight only as yielding
supplementary and not conclusive evidence. It has been suggested by some
that one " stigma " means little, but that two or more in one individual have
definite evidential value. When groups A and B (3,059 cases) were searched
for information on this point, there were found 20 cases with 2 anomalies each,
including epicanthus as one anomaly, 3 with 3 and 1 with 4.

The grouping of " stigmata " seems, therefore, to occur too seldom to be
of much value in a negative sense, that is to say, absence of " stigmata " proves
nothing. Even the presence of grouped anomalies proves little, for it has no
relation to degree of defect, and this confirms the general evidence of the statis-
tics from Group A.

TABLE D?Stigmata Related to Degree of Mental Defect
No. of cases Stigmata Percentage
Idiots   1,067 ... 85 ... 7.0
Imbeciles   1,397 ... 118 ... 8.4
Feeble-minded   12 ... 0 ... 0.0
All cases  2,476 ... 203 ... 8.2

It was thought that physical anomalies, if related to mental deficiency,
should be found with increasing frequency as the degree of deficiency increased,
yet this proves to be untrue. Group A contained over 1,000 idiots and more im-
beciles, and the relationship to each group is simply that to deficiency as a
whole.

When an examination was made into the incidence of physical anomalies
among the different types of deficiency, a different picture was obtained.

TABLE E?Stigmata Related to Type of Mental Defect
No. of cases Stigmata Percentage
Simple   942 ... 76 ... 8.0
Paralysed   546 ... 46 ... 8.4
Hydrocephalic   70 ... 7 ... 10.0
Epileptic   542 ... 34 ... 6.2
Syphilitic   53 ... 0 ... 0.0
Cretin   33 ... 3 ... 9.0
Microcephalic   90 ... 6 ... 6.6
Mongol     200 ... 31 ... 15.5
All types   2,476 ... 203 ... 8.2

The one outstanding feature is provided by the Mongolian group with
nearly twice as many anomalies as the average for all defectives, and that figure
is obtained after excluding those conditions, such as epicanthus and small
simple ears, which are part of the condition of Mongolism.

This seems to provide evidence that those are right who are driven by
contact with aments to the belief that Mongolism is a distinctive condition,
different in nature and causation from the other types of mental deficiency.
Perhaps there is here also a clue to the problem of such nature and causation,
a problem that many workers would be glad to solve.

SUMMARY
!? The essential physical basis of mental deficiency is imperfection of brain
structure.
-? Other structural abnormalities are seen in many defectives, both generalised
and localised, which may be grouped under the heads of imperfections and
aberrations of growth.
3- The possible values of these conditions are discussed as evidences of the
nature of mental deficiency.
4- Normal standards are inadequately known and only tentative conclusions
are justified.
5- There is a correlation of localised physical anomalies with mental defici-
ency amounting to about 20%.
6- There is no relation with degree of defect but there is a definite relation
with one type of defect, namely, Mongolism.
I have to thank the Medical Superintendent, Dr. James Nicol, for per-
mission to use the records of his hospital in the compilation of the statistics,
and to state that the London County Council is in no way responsible for any
?f the views expressed.
