The Difficult Child
===================

MENTAL WELFARE 71
Book Reviews *32 Abstracts
." A series of six
lectures delivered under the auspices of the
Jewish Health Organisation of Great Britain
at Toynbee Hall, London, May 19th to
June 5th, 1930, and published in " Mother
and Child." 1 /- net.
-This pamphlet ought to be studied by all
hose who have the interest of the child at
heart, and if this were so the wide circulation
^hich it would achieve would not be beyond
s merits. In the six lectures contained in it
are set down clearly and concisely the prin-
pPies and practice of Child Guidance. The
sychiatrists in charge of the Child Guidance
hnic organized by the Jewish Health Organ-
Sations, give two lectures each while the
fecial worker and the psychologist give one
ecture each. In these, the way in which the
formation is collected which is requisite for
, ^ assessment of the difficulties of the difficult
, lld is explained. Further, how each mem-
er of the team can co-operate in the measures
fc.essary to remedy these difficulties is ex-
k ained. The general impression which may
gained is that successful Child Guidance in-
kn VeS a team work by persons endowed with
th ?wl.e(lge, skill and common sense, but that
SoGfC n? esoter^c rnystery about the business.
sa'H as clin^c is concerned and it may be
th' same applies to other clinics in
ch'^ 1Country> no one responsible for a difficult
an need fear that in bringing him to a guid-
tr- e elinic, he is to be subjected to some in-
iata ^ an dreadful enquiry which might
tha ? ?Uce more difficulties into his personality
t^at Vj took out- Nor need such a person fear
PUr ? c^n*c a cover and an excuse for the
^ ?f some pet fad of an eccentric genius.
tea ^ other hand, it would appear that this
the nds, as others do, that very often it is
ratu^arent and guardian who require guidance
the er ^an the child, for it is very frequently
cmtj?cial conditions which make for the diffi-
rather than anything peculiar in the
ychologicai make-up of the child.
aUce ^ necessity of team work in child guid-
lutelvS stressed in this pamphlet, for it is abso-
the o es^ential that the director, usually called
Psyel? ihiatrist, should have knowledge of the
0 ogical aptitudes of the child, of his
educational achievements, of his social milieu,
and of his physical health and he cannot be
expected to find out all this for himself. It is
salutary also that the social worker should not
imagine that she can know all about the prob-
lem from a few visits to the home, or that the
psychologist should think that a formal test
by any of the standard methods is an infallible
guide to the solution of all the problems at
issue.
It is to be hoped that this pamphlet will be
widely read and that as a result the knowledge
of the usefulness of child guidance in the
present and its great potentialities for the
future will be more widelv recognized.
R.G.G.
Modern Psychotherapy by Emanuel Miller,
M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.M. Jonathan
Cape, 1930. Price 5/-net.
The value of this little book lies in the
simple, unbiased treatment of complex and
sometimes controversial matter.
The science, or art of Psychotherapy suffers
(perhaps because it lends itself so well to specu-
lative exercises) from the mass of literature
that has grown up around it. These many
books and articles hold matter of extreme in-
terest but as this is usually couched in a lan-
guage of its own?its presentation is often
needlessly verbose?it is little wonder that the
general practitioner has no time to deal with it,
even although he may be aware of the psycho-
logical interaction of mind and body and wish-
ful of further enlightenment on the subject.
Although the scope of his work allows for
little elaboration, Dr. Miller gives an interest-
ing outline of the various psychotherapeutic
methods and also makes clear the deep-seated
fundamental principles underlying the whole
science. In Chapter I emphasis is laid on the
fact that psychotherapy is inextricably bound
up with the practice of medicine in every form,
whether its exponent be aware of it or no.
Physicians through the media of their own
diverse personalities, will of necessity use
different methods with their patients, but the
interaction of the two minds with their differ-
ing emotional and intellectual components
must be taken into consideration. " There are
cross relationships between the physicians of
a kind and patients of a kind'' which may lead
to therapeutic deadlock; Dr. Miller considers
72 MENTAL WELFARE
that these difficult situations should be clearly-
recognised and he sets out to help the prac-
titioner to deal with them by recognition of the
underlying psychological causes.
Chapter II deals very adequately with
the often ill-understood methods, meaning and
objects of psycho-analysis. The importance of
the Freudian philosophy is fully recognised as
being the link in the scientific chain which
binds together the various forms of psycho-
therapy. In the light of Freud's masterly
deductions we are able to evaluate the causes
of success and failure in the older, more em-
pirical methods. Other schools of analytical
psychology, such as those of Jung and Adler,
are sympathetically discussed.
The serious nature of the analyst's pro-
fession is stressed, the suitability of his own
personality and the necessity for adequate
preparation and training.
Chapter III is devoted to the various meth-
ods of suggestion, this being the oldest and
most universal form of treatment. In Chapter
IV " The application of Psychotherapy " will
be found most useful matter regarding the
advisability of treatment in the Functional
Psychoses.
It is generally accepted of the other group,
the neuroses and hysterias, that while some
may yield to suggestion and the forceful or
persuasive manner of the physician, in the
majority of severe cases deeper analytical
treatment only is likely to bring about perman-
ent cure.
The chapter on " Early Treatment and Pre-
vention " is all too short, particularly in view
of Dr. Miller's qualifications to speak on the
subject. We should like to have heard more
of his experience on incipient Dementia Prse-
cox and the hysterias of puberty, especially in
view of the emphasis he lays on the importance
of early diagnosis and treatment.
In the last chapter he raises fascinating
questions in the relationship of mind and body
and notes the excellent strategic position of the
general practitioner for running psychological
investigation concurrently with his ministra-
tions to organic disease.
The book ends with a useful glossary of
terms peculiar to psychological medicine.
M.P.
An Introduction to the Psychology of the
Classroom. C. E. Holley. Heath & Com-
pany. New York (Harrap), 1931. 6/- net.
This book, as the author acknowledges in
his introduction, is the outcome of his own
early experiences in the study of psychology
when he " spent many hours of blind and un-
satisfying labour in studying a formal text
book." Accordingly, he " felt an urge to
write an introduction to the field of psychology
for the teacher, that would be more pertinent
to his problems."
It may be assumed then that Mr. Holley in-
tends his book to be a text book that shall give
to students in training an introduction to psy-
chology, at once practical and interesting. The
book is certainly non-technical in character)
and is written from the standpoint of the
teacher faced with classroom problems rather
than from that of the psychologist concerned
with theories and schools of thought. For aa
introductory book, the scope is rather wide-
Every aspect of psychology is touched upon-'
there are chapters on the problems of nature
and nurture, individual differences, instinct
and emotion?with special reference to the in1'
portance of the emotional factor in classroom
problems. Much space is devoted to methods
of learning and the formation of habits?in'
deed, one chapter of this section concludes
with a list of twenty-five " principles to guide
a teacher while directing habit formation."
Even such topics as the theory of formal
training, mental measurement, abnormal VsV
chology and mental hygiene are included nj
this comparatively small text book?whlC
concludes with a mental hygiene programme
of ten points.
Presentation is clear, and the language,
the whole, is free from Americanisms, but t1^
treatment is necessarily summary and some^
what superficial in character. The very *r
quent use of sub-headings printed in hea y
type cuts up the text and makes the ideas aP
pear a little disjointed?although possio y
such a device is helpful to students.
The exercises given at the end of each
ter are also a feature which should make
book attractive to students. ^
The Bibliography?given with each chap
for students' use in working exercises?-15 v
poor. It is confined almost wholly to so
MENTAL WELFARE 73
what obscure American writers. It seems a
pity to limit the student's reading to such
" local " work, especially as the treatment in
the book itself is so brief.
However, an " Introduction to Classroom
Psychology" should prove useful as a revision
hook for students who have attended lectures
?n psychology and also read widely, and who
need a comprehensive summary that would
Serve to call to mind?for the purpose of an ex-
arnination?ideas that had been gained from
wide reading and a more detailed study of the
various aspects of educational psychology.
E.W.
The Mongol in our Midst. BvF. G. Crook-
shank, M.D., F.R.C.P. Third Edition,
(greatly enlarged and entirely re-written),
^egan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., Lon-
don, 1931. Price 21/- net.
If we were not still held in thrall by the
??k of Genesis, we should realise that it is
j^Qst unlikely that man sprang at one particu-
ar rnoment from simian ancestry. The extra-
0r(iinary persistence of certain racial types,
^ntury after century, in spite of repeated
ln?lings of blood, surely suggests an ex-
rerneiy ancient origin for such types. Even
e-historic man showed similar differences.
, late it has been urged, with considerable
o/kT existence of four different types
Si t ' now clearly recognised by physiolo-
tio S physicians, points in the same direc-
e ? . Surely this striking fact is more readily
of aine.d by a polvgenetic origin for the races
Mankind than in any other way.
^en we free our minds from prejudices,
Dre 6Ver deep-seated they may be, we shall be
Dr to extend a sympathetic hearing to
stat d ?rookshank, who has recently re-
his h i v'ews in a much enlarged version of
orip.,-00,, " The Mongol in our Midst," which
^orr >> a^T5eared in the " To-day and To-
in vj?w " series. Not unnaturally, perhaps,
tered ODP?sition his theory encoun-
tone ' larger book is more controversial in
With' Jays about him, dealing blows
But * g00dwi11-
^e^era^6 whether this will increase the
think ?t,aPPea^ his theory. At any rate, we
w ould be worth his while also to keep
the shorter form of his book up-to-date, for
the benefit of others than anthropological spec-
ialists. To the general reader the brevity and
clarity of its original form will perhaps carry
more conviction.
Sir Thomas Browne believed that we may
" affirm that there are Egyptians, Scythians,
Indians among us; who though born in Eng-
land, yet carry the Faces and Airs of those
Countries and are also agreeable and corres-
pondent unto their Natures." But it was not
until 1866 that Dr. Langdon-Down put for-
ward his classification of idiots and imbeciles
based on ethnic characters. According to him,
a very large number of congenital idiots are
typical Mongols, while others show Ethiopian
and yet others Malayan traits. His description
of Mongolism (ably supplemented later by his
son, Dr. Reginald Langdon-Down) has been
generally accepted, but the ethnic basis of his
theory was largely neglected, until Dr. Crook-
shank rehabilitated and greatly extended it.
To this his wide reading and wealth of know-
ledge, not to mention a skilful dialectic, have
been devoted. He pointed out, moreover, that
Mongoloids may be found in Europeans who
are in no sense imbecile. It can hardly be dis-
puted that mongoloid characteristics may have
an anthropological significance in view of the
successive tides of Asiatic invasion flooding
eastern Europe and even passing the mid-
European line during a thousand years.
He would indeed go much further than this.
To put it briefly, he holds that there are close
affinities between the three races of man?
black, yellow and white, and three races of
apes?gorilla, orang and chimpanzee. He in-
fers a polygenetic origin for man, each of these
races of men and of apes springing from a par-
ticular pre-simian ancestor. Thus, the Negro
and gorilla originated from one stem of the
common ancestral stock of the Primates, the
Mongol and the orang from a second, the
" white " races and the chimpanzee from a
third, and he considers that a study of pre-
historic man supports this view, the Cro-
Magnon being of the European, the Aurig-
nacian of the Mongolian, and the Neanderthal
man of the Negro type. It would not be sur-
prising, in that case, for atavistic traits which
had become recessive to emerge again in the
event of an evolutionary failure, for " it is the
dreaded law of inheritance that nothing is lost
which once gains access to the circulating
74 MENTAL WELFARE
blood." He would agree with Keith that the
endocrine balance plays an important part in
moulding racial characters, and finds this quite
compatible with his own theories, since alike
in the Mongol, the Mongoloid idiot, and the
orang, the thyroid gland is less active.
Two things emerge from the dust and heat
of controversy. One seems clearly proved, i.e.,
that the Mongolian idiot is an atavistic betrayal
of Mongolian ancestry, and implies much more
than a mere superficial resemblance. The
other, of deeper import, may still be disputed,
though we should agree with the writer in the
Encyclopaedia Britannica who says that, " the
hypothesis of development admits of the argu-
ment, that several simian species may have
culminated in several races of man." To us the
Mongolian idiot is an outstanding illustration
of Dr. A. C. Haddon's remark : " In the life
of the cultured European from his earliest in-
fancy do we find milestones that mark the rate
and extent of his progress, and all along this
weary road, which it has taken mankind tens
of thousands of years to traverse, do we find
the tired ones?the laggards in the race of life
?who mutely indicate, if we have but discrim-
ination enough to read it, a record of the pain-
ful but glorious ascent from the brute to the
human."
W.L.-B.
