News and Notes
=================

Board of Control Appointments
------------------------------

Pursuant to the provisions of Section n of the Mental Treatment Act,
1930, the Board with the approval of the Minister of Health, have appointed
the following to be Commissioners:?

Mr. A. E. Evans, M.B., D.P.H., Mr. S. E. Gill, M.D., D.P.H., Mr. E.
O. Lewis, D.Sc., L.R.C.P., Mr. J. W. W. Adamson, M.D., Surgeon Rear
Admiral J. F. Hall, C.M.G., K.B.S., R.N. (retired), Surgeon Rear Admiral
E. T. Meagher, R.N. (retired), at present Medical Inspectors: and Mr. C. F.
Penton, Barrister-at-Law, Miss I. M. C. Duncan, B.A., LL.B., Barrister-at-Law,
Surgeon Capt. H. C. Devas, R.N. (retired). Miss I. G. H. Wilson, M.D.,
D.P.M., and Miss R. Darwin (part-time).

Mental Treatment Rules
-----------------------

The Rules under the Mental Treatment Act, 1930 (Statutory Rules and
Order, 1930, No. 1083), made by the Board of Control with the approval of
the Lord Chancellor, were formally approved in the House of Commons on
March 16th, 1931. Copies of the Rules may be obtained from H.M. Stationery
Office, price 6d.

Collection of Records on Amentia
---------------------------------

Since his retirement from the position of Senior Medical Officer of the
Fountain Mental Children's Hospital, Tooting, Dr T. Brushfield has been
occupied in compiling a valuable collection of records and publications on
Amentia. He has presented this collection to the Library of the College of
Surgeons, Lincoln's Inn, so that it may be accessible to medical practitioners,
students, research workers and others interested.

The records comprise detailed histories of over 3,000 children who were
resident at The Fountain from 1914-1927, together with photographs taken on
admission and after treatment. The case histories arc classified according to
types of amentia and elaborate details are given, not only of each child's
physical condition and family history but of the mental tests employed and of
progress in school when the child was of sufficiently high-grade to attend.
This collection is of particular interest as it dates back to a period when little
was published on the subject and interest in it was only just being awakened.
The collection also includes a large number of papers and cuttings cover-
ing not only amentia but anything which might have a bearing on it. In
glancing through the headings on the Index, such titles as Heredity, Ante-natal,
Newborn, Infant Feeding, Endocrines, Encephalitis, etc., go to show that the
collection is in reality one on The Child and any point or factor which might
lead to Amentia.

A Bibliography of books and articles not contained in the collection is also
included. Dr Brushfield hopes to keep this up-to-date and also to incorporate
whatever publications he is able to obtain, so that there may be a compre-
hensive and centralised collection of papers and information on this important
subject. Future additions to the collection will be welcomed and should be
sent to The Library, College of Surgeons, Lincoln's Inn, London, W.C.i.
We hope that the interest shown in these records and the use made of
them will repay Dr Brushfield for the work entailed in their preparation.
Those who are not of the medical profession should apply to the
C.A.M.W. Office, 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.i, for a card of intro-
duction which will give them access to the Library.

Edinburgh University Psychological Clinic
-------------------------------------------

The new premises of the Edinburgh University Psychological Clinic for
Children and Juveniles were formally opened on February 18th, 1931, by the
Marchioness of Linlithgow. The new Clinic is housed at 37, Morningside
Park, Edinburgh, and will be open every afternoon from 2.0 to 4.0 and on
Saturdays from 10.0 to 2.0.

Dr James Drever, in an address given at the opening ceremony, said
that it was hoped that a large number of children and young people presenting
behaviour problems would benefit from the skilled treatment which would be
available at the Clinic. There would be close co-operation with all depart-
ments and organisations dealing with child life in the city, with the Sick Child-
ren's Hospital and with the School of Social Study. It was hoped also that
the Clinic would serve a useful purpose in connection with medical education.

Training for Occupational Therapy
-----------------------------------

We have received particulars of an interesting experiment to provide
training in the theory and practice of occupational therapy.
Dr Elizabeth Casson, of Dorset House, Clifton Down, Bristol, will
rcccive a few students who will work in her house under the direction of a
fully trained Occupational Therapist. The studies will include lectures in
anatomy, physiology and psychology, and the application of occupational treat-
ment to various diseases and conditions. Thorough training will be given in
design, wood and metal work, needlework, weaving, and other crafts. It is
proposed to arrange expeditions to local mental hospitals and other institutions,
and practical work with patients will be arranged for 2 or 3 hours daily.
Full particulars may be obtained from Dr Casson at the address given
above.

Margaret Macdowall Memorial Scholarship
-----------------------------------------

As a memorial to the late Margaret Macdowall, one of the pioneers of
education for mentally defective children in this country, a fund has been
raised to establish some permanent remembrance of her work.

As the result of an appeal a considerable amount of money was raised.
Part of this was devoted to the bringing out of a new edition of Miss Mac-
dowall's book, " Simple Beginnings in the Training of Mentally Defective
Children," which was referred to in a previous issue of this journal. With the
balance in hand a small bursary, amounting to, it is hoped, from /20 to ^25
per year, is to be founded to enable educated girls to obtain some training in
the care of mentally defective children, with a view to private teaching of
defectives as a career. At the invitation of the Memorial Fund Committee, the
Council of the C.A.M.W. have agreed to act as Trustees of the Fund, to ad-
minister the income and to award the scholarship. A small Committee, which
includes some members of the Memorial Fund Committee has been formed
for the purpose. Further particulars may be obtained from Miss Fox, at the
offices of the Association.

Forthcoming Conferences
-------------------------

National Council for Mental Hygiene
The Second Biennial Conference on Mental Health organised by the
National Council for Mental Hygiene will be held at the Central Hall (Lecture
Hall), Westminster, from May 27th-29th, 1931.
Sessions of the Conference will be devoted to discussion on The Human
Factor, in International Problems, in Crime, in Industry, in the Social Services
and in Education.

Amongst those speaking at the Conference are Sir Hubert Bond, Dr C.
J. Bond, Lt.-Col. Lord, Mrs. Neville Rolfe, Dr W. A. Potts, Dr F. C.
Shrubsall.
An inclusive ticket (admitting to all sessions) may be obtained, price
7/6, from The Secretary, National Council for Mental Hygiene, 78, Chandos
House, Palmer Street, S.W.i.

British Social Hygiene Council
--------------------------------

The British Social Hygiene Council are organising, with the support of
the Secretary of State for the Dominions and Colonies, the Secretary of State
for India and the Minister of Health, a Fifth Imperial Social Hygiene Congress,
to be held in London, from Monday, July 13th to Friday, July 17th.
The Congress will be held at British Medical Association House.

New Education Fellowship
-------------------------

A British Commonwealth Education Conference organised by the New
Education Fellowship will be held from July 24th to 30th at Bedford College,
Regents Park, London. The General Theme of the Conference is to be " Edu-
cation in a Changing Empire." Sir Percy Nunn is to act as President and
amongst the principal lecturers are Sir Michael Sadler, Dr Robert Wallace
(University of Alberta), The Rt. Hon. W. G. Ormsby Gore, and Dr E. G.
Malherbe (Pretoria).

The purpose of the Conference is to bring together teachers and others
from the British Commonwealth who are interested in modern education,
particularly those who wish to study the adjustments in education that are
being made to meet the new problems arising from the changes in our social
and economic life.

Full particulars may be obtained from the Organising Secretary, New
Education Fellowship, n, Tavistock Square, W.C.i.

Opportunity for Holiday-Training
----------------------------------

We have been asked to bring to the notice of readers an opportunity of
combining a quiet country holiday in Leicestershire with some training in
crafts suitable for members of the staffs of Certified Institutions and Mental
Hospitals.

One or two nurses (women) could be received in the house of a worker
with long experience and nurses who wished to gain some additional training
in this branch, but could not get leave to attend a long course, could combine
it with their ordinary holiday. Arrangements would be made to meet
individual requirements.

The suggested terms are:-?For Board and Lodging ?1 15s. od. weekly.
(?1 tos. od. if a room is shared.)
For Tuition, il/2 guineas for 1 week
2 ? ? 2 weeks
3 ? 3 weeks
For further particulars apply to Miss E. J. Price, The Laurels, Glen Road,
Oadby, Leicester.
