Board of Control
=================

84 MENTAL WELFARE
News and Notes

Advisory Committee on Scientific and Ancillary Mental Health Services
The Board of Control, with the approval of the Minister of Health, have
appointed the following to advise the Board upon questions arising in con-
nection with Scientific and Ancillary Mental Health Services: ?
L. G. Brock, Esq., C.B. (Chairman).
Sir Hubert Bond, K.B.E., D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
Robert Bruford, Esq., J.P.
W. E. Lovsey, Esq., J.P.
T. S. Good, Esq., O.B.E., L.R.C.P.
Dr. Adeline Roberts, O.B.E., J.P.
J. C. Grime, Esq., M.B.E., J.P.
Professor J. Shaw Bolton, D.Sc., F.R.C.P.
P. Barter, Esq. (Secretary).
The Mental Treatment Act which came into operation on the ist Jan-
uary confers upon Local Authorities powers to provide for out-
patient treatment and for the after-care of mental patients, and,
subject to the approval of the Board of Control, to undertake or to contribute
to research in regard to mental illness. The Board of Control have appointed
the Advisory Committee to assist them in the consideration of schemes of
research submitted for the Board's approval, and in regard to such questions
as the organisation of social services in connection with out-patient treatment
and after-care, on which Local Authorities may seek the Board's guidance.
On technical questions relating to research the Advisory Committee will have
the expert advice of members of the Medical Research Council's Committee
on Mental Disorder.
Honorary Consultants at Rampton State Institution
The Board of Control, with the approval of the Minister of Health, have
appointed the following as honorary Consultants in connection with diseases
occurring amongst the mentally defective patients at Rampton State Institu-
tion, Retford, Notts.: ?
Encephalitis lethargica: Professor A. J. Hall, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.
Diseases of the ear, nose and throat:
Vincent Townrow, Esq., M.B., F.R.C.S.
Ophthalmic diseases: E. Gordon Mackie, Esq., M.A., M.B.
MENTAL WELFARE 85
Psychiatric Out-Patient Clinics at London County Council General
Hospitals
In order to increase accessibility of psychiatric diagnosis and treatment
the London County Council have established psychiatric out-patient clinics at
each of three municipal general hospitals north of the river. The general
supervision of these clinics has been assigned to the medical superintendent
of the Maudsley Hospital, Denmark Hill, to whom all correspondence should
be addressed. The addresses and time of Clinics are given below with the
borough from which patients should be sent to the respective hospitals.
Mile End Hospital (Dr. Aubrey Lewis).
Monday, 2.30 p.m.; Thursday, 2.30 p.m.
Stepney, Poplar, City of London, Bethnal Green, Hackney, Stoke New-
ington.
St. Mary Islington Hospital (Dr. Louis Minski).
Tuesday, 2.30 p.m.; Friday, 2.30 p.m.
Hampstead, St. Pancras, St. Marylebone, Holborn, Islington, Finsbury,
Shoreditch.
St. Charles's Hospital (Dr. E. W. Anderson).
Wednesday, 2.30 p.m.; Friday, 10 a.m.
Hammersmith, Kensington, Paddington, Fulham, Chelsea, Westminster.
Treatment after the initial interviews for diagnosis will usually have to
be carried out at the Maudsley Hospital and plans are under consideration for
the expansion of accommodation to meet the necessary increase in the num-
ber of patients.
National Institute of Child Psychology
Hon. Director: Dr. Margaret Lowenfeld.
The Children's Clinic, originally a purely therapeutic clinic situated in
Clarendon Road, Kensington, has now developed into the National Institute
?f Child Psychology established at Robert Browning's House, 19, Warwick
Crescent, W.2. The change of title follows the development of Training and
?f Research departments side by side with therapeutic work.
A provisional syllabus of a One Year's Training Course for workers
with difficult, nervous and delinquent children has been drawn up. Part of
this Course will be taken at the University of London and part of it at the
Institute. Courses of lectures will be given in Anatomy, Physiology, Psychol-
?gy and Comparative Psychology, Psycho-pathology, Mental Hygiene,
Growth, Myth and Fairy Tale in relation to work done by children; also some
special courses in curative work, rhythmic work with maladjusted children.
86 MENTAL WELFARE
It is proposed to follow up this Course with a second and third year
course. Shortened Courses will be arranged for qualified medical men and
women occupying three or six months. The Composition Fee for the Train-
ing Course of three terms including fees paid to the University and for practical
work will amount to fifty guineas.
Further particulars can be obtained on application from the Secretary,
19, Warwick Crescent, W.2.
Forthcoming Lectures
A course of eight lectures on " Nerves?Ancient and Modern " will be
given by Professor Millais Culpin at The Friends House, Euston Road, N.W.i,
on Mondays, beginning on October 12th, 1931, at 6.0 p.m.
The fee for the full Course is ^1 is. od. and if accommodation permits
single tickets at 3/6 each can be obtained from the Hon. Lecture Secretary,
Institute of Medical Psychology, 51, Tavistock Square, W.C.i.
A Course of lectures for medical practitioners and medical students will
be given on Functional Nervous Disorders at The Institute of Medical Psychol-
ogy (formerlv the Tavistock Square Clinic) from November 2nd to 14th. The
lectures will be given at 4.45, 5.45 and 8.15 p.m. each week-day except Saturday,
when there will be demonstrations from 2.30 to 5 p.m. The fee for the full
Course is ?2 2s. od. for medical graduates and 10s. 6d. for medical students.
Full particulars can be obtained from the Hon. Lecture Secretary of the In-
stitute, 51, Tavistock Square, W.C.i.
A series of lecture discussions will be delivered under the auspices of the
National Council for Mental Hygiene in the Lecture Room of the Medical
Society of London, 11, Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, W.i. The lectures
will be held on Thursdays at 5.15 p.m., commencing on October 22nd. The
following may be of particular interest to our readers:?"The Prevention and
Treatment of Nervous Breakdown," by Dr. Helen Boyle; " Crime and Pun-
ishment," by Dr. Letitia Fairfield; " The Mind of a Child," by Dr. William
Moodie. Tickets, price 1/6 or 7/6 for the Course may be obtained from the
Secretary, The National Council for Mental Hygiene, 78, Chandos House,
Palmer Street, S.W.i.
New Institutions and Homes
Dovenby Hall Colony, Cockermouth
The Cumberland, Westmorland and Carlisle Joint Committee for the
Mentally Defective have opened Dovenby Hall as an Industrial Home for
mentally deficient people. The Colony is about 2 ^ miles north-west of
Cockermouth and is situated in pleasant grounds of about 168 acres. The
MENTAL WELFARE 87
Hall itself is to be used as an administrative centre and as a home for women
and children and this first instalment was declared open on 1st October. Out-
buildings have been converted into laundry, general stores, domestic school
and recreation rooms. Two homes for male patients are near completion.
When completed the Colony is to accommodate 850 patients and staff.
Colony for Male Defectives
A Colony for male defectives has been opened by the Westminster Dio-
cesan Education Fund at Barvin Park, near Potters Bar, Hertfordshire. The
Colony is under the direction of the Brothers Hospitallers of St. John of God.
The estate consists of some 100 acres and the large house has been adapted
to accommodate 43 patients as a nucleus of the Colony which it is hoped will
develop in the future. The Colony was recognised by the Board of Control
last April and was formally opened by Cardinal Bourne on October 1st.
Mount Olivet, Frensham, Farnham, Surrey
A home for high-grade mentally defective boys has been opened at
Mount Olivet, Frensham, by the Anglo-Catholic Community of Christ the
King. The house is four miles from Farnham, is lofty and spacious and stands
on a southern slope in 15 acres of ground, including a playing field, orchards
and gardens. Only high-grade boys will be accepted between the ages of 16
and 20 at the time of reception. The main occupation will be gardening and
farming on a small scale. The home is also equipped with a printing press,
a carpenter's shop and facilities for other indoor occupations. We understand
that the fees charged will probably be about 24/- a week but full particulars
may be obtained from the Rev. Brother Superior at the above address.
Home for Mentally Defective Youths
The Brothers of Charity are shortly opening an Institution for mentally
defective youths from 16 upwards at Whittle-le-Woods, Chorley. The
official name of the Institution will be " Liseux Hall." For some time there
will be accommodation for 40 boys only. Applications for admission and
further particulars should be addressed pro tern to the Rev. Brother Provincial,
St. Edwards, Broadgreen, Liverpool.
Resignation of Miss E. J. Blake
Miss E. J. Blake, who has been for many years Inspector under the Wilt-
shire Mental Deficiency Act Committee and Secretary of the Wiltshire Local
Association for Mental Welfare, resigned her post at the end of September,
J931- She was one of the pioneer workers in this field of public health, and
ln addition to her official duties she played a leading part in the formation and
organisation of the Association of Mental Health Workers, of which she has
?een for many years the representative on the C.A.M.W. Council. The good
wishes of all will go with Miss Blake into her retirement.
88 MENTAL WELFARE
Analysis of London Case Histories
A very interesting account is given in the recent Report of the County
Medical Officer of Health for London of an analysis of 130 case histories of
persons dealt with under the Mental Deficiency Acts with a view to ascertain-
ing the causes assigned for mental deficiency. The analysis was made by Dr.
A. C. Williams. The following causes were suggested by the parents: ?
In the Feeble-minded In the Imbecile
Per cent. Per cent.
Inherited defect
Alcohol and syphilis in life of parents
Fright and worry in pregnancy
Illness and injuries in pregnancy
Difficult birth
Neglect at birth
Meningitis
Epilepsv
Other illnesses
Injuries in infancy
Air raids in infancy
Nil
2.5 ?
6.25 ?
12.5 38
5.0 6
2.5 6
1.25 2
1.25 2
6.25 6
3-75 2
10.0 6
? 2
48.75 30
100.0 100
The report points out the striking feature that in 70 per cent, of the im-
beciles the alleged cause depends on extrinsic factors, whereas in the feeble-
minded the percentage is only 42.5. In a large proportion of the cases where
no cause was suggested by the parents there was evidence in the family history
of an inferior or unstable stock though rarely of certifiable mental defect or
lunacy.
Clinic at Dowanhill, Glasgow
A Clinic has been established at Notre Dame Convent, Dowanhill,
Glasgow, on the premises of the High School, to which a Training College
and a Montessori Department are attached. A full-time social worker (Miss
Cecil Hay-Shaw) has been loaned by the Child Guidance Council for one year
and the Clinic was actually opened on the 21st September, 1931. A fully
qualified psychologist, who is already a member of the staff, assists in the
Clinic and the psychiatry is undertaken by Dr. Mary McGowan.
Manual for Mental Deficiency Nurses
As we go to press we have received a review copy of the Manual for
Mental Deficiency Nurses which has just been compiled by the Royal Medico-
MENTAL WELFARE 89
Psychological Association. The manual may be obtained from Messrs. Bailliere,
Tindall & Cox, 8, Henrietta Street, W.C.2, price 6/- net. A review of this
book will appear in our next issue.
Deaf Patients in Mental Hospitals
Miss Hall, of the Royal Association in Aid of the Deaf and Dumb,
6, Broughton Road, Thornton Heath, Surrey, is anxious to hear of women
who will undertake to visit, voluntarily, deaf patients in Mental Hospitals near
London. We are informed that the finger alphabet is very easily learnt and
Miss Hall will be glad to initiate volunteers into the work.
National Special Schools Union Conference, Liverpool, October, 1931
The hall of the Central Technical School, Byron Street, Liverpool, was
packed to capacity at the opening of the 14th Biennial Conference on October
2nd. The Lord Mayor, in welcoming the Conference, referred to the honour-
able record of the city in the care and training of mentally and physically
defective children. Pioneer work had been done in the early days of the move-
ment and it was at Liverpool that the National Special Schools Union was
inaugurated, largely owing to the initiative and missionary zeal of Miss James,
Liverpool's first Superintendent of Special Schools.
On Friday morning, under the chairmanship of Councillor G. Cameron
Ollason, Chairman of the Liverpool Special Schools Committee, the principal
subject for discussion was the Curriculum for Retarded Children. This was
dealt with by Mr. C. A. Richardson, H.M.I., who spoke particularly of Senior
Retarded Children. His principal theme may be summarised thus: Teachers
should suit their methods to the mental age of the child, but the material
should suit, not the mental age, but the chronological age. Retarded children
differ in abilities and temperament and the teacher must study the child as an
individual. A good deal of discussion arose as to the proper place for the
child who is 3 or 4 years retarded, several speakers holding that he could be
more suitably catered for in a Special School.
In the paper that followed, Miss Mackintosh, District Inspector of
Schools, Birmingham, dealt with the Place and Purpose of Handwork in the
Curriculum. In her paper the term Retarded Child was used in the sense of
the more retarded child whom we find in the Special School and the less
^tarded child who remains in the special class within the ordinary school,
yistinction was made between ancillary handwork and pure handicraft. Much
importance was attached to the former. Handwork which is ancillary to other
subjects in the curriculum adds interest to the subject and helps to strengthen
me impressions gained in other ways. The making of simple dramatic pro-
perties helps the child to observe, gives it time to assimilate the subject matter,
and helps it so to reflect that impressions are deepened, facts are memorised
and imagery strengthened, and the social sense is developed.
9o MENTAL WELFARE
Handicraft should aim first not at the development of technique but at
the giving of joy. The child, even though backward, will take infinite pains
and will master almost any difficulty if it is to make a thing it really wants.
For the more retarded child who remains till sixteen at the Special School some
form of pre-vocational training is needed.
A most interesting and instructive paper on the Relation between Mental
and Physical Defect was contributed by Dr. Dingwall Fordvce, Royal Liver-
pool Children's Hospital, in which he emphasised the importance of endocrine
secretions.
Space forbids extended reference to papers on the Training of Teachers
for Retarded Children by Miss E. L. S. Ross, Inspector of Special and Residen-
tial Schools, Birmingham, and Mr. D. Kennedy Fraser, Lecturer in charge of
the Course for the Training of Teachers of Mental Defectives in Scotland.
Both agreed in urging, among other things, that the specialised training should
be preceded by adequate general training and a period of actual teaching
experience.
On Saturdav morning a most valuable series of papers on the Care and
Training of the Physically Defective Child was contributed by Mr. T. P.
McMurray, Surgeon, Roval Liverpool Children's Hospital; Mrs. J. E. Thomas,
Head Mistress, Meeting House Lane P.D. School, London; Miss L. McElwain,
Superintendent, Workshop for Crionles, Liverpool; and Miss D. C. Clarke,
Assistant Choice of Employment Officer, Liverpool.
On all hands it was felt that the Conference had been most interesting,
helpful and inspiring.
N.B.?Copies of the printed papers read at the Conference can be ob-
tained from C. F. Mott, Esq., M.A., Education Offices, Sir Thomas Street,
Liverpool, at a cost of if- the set.
