News and Notes
================

41 Mental Treatment" in 1937

In the Board of Control's Report for 1937, it is noted that overcrowding in
Mental Hospitals became more serious during the year, and the warning is
given that:

"assuming the death rate remains at or near its present level, there can be no
improvement in the position until the new mental hospitals in preparation at
Lathom Park for Lancashire and at Margaretting Hall for Essex, are ready
to admit patients,"

The total number of patients under care increased by 2,201, as compared with
an average annual increase of 1,687 for the previous five years, whilst the
aggregate number of patients in excess of the authorised bed space rose to
3,608 on 1st January, 1938?the highest figure ever recorded.
Direct admissions during the year numbered 30,579, divided as follows:?
Voluntary patients under Mental Treatment Act ... ... ... 35.8%
Temporary patients under Mental Treatment Act   5.1%
Certified patients  59.1%
Of these, 87.9 per cent, were admissions into County and County Borough
Mental Hospitals.

The proportion of Voluntary admissions to total direct admissions showed
wide variation. In 15 Hospitals, it was 45 per cent, and upwards; in 18, it was
44 per cent, to 35 per cent.; in .21, 34 per cent, to 25 per cent.; in 36, 24 per cent,
to 15 per cent.; in 4, 14 per cent, to 10 per cent.- and in 4, under 10 per cent.
The proportion of Temporary admissions to total direct admissions also
varied widely. In 1.8 hospitals, it was between 26 per cent, and 10 per cent.; in
24, 9 per cent to .5 per cent. ; in .52, 4 per cent to 0.5 per cent. In one, it was
under .0.5 per cent., and in 6, it was nil.

The number of Mental Treatment Out-Patient Centres has remained
practically stationary, viz., 167 as compared with 165 in 1936. Attention is drawn
to the fact that many of these Centres are still mainly diagnostic in character
and the view is expressed that more might be done in the way of providing actual
treatment, and it is suggested that to meet the staffing difficulty, part time
physicians might be enlisted to help the Mental Hospital staffs responsible for
the work.

Considerable space is devoted in the Report to the value of Psychiatric Social
Workers, and a summary is given of the tasks which can be delegated to them by
mental hospital medical officers.

Courses for Teachers of Retarded Children, 1939
In addition to the usual Ten Weeks' Course and two Short Courses for
Teachers?

The following Courses for Teachers will be held by the C.A.M.W. in
1939:?

Long Course, May 1st to July 8th, at Morley College, London.
Advanced Course, July 3rd to 22nd (organised for the Board of
Education), London.

Elementary Course (Board of Education), August 28th to
September 15th, at Bristol.

In addition to these Courses which are held annually, two special Courses
have, this year, been added, viz., a Refresher Course and a Mental Testing
Course.

The Refresher Course is being held whilst we go to press, at King's
College for Women^ Kensington. 28 students are attending, all of whom have
already been to previous Courses, and special opportunities are being provided
for discussion and the interchange of ideas and experience, in order that the
utmost practical benefit may be gained. Lectures on the educational treatment of backwardness are including " The Teaching of Civics to Backward
Children " and " The Teaching of Science to Backward Children." The Course
is under the general direction of Miss Grace Rawlings, C.A.M.W. Educational
Psychologist, assisted by two other members of the Association's psychological
staff, Mrs. Hamilton and Miss Ruth Thomas, and by several outside lecturers.
The Mental Testing Course will be held in the London area from April 17th
to 29th. This has been arranged in response to many requests, for teachers
who have attended either a Long Course or two Short Courses. The Course
will be under the direction of Miss Lucy G. Fildes, Ph.D., assisted by the
Association's Psychologists?Miss Grace Rawlings, Mrs. Hamilton and Miss
Ruth Thomas. It will include lectures on the principles of mental testing
and the interpretation of tests and demonstrations given, whilst in addition
students will spend 14 to 16 sessions in themselves testing individual children
under expert supervision. Discussion of the results of these tests will be an
important feature of the Course.

The fee for the Course (non-resident) will be three guineas, and applications from those qualified to attend are invited. These should be received not
later than February 28th.

Courses for Medical Practitioners
---------------------------------
The 1939 Course in Mental Deficiency for Medical Officers' Practitioners,
will be held in conjunction with the University of London, from March 20th
to April 1st.

Part II of the Course (on Problems connected with Retarded and Difficult
Children) will be held for a week in November.

The Association is again arranging the practical work in connection with
the Course on Mental Deficiency held by the London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine as part of the Diploma Course in Public Health.

Training of Social Workers for the Mental Health Services
---------------------------------------------------------
On page 32 of this issue readers will see that scholarships are again being
offered, through the generosity of the Commonwealth Fund of America, to
enable trained social workers to take the Mental Health Course at the London
School of Economics in the session 1939-40.

The Course is primarily designed to equip social workers for work in the
mental health services, by providing theoretical and practical training.
Lectures on physiology, psychology, psychiatry, social case work and administration are given, individual coaching and discussion classes are arranged.
Three days a week are spent in practical training under qualified supervisers,
in a child guidance clinic and a mental hospital.

Recently the Association of Mental Health Workers, emphasising the
advantage of a uniform training for all social workers entering the Mental
Health Services, recognised this Course as the most suitable preparation available for those taking up work with mental defectives. While a period of
observation of the provision made for mental deficiency is arranged for all
students, specialisation in this field is possible, as it is in child guidance or
in adult psychiatric social work. A month's practical experience in some
centre outside London can also be arranged, and in these ways the training
can be adapted to suit the requirements of the future mental deficiency worker.

Probation Officers, members of the staffs of children's homes, of Borstals
and of general social agencies, have also found that the training meets a need
for further understanding of the psychological problems of family and social
life.

While scholarships are restricted to candidates under 35 the Course is
open to others who have the necessary qualifications and experience. Scholarship applications must be received by Saturday, April 1st, 1939, but others will
be considered until the end of June. Further information about the Course or
preparation for it may be obtained from the Secretary of the London School
of Economics, Houghton Street, Aldwych, London, W.C.2.

Board of Control
----------------
The Board of Control, with the approval of the Minister of Health, have
appointed Mr. R. G. Anderson, M.D., D.P.M., to be a Commissioner to fill the
vacancy caused bv the retirement of Surgeon Rear-Admiral J. Falconer Hall
C.M.G., F.H.S., R.N. (retired).

Mental Health and Delinquency
-----------------------------
During the year 1937, the Prison Commissioners report that 121 prisoners
were certified as insane whilst serving; sentences in local prisons; 291 were
found to be insane whilst in prison on remand; 31 were found by juries to be
insane on arraignment, and 16 were pronounced " guilty but insane." This
total group numbers 459, as compared with 393 in the preceding year.
Whilst undergoing sentences in local prisons, 30 persons were certified
as mentally defective (compared with 34 in 1936) and of these 25 were moved
to Certified Institutions under Section 9 of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913.
The remainder were on discharge handed over to the care of the Public
.Assistance Authority or were brought to the notice of a Voluntary Association
for Mental Welfare. Under Section 8 of the Act, 152 defectives were dealt
with by the Courts (compared with 194 the previous year). One girl was
removed to a Certified Institution whilst undergoing Borstal training, and
4 Borstal youths were certified insane.

The results of the 4-year programme of psychological investigation and
treatment of selected prisoners at Wormwood Scrubbs instituted in 1934, are
now being examined, and a report will subsequently be published by Dr.
Norwood East and Dr W. H. de B. Hubert.
--------------------------------------
A further report which will be anticipated with interest is that of an
exhaustive investigation now proceeding at Wormwood Scrubbs into the
causes of delinquency amongst adolescents, the material for which comprises
:some 4,000 cases.

During 1937, under the auspices of the Borstal Association, research was
carried on by Dr Mannheim and Mr. Dryden Donkin into the records of
<606 boys discharged from Borstal Institutions during the 15-year period,
1922 to 1936. In 243 cases the delinquency was found to be associated with
unsatisfactory home conditions, such as lack of parental control, too strict
?control, over-indulgence, neglect, or psychological conditions connected with,
?e.g., the existence of a step-mother, illegitimacy, etc. In the case of 144 lads,
mental backwardness or instability were noted as significant factors producing
the delinquent conduct.

It is interesting (especially to those concerned with promoting special
?education for the retarded child) to read the observations of the Governor of
Feltham Borstal Institution, with reference to mental retardation amongst
the boys sent to him.

" The abysmal depths of ignorance," he writes, " from which seven or
eight years of State education has failed to rescue many of the lads received
here?or to which they have reverted after two or three years of complete
mental vacuity?would be inconceivable and probably incredible to anyone not
in touch with this problem. The worst of these cases seldom present such an
inherent or long-standing degree of defectiveness as to warrant certification as
mentally defective under the present Acts, yet, on reception, it is difficult to
believe that they are really fit to be allowed to cross a busy street or to go on
errands by themselves."

And he proceeds to emphasise the importance, in such cases, of devoting
?energy and time to the simplest form of training in the most elementary things
?cleanliness, personal hygiene and the correction of habits which if left unaltered would mitigate against the success of any subsequent experiment at
placing out in lodgings.

Another mental health problem is referred to by the Governor of
Aylesbury Borstal Institution for Girls. Recording such happenings as
shopping expeditions, netball matches against outside teams, and tea parties at
private houses, she writes :?

" These constitute the small and obviously inadequate attempts to minimise
the dangers of discharging, even though under supervision, a giri who has probably known nothing but institution life for years and is now required to live the
life of a free adult without ever having been a free child. Within the institution,
too, every effort is made to provide opportunities for girls to develop communal
responsibility, but these opportunities are necessarily limited, and have very
little relation to the responsibility required of them in life outside. It is
clearly impossible to allow girls the freedom allowed to boys, but the lack of
this freedom probably accounts both for the reluctance of some of them to
take the plunge into the outside world and for the irresponsibility and lack of
judgment shown by many others who go out full of confidence."

Dr W. Norwood East
--------------------
The Prison Commissioners, in their 1937 Report, note with great regret
the retirement of Dr Norwood East, Medical Commissioner, who joined the
Prison Service in 1899 as a Deputy Medical Officer and after nearly 25 years'
service in H.M. Prisons at Portland, Manchester, Liverpool and Brixton, was
?appointed Medical Inspector of Prisons in 1924, and Medical Commissioner in
1930. Always interested in the psychological aspects of medical work in
prisons, Dr East was responsible for the initiation of the experiment in the
psychological treatment of selected prisoners in Wormwood Scrubbs, as well
as for the Wormwood Scrubbs investigation into the causes of adolescent
delinquency. It will be remembered also that he is the author of " Forensic
Psychiatry " and " Medical Aspects of Crime."

Dr East has for long been a friend of the C.A.M.W. and for a number of
years served on its Council as one of the representatives of the Prison Commission. We offer to him our good wishes in his retirement.

Criminal Justice Bill
----------------------
The Criminal Justice Bill, which passed its Second Reading on
November 29th, contains a number of important provisions of special interest
to Mental Health workers. To these we hope to refer at length in a subsequent issue, and the following brief notes are designed for the purpose of
placing on record the initiation of a piece of social legislation whose results
are likely to be profound and far-reaching.

Clause II empowers the Secretary of State to provide Remand Homes
for persons under 17 "requiring special medical observation" and the new
" Remand Centres" to be set up under Clauses 10 and 28 to which young
offenders are to be sent whilst on remand or committed for trial in custody
(instead of to prison) " are to serve not only the purpose of custody but also
the purpose of observation, that is, the making of such medical or other
investigations as may be desirable in order to assist the court in deciding how
best to deal with the offender."

An entirely new experiment is that provided for under Clause 12, by which
the Secretary of State may institute " compulsory attendance centres " at
which offenders between 17 and 21 may be required to attend on half holidays
or in the evening after work. This is to be a substitute for the imposition of
short terms of imprisonment for minor offences or in default of payment of
fines. Similar centres for delinquents between 12 and 17 may also be provided
by local authorities.

The proposal (Clause 13) to set up " Howard Houses " for young offenders
between 16 and 21 who, whilst continuing in ordinary employment, need for
a time to be removed from their home surroundings, constitutes another
experimental innovation which will be watched with great interest.

Clause 38 of the Bill is designed to facilitate the obtaining of medical
reports on the mental condition of offenders brought before the Courts. At
present, there are difficulties in this procedure in cases where the offender is
npt remanded to prison. It is now to be made possible for an offender on bail
to be required to submit himself to medical examination, the cost if necessary
being borne by public funds. It is also proposed (Clause 19) that offenders
on probation may be required to submit themselves to mental treatment if
they are suffering from some form of mental illness or abnormality which is
deemed to be susceptible to such treatment.

Clause 39 brings the procedure with regard to offenders found by the
Court to be insane, into line with that under the Mental Deficiency Acts in
the case of those found to be mentally defective.

Under Clause 68, it is proposed to transfer the responsibility for the
control and management of the Broadmoor Institution from the Home Office
to the Board of Control and to designate it " Broadmoor State Mental
Hospital."

The provisions of the Bill are now being submitted to close scrutiny by
the various bodies specially interested, and various amendments are being
considered, but taken as a whole it has received a warm welcome on every
hand for?to quote the Times Educational Supplement?it " fulfils to a
great extent the hopes of all those social workers who believe, with good
reason, that the best means of reforming the potential criminal is by education
and training outside the prison walls."

The C.A.M.W. and the Ministry of Agriculture
--------------------------------------------
Recently there has been some discussion between the C.A.M.W. and the
Ministry of Agriculture concerning cases placed by Mental Welfare Associations on farms, small-holdings, etc. The Ministry are naturally anxious that
no such persons should be exploited, and moreover, that the public should feel
confident that such persons are fully protected.

As our readers are aware, permits can be granted under the Agricultural
Wages (Regulation) Act, 1924 by an Agricultural Wages Committee, exempting a worker from the provisions of the Act if he is "so affected by any physical
injury or mental deficiency or any infirmity due to age or any other cause that
he is incapable of earning" the minimum rate of wages. We find on enquiry
that Associations differ in their methods of dealing with this question of
permits. Some leave the onus of applying for a permit to the employer concerned, others make themselves responsible for seeing that the necessary
permit is obtained; in some areas the representative of the Agricultural Wages
Committee visits the place of employment, in others they rely on the
Association's statement. This is a matter for local arrangement, though we
feel that where possible the Association should be in direct touch with the
Agricultural Wages Committee in regard to each case.

There is one point which arose in the discussion with the Ministry. Not
everyone may be aware that if an employer is willing to provide board and
lodging, even without cash payment, in return for services rendered, it might
be held that the relations between the employer and the person concerned
would be tantamount to a contract of service and would bring that person
within the scope of the Act. In all such cases, therefore, a permit should be
obtained.

The main discussion with the Ministry, however, centred upon those cases
which are boarded out on maintenance and are occupied in certain ways about
a farm, but are not " employed." In the first instance, the Ministry suggested
that if a permit were obtained for such cases, there would be an additional
safeguard against exploitation; the C.A.M.W. contended that it would be
illogical to ask for a permit, when in fact the person was not employed, though
they were willing to co-operate in any way possible. "The Ministry now
appear satisfied that cases placed out on maintenance are adequately supervised and that no further steps need be taken to protect them. The Ministry
emphasised, however, the need for very great care, so that should a man cease
to be " on maintenance " after a period of trial and come within the scope
of the Act, application for a permit would be made at once. We have assured
the Ministry that the Officers of the Association keep in close touch with the
cases they place out, and that they would immediately be aware of any change
in conditions, and that we agree that great vigilance must be exercised, so
that no person on whose behalf a permit should be applied for, is overlooked.
C.A.M.W. Annual Report, 1937-38

This Report has recently been issued and is designed to interest those
concerned with the problem of Mental Health administration as a whole, in
addition to those interested chiefly in the activities of the C.A.M.W.
An Appendix gives a survey of the progress of the whole movement
during the year under review, whilst other Appendices include special branches
of the Association's work, such as the Community Care of Epileptics, and
the administration of the Middlesex County Council's Occupation Centres.
Copies of the Report can be obtained free from the Secretary, C.A.M.W.,
24 Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.

National Council for Mental Hygiene
-----------------------------------
The Fifth Biennial Conference on Mental Health, opened by H.R.H. The
Duke of Kent on January 12th, is being held in London under the auspices of
the National Council for Mental Hygiene as we go to press.
The subjects dealt with in the three-day programme comprise " Is
Our National Intelligence Declining?", "Should Mental Treatment be
Practised Solely by Doctors?", "The Psychological Factor in Sexual
Delinquency", "Problems of Adolescent Instability and of Juvenile Delinquency ", " Education and the Emotional Needs of the Child " " The Place of
the Social Worker in Mental Health", " Out-Patient Mental Treatment
Clinics ", " Mental Hygiene and the Press."

The papers will be published during the year in the National Council's
organ, " Mental Hygiene (annual subscription 4/6) to be obtained from
76/77 Chandos House, Palmer Street, London, S.W.I.

Child Guidance Council. Forthcoming Events
------------------------------------------
The Fourth Biennial Inter-Clinic Conference will be held in London on
January 27th and 28th, 1939, at the British Medical Association, Tavistock
Square, W.C.I. The session on Friday, January 27th, at 2.30 p.m., will be
devoted to the subject of Juvenile Delinquency, and will be open to the public.
The Rt. Hon. the Lord Alness will take the chair. Tickets of admission,
price 2/6, can be obtained on application to the Child Guidance Council,
Woburn House, Upper Woburn Place, W.C.I.

Preparations are in hand for a Regional Course of Training for Institutional Workers. This is being organised by the Council in conjunction with
the Bristol Vocational Training School and will take place from January 16th
to March 20th, 1939, in Bristol. The lectures will be held on Monday afternoons from 2.30 to 4.30 p.m., at the Vocational Training School.

The Course will be practical in character and will cover training from
the three following aspects: (a) the physical care of the child; (b) domestic
care, including diet, food values and practical cookery demonstrations;
(c) child psychology and the handling of children's difficulties.

An Easter Vacation Course on " The Difficult Child " will be held at
Southlands Training College, Wimbledon, S.W.19, from Wednesday, April 12th
to Monday, April 17th, 1939. Fee : 3? guineas resident, 1-1 guineas non-resident
(payable in advance). Applications should be made before Monday,
March 27th, addressed to the Secretarv of the Child Guidance Council. The
final programme will be available shortly.

Anti-Semitism and Child Guidance
---------------------------------
In a note on the East London Child Guidance Clinic contained in the 1937
Annual Report of the Jewish Health Organisation of Great Britain, attention
is called to the psychological suffering which is beginning to be created
amongst children in the East End as a result of anti-Jewish feeling.
" It is deplorable that, despite the general prevalence of nervous disorders
which is already very heavy, there is no adequate realisation yet of the serious
effects of fear and hatred on a child's nervous system to bring in sufficient
financial support for the work of the Clinic. The mental anguish and nervous
troubles of these children have raised a new problem for the Community, and
the Committee feel sure that in these troubled times, the special importance of
having a clinic in a district where the majority of Jews in this country still live,
will be recognised."

Birmingham Society in Aid of Nervous Children
----------------------------------------------
This Society, which was founded in April, 1937, has just issued its First
Annual Report.

Its object is to provide for the boarding-out of nervous and difficult
children (the majority of whom are referred by the Child Guidance Clinic)j on
farms specially selected for the purpose, and during the first year, 16 children
were dealt with. The changes wrought in these children have fully demonstrated the faith of the founders in the need for their pioneer enterprise.
Under the chairmanship of Dr C. L. C. Burns, the work during this
experimental year was carried out entirely by voluntary workers using as a
headquarters the house of the Hon. Secretary, Mr. Frank Mathews. It was
then found necessary owing to the increased demands made upon the Society,
to appoint a trained assistant and to rent an office, which makes additional
financial support an urgent necessity.

St. Catherine's, Doncaster
--------------------------
In October, Mr. Robert Bernays, M.P., Parliamentary Secretary to the
Ministry of Health, opened extensions to St. Catherine's Institution, Doncaster,
which include a school for 100 children and an assembly hall to seat 476 persons.
The Institution, for which the South-West Yorkshire Joint Board for the
Mentally Defective, is responsible, has now accommodation for 480 patients,,
and when the buildings are finally completed, this number will be brought up
to 640.

During the proceedings, Mr. Bernays paid a generous tribtue to those*
who care for defectives in Institutions such as these :?

" They have," he said, " all the trials and difficulties of the teacher many
times intensified without having the reward of the teacher of ordinary children,.
that of seeing the child develop into maturity. They have to know and train
most diverse types of men, women and children of all ages with varying grades
of mental defect. It is a task requiring infinite skill and patience to lead these
people into a sense of responsibility, and it ought to be a source of pride to all
concerned that this work is being done and, in .fact, extended."

St. Catherine's caters for defectives in the administrative areas of
Barnsley, Dewsbury, Doncaster, Halifax, Huddersfield, Rotherham and Wakefield, whose Authorities comprise the Joint Board.

Play Therapy
-----------
In his Report for 1937, the Chief Medical Officer of the Board of
Education (Dr Arthur MacNalty) deems it expedient to issue a warning
against a too facile and dogmatic interpretation of the play of maladjustedchildren.

" While in all branches of therapy," he writes, " study of the case material
is necessary if progress is to be made, and while there is no desire to hinder
investigation and research, it must be reiterated that the children are primarily
patients to be cured, and not experimental material for over-enthusiastic
psychiatrists obsessed with some particular theory. . . . Much may be learned
by unobtrusive observation of a child's activities at play and the knowledge
gained may be applied for the child's benefit. But children will not play
naturally or enjoy themselves if they are constantly looked at through a
magnifying glass as Gulliver was by the wise men of Brobdingnag. Neither
should any system be encouraged which reads into some spontaneous and
innocent action of a child, a dark chapter in its parental, prenatal or infant
history. The interpretation of the play of maladjusted children is, therefore,
beset with pitfalls; the conclusions drawn from it must be treated with the
greatest reserve, and corroborated if possible from other sources before action
is taken upon them."

In commenting on the progress of the Child Guidance movement
throughout the year, Dr MacNalty draws attention to the wide variation as
between one Clinic and another in the proportion of children referred for any
one specific reason. Thus whilst at the Maudsley Hospital Clinic only 13%
were referred for " backwardness," at the Bristol Clinic, which is in closer
touch with the schools, 30% of the cases were referred for this reason.

Occupation Therapy
-----------------
In the Board of Control's Report for 1937, attention is drawn to a
diverting device consisting of a toy electric railway, which has been installed
at Wadsley Mental Hospital (Sheffield). This has been found very useful
in interesting the more confused schizophrenic patients, and has shown the
possibility of reaching even the patient previously considered to be " inaccessible." The Board sympathetically express the hope that " some equally
ingenious distraction could be devised for the female side, for the fascination
of model trains is apparently an exclusively male reaction." ( !)
The Occupational Therapists' Association, though still in its infancy, has
published the first number of a new journal, to be issued quarterly (price 1/-).
The journal contains news of the founding and progress of the Association,
messages of goodwill from its President, Sir Hubert Bond, from Miss Ruth
Darwin and Dr J. R. Rees, and articles on " Occupational Therapy and Mental
Nursing," " Cord Knotting as a Therapeutic Measure," " Bookbinding and
Bookcraft in Occupational Therapy," " Weaving as a Curative Agent." It is
attractively printed and produced, and should fill a real need.

The Editor of the Journal is Miss Nancy Ross (Occupation Therapist at
Cambridge Mental Hospital) and the Sub-Editor, Miss English (Woodside
Hospital), 15 Onslow Gardens, London, N.10, from whom copies can be
obtained.

St. Francis' House, Sudbury
---------------------------
Our readers will be glad to hear of a new venture recently undertaken by
the Society of the Crown of Our Lord?which has for many years carried on
its beneficent work for the helping of mental patients by personal service.
The Society has opened St. Francis' Home, Sudbury, Middlesex, for
educated women of the professional classes, suffering from slight nervous
illness or threatened with nervous breakdown and in need of complete rest
at very moderate cost.

The house stands in its own grounds of 2\ acres including an attractive
garden. A fully-trained nurse is in charge of the medical side and a Lady
Warden is responsible for the general comfort of the residents. Single
bedrooms are provided and the house is well warmed. There is accommodation for 11 or 12 patients and admissions are made only on the recommendation of a doctor who may, if he wishes, continue to be in attendance.
Otherwise, patients are under the care of the psychotherapist and physician
who are the Home's medical advisers.

There is a Chapel which all are invited to attend if they wish, but patients
of all denominations or of none are accepted.

For fuller particulars, apply to the Lady Warden, St. Francis' House,
Harrow Road, Sudbury, Middlesex. Telephone : Arnold 2834.

New Joint Special School
-------------------------
Under the Lanarkshire Education Committee there is to be shortly erected
a fifth Special School. The new school will be situated near Hamilton and
will make provision for " physically invalid and mentally invalid children and
also for deaf-mute children."

The number of classrooms for each type will be eleven for the physically
defective, six for the mentally defective and four for the deaf-mute. In
addition, the plans provide accommodation for manual instruction (Woodwork, Tailoring, Shoemaking, Basket-Making, etc.) and for Cookery and
Housewifery, and for a dining-room, rest room, clinic, baths, etc.

The Scottish Association for Mental Hygiene
--------------------------------------------
In May, 1938, there took place an amalgamation of the Scottish Association for Mental Welfare and the Scottish Child Guidance Council.
The new Association thus formed consists of three Sections, viz., Mental
Deficiency, Child Guidance and Mental Health. Each Section has its own
Chairman, and has made recommendations to the Executive Council concerning future activities. On the Executive Council there are 5 representatives
from each Section in addition to representatives from various Public Bodies.
Dr Constance Hunter is the Secretary of the Association, whose offices
are at 25 Palmerston Place, Edinburgh.

Home Teaching in Nottinghamshire
---------------------------------
The County Medical Officer for Nottinghamshire has kindly supplied the following
particulars with regard to the appointment of a Home Teacher for defectives in
the area.

Following the successful establishment of the Mansfield Occupation
Centre in 1934, serving the Borough of Mansfield and the adjoining Urban
Districts, the Committee for the Care of the Mentally Defective further sought
to fulfil their statutory obligations in regard to the training of defectives by
preparing a Home Training Scheme for those defectives living in the smaller
urban areas and scattered rural districts.

There was an unfortunate paucity of applicants for the post of Home
Teacher, but in July, 1938, a suitable appointment was made.
The Scheme provides for a three-weekly cycle of visits to some sixty
cases, twenty-eight of whom are under Guardianship, and the remainder under
Statutory supervision. The programme will be extended to embrace new
cases when the progress of those now being visited warrants lessening the
frequency of visits.

Up to the end of the year some 440 visits have been made by the Home
Teacher in the course of giving approximately 380 hours' instruction.
Reports show that the training given is producing highly satisfactory
results, even after only one or two visits, and appreciative letters have been
received from parents.

An Apology
----------
In our last issue, under the title of " The Adolescent Defective," we
quoted an extract from a Report issued by the Keller Institute, Denmark.
Our attention has been drawn to the fact that the Report in question came
from the Institution at Ebberodgaard and not from the Keller Institute, and
to the Medical Superintendents of both the Institutions involved in the
mistake, we offer our sincere apologies.
