High, Wide and Deep
====================

58 MENTAL WELFARE

By C. Madeline
Dixon. Geo. Allen & Unwin, 12/6.
C. Madeline Dixon has taken the words
of Schiller, Deep meaning oft lies hid in
children's play " as the theme of her latest
book on the growth and development of
young children. Three-dimensional living?
high, wide, and deep?through their play
activities and in their everyday experiences
in contact with their fellow creatures, should
be the lot of every child if he is to attain
full stature as an independent and creative
adult. After publishing her previous book
the author went back to work with children
of all ages, both in home and school, for
a period of ten years in order to gain a more
complete and understanding knowledge of
her subject. So often does it appear in the
lectures and writings of psychologists as
though the small child were compounded all
of problems and complexes. The author was
amazed at the gap displayed between the
jargon spoken by certain adults and their
slight knowledge of children. The only way
to understand children is to get to know
them.
The young child often leads a Jekyll and
Hyde existence between home and school.
In the former he may he a very special
individual, such as an only child, or the baby
and pet of the household; while at school he
is merely one among his contemporaries, all
with interests and needs parallel to his own.
The conflicting situations may for a time
cause confusion in the mind of the child and
may even lead to the development of
symptoms of psychological disorder.
There is a wide range in the minds of all
children, however young. They are a pro-
duct of the immediate results of their en-
vironment in both their positive and negative
reactions; and they are also a product of
age-old fears and ecstasies. They need
channels for the expression of these things.
The subject matter of this book is divided
into two parts, viz., " The Play Group"
and " Children in the Home "
The dimension of " Width " in this three-
dimensional expansion of life is concerned
with socialisation of the child?the develop-
ment of interest from himself to things and
to his fellow beings, including, as it does,
sharing, sacrificing, gaining and adjusting.
Various kinds of play whereby this may be
accomplished are discussed. Types of play
which provide opportunities for physical
courage, quick thought and action, disci-
pline, perseverance, out-of-door nature study
and friendships are also discussed. Amongst
the group were non-adjusting children
already in the process of developing into
bullies or suffering from compulsions and
excesses. The methods used for combating
these tendencies are interesting, particularly
the use of out-door locations known as
Wild Man's Woods and The Village.
" Height" is the conception used to
signify a stretching up to creative activity
and is concerned with ideas and emotions,
not people and things. Creative expres-
sion is spontaneous in young children
and based on sources within the child.
" Children under 5 are not yet copyists
in Art," says the author. The use of
language, drama, dance, music and painting
are necessary here and Miss Dixon has her
own ideas about these activities. The desire
for the use of these should spring spon-
taneously from the child and the adult
should be there merely to help with simple
advice where asked for, and not to impose
on the child a perfectionist theory of tech-
nique. Above all, over-stimulation should be
avoided and periods of little content or even
of boredom should be accepted by the child
as normal.
" Depth" is perhaps the quality most
lacking in modern life, with its presentation
of many problems in nature and science
completely solved and the everyday use of
perfected scientific apparatus and quick
travel. How soon do the faculties of wonder
and awe perish through lack of opportunities
for development? "To-day's children are
in need of some opportunity to slow down
and get below the surface of things," says
Miss Dixon. " We give knowledge instead
of letting it grow." Even the teaching of
science becomes more of an exciting tech-
nique for uncovering truth rather than a
process of slow assimilation and inner
experience. In those early pre-school years
when troublesome queries are so often
discouraged by impatient adults, children
need to have their early concern with the
depths of life encouraged so that these
fundamental qualities are not destroyed. We
should not seek to protect him from this
questioning as though we had a fear that he
MENTAL WELFARE 59
might be engulfed. " How do you make
worlds? " said a small boy. There are many
ways of answering that question that might
easily help to destroy the faculties of
wonder and awe instead of encouraging
them.
The short study of the development of
a two-year-old is interesting and the
chapters entitled " Back Stage" concerned
with home life, discipline, security and
orientation for the only child, are full of
wisdom. This is a most attractive book,
with its lovely photography of young
children at play and its sympathetic and
intuitive understanding of the inner
experiences of the child mind.
E. D.
