They Always Come Back
=======================

:Author: Cicely
McCall. With a Foreword by E. M.
Delafield. Methuen & Co.. 7/6.

As a result of personal experience on the
staffs of Holloway Prison and of the Aylesbury Borstal Institution, the writer of this
book can speak with some authority on the
methods of treating women prisoners and
delinquent girls as she found them to exist;
from the knowledge gained by training as a
Psychiatric Social Worker she has formed
very definite convictions as to the much
better methods which might be adopted if
the problem was tackled scientifically. What
she has to say in her book, therefore, is
eminently worth serious consideration.

She has taken as her title and motto, the
bland pronouncement of a Holloway Prison
Officer made to her when as a social worker
in search of knowledge, she paid her first
visit to the prison, and the book may be
taken as her protest against the placid
acceptance of a state of affairs which can
be thus described with an appreciable degree
of accuracy.*

To her the outstanding characteristics of
the prison regime (so far as the woman
prisoner is concerned) are its waste of opportunities; its lack of any attempt to study
the individual delinquent for the purpose of
ascertaining what is the fundamental cause
of her present plight; its stereotyped outlook; its whole handling (kind, often, but
lacking imagination or psychological skill),
of the flotsam and jetsom of womanhood
passing and repassing through the heavily
locked gates. She pleads for proper case
records, adequate investigation, efficient
classification, a greater grip of the problem
as a whole, and an increase of sensitiveness
and understanding in those most closely
concerned with it and she gives many
examples, some very moving, some exasperating, some humorous, in support of her
contentions.

The second part of the book deals with
the author's experiences as a Borstal Officer
?and here again "wasted opportunity" constitutes her theme.

* In 1937, 82 per cent, of women prisoners
convicted of drunkenness were known to
have served previous sentences, and
amongst those convicted of other offences,
44 per cent, were rccividists.

"Aylesbury zvas full of eases which
would have benefited from psychotherapy. Day after day, I saw the
same types I had met and worked
zvith as a psychiatric social zvorker and
in child guidance clinics and in mental
hospitals. But there was no psychiatrist
qualified to treat them, and there was
no question of their being sent to a clinic
outside the Institution.'

She is oppressed by the many failures of
the system as shown by the number of girls
who " come back " on revoked licences, and
she criticises the wisdom of long periods of
Institution training of the present type which
so often defeats its own ends. Perhaps in
her generous championship of these wayward, irresponsible young women, she tends
to exaggerate the possibility even under the
most ideal system of effecting that transformation of life and character which alone
could ensure subsequent stability of conduct;
perhaps, on the other hand, she does not
give honour where honour is due, for in the
three year period 1933-35 out of 117 girls
discharged there were 60.0 per cent, who had
not been re-convicted. But no one can deny
that the system as she saw it, and as she
makes us see it, needs many and fundamental
modifications in the light of our increased
psychological knowledge. This contention
is borne out by the Governor of Aylesbury
herself who, deploring the number of girls
from Home Office Schools sent to her in
1937, refers to the special problem they
present due to the fact that " many of them
are already institutionalised, and a long
?experience of homes and schools has taught
them how to get through their time with
the minimum of effort and without the
slightest feeling of personal responsibility."
Miss McCall's book is so sensitively and
vividly written, the narrative is so absorbingly interesting (in part, to quote from Miss
Delafield's Foreword, "so exciting") that the
mood of the writer is conveyed in a completeness that makes detached criticism
difficult. It should be read for itself as a
whole, and the significance of its brightly
lit pictures, from the point of view of the
Mental Health worker and the penal
reformer, should be allowed slowly to
emerge. The fact that it is the first book
about women prisoners since the publication
?f Dr. Mary Gordon's " Penal Discipline "
m 1922 (now out of print) also makes its
appearance particularly welcome.

A. L. H.
