Towards a Unified Mental Health Service
========================================

:Author: Sir Laurence Brock, C.B.

Chairman, Board of Control
------------------------------

The essential unity of all mental health services has been obscured by
entanglement with the law. This entanglement was inevitable because certain
mental states necessitate the patient's segregation, and all restrictions on
liberty demand, and rightly demand, legal safeguards against their abuse.

But, while it was inevitable that mental medicine should be entangled with
the law, the results of this entanglement are in many ways unfortunate. The
law proceeds on the assumption that people are either sane or insane. Such
a division sounds simple and logical and, to be fair to the lawyers, it is not
easy to see how they could have proceeded on any other basis. But logical
as the classification sounds, it has very little relation to the facts. " Insanity "
is purely a legal concept. Medically, the term is almost meaningless. It does
not describe a pathological condition; it is not a diagnosis; it is at best merely
a convenient way of describing the condition of persons whose mental state
necessitates some restriction on their liberty. Unhappily the use of what is
* Transcript of a speech to the North Eastern Council for Mental Welfare on the 26th May,
1939. The introductory sentences and nearly all personal references have been omitted.
The transcript represents the substance of the speech, and does not purport to be an
exact reproduction.

really a legal and not a medical term has led the public to believe that all
forms of mental disorder are one and the same, and that they differ merely
in the degree of the severity of the attack. This is far from being the case.
There are many different forms of mental disorder, as some of you know
and as all of you can see if you look at the list in any mental hospital report.
Diagnosis is exceedingly difficult in some cases, because similar aberrations
of behaviour may be due to different disorders. Even now, there is no general
agreement as to classification and nomenclature. Our classification differs
from that used abroad, and the same term may have a somewhat different
content in different countries.

Let me try and illustrate this point by a few examples. Some mental
disorders are due to physical causes. For example, general paralysis of the
insane, which accounts for about 8% of all admissions, is now known to be
due to venereal disease, and to the presence in the blood vessels of the brain
of minute organisms called spirochetes. This is now treated by induced
malaria which kills the spirochetes and, if the case has not gone too far, the
patient will recover sufficiently to return to ordinary life. Then there are
the toxic cases due to some poison in the system. The focus of infection
may be in the sinuses, may be intestinal, or due to septic teeth. The problem
is to find the source of the infection and to clean it up. Here again, if too
much damage has not been done, the patient has a good chance of recovery.

These are examples of mental disorders due to a specific physical cause,
which have to be treated by physical methods. But there are other forms
of disorder which are purely psychological, and need to be treated by
psychological methods. There is no discoverable physical cause, and the whole
method of approach has to be different. But the problem of diagnosis is not
the whole of the difficulty. There is no sharp line between certifiable patients
and others who exhibit some degree of mental abnormality. You cannot
divide people into sheep and goats, sane and insane. In reality there are
endless degrees of mental abnormality or instability; nor is there any exact
test by which to determine the degree of instability which constitutes
unsoundness of mind for purposes of the law. Between the extremes of pure
white and absolute black there are endless shades of grey. Unconsciously we
recognise this in common speech. We call people eccentric, nervy, or, if we
like them, temperamental. All these are euphemisms; they are all terms
intended to describe some degree of mental instability. If we want to be
impressively technical, we talk of these borderline cases as being
" psychopaths," but all these terms, and there are many more, all indicate
a recognition that there are many people in the community who are mentally
not quite normal.

But the difficulties resulting from entanglement with the law are far from
ending here. Unfortunately, different forms of mental abnormality are dealt
with by different Acts administered by different bodies. Let me illustrate
this by concrete examples. Mental disorders, so far as they can be treated
in public mental hospitals or in out-patient centres, are dealt with by visiting
committees. Cases of mental disorder which are treated in public assistance
institutions, are dealt with by the public assistance committee. But, if instead
of a public assistance institution there is a municipal general hospital, that hospital
falls within the ambit of the public health committee. The same haphazard division
of duties is found in the case of mental deficiency. Children who are defective
for the purposes of the Education Act are the responsibility of the local
education authority. Ineducable children and adult defectives are dealt with
by the mental deficiency committee. Child guidance, so far as it is undertaken
at all by local authorities, is a matter for the local education authority. Else-
where it is left to voluntary organisations. Borderline cases, neuroses or
psycho-neuroses, may go either to general or special hospitals, or to out-
patient centres or as voluntary patients to mental hospitals. Mentally
abnormal delinquents are dealt with by the prison authorities.

This multiplicity of statutory bodies has its parallel on the side of
voluntary effort. The After-Care Association deals with discharged patients
and, to a limited extent, with what is called pre-care. The Central Association
for Mental Welfare is primarily concerned with mental defect, but in many
areas acts as agent for the After-Care Association, besides dealing with
boarding out and organising training courses. Boarding out is also dealt
with by guardianship societies such as The Guardianship Society, Brighton.
Child guidance is organised by the Child Guidance Council, but the problem
of the difficult child also comes within the province of the Home and School
Council. Borderline mental cases are dealt with by organisations such as
the Tavistock Clinic, and the mentally abnormal delinquent is dealt with by
the Association for the Scientific Study of Delinquency. All these organisa-
tions are concerned with separate bits of work in the field of mental hygiene,
and all are competing against one another for public support. It is not
surprising that the public are confused, and that the support which they give
is generally quite inadequate. But the point I want to stress is that there
is no co-ordinating authority. There is no statutory body able to survey
the whole field and frame a comprehensive programme.

I recognise that the different classes I have mentioned need to be handled
in different ways. Mental disorders, for example, call for active remedial
treatment. Mental defect calls for training and occupation. But the difference
in the methods applicable to different classes should not be allowed to obscure
the fact that all are forms of mental abnormality. Imagine the result of
applying the same principle, or rather absence of principle, to physical
disorders. Suppose there were different committees of local authorities, or
different voluntary organisations dealing with rheumatism, tuberculosis, heart
diseases and surgical cases. The absurdity of such a position does not need
to be emphasised. We need to look at mental abnormality as a whole. All
these different sections form part of the general problem of mental hygiene.
The essential unity of the problem has been obscured in the past by too much
concentration on end results. This has led to the apportionment of duties on
the basis of the type of institution suited for cases demanding institutional
care. We cannot neglect end results, but we ought to pay more attention to
the beginnings.

If we are to unify control, there must be a simplification of administrative
machinery. There should, in my view, be a mental health committee charged
with the general oversight of all forms of mental health work. Such a com-
mittee would be able to define the provinces of municipal and voluntary effort.
There is ample scope for voluntary work in mental hygiene, but voluntary
organisations need to be linked up by some co-ordinating authority if over-
lapping and competition are to be avoided. I hope that the Feversham
Committee's long-awaited report, which I understand is soon to be issued, will
show how this can best be done.

One obvious advantage of such a co-ordinating committee would be that
the problem of institutional accommodation could be viewed as a whole. At
present it is far too common to find mental defectives, many of them children,
who because they happen to be certifiable under the Lunacy Acts are allowed
to occupy valuable mental hospital beds. This is not because of any super-
vening psychosis, which would of course justify their treatment in mental
hospitals, but simply because the mental deficiency committee has failed to
provide proper accommodation of its own either in colonies or in adapted
public assistance institutions. This is a waste of hospital beds and it is unfair
to the other patients; it is unfair to the nurses who have not been trained
in mental deficiency work, and it is unfair to the defectives themselves because
they cannot get the training which they need.

This is merely one illustration of possible improvement in administration.
But a far more important result will be to focus public attention on mental
health. At present, because the work is sectionalised, no one is concerned
with prevention. The visiting committee concentrates on mental hospital
management, which is after all its statutory responsibility. The mental
deficiency committee concentrates on ascertainment and on the provision of
institutional care for defectives. The local education authority may, or may
not, have a special school. Each committee thinks in terms of its own job,
naturally and inevitably, since their duties and responsibilities are defined by
statute. It is no one's duty to ask whether anything can be done to save
cases from reaching a stage at which institutional care becomes inevitable.
Child guidance, for example, or the problem of the so-called difficult child, is
simply non-existent in many places and where, as in London, something is
being done, the work owes its initiation to American philanthropy.

But if a mental health committee is to function effectively, it will need
a specially trained executive officer and adviser: in other words, a medical
officer of mental health. I want to emphasise the need for special training
for this officer, because experience in a mental hospital, essential as it is, is
not enough by itself. I have the greatest regard for mental hospital doctors,
but they necessarily think in terms of the major psychoses and their tendency,
naturally enough, is to want to bring the cases into hospital rather than to
keep them out of hospital. An adequate training in mental hospital work
is essential because the medical officer of mental health must have a sound
clinical background. But he needs much more than this. He ought to be
familiar with modern methods of psychotherapy. We want to develop out-
patient centres, and to do much more in the way of treatment there instead
of making the sessions so few and so short that little can be attempted beyond
diagnosis. He ought also to have experience of child guidance, and he should
co-operate with the school medical officer and with the teachers, who can
detect signs of mental abnormality far sooner than anyone else. It is equally
important that he should have had some experience in mental deficiency
work, and a knowledge of modern methods of training. I admit that this
is asking a great deal. These Admirable Crichtons do not exist to-day, but
they can be trained when the need for them is more generally recognised.
After all, the training of the M.O.H. has only developed gradually. Now in
the bigger cities and counties we have a body of men with an all round training
in public health and preventive medicine unsurpassed anywhere in the world.
But this is not the task of a day or of a year. I am not talking of what is
immediately practicable, but of the goal at which we ought to aim.

If only we can concentrate all aspects of mental health work in one
committee, we may arouse the public conscience and make people realise
the vast social importance of the problem and the need for preventive
measures. It will cost money, of course it will, but think what it might save.
It will take time; amending legislations will be needed; long-standing
prejudices will have to be overcome and professional rivalry and vested
interests faced. But our job, yours and mine, would be too depressing if we
limited our thoughts and aspirations simply to our day-to-day tasks. Nothing
of what I have outlined is impossible. It may be difficult, indeed I know it is,
but it is in no way impossible. Is it just a dream? I think not, but even if
it is a dream, I make no apology on that score. If it is a dream, surely it
is one worth dreaming. In mental health, perhaps more than in any other
sphere, it is true, literally and terribly true, " without a vision the people
perish."
