Relaxation in Everyday Life
=============================

With an
Appendix on Stammering. By E. J.
Boome, M.R.C.P., D.P.H., and M. A.
Richardson, late Therapist, Relaxation
Therapy Department, Elizabeth
Garrett Anderson Hospital. Methuen,
5/-.
This book contains much valuable advice
on the attainment and maintenance of
mental and physical health. It is particularly
welcome at the present time when the
stresses and strains of everyday life are
increasing so rapidly and it is more than
ever necessary that we should learn
adequately to cope with them. One is im-
pressed by the everyday nature of many of
the examples given. As the introduction
states, the book has been written for " The
Man in the Streetand the problems and
maladjustments of the ordinary individual
are analysed and discussed in direct and
non-technical language. Many cases of com-
plete re-adjustment by means of therapeutic
relaxation are also cited.
Reading of such achievements, the man
in the street must honestly admit that in
relaxation there is a definite therapeutic
method. It is not a fad or a dubious
experiment but an established method of
re-education. It is an art which needs to be
learned, but when the technique is mastered
and regularly practised, it may lead " to a
re-creating of the individual".
To beginners, both warning and en-
couragement are frequently given. The
method is simple, the results at first small,
and progress often slow, but we are assured
that " Relaxation will always work its way
to the end if the patient perseveres."
Actually, the quiet perseverance demanded is
itself a part of the re-educative process
involved, for even in simple cases much
readjustment is necessary. When nervous
tension and emotional instability are severe
and have become habitual, the aid of a
Therapist is advisable to teach and
encourage muscular relaxation, but in less
severe cases, the individual may successfully
treat himself by following the directions
given in this book.
In Chapter IV lies the particular value
of the book, for here are given specific
directions with safeguards and their results.
Just exactly what to do, how to do it, and
what to expect from it, are explained,
including information on correct breathing
and on dealing with specific restrictions by
the deliberate use of colour imagery.
In the chapter on " Suggestion the use
of imagery in curative auto-suggestion is
convincingly discussed and quotations from
other helpful sources are included in the
text. Simple and practical examples are
given in this connection, with the oft-
repeated advice to proceed by degrees.
In Chapter VII the use of therapeutic
relaxation for disorders such as insomnia,
exophthalmic goitre, epilepsy, asthma, etc.,
is recommended as an aid to medical treat-
ment. Enuresis can also be successfully
treated in many cases as a result of the
90 MENTAL WELFARE
restoration of confidence and self-respect
engendered through the release brought by
relaxation.
In the Appendices the treatment of stam-
mering is fully discussed. When carried out
by the aid of a therapist, treatment by
relaxation has effected, we are told, many
complete cures of obstinate cases, and in
referring to results achieved in L.C.C.
Classes for Stammerers the authors draw
attention to the fact that cases which have
made little progress over a period of three
or more years, sometimes are suddenly and
completely cured.
This is a wise and heartening book which
will bring help to many people, particularly
to those suffering from nervous over-tension
and its accompanying fatigue.
D. P.
