Recent Penal Legislation in Relation to
=========================================

MENTAL WELFARE 39

:Author: H. K. Snell, M.D.
Medical Officer, H.M. Prison, Liverpool
The new scientific approach to the problem of the criminal may perhaps
be said to date from the war period, but one of the most important measures
foretelling the change in opinion which was to follow later, was the Mental
Deficiency Act of 1913. This (in Sections 8 and 9) involved the recognition of a
partial lack of responsibility in the mentally defective individual who committed
a crime.

By the passing of this Act, means were afforded whereby our prisons were
freed from the care of the mental defective who manifestly should not be committed
to prison. In passing, we might note that the incidence of crime among mental
defectives is not as high as is sometimes suggested. In 1935 there were 401
persons found guilty of criminal offences who were dealt with as mental defectives.
This represents only 1 in 290 of the total number of defectives reported. At
Liverpool last year, out of a total of 3,591 receptions, 20 remand prisoners were
reported to the Courts as mental defectives and it was necessary to deal with
only three cases under Section 9.

The borderline case, that falling between normality and certifiable mental
defect, presents a greater problem. In Law they are not excused responsibility
for their crimes and they constitute a not inconsiderable number of prison
population, as they do that of the general populace. It is no easy task to advise
as to their treatment and disposal. Evidence that a delinquent is of subnormal
mentality, but not certifiable as a defective, does not, in practice, greatly assist
an adjudicator although it may give him a better understanding of the individual
before him. I have been asked, when giving such evidence, " But are there
not thousands of such cases? " These patients need guidance and training. During
childhood this is provided to a great extent in special schools and the training
centres of the Mental Welfare Associations help to carry it on into adolescence.
When they reach prison it has been always a controversial point as to whether
they should be segregated or seeded out among the general prison population.
If segregated some measure of special treatment may be afforded them, but the
way is then opened and underlined for them to regard themselves as mental
cases and different from their fellows. This is to be avoided, especially in prison
practice. In placing them among normal prisoners they are at a disadvantage
and also constitute a drag on their fellows and in some cases may become a
* Address (abridged) given at Conference of Association of Mental Health Workers, Chester.
February, 1939.

Published with the permission of H. M. Prison Commissioners though it does not
necessarily represent their viezvs. subject of ridicule. The nearer a case is to normal the better will he react to
prison routine and the wiser and usual method is to place such patients in the
ordinary prison, where a watchful but unobtrusive eye can be kept on their conduct
and progress; but the lower grades are best dealt with under special conditions
where they do not have to compete on equal terms with their fellow prisoners.
(In this respect temperamental abnormalities are of more importance than
intelligential defects.)

The subnormal offender should, if possible, be dealt with by probation?super-
vision and guidance being the immediate need?and co-operation between probation
officers and mental welfare workers would seem to offer the most hopeful
opportunity of achieving this end. As with his normal brother so with the
subnormal delinquent, when he does not respond to probation, Borstal treatment
is usually resorted to and special facilities obtain for dealing with these cases.
The trend of legislation is to avoid imprisonment for all young persons and a
growing tendency to send more subnormals to Borstal is being manifested because
of the difficulty of dealing with them by other methods when they have failed
to respond to probation.

The compulsory centres, proposed by the Criminal Justice Bill, which a young
offender would be required to attend in his leisure time, e.g., half-holidays and
evenings, may prove a successful alternative to short terms of imprisonment, as
may the residential institutions, which are to be called Howard Houses.

May I remind you that before a lad is sent to Borstal he is medically examined
as to his fitness to undergo and profit from the training, and reports are obtained
from his parents, his school, employers, and the Police; these are carefully
considered together with a home report, if available, prior to any recommendation
being made to the Court. The number of Borstal Institutions is growing with
some rapidity and before a youth is allocated to a particular Institution he is
examined psychologically and full regard paid to the circumstances of his case
so that he may be sent to the Borstal best likely to suit his individual requirements.
Throughout training, stress is laid on this individuality and the inmate's particular
difficulties are studied so that he may be suitably guided and advised.

This is the medical point of view, which emphasises the importance of
individual treatment for the mentally ill-balanced person whether he be criminal
or not, and it differs from the legal viewpoint which is concerned primarily with
public protection. It is, nevertheless, correct to say that the medical outlook is
influencing legislation increasingly and is altering the attitude of the Courts to
offenders when they are satisfied that some form of psychological or psychiatric
treatment is desirable.

In addition to cases of simple subnormal mentality a large number of
adolescent delinquents exhibit emotional and temperamental abnormalities with
varying degrees of mental instability. It is to be expected that a proportion of
these, as they leave adolescence behind, will become stabilised and the training
and the psychologically directed guidance which they receive in the institution
assists to this end. Actual psychological treatment, as such, is not, however, always,
nor in fact usually, a necessary adjunct to the training of the adolescent offender.

Offences due to mental defect and those which result from immaturity of
character formation and irregular development of the natural instincts must,
therefore, be carefully distinguished. While the Mental Deficiency Acts provide
for the action to be followed in the case of the former the latter must be dealt
with in a more expectant manner, and treatment should be directed towards
training and instruction, with supervision. In some cases this is best undertaken
under institutional conditions such as obtain at Borstal whereas in others the less
rigid control of probation may suffice. Prolonged and skilled observation may
be necessary to determine whether mere delayed character development, with
failure in the formation of inhibitions, is the causative factor in the production of
the antisocial conduct and whether the condition will prove transient, and social
adaptation follow stabilisation once adolescence is safely passed. When such
irregular development persists into adult life we are faced with forms of mental
instability which frequently lead the individual into repeated conflicts with the
law owing to his inability to maintain obedience to the social conventions. He
then becomes at once the bane of the legislator and prison administrator. His
abnormalities are insufficient to justify his permanent segregation and, although
his intentions are often higher than his actions, he is unable to exercise the
necessary self-control for long at a time. The result is that he becomes another
recruit to the recidivist ranks. Exhortation and persuasion by a sympathetic
observer do assist in keeping him on the rails for a while but usually fail to have
a permanent effect; in a few cases, however, where there are mental conflicts and
repressions, deeper psychological treatment may help to socialise this class of
offender. Legislation hopes to ensure improved opportunities for the diagnosis
of these conditions in offenders. Special remand homes are contemplated for the
observation of problem cases under 17 years of age and arrangements are
suggested for the provision of reports from skilled investigators in older cases
not remanded to prison. It must, however, be emphasised that sometimes a
lengthy period of observation, noting the degree of response to discipline and
training, may be necessary before a real decision can be established regarding the
true nature of the symptoms under discussion. An accurate picture of the home
life and environmental circumstances of the patient is, of course, also a requisite
for accurate diagnosis. The natural outcome of focussing attention on the treat-
ment of offenders is an increased interest in the prevention of crime and there
is reason to hope that the Child Guidance Clinics help to prevent the problem
child of to-day becoming the criminal of to-morrow.

Now we come to the insane offender. I do not propose to discuss the legal
definition of insanity, or the question of fitness to plead. Suffice it to say that
all who have to assist in the working of these matters at least agree thai hardship
to the individual does not occur in practice, and I think it is correct to add
that the tendency is to apply the legal criteria of insanity less rigidly.

Close 011 three thousand men and women are remanded to prison each year
for reports as to their states of mind; of these nearly 300 are found to be insane
and dealt with at the Courts. At Courts of Summary Jurisdiction, where the
medical view of insanity is ordinarily accepted, it is usual in cases of lesser
crime, where medical evidence of unsoundness of mind has been given, for steps
to be taken to ensure the detention of the accused in a mental hospital.

I*have referred to the power of the Court in the case of the certifiable mental
defective, under existing law to make an order for him to be dealt with as a mental
defective. If an offender is certifiable as insane, a Court of Summary Jurisdiction
in England and Wales has no similar power. Clause 30 of the new Bill proposes
to enable such Courts to make an order for the treatment of an offender who
is certifiable as insane in the same way as they can at present make an order
for the treatment of an offender who is mentally defective.

Cases of insanity among prisoners serving sentences are, of course, certified
by two medical men and two magistrates and removed, by order of the Secretary
of State, to a mental hospital.

As with mental deficiency, so here, the real problem arises with the border-
line cases, the incipient and undeveloped psychotic. The practice of the Courts
in asking for reports meets the necessity as regards those cases remanded in
custody and now if the Court omits to request a report the Prison Medical Officer
always makes it aware of such medical matters as he thinks should be brought
to its notice.

The Bill before Parliament proposes to make some provision for Courts of
Summary Jurisdiction to obtain a medical report on the mental condition of
an offender who is not remanded to prison in order to assist the Court in deciding
how to deal with him. Clause 38 will enable the Court to remand an offender on
bail with a requirement that he submits himself to medical examination, and
provides for the payment of the cost of mental examinations at approved
institutions or by approved persons.

The importance of recognising such cases of non-certifiable mental
abnormality and the possibility of their treatment by special methods has been
appreciated by the Prison Medical Authorities and during the last four years an
investigation into the psychological treatment of selected cases has been in progress
at Wormwood Scrubs Prison. This was instituted in an endeavour to form a
frank and unbiased valuation of such treatment. A psychotherapist was attached
to the prison and possible cases for treatment have been selected from time to
time by Medical Officers at various prisons and Borstal Institutions throughout
the country and transferred. We are now awaiting with interest the report which
is being prepared. In estimating the success or failure of such treatment a
thorough after history and follow-up is indispensable. Unless this is obtained
from reliable sources but little regard can be paid to apparent successes. It is
fortunate that in many of the prison cases the follow-up has been carried out by
the Central Association for Mental Welfare. Certain facts are already accepted?
perhaps the most striking among which is that the number of cases to whom
psychotherapy is applicable is relatively small.*

Apart from those considered suitable for intensive psychotherapy there exists
a number of cases of minor abnormality, the temporarily mal-adjusted and the
like, who benefit very appreciably from psychotherapic conversations. In prison,
close attention is given to such patients with, I think, a not inconsiderable degree
of success. In addition to repeated interviews with the doctors they undoubtedly
derive benefit from the regular life and peaceful atmosphere of the mental
observation ward. Such improvement is particularly to be seen in certain
remand cases. Temporary depression due to domestic or other difficulties, and
some anxiety states are among those which often show a response to these
conditions. Cases of sexual offences are notoriously difficult to treat, but others,
in whom the offences are associated with some sexual difficulty as a contributory
or underlying cause, may be encouraged to an understanding of their condition.
These patients frequently require supervision for a lengthy period of time
on release. Sometimes the Court will accept suggestions in the case of remand
prisoners and deal with them in such a manner that the necessary supervision is
obtained. The frequent difficulty is, who is to do the supervising.

The Criminal Justice Bill recognises the existence of offenders who, though
not certifiable as insane or mentally defective, are suffering from some form of
mental illness or abnormality which may be susceptible to treatment. Clause 19
provides that probation orders may include a provision requiring such persons to
submit themselves to mental treatment and the Bill further enables payment
to be made for such treatment as part of the expenses of probation committees.

The orbit of the psychiatrist has now been extended beyond the confines of
the mental hospital and I suggest that the sphere of action of the Prison Medical
Officer might likewise be enlarged. It is not infrequently suggested that prison is
not the proper place for psychological investigation and that the doctor, by reason
of his official position, is unlikely to receive the confidence and the co-operation
of the prisoner. While obviously there will be exceptions I think it can be said, with-
out hesitation, that the Prison Medical Officer does obtain the confidence of the
majority of his patients and that often the prisoner, finding in him his first oppor-
tunity of discussing his difficulties with a sympathetic and understanding listener, is
ready to accept the advice and treatment offered him. There is one point the value
of which, perhaps, is not fully appreciated and it is that just because the Medical
Officer is an official the prisoner regards him to some extent impartially and
* As the Report has now been published and is reviewed on page 55, Dr. Swell's further
references to it which here followed, are omitted.?Ed.
does not expect to meet him outside in the future. I am speaking here more
particularly of remand cases. The patient in these circumstances may discuss
matters which he might otherwise conceal and often is prepared to accept advice
of a personal nature which in other circumstances it would be hard for him to do.
I firmly believe that sometimes a little plain speaking and straight talking does
a world of good.

A scheme in which a clinic could be run in connection with the prison and
perhaps staffed by the prison Medical Officer might prove to be of benefit in
dealing with some cases after they leave prison. This could be worked up to
bring about an increased co-operation between the probation officer, the mental
health worker and the doctor with resultant benefit to the mental health of the
non-certifiable offender. It might at least save some of them from committing
repeated crimes and returning regularly to prison.

Criminal conduct is not necessarily dependent on mental abnormality. A
correct perspective is a first requirement in these matters; the safe-breaker who,
when I was X-raying his wrist, asked me whether the X-ray apparatus would
be any use for " busting peters " did not fall into the abnormal group. He was
a physically fit man of average intelligence who deliberately chose this method of
livelihood and he and his partners had a business arrangement whereby their
families were cared for while they were in prison. He said he expected to serve
approximately 3 years in 4, in prison and was prepared to do so.

Norwood East has stated "To ensure permanent advantage from medical
methods of attack the approval of legal, medical and public opinion is necessary ",
and he points to the satisfactory working of the Mental Deficiency Acts and the
public support for the compulsory detention of defectives who have committed
crime as being due largely to the fact that the medical principles relating to
mental deficiency are held to be satisfactory. The importance of this fundamental
principle must be remembered in discussing the scientific treatment of crime, and
he goes on to say " No progress can be expected in this direction unless the judicial
and administrative authorities, and the public are satisfied that modern therapy
can be relied upon to produce beneficial results in certain cases of crime."

To suggest that all criminals require psychological treatment is but to under-
mine the cause of those who are in real need of it and likely to respond to it.
Further it has been put forward by some that all offenders, including first offenders
?however trivial their offences?should be subjected to compulsory psychological
investigation, the investigator having the power to detain the subject pending the
investigation. This has, I think, only to be mentioned to be discarded as at once
impracticable and undesirable if for no other reason than that co-operation and
not compulsion is the necessary setting for all psychological investigation.
In conclusion I would say that prison is a deterrent principally to those who
do not need a deterrent. The majority of prisoners settle down in a more or
less comfortable manner to the circumstances and routine in a comparatively short
time and this in my view shows the futility of the short sentences for most
cases. Something more is required; investigation and guidance?not necessarily
deep psychological analysis, but something which is continued on release from
prison in the form of probationary supervision,?this, of course, is !he method
of the Borstal Association. There are many cases who will not return to prison
?they do not need mental investigation but often friendly talk and advice is of
much assistance to them?they are those who do not normally need a deterrent
but have for once made a mistake and yielded to temptation and circumstances.
The adequate protection of society must take priority over the interests of the
individual; our contribution to the problem as workers on the mental health side
must be to forward the study of the individual delinquent and therebv be in a
position to determine the best methods of dealing with him.

Immature prophecy and over zealous enthusiasm will bring into disrepute
and enshroud in scepticism new departures from established practice. The careful
worker, whether official or unofficial, will gradually adjust his perspective as new
methods prove their worth.

I have mentioned the new Criminal Justice Bill where it touches the mental
side of our problem most intimately, but obviously it would not be proper for me
to comment on its more controversial aspects. I have indicated the general penal
changes which have taken place in recent years and have followed the appreciation
of the contribution of psychological medicine to the treatment of criminals. The
bases of psychological medicine are still somewhat fluid. It has, however, helped
us to a better understanding of many of our cases although further study is
necessary before its final place can be satisfactorily assigned. The future prospect
is one of hopeful anticipation, which, to be realised, must be based on proved
and sound foundations, and these can only be established by the unhesitating
and liberal co-operation of all who are engaged in the care and treatment of
the abnormal delinquent.
