Mending Minds
===============

:Author: Paul Winterton.
Peter Davies, 1938, 8/6.

This book is the result of an investigation
undertaken on behalf of one of our great
daily newspapers into the conditions obtain-
ing in the Public Mental Hospitals of
England and Wales and the subject of
mental disease and its treatment in general.
Whatever was the original intention of the
investigation, the book actually constitutes
perhaps the strongest lay defence of the
Public Mental Hospital system which has
appeared in print.

The author's avowed intention was to
investigate the life and work of the Public
Mental Hospitals on behalf of the News-
Chroniclc, and to present the truth about
present conditions in these Hospitals while
avoiding all trace of sensationalism. He
apparently anticipated considerable difficulty
in obtaining access to a Mental Hospital and
it is instructive and somewhat amusing to
watch his initial attitude of suspicion
gradually changing to a warmly expressed
admiration of the work which is carried out
by the Medical and Nursing staffs in the
majority of these institutions. Such a change
in attitude is familiar to those of us who
have had experience in Mental Hospital
work but it is none the less gratifying to
find it so definitely expressed in this book.
Mr. Winterton deals very fully with the
problems of overcrowding and the conse-
quent difficulties of proper classification of
the patients in the majority of our Mental
Hospitals and he has much to say about the
short-sighted policy adopted by many local
authorities in this connection.

His indictment of the manner in which
some Authorities are carrying out their res-
ponsibilities in the matter of Mental Health
is a strong one. His facts are clearly stated
and his case against local apathy is so care-
fully reasoned that one would like to see
this book in the hands of every member of
the various Mental Hospital Visiting Com-
mittees with a view to stimulating and
guiding their interest in the hospitals for
which they are responsible.

The law relating to mental disease is
discussed and the bogey of wrongful deten-
tion is given the place which it deserves?
that is the end of the book.

A number of criticisms of the clothing,
feeding and occupation of patients and of
the unsatisfactory sanitary accommodation
at some Mental Hospitals is made by quoting
extracts from the Board of Control's
Reports on these Hospitals. This is not
altogether a fair method of criticism, how-
ever, for (as the author himself mentions)
conditions which have been criticised by the
visiting Commissioners may well have been
rectified by the time the Commissioners
report appears in print.

On the subject of the problems connected
with obtaining nursing staff, particularly
female staff, the author expresses a number
of opinions and recommendations which are,
in the main, those which are generally
expressed by persons with a superficial
knowledge of this subject and which do not
agree with the conclusions held by the
majority of Medical Superintendents and
Matrons.

The author makes an excellent point when
he alludes to the ignorance and dread of
the general public on the subject of mental
hospitals, and puts forward the suggestion
that the Board of Control should employ a
Publicity Officer to make known the real
facts. There is much to be said for this
suggestion, but in some districts the desired
end is already being obtained by throwing
open periodical^ the whole hospital for
inspection by the public with gratifying
results and, in the absence of helpful official
publicity designed to overcome the prejudice
against mental hospitals, this plan might
well be more generally adopted.
R. W. Armstrong.
