Report on the Psychological Treatment of Crime
================================================

The publication of this important report at a time when the Criminal Justice Bill is
before the House and its progress eagerly watched by so many of the public, is singularly
opportune. The report gives the result of an investigation carried out at Wormwood
Scrubs Prison for a period of four years to ascertain the value of psychological treatment
* By W. Norwood East, M.D., F.R.C.P., and W. H. de B. Hubert, B.A., M.R.C.S.. L.R.C.P.
With an appendix by Dr. H. T. P. Young, M.B., Ch.B., on the influences of prison
conditions in relation to psychotherapy in prison. H.M. Stationery Office, 2s. 6d.

in the prevention and cure of crime. In 1932 the Departmental Committee on Persistent
Offenders stated in their report that they considered " a certain amount of persistent crime
?as well as first offences with which we are not concerned?is due to abnormal mental
factors . . . that there is reason to suppose that certain delinquents may be amenable to
psychological treatment" and they recommended that " a Medical Psychologist should be
attached to one or more penal establishments" to carry out such treatment in selected
cases. The Wormwood Scrubs investigation was undertaken largely as a result of that
recommendation.

In the Prison Commissioners'-Report for the year 1935, a mental classification of criminals
is given?normal, sub-normal, mentally defective, mentally inefficient, psychoneurotics,
psychotics (sub-headings being given in each class except the normal). Under the normal
group are included all those offenders " whose general behaviour corresponds to that of the
average man". "There is no doubt," says the Report, "that the tendency to break the law
and acquiesce in certain forms of crime is widespread, and the occurrence of anti-social
behaviour cannot be taken to imply abnormality unless the word is used in a very special
sense." It is important to note that in the opinion of the authors, the normal group will
include at least 80 per cent., that psychotherapy is usually unnecessary in the treatment of
the normal offenders, and also for those who do not commit further crime, that in general
its application is unsuitable in cases of mental defectiveness, and in the psychoses, and that it
is most likely to benefit the mentally inefficient and psychoneurotic groups.

The cases dealt with were selected after very careful consideration from those submitted
by the medical officers of the prisons as likely to be suitable; in general they were under
40 years of age and serving a sentence of not less than six months, for indecent exposure,
homosexual, or abnormal sex crimes, certain cases of arson and other crimes considered to
be due to obsession or hysterical reactions or some other remedial condition, and included as
suitable were the adolescents who showed pronounced mental instability while in prison.
The willing co-operation of the prisoner in the treatment was essential and the greatest
caution exercised to prevent prisoners acquiesing in treatment in order to avoid work, and
obtain preferential conditions.

A perusal of the report makes one realise the need for extreme caution in dealing
with the whole question, and avoidance of easy generalisations. Out of 406 cases seen
and investigated, only 214 were approved for treatment. The report states, " It should be
recognised generally that psychological treatment may be harmful if applied to certain
patients, and that to ascertain its suitability, or otherwise, in any case demand* not only
a knowledge of psychology but also a scientific knowledge of mental disease and of crime
which is only attained after long training as a psychiatrist with experience of criminals."
After giving figures to show that " the usual methods of dealing zvith offenders in this country
are effective in a considerable proportion of cases" the authors go on to say " the psychological
treatment of crime has suffered considerably from over-propagandisation and over-statement.

Both are unfaithful servants, for they lead away from truth. A discriminating critic will
ref use to accept the statement of a psychologist that a law-breaker was cured of Ins criminal
tendencies as the result of a recent course of psychological treatment. . . . IVv do not believe
the word ' cure' can be properly tised in this connection until many years have lapsed. . . .
IVe shall not use the word 'cured' in this Report in connection zvith our results."
A Table is given (para. 69) showing the cases approved for treatment as follows :?

Cases Cases approved
----------------------

Class of Offender investigated for treatment
Borstal group (excluding sex cases)  63 ... 29
Adolescent group (excluding sex cases)   41 ... 34
Adult group (excluding sex cases)   97 ... 27
Homosexuals    79 ... 52
Exhibitionists   35 ... 23
Other sexual offenders (perversions)  41 ... 27
Offenders against women and girls  50 ... 22
Total  406 ... 214

Part II of the Report deals with Criminal behaviour and general offences and the types
most suited for psychotherapy and illustrative cases are quoted from the various groups set
out above, and in Part III the same procedure is followed, and deals entirely with sexual
offences. Seventy-nine illustrative cases are described at some length, and need to be studied
with great attention. It would be impossible in this short review to quote. Several of these
descriptions which one reads with absorbing interest end with the words "He was not suitable
for psychotherapy", or similar negative indications. Others state, "Psychotherapy in this
case if as probably successful, or helpful". Other cases are quoted as being suited for special
supervision in a suitable institution (such as is recommended later in the report). In connection
with the treatment it is pointed out in paragraph 90 (3), that conditions of the prisoners' life
in prison were sometimes altered; in some cases supervision on release was carried out
by the Central Association for Mental Welfare, and further treatment was given by
Dr. Hubert in the department of psychological medicine at St. Thomas's Hospital.
Part IV comprises conclusions and recommendations. It is pointed out that as, at the
most, any treated case can only have been out of prison four years at the time of writing
the report, while the majority have been at liberty for a shorter period and some are still
in prison, it is not possible to show the result of the investigation statistically. After discussing
the uses of specialised psychotherapy and the psychiatric approach, the authors strongly
recommend (para. 164) a special institution for the care, study and treatment of a group?
selected under expert supervision?and would include cases suitable for : " (1) psychotherapy
alone, (2) psychotherapy combined with more general measures of psychiatric treatment
and training or (3) the more general measures alone. The second group would consist of those
cases who require observation and investigation because of the presence of features that are
unusual, abnormal or the subject of special lines of research. The third group would consist
of those who, for other reasons, need the care of a special institution. In general, this latter
group would consist of those for whom the institution could supply an environment more
suited to their individual requirements than the observation section of an ordinary prison.
For example, many offenders whose sentence is preventive and others whose behaviour during
sentence is very abnormal would be much more satisfactorily dealt with in such an institution
than under ordinary prison conditions although no more than employment and supervision
might be practicable."

The authors enter a caveat against too ready recommendations for psychotherapy of an
offender on bail or on probation unless made by approved medical experts and express
the view that in districts where there is a prison or State Remand Home (if these are
established as proposed in the Criminal Justice Bill) the Medical Officers should be available
for the necessary examinations, and that "if Local Authorities generally established
psychiatric clinics and they were made available for persons on bail or probation " it would
be of great advantage. While this investigation has only dealt with men and youths, the
experience is sufficient to justify a recommendation that a woman psychotherapeutist should
be appointed to a woman's prison.

At the close of the report, the need for Criminological research is emphasised in these
words:?

" Whilst we recommend close co-operation be maintained between the prisons
and the special institution we attach much importance to any extension of the
psychiatric and psychotherapeutic service to prisons and Borstal institutions being
centralised as much as possible. Not only zuill this further develop, but it will
promote scientific study by collecting case material together instead of allozving
it to remain scattered in different centres."

The value of the Report cannot be over-emphasised, and to those responsible for it our
grateful thanks are due. T ~ ?
? Lucy E. Beach.
