Evacuation and Mental Health Problems
=====================================

MENTAL WELFARE 107

Through its Educational Psychologists who have been working in
" Reception Areas ", and through teachers who have reported their personal
experiences, the C.A.M.W. has already acquired abundant evidence of the
existence of problems amongst the evacuated school population the solution
of which would seem to need the contribution of the psychologist and the
Mental Health social worker as well as that which other types of workers
can make.

One correspondent?a Head Master who has specially concerned himself
with the education of retarded children?writes : " You and your organisation now
have a wonderful chance of being useful", and urges the need for people of
" sympathetic understanding and vision to go round the countryside pressing,
begging for, and organising welfare work " of all kinds. The following extracts
from a letter reporting his experiences in the remote village to which he, with
his school has been drafted, give a vivid picture of some of the difficulties
with which " evacuated " teachers everywhere are now valiantly striving
to deal.

" I have been greatly perturbed at the immense numbers of eneuretics. ,
How much of this is due to the stress, maybe temporary, of change of home and
environment it i.s difficult to say. . . . Then again I had a child suddenly develop
fits'?probably induced by his change of billet, and fear. Difficult (delinquent)
children have been turned out of billets . . . and dumped on my own doorstep."
..." Something urgent had to be done for these unwanteds; I got a spacious
house and grounds and put them there . . . and now they are happy."

"... There are children who are shy and distressed in cottage homes that
are run on old fashioned discipline lines. . . . Either they cry and cry, or prove
aggressive and go home. ... Yet most children tolerate their billets, and I
suppose, so far, 50 per cent, would not go back if they could. Say 25 per cent are
passably contented. 25 per cent, would go back at once, and of these, say 10 per
cent, are definitely unhappy, uncared for, decidedly out of gear."

Talks on the wireless, he suggests, on the management of children should be
arranged for the benefit of these new and often bewildered foster-parents, and
" organisation for leisure " is urgently needed. The opportunities are endless,
if the skilled and experienced workers are forthcoming.

There was, of course, no means of accurately assessing beforehand the
extent and nature of the problems which would arise in connection with an
experiment of such magnitude, and some of them have proved to be far more
acute than had been envisaged. Particularly is this the case with regard to
eneuresis, a disability which, however, it must be borne in mind, does not under
ordinary conditions make itself known as parents are naturally reluctant to
disclose its existence to doctors or social workers. Without further research,
therefore, it is impossible either to arrive at any estimate of its prevalence
under ordinary conditions, or to assess what proportion of it is due to the
emotional disturbances created by evacuation. Evidence of the distress and
friction which it is producing is abundant, but it is encouraging to read the
report of one of the C.A.M.W.'s Educational Psychologists working in a
Reception Area, that in most cases in which her help had been sought, the
foster-parents were being " extremely sensible, often taking great pains to
effect a cure. In nearly all cases, affection for the child had overcome their
spontaneous disgust."

Referring to another of the " mental health " problems which is everywhere creating difficulties?viz., that of the frequent visiting of evacuated
children by parents and relatives?this same worker writes of a scheme in one
village where a comfortable meeting place has been set aside for visits, with
facilities for tea, etc., provided by voluntary workers; this is one method by
which, it is suggested, there may be alleviated " the conditions of jealousy
which arises when the parent, over-anxious to see her own child, is met by
the obvious and natural affection of the child for the new foster-parent."

The need for provision for the disposal of " difficult children" was
referred to by the Board of Education in Circular 1469 (issued in May, 1939),
in which it was suggested that local authorities should consider the possibility
of placing them in empty houses equipped for the purpose with a staff
experienced in child guidance matters. In a Circular recently issued by the
Ministry of Health, " Public Health Services in the Receiving Ar.eas " (No.
1882), the subject is again mentioned with the suggestions made
by the Board, and Local Authorities are further reminded of the
existence of " special schools" willing to receive difficult children. As
reported on page 105, the Mental Health Emergency Committee are devoting
careful attention to this particular problem and have circularised Education
Authorities making certain concrete proposals and offers of help in regard
to it.
