The Study of Society, Methods and Problems
===========================================

MENTAL WELFARE 117
.
. Edited by r. C. Bartlett,
M. Ginsberg, E. J. Lindgren, and
R. J. Thouless. Kegan Paul, Trench,
Trubner & Co. Ltd., Broadway House,
68-74 Carter Lane, E.C. 10/6.

The necessity for detached work of a
scientific nature concerning the study of
society, its methods and its problems is not
lessened but increased many times when a
society passes through the experience of
war. When many societies are involved and
the experience threatens to widen into world
patterns, though the work becomes in-
creasingly difficult, this study, and its
orderly presentation through critical and
constructive minds to those who are con-
cerned with social development may prove
to be one of the chief avenues by which,
when peace returns, the world may be rebuilt
on reasonable lines.

In the hour of such crises men and women
engaged in this work need to be unhesitating
and undeterred in its continuance?if they
are able?in the midst of their society's
upheaval. During the last war Hobhouse,
from his Hampstead garden, wrote the
following words to his son in the air force.
They form part of the dedication of " The
Metaphysical Theory of the State" (a
pungent criticism of the Hegelian theory
of the State) in the writing of which he had
been interrupted by an air raid over
London:

" The raid was soon over and the three
specks drifted away towards the east. The
gunfire died down, and below the hill the
great city picked up its dead. ... As I went
back to my Hegel my first mood was one of
self-satire. Was this a time for theorising
or destroying theories when the world was
tumbling about our ears? My second
thoughts ran otherwise. To each man the
tools and weapons he can best use. In the
bombing of London I had just witnessed the
visible and tangible outcome of *a false and
wicked doctrine, the foundations of which
lay, as I believe, in the book before me. To
combat this doctrine effectively is to take
such part in the fight as the disabilities of
middle age will allow. ... In the Hegelian
theory of the god-state all that I had
witnessed lay implicit. You may meet his
Gothas in the air and may the full power of
a just cause be with you. I must be content
with more pedestrian methods. But ' to
make the world a safe place for demo-
cracythe weapons of the spirit are as
necessary as those of the flesh."

A generation has grown up since then, and
during those years the truth has been slowly
if belatedly gaining ground that spiritual
weapons are as dependent upon accurate
knowledge and experienced skill for their
right and effective using as are the weapons
of material and physical forces. This book
is a scholarly and constructive effort in the
direction of bringing such knowledge and
skill a little nearer the increasing number in
our modern society who are concerned with
discovering the conditions and means
whereby its quality and progress can be im-
proved. To quote from the preface "it is
designed mainly for the use of those who
are engaged upon or who wish to engage
upon social research, and who require to
know what methods are already available,
upon what established conclusion they may
reasonably build, and what are some of the
outstanding problems which may repay
further study."

In a brief review of a book like this, in
which the contributions are all the result of
diverse and specialised study, and where
there is not a page whose matter is
extraneous to the subject, it is difficult to
select one section for comment without
giving an impression of its content which
might destroy that balance of varied and
integrating interest which?to the present
reviewer?is one of its most helpful
features. It gives in a small space, from the
angles of psychology, anthropology, and
sociology, the kind of information and con-
structive suggestion which, if studied care-
fully may save those wishing to engage in
social research hours of scattered and mis-
directed enquiry. The excellent bibliography
at the end of each chapter, and the com-
prehensive index increase its value in this
direction.

Beyond this, however, there is much in this
volume which the general reader, interested
in his social environment, will find helpful
and suggestive, especially if he brings to the
reading a perception of the importance of
ordinary everyday happenings and be-
haviour, the bulk of which make up the
texture of society?such things, for instance,
as the significance of language, of attitudes,
and of conversation. I should like to under-
line Professor Pear's words with reference
to the last: " Of all the patterns of social
behaviour which we know, one of the most
subtle and effective is conversation, and its
study should form a large part of any ade-
quate social psychology."

The book should help to encourage a
consciousness of the forces at work?to
mention a few of the more obvious?in the
press and the cinema, in work and in the
lack of work, in the telling of tales, and in
the behaviour of children. It is this con-
sciousness, widely disseminated, which is
needed if the specialist is to get the full co-
operation from the members of a com-
munity in his social research which will
bring the maximum result. It is the lack
of this consciousness which helps to make
a people an easy prey to subtle forms of
dictatorship and control even while they
protest that they will fight to the end for
freedom.

The Study of Society is a book which
needs to be followed up, continually, by
others on the same co-operative basis. One
of the most hopeful indications that, in spite
of the disintegration of wars and rumours
of wars, some advance is being made in the
right direction, lies in the fact that men of
such diverse points of view and experience
should have been sufficiently convinced of
the necessity of co-operative thought and
effort as to produce a book of this kind. At
last the social sciences are learning to
appreciate each other, and are aiming at
that unity which comes through comrade-
ship in diversity. The highest social and
individual development depends upon that
unity being gained over an increasingly wide
area. If we enquire as to the nature of that
development, Professor Ginsberg's con-
cluding chapter may throw some light on
this final problem : " If," he says, " develop-
ment is understood as consisting in a process
whereby a full realisation or fulfilment of
human capacities is gradually attained, that
society might be regarded as most developed
which evokes the most spontaneous devotion
to common ends among its members and
releases the greatest fund of intelligent
energy
This piece of co-operative work is a
distinctive contribution towards building up
those conditions which will make that
process easier and more effective.
M. L. Haskins.
