A Survey of Child Psychiatry
=============================

Edited on behalf of the Child Guidance Council
:Author: R. G. Gordon, M.D., D.Sc.,
F.R.C.P.Ed. Contributed by Contemporary British Authorities. (Pp. 278;
2 tables. 10/6 net). London: Oxford
University Press, 1939.

To attempt in two hundred and sixtyeight pages, as this book does, a survey of
Child Psychiatry by twenty-one different
contemporary British authorities, is no mean
task. The Child Guidance Council, by whom
the book is sponsored, felt that, after ten
years' practical experience, the time had
come to collect and publish the knowledge
possessed by British experts for the purpose
of demonstrating the extent to which Child
Psychiatry had become a living subject in
this country. That they have fulfilled their
intention there can be no doubt. Although it
is only to be expected that some contributors should find it possible to express themselves more clearly, aptly and interestingly
than others, the book as a whole is alive
with positive, constructive views and recommendations, while not lacking in the breadth
of opinion necessary in the approach to a
relatively new science.

The book is divided into four sections.
The first part deals with problems related to
physical illness, and includes excellent
chapters on epidemic encephalitis, juvenile
rheumatism, epilepsy, and certain biochemical and metabolic disturbances. An
example of the close collaboration between
physician and psychologist which the book
exemplifies is revealed in the chapter on
rheumatism where the differential diagnosis
between latent chorea and " finding life
difficult" together with its significance in
relation to the welfare of the child is discussed. In the chapter on epilepsy, the contributor, while including reference (with
diagrams) to electro-encephalography as a
means of diagnosis, gives a good description
of the epileptic personality and propounds
the interesting theory as to how far the
epileptic personality is the result of the
attitude of the community (as exemplified by
the " no epileptics " clause in the regulations
for admission to every convalescent hospital
in the country) towards the epileptic, rather
than a concomitant of the disorder itself.
This is followed up by admirable advice to
parents and others regarding the management of epileptic children. The last chapter
in this section, while reviewing present day
knowledge on the subject, reveals that there
is still a large field for research into the
biochemical changes which are associated
with mental disorders in childhood. Whereas
a considerable amount of space is, quite
rightly, devoted to conditions such as
epilepsy and rheumatism, one looked in vain
for any reference to asthmatic states, and
allergic disorders as a whole receive but
pas.sing reference. In view of the increased
knowledge that is being obtained relating
to the psychological aspects of these disorders, and the extent to which they are
being referred to psychiatrists for investigation, the omission is perhaps unfortunate.
The second section deals with problems
related to mental illness and covers the
field of psychosis, hysteria, anxiety states,
obsessional and compulsive states, family
neurosis, the unstable mental defective and
backwardness. An excellent survey is
presented of the comparatively rare condition of psychosis in children, with a
detailed discussion on the differential
diagnosis between organic cerebral disease,
mental deficiency and mental disorder. The
chapter on hysteria stresses a fact that
cannot be over-emphasised, namely the importance of psychoneurosis being diagnosed
not only on the fact of negative organic
findings, but on the positive signs of
emotional disorder. In the chapter on
anxiety states, classification plays an over
prominent part at the expense of a constructive account of these disorders and their
management. The chapter on the family
neurosis, however, provides a masterly
survey of Freudian psychology clearly and
precisely expressed in simple, everyday
terminology. It is illustrated by well chosen
and deftly described cases which seem, as
is not always the case, to belong to the text
in that one obtains from each a constructive
idea of the purpose for which they were
selected. It is not easy in a volume compiled by twenty-one co-writers to avoid
overlapping on the one hand, or important
omissions on the ether. Of the former
there is very little, and, for the most part,
where it occurs it only serves to present
significant opinions or recommendations in
a more vivid form or from a slightly
different angle. Perhaps the most obvious
omission is a chapter showing the relationship between Child Guidance and the
problem of mental deficiency. It is stated
by the Editor on page 137 that, as the book
is intended to deal with those conditions
met with in Child Guidance work, mental
deficiency as such is not included in the
subjects discussed. In view of this, the
chapter on conduct disorder in mental
defectives based upon experience of the
residential care of grossly unstable
defectives of all ages, inmates of the
Rampton State Institution for such, appears
to be wholly out of place and out of keeping
with the rest of the book. Apart from
mental deficiency resultant upon organic
brain disease or injury, instability of conduct
would be expected to occur with similar
frequency in the mentally deficient as in
those of other grades of intellectual
development, and this the writer admits
when he states that the great majority of
the mental defectives in England and Wales
is at large and presumably living respectable,
more or less independent, lives. The writer
goes on to argue that serious conduct disorder is seen much more frequently in highgrade feebleminded defectives than in
imbeciles and idiots, and bases this assumption on the fact that the proportion of
feebleminded to imbecile and idiot
admissions to the State Institution is more
than four to one. In the Report of the
Mental Deficiency Committee, 1929, compiled by Dr E. O. Lewis, it is recorded
with regard to the different grades of defect
that the incidence varies inversely with the
degree of defect, i.e., in every 100 aments,
there were approximately 5 idiots, 20
imbeciles and 75 feebleminded. From these
figures it will be seen that the proportion
of admissions of different grades to the
Rampton State Institution approximates
fairly closely to that of mental deficients as
a whole. In so far as cases of mental
deficiency are presented for examination in
psychiatric practice, a chapter dealing with
the methods of diagnosis and the facilities
provided by the various authorities and
social organisations for their treatment or
disposal according to the degree of their
stability or instability, would have filled a
real gap in a book which purports to cover
the field of Child Psychiatry. Particularly
is this so in view of the recommendations
for increased use of voluntary residential
supervision for such patients contained in
the Report of the Feversham Committee,
1939. The chapter which follows contains
an interesting and helpful account of what
can be a very dull subject, namely the
medical aspects of backwardness.

The third section covers the sociological
aspects of Child Psychiatry from the point
of view of the family, the school, social
maladjustment generally and juvenile
delinquency. A brilliant exposition of the
subject is provided under the title of maladjustments in the school. Not only are the
ideas and recommendations which it contains
charmingly presented and delightfully
expressed, but they relate to vitally important matters in present-day school regime
and are recorded by one who clearly knows
his subject from the inside. The problem
of juvenile delinquency with its manifold
contributory factors L not easy to condense
into a single chapter but is well done.
There can, however, be no excuse for confusion regarding the use of the terms
" moral defective " and " dullness " as here
presented. When the writer turns to the
question of the preparation of medical
reports for Magistrates or Probation
Officers, however, he is clearly speaking
from wide experience and his remarks are
most valuable.

The final section is devoted to what are
referred to as special syndromes such as
enuresis, stammering, sleep disorder, tics,
tricks, and habits, and sexual difficulties.

The chapters on enuresis and stammering
are excellent, although the omission of
references relating to the authors quoted in
the text, so admirably carried out in the rest
of the book, is unfortunate. The account
of sleep disorders makes disappointing
reading. It is followed by a good description of habit movements, although the views
expressed regarding the nature and treatment of nail biting are not acceptable.

There follows an excellent and practical
account of sexual difficulties in childhood,
while the book closes with a comprehensive
and masterly survey of the history, development and application of child guidance
methods. It is perhaps unfortunate that so
excellent a volume should have been
launched at a time when the attention of
those for whom it was written has of
necessity been directed towards dealing with
mass emergency situations rather than with
the problems of the individual child, for the
Editor's wish that the book should "promote
an interest in mental health in its beginnings
and so encourage a more vigorous attempt
to prevent mental illness " has been amply
fulfilled. M. B. H.
