Out of the Running
====================

:Author: G. Gertrude
Hoopes. With a Foreword by Edgar
A. Doll, Ph.D., Department of
Research, Vineland Training School,
and with Clinical Notes by Winthrop
M. Phelos, M.D., Director of Children's
Rehabilitation Institute, Baltimore.
Clias. C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinoi.s.
$2.00.

The author of this autobiography has
suffered since birth from grave physical
handicaps. To quote from a medical report
on her condition :?

" She is about the size of a child of
twelve. . . . She is practically mute,
never trying to talk. . . . The muscles
of the face, especially the frontalis and
masseter muscles, are in constant
motion. The tongue is moved con-
tinuously from side to side, protruded,
retracted, never still for a moment. The
head is jerked forward, backward, from
one side to the other. The shoulders
are from time to time elevated and
depressed."

Until the age of 45 she was able, though
with difficulty, to walk; then an accident
deprived her even of this limited freedom
of movement and since that time she has
only been able to move about by using a
specially constructed tricycle.

Nevertheless this book is a record of
achievement despite almost heartbreaking
difficulties. At the end of it we leave the
author living a life enriched by her spiritual
vitality (she is a devout Catholic), by the
mental alertness which enables her to listen
with zest to radio talks and discussions, by
a power of aesthetic appreciation which
finds delighted satisfaction in the great
music which reaches her through the same
channel, by practical ingenuity through
which she is able to use a typewriter (albeit
with one finger only) to communicate with
others through a shorthand sign language,
and even to play a little on the piano.

Just as Helen Keller's autobiography
brought a message of courage and hope to
the blind and deaf mute, so will our present
author's bring such a message to those who
are " out of the running" through grave
physical deformity. Equally to relatives and
social workers concerned with their welfare
should the book be of value in increasing
understanding, deepening respect and en-
couraging an attitude of faith in the hidden
possibilities even of those who seem to be
immured in a prison, the key of which is
in no man's keeping.

To Dr. Doll?who contributes a Foreword
to the book?the author freely expresses
her gratitude. Without his encouragement
and guidance, she tells us, it would never
have been written.
A. L. H.
