Report of the Feversham Committee
===================================

98 MENTAL WELFARE

By HENRY HERD, M.A., M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H.
Formerly School Medical Officer, Manchester Education Committee.
The publication of this Report is an event of no small importance in the
sphere of Mental Health.
The Committee responsible for the Report was formed as the result of
a movement for the co-ordination of the existing voluntary Mental Health
Services. For several years there have been in existence a number of separate
organisations dealing with various aspects of Mental Health work, the chief
of these being the Central Association for Mental Welfare, the Mental After-
Care Association, the National Council for Mental Hygiene, the Child Guidance
Council and the Home and School Council. It has gradually been realised
that while, for a time, such separation may give scope for initiative and
exploration in a variety of directions, there comes the stage when overlapping
with consequent waste of effort, makes it desirable, even imperative, to
co-ordinate activities.
The terms of reference of the Committee were :?
" To consider the scope and activities of the law affecting existing
voluntary organisations rendering Mental Health Services, and to report
on the possibility of increasing their usefulness to the community, parti-
cularly in relation to:
(1) Their co-operation with Government Departments, Local Authorities
and other bodies interested in Mental Health work.
(2) The co-ordination of their activities.
(3) The extension of the services rendered by them."
The Committee carried out its task in a very thorough manner. A com-
prehensive and searching questionnaire was issued to Government Depart-
ments, Local Authorities, Voluntary Associations and private persons
connected in any way, however slight, with Mental Health work in its varied
aspects. The task of arranging, analysing and summarising the replies was
undertaken by a member of the Committee, Dr. J. M. Mackintosh, now Chief
Medical Officer of the Scottish Health Department. In this way, there has
been collected a large amount of valuable information relating to the treat-
ment of mental disorders (in the widest sense) in different parts of the country
?information which has enabled the Committee to discover the many existing
gaps and weaknesses, and to make concrete suggestions for the improvement
* Obtainable from IV. H. Barrell Ltd., 112/116 High St., Portsmouth. Price, 2/10 post free.
MENTAL WELFARE 99
of the service. The Report, therefore, apart altogether from the specific
recommendations it makes on its terms of reference, is an extraordinarily-
useful compendium, showing the position of Mental Health activity all over
the country at the present time.
In a short article it would be impossible to attempt to give anything
like an adequate summary of the Report. It is, in any case, one to be read
in full by every one interested in Mental Health. Here it is possible only to
take a very general survey and to refer more particularly to certain points,
the selection of which may be dictated by the writer's own interests as a past
School Medical Officer.
There may be said to be two outstanding propositions maintained by
the Feversham Committee.
The first is their insistence as an indispensable preliminary to a pro-
gressive policy, that Mental Health should be recognised as a single concept.
Mental defect, mental disorder, organic or functional, and delinquency should,
i.e., be regarded not so much as separate pathological conditions as being all
of them, in different ways, departures from a normal condition of Mental
Health. This conception pervades the whole Report and is fundamental. It
is, of course, not a new idea to mental workers and it has already received
partial statutory recognition. As the Report points out, " the Board of Control
is a supervising and co-ordinating authority for all branches of mental Welfare
recognised by statute," and the Mental Treatment Act of 1930 extends the
Board's controlling powers to voluntary and temporary patients and even
to encouragement of community care.
Throughout the country, however, there is far from general recognition
of this unity, and for this reason, the Committee has not been content with
a general statement of its view, but applies it in detail. Mental Health Clinics,
it is contended, should deal with " patients of all ages likely to benefit by
psychiatric treatment." This would only exclude the ineducable defective,
and the educable defective who requires " training" and not " treatment,"
but would include the defective who has psycho-neurotic symptoms or shows
problems of conduct. Staffs also should be unified.
" We do not think it necessary or desirable for the average Local Authority
to appoint one trained staff for Mental Disorders, one for Neuroses and P.sycho-
neuroses, and one for Mental Defectives "
though separate examination or treatment sessions may be required.
The second main proposition of the Report is really only a natural
corollary of the first. As a concrete application of the idea of the unity of
Mental Health, it proposes that every Local Authority responsible for it
should appoint a single Mental Health Committee which would deal with all
matters relating to mental welfare?control of institutions, treatment of
early mental and nervous disorders, establishment of clinics, community care
and education of the public. Such an arrangement would provide a unity of
100 MENTAL WELFARE
control of Mental Health and mental disorder in its manifold aspects, similar
to that exercised to-day as regards physical health by Public Health Com-
mittees, although even here there is not complete unity, as part of the physical
health control is in the hands of Education Committees.
In this connection, the Report refers to two contributions made in this
century to psychological medicine ; viz :
" The growth of the idea of prevention and the recognition of personal care
as a more weighty consideration than mere protection of the community."
In these points there is a close parallelism with the Public Health service in
which the idea of prevention is dominant and in which also the care of the
child has now largely taken the place of earlier concern for the improvement
of the environment.
At present, control of Mental Health is in the hands of several Committees,
working for the most part independently. The proposal now made is that
the Mental Health Committee should be on the " same footing as other
Committees of the Local Authority which are responsible for public health
and social welfare." For the particular case of patients in Public Assistance
Institutions, a joint Sub-Committee of the two Committees is suggested,
but even here unity could be achieved by ensuring that clinical supervision
of all cases should be in the hands of a Medical Officer who is an expert in
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy?a medical officer who might or might not
be equal in status to the Medical Officer of Health. In practice a difficult
situation might be created if the Mental Health Medical Officer was a
subordinate of the Medical Officer of another Committee (Public Health)
but close co-operation between the two officers would be necessary.
One is tempted at this point to wonder why the Feversham Committee
has not carried its zeal for unity still further and recognised that the "physical "
and the " mental" cannot be dissevered. Physical health and mental health
are not completely separate conceptions. Health is affected by both physical
and mental factors, and while " Public Health " has up to the present been
generally understood to cover only physical health, there is no reason why
that narrow conception of its function should be perpetuated.
In relation to the functions of Education Committees, special problems
arise. These have statutory duties relating to education and notification of
mentally defective children, and some have established Child Guidance Clinics
for the treatment of " problem " children. As a rule, on the staffs of the larger
authorities, there are one or more School Doctors who have taken the special
Course in Mental Defect which qualifies them?theoretically at least?to be
Certifying Officers. Child Guidance work, on the other hand, when under-
taken, is usually controlled by a part-time psychiatrist, holding the Diploma
in Psychological Medicine. Sometimes the psychiatrist is responsible for
the M.D. work but there are areas where the two sections function separately,
co-ordination being secured bv the Chief School Medical Officer himself.
MENTAL WELFARE 101
The Feversham Committee recognises this differentiation in the practice
of Education Authorities and suggests the need for greater co-ordination.
The care of " mentally retarded " children should, in the opinion of the Com-
mittee, remain a matter for Education Committees and these should also
appoint psychologists and psychiatrists, the Local Authority either itself
maintaining, or giving grants to, a Child Guidance Clinic. Co-ordination
is apparently intended to be secured by referring to the Child Psychiatrist
" special cases of mental defect or behaviour disorder."
The Committee is justifiably critical of the employment in Child Guidance
Clinics of Assistant School Medical Officers with no special training in Mental
Health. " A course on Mental Deficiency is utterly inadequate training for
Child Guidance." The writer, however, has been convinced for a long time
that it has become necessary now for any doctor engaged in the Child Welfare
or School Medical Service to acquire some knowledge of the science of Mental
Health as its affects children. Such knowledge would enable these officers
to recognise factors other than the physical affecting the children they
examine, and also to do a certain amount of educative work among parents.
It is very questionable whether the Diploma in Child Health is a guarantee of
the possession of adequate knowledge: some may even doubt whether
the Diploma in Psychological Medicine is sufficient. Post-graduate courses on
this very specialised line of study are required, and should be part of the
equipment of every Medical Officer examining children. The status of the
School Medical Service in particular, would be greatly enhanced by such an
additional qualification. Psychiatric treatment would be in the hands of the
trained psychiatrist, but a preliminary selection of cases by School Medical
Officers would save much valuable time in the Child Guidance Clinic. Selection
of children on grounds of mental and educational retardation for " special "
education might remain as at present to be the responsibility?probably shared
with the psychologist?of School Medical Officers who have taken the special
course, but the psychiatrist might well share responsibility for final notification
under the M.D. Act.
The Feversham Committee has given careful consideration to the present
statutory provisions relating to defectives in the Education and Mental
Deficiency Acts, a subject recently under consideration by the Special Com-
mittee representative of many medical and educational bodies appointed by
the C.A.M.W. The conclusions of the two Committees are very similar,
though not alike in every detail. The term " mentally defective," it is
suggested, should be reserved for those who have to be dealt with under the
Mental Deficiency Acts and the Feversham Report favours the omission of
all references to educational incapacity in the definitions in those Acts.
Certification as defective should not be a preliminary to giving a child Special
School education and the Feversham Committee goes further in the. recom-
mendation that it should be possible for defectives to be admitted to
102 MENTAL WELFARE
institutions as voluntary cases without certification, just as in the case of
persons suffering from mental disorder. Notification of children to the Mental
Deficiency Authority should, in the opinion of both Committees, apply to all
socially defective children whether in Special Schools or not.
Most School Medical Officers will heartily welcome every one of these
recommendations, and have difficulty in understanding why, from any quarter,
there should be opposition. The whole purpose of the Special Schools has been
to prevent as many as possible of their children from becoming social misfits,
yet it has been necessary to certify them as mentally defective in order, if
possible, to prevent their becoming mentally defective! The double use of
the term has been a source of much confusion and the necessity of certification
for educational purposes has deprived many subnormal children of the
" special " education they required.
An Education Committee as such, is not really concerned with the question
whether any child in its schools is defective or not. Its whole concern is with
educability. Children not educable can be notified under present legislation
as " idiots" or " imbeciles." If educable, but not so by ordinary school
methods, then a Special School or Class can be provided for these children
with limited possibilities. The question whether they are mentally defective
in the true sense (i.e., socially defective) can be determined later, and
notification then resorted to if necessary.
The Committee's enquiries into the provision for skilled observation and
treatment of delinquents, have convinced them of its entire inadequacy. There
is no organised service of this kind throughout the country. Courts make
comparatively little use of the services of psychiatrists, and their advice when
given is not always acceptable to the magistrates. Skilled help is too often
not available in Remand Homes and there is a great dearth of facilities for
in-patient observation and treatment of the delinquent.
School Medical Officers are only too well aware of each and all of these
deficiencies. They have welcomed the Child Guidance Clinic, but even then
their difficulties in regard to delinquent children are only partially cleared,
because of the fact that in so many cases removal, temporarily at least, from
the home environment is required. Even when this is secured and the child
is removed to an institution, there is no guarantee of adequate supervision
and treatment. As the Report says, "the environment must be supervised by
a psychiatrist: mere residence and vocational training are not enough " and
only too often, in fact usually, this is all that is available, even in Approved
Schools. In any case, admission to an Approved School is generally the last
resort of the magistrate, and reserved for persistent delinquents. It is the
early delinquent for whom workers in this service wish to make provision.
The Report therefore suggests that Local Education Authorities should
establish residential homes or schools for maladjusted children or maintain
MENTAL WELFARE 103
these children in homes provided by other bodies. Such provision is just as
important as that of Residential Homes for the Mentally Defective.
" There is every reason to hope," the Report continues, " that increased
concentration on psychological care within the school system will reduce the
sum of mental ill-health requiring treatment at a later period of life."
Much emphasis is laid upon the provision of public education in mental health,
with the object of inculcating the principles of normal psychology and mental
hygiene, of fostering a healthy attitude towards mental illness, and of
identifying early signs of mental instability. Teaching to children?widening
the scope of the present biological education?to parents, teachers and social
workers, is contemplated. " The foundations of mental health are laid at home
in the family," and it is to the home, therefore, that the teaching must chiefly
be directed. The benefits of education in physical health are gradually
becoming more apparent, and the Feversham Committee is confident of the
benefit to be derived from education in mental health.
" We believe," they say, " that mental ill-health in childhood could be
reduced to a very small proportion of its present figure by ordinary educational
methods, including patient education in the home by Health Visitors during
infancy and pre-school age, and a wise co-operation between home and school."
As already hinted, Child Welfare and School Medical Officers might play a
useful part here, and there is also much scope for work by voluntary
organisations.
A complete scheme for the amalgamation of existing voluntary mental
health organisations is submitted in detail in the Report, with a draft con-
stitution of the proposed National Council for Mental Health, with Articles
of Association. These will, in due course, doubtless be discussed by the
bodies concerned and the scheme, let us hope, put into operation.
This is a Report of great importance and it is sincerely to be desired that
its recommendations will not be neglected when the world of nations has
recovered from its own instability and maladjustments. The science of Mental
Health may mean much to the future peace of the world, for the great
principles of prevention and early treatment are as applicable to national as
to individual mental aberrations.
The individual may present himself to the school teacher or attendance
officers as a backward scholar or a truant; to the probation officer or diocesan
worker as a persistent pilferer or sexual offender; to the relieving officer or
institution authorities as a quite unmanageable rebel or a case of acute depression
.... but the apparently various problems are in reality a single one, that of
helping the sufferer to a better adjustment of life, in short, in restoring to him
mental health.
W. J. T. KIMBER.
