Pennorth of Chips
==================

:Author: Charles S. Segal,
with an Introductory Note by Dr. Cyril
Burt. Gollancz, 3/6.

The present conditions of classroom instruction to numbers of children still too
large to be adequately handled, makes it
nearly inevitable that the problem of educafor teachers of backward children should
become largely a question of measuring
abilities, testing attainments and organising
children into more homogeneous grades;
and within those grades, diagnosing and
treating by individual methods, the special
academic disabilities of each. Of a number
who cannot read, some must approach the
problem in one way, some in another?by
learning to write or by word building, or by
the added emotional stimulus and more
exciting content of a manual or story
activity. The conscientious teacher proceeds to devise, make and use a quantity of
apparatus which will induce children to eke
out their share of a fiftieth of a teacher by
a little self-help, and then to consider
further, methods of school organisation and
time-table management which may help in
the solution of this seemingly endless situation. At the end of it all, much has been
done, and it may be only the teacher
herself can assess the disproportion of
achievement to effort.

It is at this stage that there is urgent
need of someone to point out that no teacher
can take on himself the whole burden of the
social and economic problem of the modern
State. With no desire to consider a slackening of classroom effort, there is every reason
to feel certain that the treatment of backwardness in schools will always lag far
behind what is desirable till the politician
and the economist take a hand; till such
time as adequate finance is available for
smaller classes, and better medical services,
and till the conscience of the State is more
acutely alive to the part played by malnutrition, inadequate housing and the general
poverty of cultural interests with which the
lives of the poorer children are encumbered.

It is for this reason that teachers and
social workers will welcome the detailed
study of these conditions in the life of a
class of 26 backward children in a Kensington elementary school. Mr. Segal reveals
that the majority of his children were inadequately nourished on diets overweighted
with starch and under-supplied with
proteins, and that the economic status of the
parents was such as to make better feeding
impossible; that there were prolonged
absences due to contagious diseases and
their aftermath, and that many parents considered these conditions as a necessary part
of existence; that even in the newer Council
houses, many of the children were inadequately housed because kitchens and livingrooms may still count in the assessment of
accommodation for sleeping purposes and
because the expenditure on gas and heating
often needs to be disproportionately large.
Whilst writing appreciatively of the work
of some educational authorities, Mr. Segal's
suggestions for an extension of their
activities form, I would suggest, the most
valuable part of his book. He points out
that in the assessment of a nutritional index
below which supplementary feeding is considered necessary, some medical officers are
so influenced by the prevailing low nutrition
of their areas as to set far too low a
standard, and he suggests that there is a
necessity for bringing all such medical
officers into closer contact with contrasting
conditions in more fortunate areas. The
extension of school feeding to week-ends
and holidays, and the feeding of children
whose parents are unemployed without consequent deductions from unemployment
relief, would also seem to be an obvious
recommendation. In an interesting account
of his own pupils' desire to lounge rather
than play in leisure time, Mr. Segal points
out that psysical education by games and
exercise may be a harmful waste where the
child's bodily condition is so seriously below
par.

While the greater part of the book is
devoted to a study of physical and
nutritional conditions, there are some
interesting recommendations for filling in
the extraordinary gaps in the general and
cultural experience of the town bred child,
and for satisfying the widespread desire for
adventure which may originate in the boredom of the streets and culminate in
delinquency. Mr. Segal presses again the
claim for permanent camps on American
lines which might be usefully ro-ordinated
with schemes for war-time evacuation of
children. Evenings devoted to home-work
classes and school cinemas, cricket and football matches and clubs for children and
parents are part of a programme he has
himself carried out.

The psychologist and administrator will
certainly not be satisfied that Mr. Segal has
proved his underlying assumption that
backwardness and poor physical and
economic conditions are causally allied,
though he quotes widely from American
and English experimental studies of the
problem. It is obviously not within the scope
of a book with so popular a title to estimate
the statistical validity of much of the data
quoted at second hand, and the author might
have escaped some criticism by supplying a
bibliography of reference to draw off his
more sceptical and scientific readers.
What is important is that a practical
teacher has published an all round study of
the physical and emotional lives of his
children of a kind which most teachers are
making in a more desultory fashion; that in
a spirit of practical protest, he voices conclusions which, whether correct or not from
the standpoint of scientific psychology, are
obvious to all who deal with backward
children in the flesh; and finally, that he
puts together in one brief study, a number
of eminently practical recommendations
which it would be worth while for informed
educators to consider and for whose
adoption they might usefully work.
R. T.
