Some Experiences of an Educational Psychologist
=================================================

:Author: GRACE RAWLINGS, B.A.
Educational Psychologist, C.A.M.W.

Exactly four years ago, the Central Association for Mental Welfare appointed
an Education Psychologist, who, besides assisting at the Association's well-
established Training Courses for Teachers, was to be loaned to Education
Authorities. This arrangement provided an opportunity whereby Authorities
doubtful of the scope and value of a psychologist's work might have his, or
her, services on trial for a few months in their own area without the complica-
tions and commitments involved by themselves making a temporary or a permanent
appointment. The plan had a wide appeal for, in a very short time, the
psychologist's services were booked in terms of three or six months, for a period
of five years! In fact, to meet the demands of Local Authorities for such
services the Association has employed during the past three years three?and
at one period, four?full-time workers.

Perhaps it is interesting at this stage to place on record a few first impressions
about this newer branch of the Association's work, although many of these
impressions must be left in abeyance until?in my retirement?I write " The
Memoirs of a School Psychologist " !

In the beginning, there was much uncertainty about the exact functions
of the psychologist. The C.A.M.W.'s Education Committee suggested to
Education Authorities various definite ways in which she might be helpful, but
the Authorities were slow to make their choice or to express their wishes and their
usual request " to be shown what a psychologist was for," tended to make one
feel like an inexperienced commercial traveller uncertain of the nature of his
samples! However, it must be admitted that although it increases responsibility,
such an attitude provides opportunities which many would envy and offers the
thrill of devising and carrying out a plan for a purpose.

Slowly?or perhaps not so slowly?a plan of work emerged, and is even now
changing since it has already almost played its part. Authorities at first chiefly
wanted to know the number of children requiring special treatment on account
of backwardness or problem behaviour, and to have suggestions as to ways of
providing for such children which would be most appropriate to local conditions.
Given three months, or even six, in which to gather data that would yield an
answer to the first question and at the same time collect those observations
which must form the basis for recommendations as to treatment, how should
one's time be spent?

In the first place, having decided the details of procedure in conference with
the Director of Education, it is necessary to spend a little time gaining the co-
operation of the teachers 011 whose help the psychologist must depend for
gathering data. It is usual to have a meeting of Head Teachers at which the
plans for the period of work are presented and at which the psychologist asks
for the information that will be required. This information is usually only the
name and date of birth of the children considered seriously backward in school
work, and perhaps also of children showing nervous or difficult behaviour, but an
attempt has to be made to come to some common understanding of the term
" seriously backward

During the week or so before these returns come in from the various
schools, the psychologist has to be installed in an office, to meet her temporary
colleagues, to go through any records that exist of previous work in connection
with this group of children, to visit classes for backward children and to visit
any Special Schools in the area. If the area is large and the time for the work
limited, it is possible to examine a sample only of the children referred by their
teachers. When this is the case, the psychologist must wait until all the returns
have been received from schools before she can construct her sample and begin
examining the children. In this period of preparation she must forecast with
some precision the amount of work she can get through so that no part of the
precious three or six months shall be wasted. Although the length of the examina-
tion varies with individual children, it is not difficult to find an average of how
many children can be examined in a given time. What is far more difficult is
to know how much time to allow for discussion with the teachers about the
treatment of the cases they bring forward and for the many " incidentals " that
do not crop up until one is somewhat less of a stranger and has begun to be
accepted by school staffs and colleagues at the Education Office. These " inciden-
tals " are signs of the willingness on the part of local staffs and officials to discover
the uses of a psychologist; it would, therefore, be most unwise to rule them out
on the ground that they are not connected with the survey in hand. The Educa-
tion Committee might be satisfied with a report on an investigation conducted
solely according to the psychologist's own plan, but when the question of a
permanent appointment is raised, it is teachers, probation and school attendance
officers who are asked what value the work was to them, and naturally they
will remember any remark that contributed to the elucidation of a particular
problem, any suggestion that led to more satisfactory response from a difficult
child, or even an attitude that gave them confidence to share the responsibility
of a pressing decision. Therefore time must be given to the additional problems
that are raised by teachers and others. These include examining and reporting
upon children who are :??

(a) to come before the juvenile court.
(b) to be sent to an Approved School.
(c) queried mentally defective?
(d) disappointing in Secondary Schools.

It includes also " going over" the results of the Annual Schools or Free Place
examinations and conferring on the theory of setting and marking papers?
discussing with teachers the uses of Group Tests of Intelligence?seeing (at
their request) parents who are worried about their children,?seeing foster-parents
about children to be boarded out.

The main part of the Educational Psychologist's work, however, is in schools,
and involves the psychological examination of a proportion of the children referred
by the teachers. The children are given an individual Intelligence Test and usually
one or more Attainment Tests of Intelligence. This means that each child is with
the psychologist for upwards of three-quarters of an hour, during which time
observations can be made of his general mental development. At the end of a day
of such testing the psychologist writes a few notes on each child examined in
which she indicates :?

(1) The degree of backwardness.
(2) The degree of subnormality (if any) in mental development.
(3) The child's type of intellect, e.g., whether verbal ability, reasoning
capacity, rote memory, etc., are good, normal or poor for his age
and/or mental level.
(4) The implication of these findings for the child's future learning and
development.

These notes are taken to the school concerned and talked over with the Head
and/or class teacher and, at the same time, the psychologist will gather whatever
information she can about the child's attendance record and school placement and
progress. Thus the school receives detailed information about some of its scholars
and, frequently, suggestions for the treatment of their backwardness and
idiosyncrasies, which suggestions teachers?according to their facilities?in-
corporate into their classroom work. Further, the psychologist obtains informa-
tion about the potentialities of the children according to which she can classify
them and recommend steps that could be taken for the amelioration of their
condition which would contribute towards their mental health.

While testing in schools it is not easy always to have conditions that are
ideal for a psychological examination. Teachers who are interested are, quite
naturally, very anxious to be present and generally want to watch the testing
of just those children whom their presence would disturb the most! Frequently
the examinations are carried out in the Head Teacher's room, which makes it
particularly difficult for the psychologist to be left alone with the child. Moreover,
there is the point that teachers' interest should be welcomed and encouraged and
that a good way of fostering it and increasing their understanding of some
of the children's difficulties is to allow them to be present at a psychological
examination. Personally, 1 welcome the opportunity of discussing this point
with them but end by asking to be left alone with the child or?as a concession
?admitting each teacher to one examination only, asking them to choose a child
who is not particularly nervous; further, I take the precaution of deciding upon
a sign to be made if 1 think it desirable for the teacher to withdraw. The
question of accommodation is frequently a difficult one?especially in smaller
schools where there is no teachers' room or available space for an extra worker
who wants to be isolated and quiet. There have been several schools that I could
not visit on wet days because the only available space was the playground !
At country schools in the summer I have frequently tested out of doors; other
" abodes " have been village halls, doctors' rooms, porches, passages and cloak-
rooms. Only the last mentioned proved to be really impossible?and that because
of the apparently constant necessity for preparing for and clearing up after,
painting lessons !

Several enquiries have been carried out along these lines, but the tendency
now is for Education Authorities to be less concerned to know the exact number
of children for whom they have to make some special educational provision than
to have some demonstration of the types of special class and tutorial groups that
can be arranged in ordinary elementary schools for children needing special
treatment. We are now in a transitional stage, so far as our short term periods
of work are concerned, but soon psychologists, and more particularly those whose
appointments are on a permanent basis, will?I feel certain?start right away
on carrying out a programme of work in which diagnosis will be followed
immediately by appropriate treatment. The gap that now exists?often it is more
than 12 months?between diagnosis made in the course of a survey, and treat-
ment after the Committee have adopted some of the recommendations, will be
reduced to a few weeks and at the same time ascertainment of cases will be
more complete.

There were two great disadvantages of the research type of work that our
Surveys had in the first place to adopt : ?
(1) The numerical incompleteness of ascertainment and diagnosis since
more children are referred than can possibly be dealt with in six months,
(2) The inevitable delay, for obvious reasons, before any extensive system
of classes or tutorial groups could be formed in which remedial teaching
could be given.

That a change is foreshadowed?indeed becoming obvious?is due to the
acceptance by Local Education Authorities of the value of a psychologist's services
in helping forward a more satisfactory and more individual adjustment of just
those children who are a trouble to adults and a responsibility to the community-
Something has been said of the attitude of administrators towards our
work?what of the attitude of teachers? Naturally one finds many Head and
Class Teachers who are less interested in exceptional individuals than in the
normal progress of the majority. A few Heads regard the schools largely as their
own responsibility; they do not welcome interference from officials and have no
desire to consult psychologists. Many more are a little chary of innovations and
are somewhat fearful lest they do not realise the fullest implications of this
new departure. But these are far out-numbered by men and women who are
open-minded and even by those who have a precise idea of how thy can get
the best out of a psychologist's visit. The thing that impresses me again and again
is the unfailing friendliness and co-operation shown to an investigator who is
only a bird of passage and who, moreover, gives inevitably a great deal of extra
trouble! This is true both of the sceptics and of the converted. One cannot fail
to appreciate the candour with which the unconverted discuss their point of view
and it is worth a good deal to hear a seasoned Head Teacher grant " there's
more in this than meets the eye " ! A serious difficulty is the lack of opportunity
for discussing with class teachers the handling of backward and problem children.
This difficulty would be lessened naturally if one's appointment were permanent?
but their keenness shows itself in the way they turn up at lectures and discussion
groups and their readiness to come to the Education Offices by appointment out
of school hours.

Educational Psychologists are in no danger of eating the bread of idleness.
The routine examinations are carried through in close succession and this is very
exacting work in which one must be equally patient and observant throughout
the day; there must be no evidence of fatigue, and reassurance must come just as
readily for the last child as for the first. But this is not at all a superhuman
task because the children themselves bring endless change, variety and interest.

There is the case that is a challenge because it is so intricate to unravel; on
the other hand, in a burst of confidence a child may give you his difficulty in
a nutshell. There is the pleasure of seeing a child gain confidence as the
examination proceeds and the amusement at being told that a " brunette " is
a " mother bear (These feelings of the psychologist must be kept well guarded,
but they are the minor pleasures that contribute to the major satisfaction that
a psychologist, being human, feels in being a psychologist!) The examinations
entail written reports, discussion and eventually statistics, and that is not always
the end of a psychologist's day. There are lectures to teachers, and finally talks
to other interested groups, e.g., magistrates, child study associations, Y.M.C.A., etc.
Even in so short a period as four years, changes in attitude towards a
psychologist's work can be easily observed on the part of both administrators
and teachers but the most convincing evidence of change comes from another
sphere. An office cleaner said to me recently : " Eh, Miss, I wish you'd have a
look at my three-year-old twins ! " Whereas less than three years ago a school
caretaker was heard to remark " Um, now the season's over at Blackpool I
suppose Madame Destiny has come to "!
