The Problem of Educability
===========================

By Lightner Witmer.
The United States Commissioner of Education called a conference recently in Chicago, of persons particularly interested in
the field of elementary education, to consider what changes were
necessary and practicable in order to improve the elementary school
system of the country for the purpose of meeting after-war conditions
in a satisfactory and scientific manner.
At every point, it seems to me, from the kindergarten to the
professional schools, from the four-year-old level up to the level of
the graduate student, our school system can be improved by a
change of aim, content and method.
At two points, the elementary school system needs immediate
and thorough-going reconstruction. These two points are the
proficiency level of the first grade, and the proficiency level of the
working certificate. The former is the age level of the child of from
four to six; the latter the age level of the boy or girl of from fourteen
to sixteen. On the intellectual scale, these levels may also be designated literacy levels: the first grade level being the competency
level of literacy, while the working certificate level summarizes the
efficiency standard to be attained in reading, writing and arithmetic
before the boy or girl is released from school and permitted to go
to work.
Below the competency level of literacy are all those who cannot
read, write and cipher. They have not yet proved themselves to be
possessed of the mental abilities necessary to acquire an elementary
education in the three R's?they are the illiterates?a very large
percentage of the population of even civilized countries. Among
them are uneducated adults, normal perhaps, but a potentially
dangerous element in a democracy; children who have not yet
reached the school age; foreign-born and other children who have
not yet attended school long enough to enter even the portals of an
elementary education; and, finally, many feeble-minded children
and adults who are congenitally illiterate and uneducable. Most
of the so-called backward children in our schools are not backward,
but feeble-minded; some of them are trainable, but many are merely
custodial cases, not even trainable. The spectacle presented by our
schools trying to educate uneducable children would be a scientific
scandal, were elementary education a science. As it is, nobody
expects the school to diagnose its children accurately, or to base an
(174)
THE PROBLEM OF EDIJCABILITY. 175
expert educational training upon what may be known of a child's
capabilities and defects.
I approach the problem of educability from the standpoint of
the Clinical Educator. Every "attempt to teach" an individual
child is a "psychological test." The performance of each individual
can be measured and the result expressed in such exact terms that the
performances of different individuals may be accurately rated on
standardized scales. Only in this way can we learn whether a child
has enough ability to be worth educating. Only after tests have
been applied can we find an answer to the insistent query: "How
many children otherwise normal are congenitally incompetent to
acquire the three R's, whether as a tool for learning or for use in life? "
Every first grade pupil beginning to learn to read, displays to
the Clinical Psychologist and Educator a measurable competency,
partly congenital and partly acquired. Among the many abilities,
constituting this competency to read, are eyesight, hearing, articulation, attention, memory span, retentiveness, imagination and
intelligence. The greater the pupil's comptency, the more quickly
will he learn to read. After he has learned to read, practice may
give him more or less efficiency in reading up to any established
standard of efficiency.
The first grade standard of efficiency in reading is approximately
zero?a pupil learns to read on his congenital and acquired competency. With the second grade he begins to acquire efficiency in
reading. What is our standard of efficiency for reading in the sixth
grade? It should be precisely defined, for children are being denied
the right to work because they have not attained this standard.
How many fail to reach this standard of efficiency, because they
cannot reach it, owing to deficient competency, or in plain words,
"lack of ability." Is the percentage of congenital illiterates in the
schools a large one? Some school men will not even understand the
question, to say nothing of being able to answer it. You will assent
to the proposition that it is a foolish waste of time to try to teach
children to sing who are tone deaf, or to train color-blind boys to
be locomotive engineers. We are forcing word-blind and word-deaf
children to try to get an education they can never get, and at the
same time refusing them the training they could put to good use in
what, after all, is the chief business of life, i. e., to earn a living.
The object of the elementary schools is to train children to
adequate proficiency in reading, writing and arithmetic. The first
grade level of proficiency is reached by a pupil if and when he gives
convincing evidence that he has the competency to acquire reading,
writing and arithmetic. Forty per cent of all children between the
176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ages of four and six can learn, in my estimation, to read, to write,
to add, to subtract, divide and multiply up to twelve on thirty
minutes' instruction per day, five days a week for nine months. The
best ten per cent can even do better than this. Two weeks ago I
tested at the Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania
a little boy four years and three months old. He gave a memory
span of six. He learned in one trial to do my Cylinder Test of Intelligence, and he gave the following record of performance as a
result of only fifteen minutes of instructon by the diagnostic procedure: '"Are you a girl,' I said?" "No," he answered. "Good,
write your answer on the board." He wrote on the board the word
"no" in script. "Whatshines at night," I went on? "The moon."
"Do you know how to spell 'moon'?" "No." "M-o-o-n," I told
him, "now write it on the board." He had never before attempted
to make a script letter, but he was able to write the word "moon,"
thus demonstrating the value of the diagnostic procedure in teaching.
At command he made a vertical stroke (I had just a moment before
taught him the difference between horizontal and vertical) then at
command he made:?"From the bottom of the vertical stroke a
short horizontal stroke to the right." When I asked him what letter
he had just made, he did not know. He had learned to make the
capital print letter "L" before he had learned to recognize it. I
estimated from the results of fifteen minutes of diagnostic teaching,
that I could teach him to express some of his thoughts in simple
written sentences within three months' time, when he would be four
and one-half years old.
Last November I sent to the first grade a boy who was five
years old last July, because I discovered he was exercising his intelligence chiefly to "beat the game," that is to say, he was acquiring
great skill in avoiding mental effort. This boy has been in my
professional care since he was two years and seven months old, when
I took him for educational treatment, apparently a feeble-minded
child. He had then just begun to walk; he had a vocabulary of
eight words, and during the first two weeks his best spontaneous
observation, as recorded in my notes of the case, was to look at his
teacher through an empty picture frame he was holding in his hands.
After five months of clinical teaching, at the age of three years and
two months, I put into his hands a copy of Monroe's Primer which
he then saw for the first time. As I pointed to a line for the purpose
of testing him, he correctly read the words: "A cat can see a dog."
At the opposite pole from these children, the poorest ten per
cent can perhaps never learn to read, write and cipher. Their competency is below the literacy level. You may teach them, or preTHE PROBLEM OF EDUCABILITY. 177
tend to teach them, the three R's but you will not be able to give them
the three R's as educational tools. You will give them only an
"accomplishment/' as you may train your dog to walk on his
hind legs.
If you do not agree with me that it is absurd to try to educate
uneducable children; if you do not believe that it is destructive to
the competency of competent children to make them take the slow
and labored pace of the incompetent ones, at least you will agree, I
hope, that until the competency of each child is measured when he
first goes to school, you will not begin to understand the educational
problems involved in the acquisition of reading, writing and arithmetic. The public schools are teaching the three R's to children
very much as our grandmothers doctored them before the scientific
physician came with thermometer, antitoxin and the trained nurse.
I assert that it is possible to measure with ease the competency of
every child to acquire reading, writing and arithmetic, before he
enters the second grade. I affirm that when you come to make this
test you will find that fifty per cent of all children can learn to read,
write, add, subtract, multiply and divide up to twelve before they
have passed their sixth birthday and they can do most of this as
play and all of it as an hygienic exercise for both mind and body.
The time for this work is before the child is six, and not afterwards.
Every child who cannot pass the competency test in the three R's
set by the diagnostic procedure in education, should be separated
for the second and higher grades from the fifty per cent of competents,
in order that he may not obstruct the progress of his more highly
endowed brothers and sisters. He should also be provided with a
different curriculum adapted to his abilities and defects. These
reforms would come into practice at once, as a result of an overwhelming derriand, if Clinical Tests and Measurements were employed by the schools to discover and eliminate the incompetent,
for the results would make plain what an enormous waste of time,
brains and effort our present indiscriminate mass education is
demanding from both child and teacher.
A second point in our school system, where clinical measurement is indispensable, is at the fourteen-year-old level, when the
boy or girl is refused his release from school in order to go to work,
because a sixth grade or some other standard of proficiency has not
been reached. If the public schools are to justify themselves before
the community, they must see to it that they undertake the scientific
educational treatment of the children to whom they refuse permission
to go to work. Some children were dragged from remunerative
employment last year, who were earning more than the truant
178 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
officer who seized them, and nearly as much as the teacher into whose
hands they were put for educational treatment. I am a friend of
the schools, and I believe in upholding our compulsory education
law, but nevertheless when I am consulted as a Clinical Psychologist
I am often compelled to advise parents asking for the vocational
guidance of their backward but normal children, children ready and
willing to work but unwilling or unable to learn, that the schools are
a degenerating influence, a worse place in many instances than even
the streets. I am compelled, as a scientific expert, when parents of
extra bright children, six years of age ask: "Would you advise sending my little boy or girl to the first grade?" to answer emphatically,
"No, your child has a good mind, the public school may ruin it."
This situation can be changed, but it will not be much changed for
the better, until the orientation of the Clinical Psychologist is accepted by the schools, and they proceed to measure the competency
of the beginner, and to ascertain the efficiency possibilities of the
child who is not allowed to depart in peace to begin to make a living.
When the Commissioner of Education invited discussion of the
changes in the elementary education of the country required for
greater efficiency, he specified changes in aim, content and method.
He did not specify the factor charged with higher potency for progress or for obstruction than any one of these i. e., the personnel.
Clinical education will need to develop a new personnel orientated in
clinical psychology, and trained to employ diagnosis at every step
in the educational treatment. Until that personnel is chosen and
trained, no real progress can be made. When the personnel arrives
and begins to work, obstruction, stupidity, ignorance and inefficiency
may still negative its every effort. You cannot become a clinical
educator as you may join church. Something more is needed than
a change of heart, though this would help mightily in some quarters.
The best ten per cent of our children do their school work at the
level of the mediocre, because the worst ten per cent is neither discovered nor eliminated. The best ten per cent of the personnel cannot function at its own level of efficiency, because it must meet the
requirements of a prescribed course of study administered by a
prescribed group of supervisors, many of whom are well below the
proficiency level of the mediocre. The testing and rating of the
personnel will throw into the foreground the ten per cent group, who,
because of incompetency, obstruction, ignorance or inefficiency, will
have to be eliminated before the school system is able to put into
advantageous and efficient operation the newer methods of clinical
examination and educational treatment which stand ready for
adoption.
