"Dick": A Case of Atavism
===========================

A clinical lecture reported by the recorder of the Psychological Clinic.
The following list of physical anomalies will show immediately
that Dick is an obvious case of arrested development. He is micro-
cephalic; at nine years his head girth is 47.1 cm., the minimum for
five years being 50.37 cm. His ears are a-symmetrical. He has a
cleft palate, the extreme opening of the fissure being three-eighths
of an inch. The uvula is missing. He is unable to open his mouth
for more than about an inch, as he does not use the proper muscles
for this purpose. His hands are also most significant. The boy was
born with one thumb attached to the third joint of the first finger,
and this was removed by operation. On the other hand the thumb
does not resemble that of a human hand, but rather that of one of
the apes, and it is not opposible, except occasionally. He grasps
with all of his fingers as a unit, instead of using them separately as
does a human being.
His performance level with the tests just made is about eighteen
months. This does not mean that his performance is that of a normal
eighteen-months-old child. This is not a case of simple retardation.
The boy is qualitatively feebleminded. He is able to pick up a block
and put it into one of three similar spaces, as with the Seguin Circles
A, but he is unable to make a choice between three slightly dissimilar
spaces, as with the Seguin Circles B. He apparently did learn to
do the three-block formboard, but his memory is not retentive as
appears from the fact that when he was given this same test after a
brief interval he failed to do it. There is no evidence that his reactions
are above the level of senso-motor reflexes. He shows no image-
ability, no associability, and no attention as we usually use the word.
He is, however, not at all like the Mongolian in attention. He is
too lethargic to give a typical Mongoloid performance. His parents
say that he has never been a troublesome child, and this is no doubt
true. The fact is that he is probably too lacking in energy to have
any initiative. This brief analysis shows that his behavior is in no
sense that of a normal eighteen-months-old child?in other words he
does not conform in behavior to the type of a normal child of that
age or of any age.
This non-conformity does not show in his moral conduct, he is
not brutal or destructive, and there is certainly no evidence that
he has immoral or criminal intentions. There are no symptoms of
285
286 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
dementia or emotional disorder?it is not a case of insanity. The
sort of non-conformity to type which we find in this child suggests
atavism, i. e., retardation on the species scale. He isd efinitely a
case of incomplete uterine development?witness the cleft palate,
the missing uvula, the microcephaly, and the non-human hand.
The mother gives as a possible cause, an injury due to breech
presentation at birth, but the child bears upon his body definite
proofs that the trouble is of earlier origin than that, and is to be
sought for either in heredity or in an arrest of uterine development.
The mother reports a fall in the third month of the period of ges-
tation, and it is possible that this may have produced a tendency to,
or an incomplete, miscarriage, the result being this monster. The
parents absolutely deny any attempt at abortion. There is no other
child. This latter fact may be of significance as it is just possible
that the trouble in Dick's case may be due either to an attempt at
abortion, resulting from a lack of desire for children, or to a lack of
procreative energy in the mother. In the latter case the lack of
procreative energy may have caused mal-nutrition in utero, and there-
fore a child monster. It is, of course, possible that the cause is
syphilis. The family history given by the parents, both of whom
seem perfectly normal, and in fact rather intelligent, is absolutely
negative as regards etiology.
Whatever the cause may be, this child is a case of arrested
development, on the species scale an atavistic monster and on the
growth scale an idiot.
