The Henderson Family.
======================

The Social Level of a Group Determined by the Clinical Field Service.
By G. G. Ide, Ph.D.,
Social Service Department, Psychological Clinic, U. of P.
The Henderson family live in New Jersey on a three-acre place
two and one-half miles from a thriving town. The house is quite
picturesque from the road, as it is surrounded by a hedge some ten
feet in height. The house is roofed in red tiles and protected by
trees. The only means of entrance to the yard is through a hole in
the hedge, through which the chance visitor creeps with some loss
of dignity and considerable wearing of temper. The house is faced
on two sides with a broad porch, the floor of which lacks many
boards and offers but poor means to escape from the dirt path. The
door which opens from the porch lurches drunkedly on one hinge,
the upper half entirely missing, and the room into which it opens
looks as if it might also have been sharing in the orgy, if the testimony of broken and discarded furniture may be taken as evidence.
Toward the rear, guarded by a gaunt yellow cur, not too unfriendly,
the back door offered hospitality. The space around the door is
bare of green owing to too frequent deluges of dirty water, but the
kitchen, lighted only by the open spaces in a diamond-shaped window frame, did not offer any reason for the assumption that water
was frequently seen there. Dishes half-washed and left in greasy
dishwater, crusts of stale bread and other foods on the table, floor
and stove, and dirt brought in from many feet accumulating on
the floor, and objectionable odors on every side were the tangible
evidences of a human dwelling. A garage, with the customary openings of broken boards, faced the road, while within stood a dilapidated Ford. In the back seat of this car, safely tucked in and ready
for flight, sat Mother Henderson, Daughter Ru and the baby son.
Lest they be forgotten on a contemplated trip, they were eating
their lunch in the car, the lunch consisting of very unpalatable looking chunks of bread and pickled fish, the two-year-old son indulging
like the rest.
The daughter, Ru, a pink-cheeked, good-looking child of twelve is
the only girl with whom Mother Henderson has had "any luck."
In fact, she is one of five reared thus far, while five other children
282
THE HENDERSON FAMILY. 283
lie on the hill just above the house, victims of "summer complaint,"
to which it seems likely the last little son will likewise prove a victim.
The eldest son of the family is fifteen years old, heavy and husky.
He finished the sixth grade in a country school and is now working in a garage as errand boy. Two other sons, ten and eight respectively, are in the first grade in a consolidated school. Neither will
pass this term into the second grade, for they are absent a great deal,
and the younger does not seem strong enough to cope with the
problems he is meeting in school. The older boy is stolid and
healthy, able to hold his own in the world, if not in school. The
girl, Ru, has never been entered in school, because she did not learn
to talk until she was eight years old, and now, at twelve,has a vocabulary which does not exceed one hundred words and an infantile
stammer as an added handicap.
Ruth was brought to the Psychological Clinic at the University
of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, at the behest of relatives. Her
characteristic attitude while there was an up-raised arm in an attitude of defense and a loud whining "Let's go." She stamped her
foot and demanded of her mother protection, which latter did not
move the mother to come to her aid. Ru refused to "play" with
the examiner most of the time. Her face was usually drawn into a
troubled frown, but on command she would smile for a moment.
The simplest mechanical test was beyond her power. Her memory
span was three, with echolalia on the final word or syllable for which
she was asked. Questioning the mother did not bring out much
information, as the mother was too much in doubt herself to answer
questions intelligently. For instance, she could not give her home
address or directions how to get there. She did not know her children's school records, and her statements in regard to her children's
history were very, vague. The father a shipyard worker on occasions,
was certain that Ru remained about the same, neither excited or
melancholic, at intervals. He thought her attitude of defense brought
about by a great deal of teasing on the part of her brothers and
cousins living nearby. She ought to go to school, he admitted, but
he would not want her to leave home.
Mr. Henderson is an easy-going sort of man, little worried by
the conditions which he faces at home. He thought his strawberry
bed needed fixing up this year, and did fix it up?by plowing a
furrow between the rows. He planted a small garden, principally
with onions, and left the rest of his three-acre plot to grow up to
weeds. His car has lost several floor boards and sundry bolts and
straps, but these, together with a leaky and very much patched
tire, did not move him to use some of his leisure time to their mending.
284 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The conditions in the house are seldom equaled in a city slum, and
the general response of the mother, if her success as a homemaker
and mother are used as a standard, are those of the feebleminded
type. Her tiny son, long past two, does not walk or talk, and shows
no inclination to do so. The next son is very dull and in poor health.
Two years in school have failed to teach him anything of first grade
work. The next son is very dull and slow, and mentally deficient in
the sense of not being able to do well in school work, but his reactions
among the other children are normal for his years. Ru is unquestionably feebleminded and of low grade.
The family is not a hopeful one from the standpoint of their
probable value as a social unit. Ru will soon be of an age where
she will be a menace to society, and the feebleminded mother is not
strong enough to be of value as a disciplinary agent. The father
is not at home when he can be a member of some jolly party in
town, and if there, would not understand the problems to be solved.
The conditions in the home are not favorable to the physical development of the two younger children. The entire family are not at the
present time, or likely to be in the future, productive members of
the community.
