The Classification of Criminals
================================

By Carl Muechison.
Miami University.
The writer, while serving in the dual capacity of Camp Morale
Officer and Camp Psychological Examiner at Camp Sherman, Ohio,
was asked to appear before a joint session of the House and Senate
Finance Committee of the State of Ohio and present certain data
in his possession bearing on the prevalence of feeble-mindedness in
that state. In spite of a war-time budget already unprecedented
in size, the members of the committee were so impressed with the
tragic seriousness of certain plain facts that they easily persuaded
both branches of the legislature to appropriate $650,000 for the
immediate construction of a new institution for the feeble-minded.
It was that experience, together with certain conferences with Doctor
H. H. Goddard, that determined the writer to gather still further
data and attempt a contribution of the statistics of psychology to the
problem of the causes of crime.
The writer has given a mental test to the prisoners in the Ohio
State Penitentiary at Columbus, the Ohio State Reformatory at
Mansfield, the Ohio State Farm at London, the Ohio Penitentiary
for Women at Marysville, the Illinois State Penitentiary at Joliet,
the Illinois State Reformatory at Pontiac, the Indiana State Penitentiary at Michigan City, the Indiana State Reformatory at Jeffersonville, and to hundreds of prostitutes and military prisoners in
and around Camp Sherman. Data were also gathered on hundreds
of insane criminals. In addition to the exact mental grade, the
writer learned concerning each criminal his race, age, trade, previous
economic condition, education, crime, sentence being served, and
criminal history; while in the States of Illinois and Indiana each criminal was asked to name the three worst crimes and the least crime
from the moral point of view.
In gathering these data, the writer received invaluable assistance
from the War Department, from the Commanding General at
Camp Sherman, from Doctor H. H. Goddard, from Doctors Adler
and Rowley, from the Board of Control of Ohio and from the many
highly efficient wardens and superintendents of prisons. The
results of the investigation will be published as rapidly as possible,
this being the first paper to appear. This paper is not concerned
with negro criminals, with women, or with insane criminals, as those
(66)
THE CLASSIFICATION OF CRIMINALS. 67
three groups will be taken up in later papers. This paper will deal
with the classification of criminals in so far as such criminals are men
and are white. The total number of white criminal men to be classified in this paper is 3,328.
Many scientific men have met with sad experience in the presentation of their most far-reaching discoveries, because they wandered
so far away from their own literature that their presentation lost its
significance for the scholarly and conservative. So the writer will
risk being didactic while he constructs rapidly what to some will
be the very familiar history of attempts at criminal classification.
Polemon classifies criminals en masse as those who have narrow
foreheads and are left-handed.1 There is recorded for us by Valerio
the very interesting edict of the Middle Ages to the effect that in
the case of two suspccts the one showing the most deformity is to
be found guilty and tortured. A certain Medici, having reserved
his judgment till after the physical examination, exclaimed to the
prisoner: "Having seen your face and examined your head, we do
not send you to prison but to the gallows." 2 Traces of these early
forms of superstition and stupid ignorance are still alive in the far
outskirts of the scientific world. There are pretentious books on
criminology published within the last ten years that exude from their
pages nauseous winds out of the graveyards of dead centuries.
The first scientific theory of criminality was formulated by
Morel in his treatise, "Physical, Intellectual, and Moral Degeneration
of the Human Species," published in Paris in 1857. This theory of
degeneration as the cause of crime was a meritorious attempt and
would have exerted greater influence if Morel had not "played
politics" with the religious world to the extent of explaining degeneration as the culminating effect in the individual of the original fall of
Adam.
The second influential theory of criminality was advanced by
Despine in his "Natural Psychology" published at Paris in 1868.
According to Despine the outstanding characteristic of the criminal
is the total absence of remorse. But this theory of moral insanity
was developed to far greater significance by Maudsley in his "Mental
Responsibility," published at London in 1873. Maudsley must
have had a remarkable insight into human nature. According to
him, there is a twilight zone between crime and insanity, and that
zone is peopled with criminals. A given individual might be entirely
insane and very little a criminal, he might be a complete criminal
with perfectly sound intelligence, or he might occupy any point
1 De Quiros, "Modern Theories of Criminality," 1912, p. 4.
! Ibid., p. 5,
68 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
between the two extremes. Just how true this insight is will become
clearer in the course of this and succeeding papers. Maudsley and
Garofalo are the two most remarkable men in all the literature of
criminology, and no one who fails to appreciate their contribution,
for many years to come, will go very far in solving the problem of
the causes of crime.
But it remained for Quetelet to discover that peculiar group
of criminals known as recidivists. Quetelet was the first social
criminologist and anticipated Compt by his statistical method. He
developed the Thermal Law of Delinquency, tracing the influence of
climate on types of crime thus anticipating the form of the principle
that is being worked out at the present time by Ellsworth Huntington
at Yale. Quetelet also recognized that the man who commits a
crime against property is essentially influenced by different factors
than is the man who commits a crime against the person anticipating
the later contribution of Garofalo.
At this point in the development of criminology appeared the
three great school-founders, Cesare Lombroso, Enrico Ferri and
Raffaelle Garofalo. Lombroso was the founder of modern criminal
anthropology and was the first to formulate a classification of criminals as well as a theory of the causes of crime. He found the factors
that cause crime to be atavism, moral insanity, and epilepsy. Only
the first of these three factors was largely discussed by him, as the
last two were discovered as by accident late in his life. Atavism
is the tendency of living beings to return to a distant type that
has been deviated from for many generations. The criminal is
merely an early type of man, stripped of all the accumulations of
further generations of worldly experience and wisdom, a "reproduction of the rude morphology of the savage." And as these
factors are present in lessorgreater degree, each criminal falls naturally
into one of the following five classes: 1. Occasional criminal; 2. Emotional criminal; 3. Born criminal; 4. Moral insane; 5. Masked
epileptic.
Crime is from the Sanskrit word karman, which also means
action, to do, to execute. The study of root words in Sanskrit tends
to point to murder and robbery as the early methods of acquiring
property. The criminal of today, because of atavism, is one of these
early types in every respect, having the narrow forehead, abnormal
development of the cranial vault, disproportionate development of
the mandibles and cheek-bones, obtuse sensibility, absence of vascular
reactions, left-handedness, moral insensibility, absence of remorse,
and tattooing.
The writer can only say that he would to God Lombroso were
THE CLASSIFICATION OF CRIMINALS. 69
right. If every criminal bore the stigmata of Cain, if the stars in
their courses thus fought against Sisera, criminology would cease
to be a science and would become an art of training dog-catchers to
catch men. However, the devil does not roam the earth shaking
his forked tail and showing his cloven hoof but disguised in fine
raiment and wearing the face of piety. The writer, in many prisons,
has passed along lines of fine-looking fellows, men of superior education and social advantages. Old experienced wardens have told of
men, who, having committed the worst crimes, have wept bitterly
with remorse after being talked to kindly for a few' minutes. One
warden trusts the care of his entire family of little children to the
group of murderers who comprise his household servants. A visitor
in that home is dumfounded at the courtesy, gentleness, thoughtfulness, and kindness of those servants.
Enrico Ferri also designated five categories of criminals:1 1.
Criminal insane; 2. Criminal born; 3. Habitual criminals; 4. Chance
criminals; 5. Criminals by passion. This classification differs from
Lombroso's in that room is allowed for the "chance criminal" who
may be a mere accident or creature of circumstances. This kind of
criminal is made possible by Ferri's theory of crime, which is one
of the best ever formulated. "Crime," says he, "is a phenomenon
of complex origin and the result of biological, physical, and social
conditions." According to this theory very few criminals need
necessarily be called confirmed criminals, as the biological, physical,
and social conditions are ever changing.
Raffaelle Garofalo completed the trinity of great criminologists,
he being a jurisconsult while Lombroso was an anthropologist and
Ferri a sociologist. Garofalo falls back upon a kind of common-law
classification of crime and criminals and speaks of natural crime.
Natural crime is that group of offenses that has been considered
worthy of punishment in all places and by all peoples since the
beginning of social activity. All other crimes are the result of statutory enactments. But in the last analysis, there are only two natural
laws: "Thou shalt not kill" and "Thou shalt not steal." As a result
there can be only two groups of criminals, viz., the offenders against
person and the offenders against property.2 In spite of the criticisms
that have been hurled at this classification there is something about
its simplicity that strikes one with conviction. The cause of crime
Garofalo finds to be an anomaly of the moral sense which has degenerated through retrogressive selection. One would do well to become
well acquainted with the work of Garofalo as the statistics of present1 Enrico Ferri, "Criminal Sociology." 1917, p. 139.
s De Quiros, "Modern Theories of Criminality," 1912, p. 30.
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
day psychology support it more than any other theory or classification so far considered.
Up to this point the various theories of causation have been
biological, sociological or a combination of the two. However, the
classifications of criminals have been neither biological, sociological
or any combination of the two, but rather a mixture of psychological
groups and numerical characteristics: "emotional," "chance," etc.
What earthly relation there is between any of the theories and its
accompanying classification is not clear.
Gustav Aschaffenburg criticises Lombroso unmercifully for this
seeming bungling and then gives as his own classification:1 1. Chance
criminals; 2. Criminals of passion; 3. Criminals of opportunity;
4. Deliberate criminals; 5. Recidivists; 6. Habitual criminals;
7. Professional criminals. A mere changing of the laws might make
all of his criminals recidivists. Yet Aschaffenburg was a psychiatrist
and worked with Kraepelin.
In the sociological school Tarde feels that the old classifications
are rather fictitious and proceeds to group criminals according to the
trade they worked at.2 Thus a "bootblack murderer" would be
quite a different proposition from a "ribbon-counter murderer."
And Saleilles distinguishes those delinquents who are not tainted with
criminality at all, those who are tainted to a certain extent, and
those who are saturated with criminality.3 The trouble with the
latter classification is the fact that it can be increased indefinitely
simply by decreasing the size of the unit on the scale.
On the continent of Europe the classification of criminals and
the theory of causation began in childish absurdity and seems about
to end in a nai've gesture. No theory of crime and no classification
of criminals can have enduring practical value unless the laws of
biology and of causation are considered. The anthropological
criminologists have given us many data showing the uniform presence
of certain stigmata among criminals. But not a single one has thus
far compared that proportion of stigmata with the proportion of an
equal unselected number of private citizens from the same strata of
society. The anthropological school is on the right road in so far
as it uses the data of biology in a biological manner. But when it
ignores all the laws of causality, it can only leave the entire field
unoccupied for the forces of the sociological school. The data of the
sociological school can be true or have serious existence only in so
far as certain biological laws are already true. Ferri's saturation
1 Gustav Aschaffenburg, "Crime and Its Repression," 1913, p. 207.
'Gabriel Tarde, "Penal Philosophy," 1912, p. 267.
?Raymond Saleilles, "The Individualization of Punishment," 1911, p. 282.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF CRIMINALS. 71
theory is taken over from the very heart of the present tendency 111
biology?to find a chemical basis for biological laws. Yet Ferri
belongs more to the sociological than to the anthropological school.
Simply because the anthropological school is nearer the truth than
is the sociological school, the causes of crime by necessity being
biological and chemical, is reason enough for blushing with shame
that the sociologists should break through the firing-line thus and
steal the biological thunder. In the opinion of the writer it is time
for the anthropological school to brush up in Maudsley and Garofalo,
take a stiff course in logic and find out something about psychobiology and physical chemistry.
In this country the attempt to formulate a theory of crime
and a classification of criminals is organized at the present time
into four very definite tendencies: the followers of Lombroso, as
represented by the authorities of the Elmira Reformatory in the
State of New York; the tendency to regard feeble-mindedness as the
chief cause of delinquency, ably represented by Doctor H. H.
Goddard; those who hold that no classification is yet possible, represented by Doctor William Healey; and the eugenics experts, represented by Doctor Charles B. Davenport. The brilliant genius> ol
Doctor Goddard is well known to all of us. He has ably shown us
that feeble-mindedness is a thoroughgoing recessive factor in the operation of the Mendelian law of heredity. No sane scientific man at
the present time doubts Doctor Goddard's contribution.1 But
Doctor Goddard is now attempting to explain crime as a phenomenon
of feeble-mindedness. "Although we cannot determine at present
just what the proportion is, probably from 25 per cent to 50 per cent
of the people in our prisons are mentally defective." 2 The writer
is well acquainted with the work which Doctor Goddard is doing
now as Director of Juvenile Research for the State of Ohio and the
success and obstacles he is meeting with. When it is shown that his
figures published five years ago are somewhat large Doctor Goddard
will know exactly where his mistake was.
Doctor Healey has studied one thousand young recidivists at
the Psychopathic Institute in Chicago. He denies the possibility
of classification.3 The whole effort of his office is to gather data,
and the data are exceedingly valuable. But that same method
was adopted by Bacon many centuries ago. That method of gathering knowledge can never discover any new law, for in the last analysis
it is nothing but interpretation. The world of nature is dumb
1 The Editor of the Psychological Clinic will have to be put in the category of the insane if this remark be
tnif.?The Editor.
3 H. H. Goddard, "Feeble-Mindedness," 1914, p. 7.
* William Healey, "The Individual Delinquent," 1915, p. 160.
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and tells no story. For example, the world is neither intrinsicallygood nor intrinsically bad, bearing within it as much death as life
and as much pleasure as pain. Only the unifying principle of interpretation makes it possible to attend only to the pleasure and laugh
at the pain. However meritorious the data that Doctor Healey has
gathered, the method by which they were gathered would never
formulate a theory or construct a classification even though the
universe were filed safely away into pigeon-holes. Science cannot
be made too objective or all value and meaning vanish. But the
sane scientific spirit rings true when Doctor Healey says, "the
elders, who spoke so glibly of 'the criminal' as a born type, had not
the means of investigating whether he was not rather a born defective
and a criminal through accident of environment." 1
Doctor Charles B. Davenport is with the Carnegie Institution
of Washington and is one of the best physiologists in the country.
Yet his proof that crime has its roots in heredity is based on the
statistics of seven cases,2 and he speaks of criminality as being
equally a physical thing as the color of the eyes. According to
Doctor Davenport's theory, from one's grandmother one might
inherit blue eyes, from one's grandfather a shock of auburn hair,
while from some great-grandfather one might at the same time inherit
a kind of pink criminality. Doctor Davenport surely was jesting.
Now this is the field just as it was when the writer undertook
to do his bit. How could one hope to succeed where so many eminent
men have been able merely to start in the right direction?
The criminals were given the Alpha Group Examination?the
same test that was used in the army. The test was given only to
the criminals who could read and write English and under the same
conditions used in the army testing. The papers were afterwards
sorted into groups according to crime, the criminals of each state
separately. It was then found that the states did not vary to any
great extent, so the criminals of the three states were thrown together.
The negroes were then separated from the whites and the women
from the men. This paper is concerned only with the white men.
Then the papers of each crime were arranged in order of psychological
numerical grade, which offers a possible range of 0 to 212. The
median grade of each crime-group was then found. Finally, the various crimes were arranged on a scale according to the median grades,
with the following result:
1 William Heaiy, "The Individual Delinquent," 1915, p. 17.
1 Charles B. Davenport, "Heredity in Relation to Eugenics," 1911, p. 89.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF CRIMINALS. 73
Number of Criminals Crime Median Psychological Grade
9 Having burglar tools  91
8 Conspiracy  84
19 Embezzlement  81
725 Larceny  80
6 Obtaining property under false pretense 79
25 Confidence game  79
35 Assault and battery to rob  73
178 Forgery  69
525 Robbery  68
15 Issuing fraudulent check  66
41 Burglary of inhabited dwelling  64
42 Entering to commit felony  63
773 Burglary  62
60 Vehicle taking  62
22 Horse stealing  61
46 Pocket picking    61
221 Murder, first degree 58
108 Assault and battery to kill or rob  55
48 v Abandonment  51
18 Bigamy  51
102 Rape  50
9 Indecent liberty with child  46
25 Sodomy  42
25 Incest  41
78 Manslaughter  36
98 Murder, second degree  34
51 Cut, stab, or shoot to kill or wound  34
16 Vagrancy  11
Even the casual reader will observe that the first sixteen crimes
on the scale are crimes against property and that all the others are
crimes against person, recalling the convictions of Garofalo. Similar
crimes occur near each other on the scale, recalling the insight of
Maudsley. The various crimes arrange themselves on the scale in
as orderly a manner as the alphabet of a language. The only force
that determines is intelligence, and intelligence is the world of mystery
described as the ease with which connections in the synapses are
formed and maintained.
Deception is the one factor necessary in all crime against property. It will be noticed in the group of property-crimes that the
crimes requiring the greatest skill in deception occur at the top of
the list, while crimes requiring the least skill in deception occur near
the bottom.
Premeditation is the one factor present in crimes against the
person. It will be noticed that the crimes requiring the most premeditation occur at the top of the person-group, while the crimes
requiring the least premeditation occur at the bottom of that group.
74 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The location of any crime in either group is in proportion to the
necessary presence of the required factor. The latter phenomenon
merely proves that the classification is a normal and natural one.
The parallel variation of intelligence is the significant phenomenon.
But the mere presence or absence of intelligence to a degree will not
of necessity result in crime any more than it would result in Methodism or Prohibition. The force that drives men to success and honor
is the same force that drives others to failure and disgrace. Only
in so far as the science of criminology can succeed in learning something about the factors of intelligence can it hope to solve the problem
of crime. Criminality is not a gnome that dances attendance upon
the moral world. It is rather the purgatory where are gathered the
blasted ambitions, blighted hopes and broken hearts from that
land that lies just along the border of the "promised land" of success
The next chapter will tell that story.
