A Student's Report of A Clinical Examination.
=============================================

By Helen R. Squier,
Graduate Student, University of Pennsylvania.
[In the course in Clinical Psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, a class composed of graduate and undergraduate students
in the School of Education, the students are required to observe
and make note of the examination of children brought before the
class for that purpose. In the final examination of this class at the
end of the first term of the present year the class was required to
observe and record their observations on the performance of a child,
who was examined by an advanced graduate student in Clinical
Methods under the direction of the instructor. Each member of
the class was required, as a part of the examination, to hand in a
paper which should include notes on the clinical examination, an
analytical diagnosis, a final diagnosis and recommendation.
The case was interesting and difficult of diagnosis because of
the conflicting results of the different tests. The diagnosis recorded
as given by the clinical psychologist was: "Retardation on the
anatomical scale, four years; on the pedagogical scale, five years;
on mental age score, six years. Quantitatively feeble-minded.
Considering the family history and mechanical tests will probably
be above the line of social competency." It was recpriimended
that the boy be taken from school and put to work. The diagnosis
and recommendation were not known to the class until after their
papers had been handed in.
The following paper was submitted by Miss Helen R. Squier,
B.S. in Ed., a graduate student in Psychology, and is reproduced
here as it was handed in without emendation.]1
Physical Characteristics.
C. is decidedly small for his age, which was fifteen years, but,
aside from this, he has no noticeably abnormal bodily characteristics.
His head, however, was quite suggestive. Though it was not measured, I believe its circumference must have been a little smaller
than the average normal head circumference of 22 inches, and there
1 Dr. H. J. Humpatonc was the instructor of the class and the clinical psychologist responsible for the examination and diagnosis.?L. W., Editor.
(215)
21G THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
seemed to be a slight depression of the occipital lobe. He has a
very high arch in the roof of his mouth, his lower jaw is short, his
upper jaw extended. The high arch and the bad mouth formation
in general arc not necessarily signs of mental deficiency, but they
are found more frequently in feeble-minded children than in normal
children.
Analytical Discussion.
1. The Mechanical Tests.
It was evident from the first effort lie made with the form
board that he was capable of passing this particular test. He worked
with good plan, and showed a contracted particularization and a
distribution of attention that were quite sufficient for the test. He
was successful in his first trial in 18 seconds. In the second trial,
he picked up several blocks at once, and worked from the bottom of
the pile in his hand to the top, showing that he had a clear conception
of the problem before him, and that the form board space perception
is quite within the range of his abilities. When, in the third trial, he
was asked to take the blocks out for himself, he made such good use
of his opportunity that he was successful in 13 seconds, in spite of
the fact that his movements were still rather slow. In fact, the
slowness of his movements suggested to me a lack of interest?a
feeling that he need not put forth his whole effort to satisfy the
demands of the examiner, and this suggestion was supported by the
evidence of the other mechanical tests.
In his first attempt at the cylinder test, he still worked rather
slowly, using the right hand only. His first block was wrong, but
he corrected this when he found the block that really belonged in
the hole in which he had placed this first cylinder block. At last,
at the end of 72 seconds, the cylinders were all right except two, and
he quickly corrected those two at suggestion. It was evident that
he felt that this test demanded more of him than the form board
had done, for, in the second trial, he worked a little more quickly,
though he continued to use only one hand. His space perception
seemed quite adequate for his task, and he was quite accurate in
gaging the comparative size of the holes and the cylinders. His
plan was to stick to one cylinder till he found the right hole for it.
He was successful with no errors this time in 4G seconds, proving
that he had profited decidedly by his first attempt. In the third
trial, he used both hands, and moved more quickly than he had
formerly, but he "worked" only one side of the board at a time.
He showed, however, that he comprehended the plan on which the
A STUDENT'S REPORT 217
board was built, and was succcssful in 36 seconds. This record is
quite as good as some college records.
He built his chevrons by individual blocks, rather than by an
observation of the whole effect, and showed a better contracted
particularization than a distribution of attention. When he was
working with the double chevron, he worked along long rows, instead
of completing one chevron and then trying to go on with the next, as
most children do. The result was that he ended with all his blocks
in one long row, though their relation to each other was correct except
for this. He corrected his mistake a block at a time, with less single
block analysis, and a greater eye for the general effect. The whole
test, however, showed that he worked by consideration of details
as such rather than by trying to get the general effect. He was
successful in the first transfer on blocks after he had made the double
chevron, but in the second attempt at transfer he forgot the method
and movements of the examiner, hesitated, and failed. He easily
remade the design he copied from the blocks of the examiner, however, and was successful at his third attempt at change.
It took him 2 minutes and 1G seconds to do Healy A for the
first time, but he worked steadily and was evidently putting all the
energy at his command into the task before him. On the second
trial he shortened the time to 29 seconds, and on the third, to 4 seconds, thus showing a large degree of trainability in connection with
mechanical performances and concrete objects. I think that the
second trial indicated a comprehension of method, and the third,
the fact that lie had remembered either the movements involved or
the final appearance of the completed test?probably a combination
of both.
It would almost seem as if lie had made use of his experience
with Healy A in his performance with Healy B, though his surprising
success with Healy B in 2G seconds may have been due more to good
luck than good management. The fact, however, that he fitted the
oblong-circle combination together and placed them in their proper
positions in the test at the same time showed that he had an immediate comprehension of the nature of the test. He was successful on the second trial in 22 seconds and made ver}7- few mistakes.
His performance of Healy B, together with the Healy Completion Test, showed at least some degree of visual imagination,
though the fact that he failed to imagine hands on a watch interchanged suggests that his visual imagination is limited. However,
his ability to tell time would have to be tested before his failure with
this watch test could be properly analysed and explained.
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
2. The Binet Series.
There is a peculiar lack of correlation between C.'s memory
span for digits, which is 7, his inability to repeat more than 3 digits
backward, and his inability to repeat correctly simple sentences of
18 syllables, which Stanford revision of the Binet Tests places at
the 0-year level. The seven digit memory span suggests an adequate
range of distribution of attention and a good power of association.
The inability to repeat numbers in reverse order, however, combined
with the fact that C. always had the correct numbers in his repetitions
suggests a serious flaw in this associability, and may indicate one
of the causes of C.'s lack of success in school work. The mere possession of facts which we arc unable to manipulate at will docs not
get us very far.
I believe that children are able to reproduce sentences as much
through a comprehension of their meaning and a rcvocalization of
that meaning as by the auditory memory of certain words and
syllables. If the child comprehends a word or a series of words
easily, it makes no difference whether that series of words contains
ten syllables or sixteen?he will be able to reproduce it with equal
facility. Two such sentences as: "It is nearly half-past one, the house
is very quiet, and the cat has gone to sleep," and "The apple tree
makes a cool, pleasant shade on the ground where the children
are playing," are by no means equal in difficulty to the
same child, though they have about an equal number of syllables.
The first of these sentences contains three ideas or elements, while
the second contains but one. The elements in the first sentence are
very simple, however, and clothed in exactly the language that
would come most naturally to the child who had comprehended and
imaged the ideas involved. The one element in the second sentence,
however, is more detailed and complex than is any one of the elements in the first sentence, and is therefore more difficult than are
the three elements combined in the first sentence. The first sentence
tests the ability of the child to comprehend and associate intelligently and usefully. The second tends more to test the ability of
the child to hold in his mind several details at once, without the
necessity of reproducing them in anything but the form in which
he heard them. That, perhaps, may be the explanation of why C.
failed to repeat the first sentence correctly, and succeeded in repeating
the second sentence. He could not visualize or image in any other
way three ideas at the same time, though he was capable of reproducing a more complicated series of words involving only one picture
or idea. This theory would explain the seven digit memory span and
A STUDENT'S REPORT. 219
the three digit reverse. Had the retentiveness of his memory been
tested in some way, the whole series of tests might have enabled us
to make a very accurate analysis of his mental abilities.
The idea that his trouble lies in defective control of an adequate
associability, combined with an inability to form images readily and
accurately hooks up with the rest of his performance of the Binet
Tests. His reading was, of course, below par for a boy of his age,
since he read at the approximate rate of 2 words per second, and
made 5 errors. It was the reproduction of what he read, however,
that was especially interesting. Technically, it was a failure. He
could not reproduce the passage with the required precision without suggestion. But the questions of the examiner revealed the
fact that the knowledge of the meaning of the passage was there in
decidedly larger quantity than the performance of the boy would
have indicated. Here again we have the impression of an adequate
memory span, with a bad control of association.
When he was asked to make a sentence containing three stated
words, he was able to make a sentence that made sense, but there
were only two of the three required words in it. This was true of
each of the first two trials of sentence construction, though he corrected the second of the sentences at the suggestion of the examiner.
His failure to make rhymes suggests very clearly his lack of what we
might almost call voluntary associability, as distinguished from that
uncontrolled associability that is suggested by the memory span of
the subject.
His success with the discrimination of likeness between objects
suggests, perhaps, his mechanical tendency. He notices, for example,
that apples and peaches grow on trees, rather than that they are
fruits or good to eat. He observes that iron and silver are both
found in dirt, rather than that the}'' are both simply metals; and
that a ship and an automobile both have machinery, rather than
that they both can go without being pulled, or that they are both
to ride in. He can see no way in which a book, a teacher, and a
newspaper arc alike, but he observes that a rose, a potato, and a
tree all grow. There was nothing in the mechanism or structure of
the book and teacher and newspaper that suggested any resemblance
to him.
His whole Binet examination indicates a failure in observation
and interpretation of the abstract that is so characteristic of people
with so-called "low intellectual ability." He does not know what to
do before undertaking something very important, or why you should
judge people by their actions rather than by their words, because
these questions are too abstract for his comprehension. He knows
what to do when he has accidentally broken something that belongs
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to someone else, because that situation is more concrete than the
other two I have mentioned. His comprehension of pily and charity
are most concrete. His definition involves no generalization, but
an account of a concrete tli ing in his experience.
Diagnosis and Prognosis.
Quantitatively, the boy is of course feeble-minded. If the Binet
tests can really give an intellectual level, or an age level, he is 6 years
retarded, so that he is not higher than a middle grade imbecile. His
I. Q. is about Gl, when it should be at least 80 or 85 if he is to be
considered as belonging possibly to the normal class of children.
Qualitatively, however, so many questions arise that a diagnosis of
this boy becomes peculiarly difficult. If we were to take the mechanical point of view, we might almost be justified in saying that
the boy is normal, with a tendency toward congenital illiteracy.
If we were to take the intellectual, abstract side, we would most
certainly say that he is feeble-minded, with a possible mechanical
bent or ability. The thing that must be of the greatest assistance
in deciding the question is his social proficiency, and neither the
clinical examination nor his history, so far as it could be given to
us, gave very much clue to this. If he has no more ability to conform socially than his "comprehension" tests would indicate, he
is most certainly mentally deficient; but his failure in connection
with these may be a failure in expression, rather than knowledge.
The prognosis in connection with the case depends a great deal
upon his environment. I have not had enough experience as yet to
know whether or not training could even in part eradicate the serious
defects in his "voluntary association;" but even if this could have
been done several years ago, it is probably too late for it now, and it
is probable that his environment will always be such that he will be
injured rather than benefited by it. If he had a relative or a publicspirited friend with a garage or other machinery repair shop, he
could be apprenticed to him and be self-supporting, even outside of
an institution. He seems to have enough mechanical intelligence to
copy a machine, or to learn to adjust and repair machinery along
lines that he could easily be taught. He could never produce a
machine from printed directions, and he could never invent a new
machine or suggest an improvement on an old one. But he could
be made useful around an automobile shop, with adequate supervision.
At all events, it is quite clear that he is not getting very much
out of his school life. It would probably be better for him and the
school both if he could be given a domestic or working certificate,
and found some such job as the one outlined above.
