Efficiency and other Factors of Success.1
===========================================

By Lightner Witmer, Ph.D.
There is a great deal of doubt as to what psychology really is.
Not long ago a visitor to our laboratory said to me, "I came all the
way from Florida to see you because you are a psychologist. I am
a psychologist, too, I can psychologize, and so can my wife."
They turned out to be professional hypnotists.
"Oh, yes, I have heard of tests like that being made on bald-
headed men," someone recently exclaimed, as I was speaking of a
very common laboratory experiment, the assumption apparently
being that when a man is minus hair on the top of his head you can
get a little bit nearer to his mind.
It is difficult to state just what psychology is, but I can tell you
what the psychologist studies. He studies just what you are com-
pelled to study every day of your life, the behavior of human beings.
We study mental abilities through the performance of those whom
we observe. When I test a student in my psychological laboratory,
or when parents bring children to me for the purpose of having them
examined, all that my tests do is to provide a material means or
agency by which I cause the child to perform in my presence, so that
I may observe what he can do and what he can't do.
That is the reason why psychology is so closely in touch with
human life, and that is the reason why the word "efficiency" is one
which we have regularly used in the field of psychology. Mr. Taylor
has made this word very well known to all of us, and I think he uses
the word in its proper sense. There is also the problem of efficiency
of school management which was first proposed by a superin-
tendent of schools who subsequently became an efficiency expert for
a whiskey trust.
Since the war has been on, this term efficiency has come very
much to the front. Some say, "Now that the Allies have won, we
know that they have greater efficiency that the Germans." Others
say, "Now that the Germans have been beaten, thank God we shall
hear no more about efficiency'" Evidently there is lack of agreement
as to what this much-used word actually means.
On my way back from Italy last June, I had a talk in London
1 Tuesday Luncheon Address, given at the Engineers' Club of Philadelphia, December 3, 1918, and reprinted
with a few corrections as originally published, from the stenographic notes, in the Journal of the Engineers' Club
of Philadelphia, Vol. XXXVI, No. 2? Feb. 1919.
241
242 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
with the head of the Welfare Department of the Munitions Bureau
about the kind of work they were doing for the workman. As a
result of that enlightening conversation, I said, "I see that you are
not interested in efficiency at all; you are interested in what I call
competency." He asked, "What do you mean by efficiency?"
After explaining to him my use of the two terms, he said, "You are
quite correct. In this department we are not concerned with a
maximum output in the minimum amount of time. We are only
interested in seeing that the laborers are in a fit condition to do
satisfactory work."
I believe clear thinking is essential to successful work, whether
in the school or in the business of earning a living. Certain concepts
in connection with our study of the human problem are coming out
of this war which it is extremely important for us to try and define
a little more precisely. One of these is the word efficiency. Another
much misused term is the word intelligence. We hear of "intelli-
gence testing" and we hear of "efficiency management." There is
an aspect of every human performance which requires us to use the
term efficiency, the one wherein we look upon the performance as an
operation which has as its purpose the production of a desired result.
We examine the expenditure of time and effort in securing that result.
Efficiency exists only when the result is related to the expenditure of
time and effort, and this relation is quantitatively measured.
The attainment of maximum efficiency is only one way of achiev-
ing success. Another way of achieving success is through the exercise
of intelligence. I use the word intelligence to mean invention, the
ability to solve a new problem. In its hightest manifestation it is
what we call genius. In its lowest manifestation it is what we call
cunning. It is possessed by the young as well as by the old, and by
the lower animals as well as by man.
We are constantly confronted with performances where we must
distinguish the relative efficiency of individuals from their relative
intelligence. It has been, to my mind, a conspicuous result of the
achievements of this war that the Germans, despite their greater
efficiency in industrial and military organization, have been beaten
by the superior intelligence of the allied peoples. To my mind it
does not help us in analyzing the situation to say that because the
Allies have won the victory it means they had the greater efficiency.
When, for examples, Hippomenes and Atalanta ran their famous
race and Atalanta stooped to pick up the golden apples, it did not
prove that Hippomenes was the more efficient runner, but that he
had a higher intelligence than Atalanta. And so with another
famous race?that of the hare and the tortoise. When the tortoise
EFFICIENCY AND OTHER FACTORS OF SUCCESS. 243
won the race because the hare went to sleep, the tortoise did not
prove that he was the more efficient runner, but only that he stuck
to his job and the hare trusted too much to his superior ability.
Efficiency can be acquired only as the result of-discipline through
constraint, training, and practice. It is the result of the same
performance done over and over again until the maximum amount
of output is obtained with a minimum amount of effort. We do not
like efficiency, because it exists in an atmosphere of monotony and
requires us to put forth strenuous effort. We like our employees to
be efficient, our students to be efficient; but, as for ourselves, we
prefer to be intelligent, that is to say, we like to achieve success by
our wits and not by work.
Success is not achieved solely through efficiency. Because
American business men and American professional men have achieved
success and acquired wealth and honors is no proof that they are
efficient. Efficiency is one thing; the employment of intelligence in
order to accomplish a result without efficiency is a very different
matter. These are two distinct aspects of every performance and
they stand with respect to each other at the opposite end of the poles.
There is nothing which differs so much from efficiency as this mental
quality which I call intelligence.
Knowledge, we are told, is power. Knowledge is acquired by
the exercise of memory: which means, again, either the training of
the memory and the acquisition of ideas at some relatively low
intellectual level for the purpose of producing efficiency or the acqui-
sition of knowledge in order to arrive at new ideas. For example,
the new discoveries with respect to by-products and the introduction
of by-products in the manufacturing industries, do not add to
efficiency. It is the introduction of a new bit of knowledge by virtue
of which a new line of performance is carried on.
Now, as we make so many of our successes through acquiring
new knowledge, it is of great importance that we should consider
what kind of knowledge is to be acquired and what will be its results
and consequences.
There is a certain kind of knowledge called professional knowl-
edge?professional skill?which comes fairly close to efficiency, but
which, in the higher regions of intellectual thought, does not involve
efficiency at all, but processes that had better be called imagination,
which brings it a little closer to this other capability which I call
intelligence. A man's knowledge may be professional knowledge and
lead him to success in his line of work; or, on the other hand, his
knowledge may be of human character. A man may succeed as an
engineer or as a doctor?not because he is a good engineer or a good
244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
doctor per se, but because he understands human nature, can pass a
good bluff, or has a lot of good friends.
There is one kind of knowledge which, as a university man, I
consider extremely important: that is, knowledge for its own sake?
the possession of a certain amount of knowledge for the sake of
acquiring new knowledge?knowledge which forms a basis for further
investigation. In my opinion, the great advances of the world have
come, through men of intelligence, men of genius, who have em-
ployed in specific sciences such knowledge as they were able to acquire
in order to gain new knowledge. Other persons may subsequently
have carried their results to a successful conclusion. For example,
the aeroplane was invented by an American?Professor Langley,
who barely achieved success; yet, nevertheless, he did succeed.
Others took the idea and advanced it. It is said that the submarine
is not a German invention, nor mustard gas, but Germans took the
idea and developed it. That is what I mean by knowledge further
developed in the direction of efficiency; and our institutions, should
be ready to develop and apply all kinds of knowledge. In addition,
some corner of the institution should be reserved for those who are
interested in acquiring new knowledge for its own sake; for, after all,
it is to this fountain spring that those who develop and apply knowl-
edge must come.
There is another factor which enters into all our work, a factor
of great importance, and that is what I can only vaguely call judg-
ment. Good judgment is only to be acquired as the result of experi-
ence. I observe good or bad judgment employed by every individual
I examine. It comes out in his attempts at solving the simplest
test. He must choose certain methods of operation if he solves the
test which I put before him, and he will display good or bad judgment
in solving it.
Then there are certain principles which underlie good judgment
which are mainly balance and common sense. I think it is commonly
admitted of the French as of the English, that throughout their
political development there has been manifest a faculty of common
sense. They both say, "Believe in this ideal, but do not believe in
it too strongly;" "do this, but do not do it too hard." Some find in
this, something of hypocrisy and something of the cult of the amateur.
But, on the other hand, it leads to compromise. This has come out
distinctly in the war. What the Germans did was to choose a certain
principle of action. People, whether individuals or nations, must
choose certain principles to govern their actions. The Germans
chose force?a good idea, an idea which appeals to many of us. We
do not reject force. But the Germans elevated force to an ideal?
EFFICIENCY AND OTHER FACTORS OF SUCCESS. 245
to something which was to be made irresistible and which was to
be carried out to the limit, no matter what humanity or morality
might have to say against it. On the other hand, other nations said,
"We believe in discussion, argument and compromise, but with
force always in the background."
This principle of compromise is often applied to our moral
principles. "Honesty is the best policy," we say, and so it is. That
is the right ideal to put before a man as his standard of living. Yet
anybody who lives in the world knows that success is conditioned
not only by following that policy?it is conditioned often by making
compromises with it. The same may be said of lying. It is not safe
to say, as Bethmann-Holwegg said, that "Necessity knows no law."
As a matter of fact, it does know no law under certain circumstances;
but that is not the proposition to put before humanity as a rule of
conduct. Good judgment calls upon us to select the opposing
principle, "law," which yet permits of exceptions. We say that we
are law-abiding citizens, and yet each man feels within himself the
right to annul the law when it comes to certain critical situations.
When I was in Italy, I had a very amusing illustration of this,
which, among other things, made me say, "After all, Italians are
very much like ourselves." Several men were arrested on the train
traveling from Messina down to Syracuse, along the eastern coast of
Sicily, because they had kept the curtains of their windows up. The
printed orders in the compartments read: "All curtains are to be
drawn as soon as the lights are lit"?the reason being that there
were German submarines along the coast and danger of the train
being shelled. One of these men when arrested said he did not know
he had to pull the curtain down. He was asked, "Didn't you see
the sign up in your compartment to the effect that the curtains
must be pulled down?" "Yes," he replied, "I saw the sign, but I
also saw signs, 'Don't spit on the floor,' and 'Don't smoke,' and
nobody ever pays any attention to them."
In the selection of our rules of conduct and in the way in which
those rules of conduct are observed, you will generally find that the
principle which has brought success to some men or groups of men
has been the principle of compromise. Take the uncompromising
attitude of some of the socialistic minorities. Whatever we may
think of their doctrines, whether we think them good or bad, the
question remains of our having to deal with groups who will appar-
ently decline to enter into any compromise at all?who either want
the whole loaf or none. A certain balance and judgment, which
seems to be necessary in political life, is also to be found in every
single performance, whether produced by a laboratory test or as a
part of any man's ordinary life.
246 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
In all this, as I see the situation which comes before us, there are
those two main questions: an external one of the operation?the
man in action and our estimate of his action as such, and efficiency
is a term which relates to that; 011 the other hand, there is the
internal?the man himself displays certain abilities, which we indi-
cate when we say, "He is an able man, he has intelligence, intellect,
and sound judgment."
I think it may help everyone, as it certainly has helped me, to
distinguish between this external aspect of work which is efficiency
and these internal attributes which constitute a man's competency.
A competent man?a healthy man?is not necessarily efficient.
He has the advantage over an incompetent or sick man in being
able to develop efficiency or to be trained for efficiency. If we are
selecting men on whose training we are going to spend time and
effort, undoubtedly we want to select the more competent men.
Whenever an institution asks my advice on training young
men for successful careers, I say to them, "If you are trying to give
these men professional training?efficiency on the one hand and
skill on the other?and you wish to fill their minds with knowledge
which you hope they will put to good use, you ought to provide
opportunity for the exercise of intelligence, because efficiency training
tends to dull intelligence."
That is the problem of the school, but an equally important
problem, if we are going to send out into the world well-trained
professional men, is to eliminate the unfit from the schools. To my
mind this question is every bit as important as the curriculum and
methods of instruction. We must devise some method whereby we
can select those whom it is worth while to educate. Competency
comes up in connection with our institutions of higher learning, just
as it comes up in connection with the elementary grades. Take, for
example, in the public schools, one of the problems which I have to
face many times: that of the fourteen- or fifteen-year-old boy or
girl who has advanced only to the third or fourth grade, and who is
not able to satisfy the requirements with respect to English, and
therefore cannot get a working certificate until he or she is sixteen
years of age. I make an examination, determine the proficiency in
reading and writing, and decide that within the time of the school
period the pupil can not be brought up to the level required by law.
Eliminating other considerations, to my mind it is very much better
to let the child go to work under, perhaps, certain kinds of guidance,
than to force him to attend a school where he will simply spend
another year or two doing little or nothing; because the results of the
examination have shown that he has not the competency which will
EFFICIENCY AND OTHER FACTORS OF SUCCESS. 247
enable him to acquire the proficiency demanded by the school
standards.
Psychological tests were employed in connection with the
selection of men for the army, both as privates and as officers; and
there can be no doubt that these tests will be further developed and
perfected. As a result of the war and what will grow out of it, we
are going to have a tremendous development of industrial organ-
ization along the lines of efficiency and applied knowledge. It is
certain that our professional schools will become more numerous.
Already government subsidies have been given for the establishment
of such institutions in England, and America will have to follow suit.
We need not fear, therefore, for the satisfactory development
of professional schools; but we do need to fear for the maintenance
and further development of schools that have as their main object
the cultivation, the acquisition and the discovery of new knowledge
for its own sake. If this is the aim of the graduate school, then it
means the further development of graduate schools. Surely all
professional men, but especially engineers, can appreciate the differ-
ence between the mechanic and the inventor. Some men and
some institutions must live in the pursuit of new ideas, and in the
acquisition of knowledge for its own sake instead of for the sake of
using that knowledge to secure wealth or success.
