Kanton Kallikaks
=================

By Julia F. Randolph,
Teacher of Special Ungraded Room, Canton, Illinois.
"There are Kallikak families all about us."?Goddard.
This report is based upon a study of the families of ten pupils
who have attended the Canton schools within the last twenty years.
The records, while incomplete, tend to show the increase in the
number of defectives and dependents among the descendants of
sub-normal men and women, and the relation existing between
defective mentality and economic dependence.
In making an investigation of this kind such expressions as
"not very bright," "a little off," "not all there," "very peculiar"
are often heard. The term "sub-normal" has been used where there
seems to be no doubt of low mentality yet no positive proof of feeble-
mindedness. Those who have been cared for in state or county
institutions, or supported by others than their parents, are called
dependent. Persons who live at home and receive help from the
county or from local charity are called partially dependent.
Some changes have been made in names and conditions to prevent
identification. John is a feebleminded boy. One sister is at the
state school for the feebleminded. John's father was sub-normal
and drank to excess. When he died he left his family unprovided
for, and four of the children were partially supported by the state
through the mother's pension. John's grandfather was not con-
sidered "just right" by the neighbors and his great-grandfather was
spoken of as "queer" and "peculiar." Members of this family for
three generations have been backward in school work.
For years the county contributed to the support of the Jefferson
family. Mr. Jefferson was sub-normal. Mrs. Jefferson was feeble-
minded and finally became insane. She was taken to the county
home and later to the insane asylum. A feebleminded daughter,
Marian, married a feebleminded man.
Pete Van Dusen has been in our ungraded room, and was at
the* state school at Lincoln for a short time. He is very defective
and is in poor health. Pete's sister, Miranda, is feebleminded and
his brother is at the state school for the deaf and dumb. Both
Mrs. Van Dusen and her father are sub-normal. Mr. Van Dusen
was reported "dissipated, shiftless and not very bright." He does
not live with his family, and Miranda and her husband are separated.
279
280 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Matthew Mildmary was defective mentally, but was capable
of supporting himself. His grandchildren are a burden to society.
Ned, after three years in the first grade was taken to the state school
and colony for the feebleminded, from which institution he ran
away eight times. Ned's father was a defective. Matthew's feeble-
minded daughter, Ella, married a feebleminded man who became
an inmate of one of the state hospitals for the insane. Ella's oldest
child is sub-normal and dependent. Her son Jim is at the state school
for the feebleminded, and two other children were declared dependent
by the court and placed in homes. Matthew's son, Peter, was killed
by a train, and his wife married again. Her second husband, who
was related to Mr. Reuben, was shot. The two children are in
private homes. The mentality of one of them is doubtful.
Mr. Argum lived on a farm near Canton. He was poor and
worked very hard. We know nothing of Mrs. Argum. Two
daughters are feebleminded. Lulu married a feebleminded man
who became an inmate of a state hospital for the insane. Lulu's
son, Jacob, is feebleminded. Her daughter is too young to judge
mentally. They are all dependent. Jane's husband belonged to an
intelligent family, and of their children one is normal, one rather
slow and physically weak, and the third is not old enough to judge of
her mentality. Jane was separated from her husband, and, though
she was able to work under supervision, she could not make a living
for her children.
The families of Luther and Sam are connected by marriage, and
one chart answers for both families. According to their neighbors,
all the members of Luther's immediate family were sub-normal.
His sister spent some time at the state school for girls. An older
brother married Helen, a sub-normal girl whose early life was an
eventful one. When Helen was a very young girl a middle-aged
man, said to be "half-witted" persuaded her to marry him and go
to another town to live. Helen was brought back to Canton, and the
marriage was legally annulled. Then Helen was taken to a mission
home supported by private charity. Sometime afterwards the
man became an inmate of one of the state hospitals for the insane.
Helen's brother was at the state school for boys. We know nothing
of Helen's father, but her mother was sub-normal and married a very
eccentric man for her second husband. The husband and three
children were at one time in the county home, and later two of the
girls were cared for at the mission home. Sam has been in the
ungraded school. Both families have depended upon county help
and local charity for partial support in addition to the institutions
mentioned.
CANTON KALLIKAKS. 281
The story of the early life of Harriet was given by an old gentle-
man who was once her teacher. Many years ago there lived in
Canton an immigrant family of low type. Mr. and Mrs. K. were
"very peculiar," and Mrs. K.'s brother John was a sub-normal
man. Their house was very dirty. Mrs. K. as well as the men drank
to excess, and their standard of morality was low. Harriet, a little
orphan girl of defective mentality, was taken into the K. home
where she became the household drudge. When very young she
married Tom, a neighbor boy. In later years Tom drank a great
deal. Tom and Harriet had two daughters, both sub-normal. After
several years of poverty and hard work Harriet finally ended her
days in the state hospital for the insane. Hattie followed her mother's
example and married a drinking man. Jonas was not able to take
care of his children without occasional help from local charities.
His relatives were dull and inefficient and depended more or less
upon outside help. Two of Hattie's children, were considered sub-
normal by their teachers.
The family history of Jacob D. is a good illustration of the fact
that dependence increases at a rapid rate in succeeding generations.
Jacob was the only one of several brothers and sisters who was
mentally deficient or dependent. Both of his wives were from
families greatly inferior to his own in position and intelligence.
Jacob's son Philip was killed by accident leaving a family of small
children. Janet, a feebleminded daughter, became insane and was
sent to a state hospital for the insane. Janet's husband was sub-
normal and could not support his family. In the third generation,
Henry is feebleminded, Philip's three children are helped by the
mother's pension, and Janet's three children are in homes kept up
by the state or county. Jacob depended largely upon county orders.
The Reubenites lived in tumble-down shanties in the slum
district. Mrs. Reuben has been married twice. Her son is at the
state school and colony for the feebleminded, and her feebleminded
daughter is said to be sexually immoral. The daughter's husband
and son are deformed. Mrs. Reuben is feebleminded. Mr. Reuben
was reported as alcoholic, and both Mr. and Mrs. R. have been in
the county home. These people depend largely upon others for food,
clothing and medical attention.
