The Meaning of a Binet Score
=============================

:Author:  H. J. Humpstone, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.

Of the origin and history of the Binet tests there is no need to
write here, but to understand the significance of the results obtained
by the use of the tests it is necessary to know something of their
genesis. In 1904 Binet was appointed by the French Ministry of
Public Instruction a member of a commission to take charge of the
study of measurements for the insuring of the benefits of instruction
for defective children. Of course the first problem that confronted
the commission was the finding of a method of detecting the defective
children. Out of their efforts to solve this problem came the method
of testing and the series of tests which came to be known as the
Binet-Simon scale. Binet published the story in a series of articles
and books. These have been translated into English and put together
into two books.1 In 1905 in his magazine, L'Annee Psycholojique,
Binet published an article entitled "New Method for the Diagnosis
of the Intellectual Level of Subnormals." Notice the title. He
says "Intellectual Level." Intelligence is not mentioned in either
the title of the article nor the statement of the problem. He says,
"Our purpose is to be able to measure the intellectual capacity of a
child who is brought to us in order to know whether he is normal or
retarded. We should therefore, study his condition at the time and
that only. We have nothing to do either with his past history or
with his future; consequently we shall neglect his etiology, and we
shall make 110 attempt to distinguish between acquired and congenital
idiocy; for a stronger reason we shall set aside all consideration of
pathological anatomy which might explain his intellectual deficiency."
(Page 37.)

Now if the followers of Binet had stuck to that we should have
had no quarrel with their methods or with their tests. Then Binet
goes on to distinguish the different kinds of subnormal children and
the tests that he employed with them. "Here we shall limit ourselves to the measuring of their general intelligence. We shall determine their intellectual level, and, in order the better to appreciate this
1 The Intelligence of the Feeble-minded, translated by Elizabeth S. Kite, 1916, The Training School, Vineland,
New Jersey.

The Development of Intelligence in Children, translated by Elizabeth S. Kite, 1916, The Training Sr.hool,
Vineland, New Jersey.

Thu quotations in this article are made from the latter.
level, we shall compare it with that of normal children of the same
age or of an analogous level. The reservations previously made as
to the true conception of arrested development, will not prevent
our finding great advantage in a methodical comparison between
those of inferior and those of normal intelligence." (Page 39.)
"The Psychological Method. The fundamental idea of this
method is the establishment of what we shall call a measuring scale
of intelligence. This scale is composed of a series of tests of increasing
difficulty, starting from the lowest intellectual level that can be
observed, and ending with that of average normal intelligence.
Each group in the series corresponds to a different mental level.
" This scale, properly speaking, does not permit the measure of the
intelligence, because intellectual qualities are not superposable, and,
therefore, cannot be measured as linear surfaces are measured, but
are, on the contrary, a classification, a hierarchy among diverse intelligences; and for the necessities of practice this classification is equivalent to a measure. We shall, therefore, be able to know, after
studying fr\vo individuals, if one rises above the other and to how many
degrees, if one rises above the average level of other individuals
considered as normal, or if he remains below. Understanding the
normal progress of intellectual development among normals, we shall
be able to determine how many years such an individual is advanced
or retarded. In a word, we shall be able to determine to what degrees
of the scale idiocy, imbecility, and moronity correspond." (Pages
40 and 41.)

"Our purpose is to evaluate a level of intelligence. It is understood that we here separate natural intelligence and instruction.
It is the intelligence alone that we seek to measure, by disregarding
m so far as possible, the degree of instruction which the subject
possesses. He should, indeed, be considered by the examiner as a
complete ignoramus knowing neither how to read nor write. This
necessity forces us to forego a great many exercises having a verbal,
literary or scholastic character. These belong to a pedagogical
examination. We believe that we have succeeded in completely
disregarding the acquired information of the subject. We give him
nothing to read, nothing to write, and submit him to no test in which
he might succeed by means of rote learning. In fact we do not even
notice his inability to read if a case occurs. It is simply the level of
his natural intelligence that is taken into account." (Page 42.)
Note particularly the statement just read. We must disregard
the degree of instruction possessed by the subject. And yet we
question him on the days of the week, the names of the months
and to count forwards and backwards, etc. Are not these facts
acquired through instruction? He even contradicts the sentence
that "we disbelieve that we take into account any acquired information." Some of the tests in the later revisions do ask him to
read something and to write something. In my opinion this does
not interfere with the purpose as expressed by Binet.
My criticism of the Binet Test and the series is not against
Binet's work, nor against the tests themselves, but against the use to
which they have been put in the American adaptation.
" It seems to us that in intelligence there is a fundamental faculty,
the alteration, or the lack of which, is of the utmost importance for
practical life. This faculty is judgment, otherwise called good sense,
practical sense, initiative, the faculty of adapting one's self to circumstances. To judge well, to comprehend well, to reason well, these
are the essential activities of intelligence. A person may be a moron
or an imbecile if he is lacking in judgment; but with good judgment
he can never be either. Indeed the rest of the intellectual faculties
seem of little importance in comparison with judgment." (Pages
42 and 43.)

Intelligence, level of intelligence, intellect, level of intellect,
judgment, initiative, comprehension and adaptation are different
terms used. Those terms are all used as equivalent in this article,
and they are also used in the same article as elements which he has
analyzed out of something else for which he uses the same term.
In the next article which he calls: "Application of the New Methods
to the Diagnosis of the Intellectual Level Among Normal and Subnormal Children in Institutions and in the Primary Schools," he goes
back to the use of the word in his first article, and it is clear that
"Intellectual Level" is what is meant by all the terms.
"Application of the New Methods of the Diagnosis of the
Intellectual Level Among Normal and Subnormal Children in
Institutions and in the Primary Schools. The preceding article
contains a strictly theoretical exposition of the methods of diagnosis
which we have devised for recognizing and measuring intellectual
inferiority. It remains to complete the preliminary work, to standardize it, to show how far these methods work out when applied to
real facts. After the theory must come the proof.

"The psychological examination of a subject lasts on an average
forty minutes. We made in the beginning many useless tests with
each child, because we were doing a work of investigation; we were
groping; now that one knows what to look for, one can proceed more
rapidly, and we believe that a half-hour will suffice to fix the state of
the intellectual development of each child." (Page 91.)
In the use of the tests certain concepts have been formed and
are in general use. Two of these concepts are fundamental. The
first is the concept of the mental age. It is claimed that by the use
of the Binet scale we arrive at a figure or a number which represents
the mental age of the child. What is meant by Mental Age? If
the term means an intellectual level it seems to be about what Binet
intended provided it is taken in a rather broad sense. If we say
"He has the intelligence level of about ten years," that is understandable and rather acceptable; but considering the Mental Age
as equivalent to the mentality of a normal child of that age is quite
another matter. Along with that goes the concept that feebleminded children represent stages in the development of normal children; that is to say an imbecile is like in mentality a normal child
of a certain age, and the expression is used constantly to indicate
the fact or to stand for the concept. This is the meaning given by
the foremost exponents of the Binet method in this country.
It is not true that an idiot or an imbecile or even a moron has
the mentality of a normal child of any age whatever.
One boy, nineteen years of age, had been in school up to the age
of fourteen and had then gone to work. He was the driver of an
ash cart in a gang that went around the city streets. He earned
something like ten dollars a week at that time which would be
equivalent to about twenty now, but when I saw him he was in rags.
I said to him: "Is that the only suit of clothes you have?" "Yes."
"Why don't you get a decent suit of clothes?" I asked. "I have
started to save to buy some," answered the boy. "How much have
you saved?" I questioned, and received the reply: "Seventy-five
cents." The boy spent as he earned, in saloons and on prostitutes.
He had had five years of experience in the life of a big city, sleeping
under the cover of his ash cart or beneath the shelter of a dry goods
box. Three of us tested him, giving him every advantage possible,
and we found that he had a mental age score of a little less than
nine and a half years. Does that represent the mentality of a normal
child of nine and a half years? The diagnosis of feeble-minded children is made entirely on that concept by those who use the Binet
scale and apply it strictly.

The tests are arranged with that fundamental concept in view.
No feeble-minded child ever gets a mental age above twelve. If the
mentality is twelve or over we do not have a feeble-minded child no
matter what the age of the child may be. Three grades are made
and the subject is classified under that grade which is indicated by
his mental age. An idiot has a mental age of two or less. From
two to seven or eight is classed the imbecile, and from eight to
twelve the moron. There are three degrees in each grade and each
one of those degrees has its own mental age.1 That is the classification which is most widely used in this country, based on the
concept of mental age and the other concept which goes with it,
that intelligence is a unit characteristic. In spite of the analysis
which Binet started to make, it is specifically taught in the use of the
Binet tests that intelligence is a unit characteristic. Therefore,
feeble-mindedness is also a unit characteristic. Such studies as
have been made of families, with a view of arriving at the etiology,
all point to the fact that the mental aberrations that are present
in those children whom we call feeble-minded are different, not only
in different localities and in different families, but also in the same
family. The same is true of normal children.

Those are the two fundamental concepts which underlie the
general applications of the Binet-Simon Scale for intelligence, and
they are both false. The mental age score is not the representation
of the mentality of the child, because feeble-mindedness does not
indicate the arrested development at some stage, necessarily. Nor
is intelligence a unit characteristic transmissible, nor is feeblemindedness a unit characteristic transmissible. There is a sense
in which it is perfectly justifiable to arrive at a number which they
call a mental age and to use it as an index. You can think of the
development of the intellect and intelligence as the child grows
older and older and develops. A child does not have a memory
span of six because he is ten years old. At the age of ten his memory
span may cover six digits or more. What is meant by a normal
mental age of ten? Nobody knows. But we can have a general
idea of the mental level of ten years. We are more and more convinced that these absolute general diagnoses do not give us the
expression that we want. What we have to do is to analyze out of
the performances and behavior of a child the specific competencies
or in the last analysis the capabilities (congenital competencies) of
the child, and then we have something to work on. The result of the
Binet tests as expressed in some objective score?that is, the scoring
of each test as right and wrong and the compilation of the results
of those scores into a final score expressed as Mental Age, Intelligence
Quotient or a rating on a Point Scale?does not help us at all in such
an analysis. No matter how excellent the Intelligence Quotients
may be as criteria for the differentiation of children in the grades
or for a prognosis of their intellectual development, the score alone
derived from any of these arrangements of the tests in the series is
absolutely worthless for diagnostic purposes. What does the I. Q.
1 Of course the mental age must be considered with reference to the attained chronological age, and the twoand-three-year system is understood in this discussion.
mean? Does it mean social competency? No. The M. A. or the
I. Q. is no index of social competency. Under certain circumstances
it may be an index of educational competency. They are using these
tests very largely in the public schools for the purpose of educational
differentiations, and in the right hands with the proper safeguards
they are extremely valuable for that purpose because they can be
administered and scored with a minimum of training and can be
checked up and verified as occasion arises for such procedure. This
usage agrees with the purpose as expressed by Binet. But the use
of the scores as criteria for vocational guidance is a different matter
entirely. There may be some vocations in which a high intellectual
level is required where a Binet test would help in the selection, but
I do not think of any at this time.

What do these tests measure? A series of tests which can be
applied and the results used in any field should be selected and applied
so as to show definite competencies or proficiencies necessary in that
field. How can you give vocational guidance unless you know what
competencies are required in a particular vocation and whether
the person applying for the job has these competencies? What
competencies will distinguish a girl that you would be willing to
prognose as having the competencies to make a successful stenographer and typewriter? You can, however, use some tests in negative
guidance very well. I have seen girls whom I had no hesitation in
telling that they were wasting their time in studying stenography,
for they will never get anywhere with it. Suppose we say that the
Binet series tests the general ability to get on. Even this assumption
has been proved false by the study of many individual cases. The
Terman revision is undoubtedly the best form which we have today.
We have tried to make an analysis of the Terman series and see what
it is that is involved in the successful performance of each of these
tests, and we have found that no test in the series involves any single
competency; and very few tests definitely test one specific competency. The memory span tests come the nearest to it, but even in
these are involved audition, vision, attention and imageability.
The memory span test may be for simple discrete units, for complex
units, for still more complex units or for a combination of units. In
making a classification of the tests included in the series the first
category we would have to have is memory span. In the whole
series, including the alternate tests, there are ninety tests. Seventeen
of these are memory span tests, using digits, sentences or ideas, and
they all use auditory stimuli. Visual memory span is not tested at
all, although some of the other tests involve some visual memory
span. The next ability which seems to be tested by some of the
tests is memory. There is no attempt to distinguish between auditory
or visual memory. Most of the memory tests involve chiefly verbal
memory and that may be largely motor. So the analysis can not
be very fine. We might use the term "general information" as
the title of one category. Many of the tests can be put in this category. But of what use is general information if you can not recall
and use it? Using memory in a broad sense and putting the general
information tests with the others, we find that there are forty-one
tests which belong under that heading. Of the tests which primarily
test discrimination of some sort, like lifted weights and likenesses
and unlikenesses, there are ten. There are some tests which primarily
test imagination. Perhaps they could be included under memory,
but we will put them under a separate heading. Of those there are
only five. There are seven which may be said to test intelligence
in the sense in which we use it, that is the ability to solve what for
the individual is a new problem. Such tests as the fifth test under
Table of the Tests Under Each Heading.

Memory Span Memory Discrimination Imagination
III 6
III al
IV 6
IV al
VI 6
VII 3
VII al 2
IX 4
X al 1
X al 2
XII 6
XIV al
XVI 5
XVI all
XVIII 3
XVIII 4
XVIII 5
III 1
III 2
III 3
III 4
III 5
IV 3
V 2
V 4
V 6
V al
VI 1
VI 3
VI 5
VI al
VII 1
VII 2
VII al 1
VIII 2
VIII 5
VIII 6
VIII al 1
IX 1
IX 3
IX 5
IX al 1
IX al 2
X 1
X 4
X 6
XII 1
XII 2
XII 4
XII 7
XIV 1
XIV 3
XIV 5
XVI 1
XVI 2
XVI al 2
XVIII 1
IV 1
IV 2
V 1
V 3
VI 2
VII 5
VIII 4
IX 2
IX 6
XII 8
XIII 1
XII 3
XII 5
XIV 6
XVIII 2
Intelligence
V 5
X al 3
XIV 2
XIV 4
XVI 4
XVI 6
XVIII 6
Comprehension Motor
IV 5
VI 4
VIII 3
X 2
X 5
IV 4
VII 4
VII 6
VIII al2
X 3

Aboye all other abilities this series tests the ability to understand and use language. There are only right
tests in th? ninety that do not depend primarily on language ability. They are IV, 2; IV 4; V, 1; V, 5; VII, 4;
VII, 6; X, 3 and X, 3d alternative.

the fourth year seem to be in a special series by themselves. They
may or may not test memory. If the child has already learned by
experience the thing to do then they come under memory; if the
child has not had the experience so that he has learned the reaction,
then they would test judgment. They would constitute then the
same sort of a test as the hypothetical questions we are asked to
answer all the time. These we will put in a separate class called
comprehension. There are five of them. There are five tests left
and these I put under a separate heading which I call motor.
These categories indicate the competencies which it seems to me
are most involved in the performance of the test or which are most
brought out by the test. Considering that the tests which I include
in the forty-one under memory are for the most part based upon
acquired information, that the information is usually acquired in the
school, that some of the tests under the head of discrimination involve
discriminations which the children are taught to make in the kindergarten and lower grades, that of the comprehension tests some at
least are learned in school by most of the children or through their
contact with the school, taking the memory span tests in their different
forms as the tests which bring out the competency which is at the
basis of all intellectual development, there is no question that these
tests are or ought to be a very good index of the attained level of
intellectual life. That is to say, the score, whether in terms of M. A.
or I. Q. or point, is a rating of performance level on the intellectual
scale. Now I believe, and I have tried to show above, that that is
really what Binet had in mind when he started with a definite problem of the school administration, that is, the grading of these children
not on the basis of definite examinations or tests of specific subjects
but on the ability to understand and use language. The tests were
then and always have been not tests of congenital competencies nor of
efficiencies but rather of proficiencies, and in the form in which
Terman has cast them they have become still more tests of performance levels on the intellectual scale, because the competencies
which are involved in school work are the competencies which are
involved in the performance of these tests. On the other hand for
the trained psychologist these competencies may be analyzed out of,
or estimated from the performance of, these tests, but in the grouping
of the tests and in the method of scoring them they are concealed
and lost sight of.

Neither the Terman tests nor any other form of the Binet tests
when administered and scored by the standard method can show the
abilities or disabilities of the individual child. It is true that in most
school systems and clinics where these tests are used the examiner
is directed to record carefully and accurately the response of the
child and the method of procedure in all tests, and the experienced
examiner can often tell from these notes the way in which the child
responded. But such notes, no matter how carefully recorded,
cannot give the picture of the child that it is necessary to have in
order to determine the capabilities or the acquired competencies.
The meaning of the Binet score then is a performance level on
the intellectual scale. This is one element useful in giving a diagnosis
of the child's mental ability. It may be obtained without the use
of a Binet test, and in many cases in much less time than it takes to
give the Binet test properly. However it is obtained it is only one
fact, and no diagnosis is valid which is made upon it alone.
