The Present Status of The Subnormal Class
==========================================

By Francis N. Maxfield, Ph.D.,
Psychologist of the Board of Education, Newark, N. J.
Adapted from an address before The Council of Education of the State
of New Jersey at Montclair, October 25, 1918, printed by the
Council and reprinted here by its permission.
The enforcement of compulsory education laws has laid a
burden upon the public schools of the United States which involves
many difficult problems. The public school system has been developed under a spirit of democracy which has not only demanded
equal opportunity in free education for all children but in its earlier
developments assumed that the type of education offered to all
should be the same. There was little differentiation in the curriculum
as to content or method.
Recent years have seen a good degree of differentiation in secondary schools. Some distinction has been made in the elementary
school between the needs of rural and urban populations. Much
less thought has been given to the varying needs of different children
in any one school jurisdiction. Children who will leave school at
fourteen are in most cases given the same course of study as those
who will go on to the high or the vocational school. Pupils who did
not possess intelligence or capability for mastering the subjects of
this academic course of study have been allowed to drop behind their
fellows and to repeat what has been for them a treadmill routine, an
uninteresting grind, which has left them ill prepared for any vocation or even for vocational training. This has been an expensive
process and the presence of these repeaters has not only added
to the financial burden of the taxpayer but has seriously decreased
the effectiveness of the elementary grade teacher in her work with
the other children.
The establishment of special classes for these subnormal children
has been an important step in a much needed differentiation of the
elementary school system. The present New Jersey law has assigned
specially trained teachers to classes for children "three years below
normal" and has limited the enrolment to fifteen. This has involved
a considerable increase, usually about three-fold, in the expense per
pupil. What has been the justification for this expense?
In the first place the warrant for the establishment of such
classes lies in the fact that by this means the regular grade teacher
(27)
28 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
has been relieved of the burden which the presence of these children
involved and her effectiveness with the normal children under her
care has been appreciably increased.
The second reason for their establishment is not so clearly recognized by school men. It lies in the opportunity which they offer as
experiment stations in differentiated educational practice. Here we
see a frank attempt to adapt the course of study to the needs of the
individual pupil. This experiment should lead to still further differentiation in the elementary grades to meet the needs of the congenital
illiterate, the so-called manual minded children, as well as to offer
prevocational opportunity for those who leave school at fourteen.
All special classes, those for the deaf, the blind, for recently arrived
immigrants, etc., as well as those for the feeble-minded, mark progress
in this direction.
Lastly, since all subnormal children cannot be cared for in
institutions at the present time, these classes offer them an educational opportunity. This is the least important of the three reasons,
though it is at times the first one mentioned. Alone it would not be
sufficient warrant for expensive instruction under trained teachers.
In its earlier development the special class for subnormal children
was usually organized in a graded elementary school. In many
cases the room used differed little in arrangement and equipment
from any other room in the building. The children assigned to this
class were placed in it because they were "backward," "over age,"
"retarded," or even in some cases because they were difficult to discipline in the regular class, the so-called incorrigible type. This
miscellaneous group was put in charge of some regular grade teacher.
No definite determination of mental ability or prognosis of future
progress was made. To prevent objection on the part of the parents
it was called merely a backward or ungraded class, and emphasis
was placed on the opportunity for special teaching. Its enrolment
was usually smaller than that of the regular grades. The methods
followed resembled those of the ungraded country school.
The problem presented by such a class has been studied by
educators and much progress has been made.
Different types of backward children have been recognized and
when possible have been separated. Those whose retardation was
due to remediable causes?physical defects, irregular attendance, a
foreign language difficulty, and the like?but whose native ability
or intelligence compared favorably with that of children in regular
classes, were placed in "restoration" classes. Teaching in these
classes was planned to restore pupils to their rightful grades, their
assignment for special class teaching being only temporary. The
PRESENT STATUS OF THE SUBNORMAL CLASS. 29
personnel of such a class changes from time to time as this restoration
is effected and new transfers are made. The disciplinary cases are
assigned to special classes of their own.
This leaves two main classes of backward pupils, the congenital
illiterates, to whom I have referred, and the feeble-minded or mentally
deficient. The improvement in methods of clinical psychology and
the development of mental tests has made it possible for us to define
the latter class of pupils more clearly. As a result of this development we now find a new situation in a well-organized class for mental
defectives. The teacher is trained for this work and uses the methods
which have been found effective in institutions for the feeble-minded;
special equipment is used and the classroom presents a picture quite
different from that of the ordinary grade room; the curriculum has
been modified to meet the needs of these pupils as individuals and as
a class. Less emphasis is placed on formal school work, reading,
writing, arithmetic, etc., and more on manual occupations, preparation for home life, and self-help generally.
Development has progressed further in those communities where
the classes have been brought together into schools for mental
defectives, and in this development the city of Newark holds front
rank. In coming into contact with the work which has developed
in Newark under the supervision of Miss Anderson, I have been particularly impressed with the decided advantages a school for mental
defectives presents as opposed to scattered classes.
Among them we may note: better grading and organization;
the introduction of departmental work; closer supervision and a
better opportunity to train new and less experienced teachers in
this work; and an opportunity for the wide-awake school superintendent to carry on a profitable experiment in educational differentiation. There is less feeling of exclusion on the part of the pupils
and the development of a school spirit among the teachers and
pupils becomes possible.
In some school districts there are practical difficulties in the
way of such an organization owing to the small number of children,
the problem of transportation, etc., as well as lack of building and
equipment. These may be met by bringing the pupils together,
as is done in rural centers, in a single school which can be established
in a dwelling house rented and adapted to this purpose.
It has been urged that these children gain something from
association with normal children, but it should be remembered that
on the ordinary school playground mental defectives are by the very
nature of their handicaps segregated from the others or, at best, associate in their play, games, etc., with those younger than themselves.
30 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Parental objection to a school of this type is probably stronger
at first than to a class for mental defectives, but this feeling tends
to disappear with the growing appreciation of the work of such schools.
Hardly a month passes in Newark without at least one application
for admission from the parents of a normal but backward child.
A working plan for such a school is already available in Miss
Anderson's "Education of Defectives in the Public Schools."1 With
its aid the supervisor or principal can work out experimentally,
unhampered by academic tradition, an educational scheme with a
view to preparation for life, through prevocational training, for the
children of higher grade. These should have some formal school
work but hand work should predominate. For children of the lower
grades of intelligence no formal school work is given but they are
trained in self-help and the simpler household tasks.2
Since the New Jersey law contemplated a heterogeneous class
including all grades of mental defect, it very wisely limited the enrolment of the special classes to fifteen. Under a school organization
with better grading and departmental work this number can be
slightly increased. The attendance for such classes is probably
about 85 to 87 per cent. It would seem wise to base the legal restriction on the size of the class on average attendance rather than on
enrolment. When schools for mental defectives are organized, this
figure might be put as an average monthly enrolment of twenty
or an average attendance of eighteen.
Although some lack natural qualifications for the work the
present standards for the teachers of such classes are good. The
morale is excellent and ideals of service high. These high standards
for teaching the children of higher mental level should probably be
maintained, but for the children of lowest mental level, the imbecile
group, it would seem advisable to follow Dr Mitchell who, in his
report in the Cleveland survey, suggested that the children be in
the care of such a matron as would be employed in a day nursery,
and that no teaching should be done. This would amount to custodial care during school hours. The matron would be assisted by some
of the older girls of the moron group, acting in rotation, who would
thus get training in caring for younger children under her direction.
Thus far I have had in mind the instruction of the mentally
defective child, i. e., the problem of his education and training during
school hours from the time he becomes of school age until he is
sixteen years old. This is only part of the large social problem
involved in feeble-mindedness.
11917. World Book Company, Yonkers-on-Hudson, N. Y.
2 See Commissioner Kendall's Bulletin on "The Teaching of Children Mentally Three Years or More Below
Normal," N. J. Department of Public Instruction, April, 1918.
PRESENT STATUS OF THE SUBNORMAL CLASS. 31
As New Jersey has taken the lead in provision for classes for
mentally defective children it should also keep before itself the
problem of their lives after they reach sixteen years of age.
It is all verj' well to say that we believe in segregating the
feeble-minded in institutions and colonies but to keep saying this is
rather futile unless we do more. What can we schoolmen do?
1. Arouse public opinion to the need of more adequate provision for segregation.
2. Keep the department of charities and corrections informed
in regard to this need in our different localities. Make returns
each year on the basis of the school census, etc.
3. Afford valuable assistance to this department in urging for
immediate admission to institutions or colonies those cases most
likely to become public charges or to become in some other way
socially undesirable or dangerous. There is a great difference
in the social competence of feeble-minded individuals of the same
mental level. We have the stable or benign type, usually docile
and easily influenced, that gets along fairly well in a favorable environment. On the other hand we have the excitable, unstable type, often
psychopathic or suffering from a genuine psychosis, that is fairly
certain to become a social menace even under favorable circumstances.
In some cases parents are so irresponsible or the environment is so
undesirable that even the stable type of mental defective becomes
either a social menace or at best a social burden. When special
class teachers have had these cases under observation they can
afford valuable assistance in pointing out those for whom institutional
care and restraint is most urgent.
All these purposes can be effected with our present machinery.
There should be a further provision and the school authorities might
be called upon to make it, though in all but the smaller districts it
would be necessary to appoint some officer to carry it out.
This is the provision for the registration and regular reporting,
as under a probation system, of all mentally defective children from
the time they leave school. The objects of this system would be:
(a) To emphasize to the parents the need for particularly
careful oversight in these cases; a responsibility continuing beyond the age period where such responsibility
is felt in the case of normal children. (To secure employment, to direct expenditure, to prevent marriage.)
(b) To allow the question of institutional care to be taken
up at any time, as in the case of a suspended court
sentence, when social incompetency in the near future
seems likely. (Death of parents; tendency to delinquency or crime; exploitation, as in prostitution, etc.)
32 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC,
(c) To check up earlier diagnoses and to furnish scientific
data for future diagnoses, and to determine educational
method in similar cases. This procedure should be
supported by new legislation in regard to commitment
of those cases where parental responsibility is insufficient to insure the proper protection of society or of the
individual case. Such commitment should be for life,
release being granted only on review of the case and
decision by the same authority who made the original
commitment. In cases of the stable type if parents
are dead or are irresponsible, guardianship might be
assumed by child welfare organizations.
In other words, we, as schoolmen, are interested in the broad
social problem of the mental deviate?the insane, the psychopathic,
the feeble-minded, the moral imbecile, the delinquent, and the
criminal. Of this problem their education during school age is only
a part. We believe in segregation in colonies and institutions, but
the institutional capacity is inadequate. We have our part in
getting the rest of the community to see this need as we see it. We
are in a position to assist in reducing the amount of poverty, delinquency, and crime caused by the presence of these mental deviates
in society, by keeping track of them and urging commitment on a
selective and intelligent basis.
To summarize:
I have urged the claims of the school for mental defectives over
the separate classes.
I have tried to point out the gap between these classes and the
regular grades which should be filled by a similarly organized school
for the congenitally illiterate.
I have suggested that we enroll twenty pupils per teacher in
classes for defectives or at least have an average attendance of
eighteen per teacher except when the class is ungraded.
I have urged that the lowest grade of mentally defective children
should be treated custodially and cared for by a practical matron,
rather than taught by a trained teacher.
I have suggested that it is not enough for the school authorities
to care for these children up to sixteen and then lose track of them.
We or some other state or municipal authority should follow them up
and secure their commitment to institutions or colonies before they
become socially dangerous or a public charge. Meanwhile we should
do our part in educating public opinion to recognize the need for
institutional provision more nearly adequate to the requirements
of the situation.
