The Training of Very Bright Children.1
=======================================

By Lightner Witmee.
What children are very bright? Our own, of course, but how
to discover the "very bright" children of other people? To be very
definite, what percentage of six-year-old children, in the first grade
of the public schools of this country, may we expect to be properly
classified among the "very bright?"
Before I can answer this question, we must arrive at a satisfactory definition of the "very bright" child. To define the very
bright child, we must also define the bright child, the ordinary child,
and those children who are inferior to the ordinary. The definition
of "brightness" requires a psychological analysis of the mental
competency of children.
I propose, first, to define the ordinary child, for which purpose
I take the norm already established by the school system. The
ordinary, or normal, child is one who is able to enter school at the
age of six years, and, taught by a recent normal school graduate
of ordinary mental ability and moderate professional efficiency, is
able, along with forty or more other children, to do the prescribed
work of the first year, in not more than nine months, five hours a
day, five days a week, attaining, at the end of the period, a proficiency adequate to begin the prescribed curriculum of the second
school year. It follows from this definition, that a child isn't an
ordinary child, if he requires two years or more to do the prescribed
work of the first grade; nor is he an ordinary child if he can do the
prescribed work under the conditions in less than the prescribed time.
The learning rate of a child determines his rate of progress
through the grades. It measures the child's educability, which is
an important part of his school competency. School competency is
the aggregate of all those abilities which the child brings with him
to school and through the employment of which he attains, stepwise, the proficiency standards of the grades.
Many children have deficient educability or, in other words,
deficient competency in school work. Some children have superficient educability, they are supercompetent. Those children, on the
other hand, who are so deficient in educability, or school competency,
that they are unable to do the work of one grade in two years or
1A discussion prepared for the Educational Congress held under the direction of the Department of Public
Instruction of the State of Pennsylvania, Harrisburg, November 17-22.
(88)
THE TRAINING OF VERY BRIGHT CHILDREN. 89
more, or to complete the six years of the curriculum in eight years
or more, constitute a special problem so far as the school system is
concerned. They are below the level of competency assumed in the
standards established by the school system. They are not educable
children in the school sense of the word.
The remedy sometimes proposed for these children is individual
training, but what is individual training? To how many children
can a teacher give real individual instruction at one time? In my
opinion, to not more than two or three. Individual training is,
therefore, out of the question in public school work. The grouping
or classification of children, in large or small groups, must be assumed
as one of the prescribed conditions entering into the definition of
educability.
Applying this definition to the group of very bright children, we
arrive at a definition of the very bright child as one who has such
a high measure of competency that he is able to learn more than the
prescribed curriculum within the prescribed time under the prescribed conditions. Do such children exist and if they do exist
would it be wise or practical to group them together, permitting
them to advance more rapidly than the ordinary or standard child?
The use of the term "bright" in the diagnosis of an individual
child or the definition of a group of children implies the possession
of two mental attributes, alertness and speed. The bright child
displays a more than ordinary alertness in the vivacity of his responses
and the liveliness of his initiative. He will be quick to move, to
observe, to think and to learn. At the opposite pole is the dull and
slow child. The bright child is dominantly the child who is very
much alive, and a fair measure of his liveliness is given by the relative
speed of his thinking, doing, reacting and moving.
I take it, however, that in our discussion of this afternoon we
mean by the term "very bright" children to imply the possession
of other abilities than alertness and speed. A very competent child
will always have, and an alert and speedy child will usually have,
another important ability which I call intelligence, the ability to
solve what for each individual child is a new problem. An alert,
quick and intelligent child uses his congenital and acquired abilities
to achieve successful results without effort. The dull, slow and
stupid child gets on only as a result of such training and by dint of
much drilling.
If a very bright and intelligent child is to be really educated, the
education must be one that requires him to make an effort at his own
level of competency. What will educate a dull, stupid and slow
child will not educate a bright and intelligent child. The most
90 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
competent children pass on from grade to grade without having to
exert themselves. Some, indeed, use their intelligence to avoid
getting an education, to outwit the teacher, to beat the game.
Somewhere in the upper grades or in the high school it becomes, at
last, impossible for them to get on any longer by their wits alone,
and it is revealed to them, and sometimes to their teachers, that
they have managed to pass on from grade to grade, without having
acquired an adequate training in fundamentals.
This brings me to another important component of a child's
competency, i. e., his ability to be trained, his trainability, which, in
general terms, is his ability to acquire efficiency. A child begins to
talk at the age of eighteen months, but his initial efficiency in talking
is approximately zero. From year to year he increases in efficiency
until, at the age of six, he enters school with a relative proficiency
in language, which is partly the result of a congenital ability and
partly the result of practice and training. A high level of competency in language or in some other ability does not assure the child
a high degree of efficiency. Endowed with a good voice and an
ear for music a child may, on his own initiative, acquire enough
efficiency in singing to sing fairly well without instruction. The
smaller his measure of vocal and musical competency, the more training will he require to attain an acceptable standard of proficiency.
If he would make a great success in life as a professional singer he
must have the congenital ability to begin with and must then train
it to a high degree of efficiency. More than ordinary competency
in a specific ability is commonly called a talent, and the child endowed
with one or more such unusual abilities is designated as talented,
capable, or gifted. Some children are so alert, quick, intelligent and
talented, and they acquire efficiency in the direction of their particular abilities so easily that they will enter school with a proficiency,
even in school subjects, which children who are dull, slow, unintelligent and ungifted cannot attain after a year or more of hard work.
The moral of the old fable of the hare and the tortoise should not
persuade the educational administrators of this country to stake
all of the public money on the success of the tortoises.
If a child is to learn to read, write and cipher, he must bring
with him to school some measure of competency to do and learn
these elementary school operations, the school must then give him
an adequate measure of efficiency. The ordinary standards of
efficiency training in these subjects, at least as they are realized in
school practice, are so low that very intelligent and talented children,
especially in the early years, can meet the required standards of
proficiency by their wits alone. When they reach that point in the
THE TRAINING OF VERY BRIGHT CHILDREN. 91
educational system, where they can no longer produce a satisfactory
result without working, some begin to work for the first time; others
who still refuse to work are eliminated from the school system.
I contend that it is not only the dull, unintelligent and incapable
children, that is to say the relatively incompetent, who are eliminated
year by year from the sixth grade level on, but many highly competent children, whose competency is not adequately exercised and
trained in the lower grades. These leave the school system without
having acquired any respect for educational or cultural ideals.
They remain ignorant, but intelligent, critics of our educational
theory and practice.
This must continue just so long as children of superior competency, ordinary competency, and inferior competency, are educated
together in one and the same group. The competency of a child
is an aggregate of many component abilities; alertness, speed,
specific talent, and, perhaps the most important, intelligence and
efficiency. The analytical diagnosis of children compels us to recognize that one child has great intelligence and but little efficiency;
another, a little intelligence but much efficiency; a third, great
intelligence and great efficiency, and yet another may have neither
intelligence nor efficiency.
The life of the child at school, at home and on the street, and
all his subsequent adult life is a continuous performance. In general
the object of each particular performance is to achieve the highest
possible measure of success. Some will succeed because they have
the intelligence, which is creative imagination, invention, originality
and initiative; others will succeed only by attention to detail, by
industry, persistence and acquired skill.
The proficiency standard of a grade cannot possibly be set
above the competency level of the ordinary group of children in the
grade, but it should not be set below this level. In practice, day
in and day out, the proficiency standard really operates at the level
of the inferior group, because the teacher and the school system
are judged adversely by the number of those who fail to meet the
prescribed standard. For example, in rating Philadelphia school
children, I do not accept the fact that a child is in a particular grade,
say the third grade, as conclusive evidence that he is doing third
grade work. Indeed, I often find children in the third grade, who
are unable to do first grade work and, amazing as it may seem to
you, I find, every now and then, children in the high school who are
not able to make good in composition and arithmetic with the efficiency prescribed for even a sixth grade pupil.
I come now to another mental ability, one which is the focal
92 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
center of our professional interest from the first grade up through the
high school, the college and the professional school. This is intellect,
which I define as knowledge put to use. The imparting of information is justly enough considered to be the chief function of the educational system. "Knowledge is power," and the educational
system is distributing this power among the infant portion of the
population. But knowledge is not power, until it is put to some use.
Within the educational system, the use to which acquired knowledge
is commonly put is to pass an examination. Elementary school
children and college students, as well, are highly trained, i. e., they
are made efficient in absorbing the well-digested information imparted
to them by their teachers, in retaining this information and in
reproducing it on demand. An amount of information, measured
in terms of its simple reproducibility, does not measure intellect or
culture, and gives the pupil a very small modicum of the knowledge
which is power. Does he use this information to solve problems?
Can he acquire new knowledge for himself? Is he able to observe,
describe, define, generalize and reason? Can he give oral or written
expression to what he has observed and thought about? The true
measure of an intellectual level is the ability to use acquired knowledge
as an organic instrument of expression. The very bright child must
be not only alert, quick, talented and intelligent, but these component parts of his competency must operate efficiently at a high
intellectual level. Are college graduates more intelligent than those
who have not been to college? No?because we fail to exercise
their intelligence at a high intellectual level. We strive mainly
to raise their intellectual level. Often we succeed only in adding
inappreciably to their stock of reproducible information.
We are now ready to define the characteristics of the very bright
child. He will have superior alertness, quickness and intelligence,
he will have attained a fairly high intellectual level or at least be
capable of reaching a high level, and he must be able to acquire a
high degree of efficiency in order that his intelligence may operate
at the highest possible intellectual level with a maximum of efficiency
and a minimum of effort. How many such children are there? I
don't know, any more than I know how many feeble-minded children
there are. The line separating one group from another will be
drawn with reference to many different and always changing conditions. A child may be feeble-minded in one environment but not
in another. Children are diagnosed as feeble-minded today who
would not have been called feeble-minded fifty years ago. Feeblemindedness in the white race is not feeble-mindedness for the colored
race. To determine the number of mentally deficient children who
THE TRAINING OF VERY BRIGHT CHILDREN. 93
should be separately grouped and taught in special classes, it is
necessary to know how many children six years of age are incompetent
to meet the standard requirements of the first grade. I can only
hazard a guess; and so I say that such children are probably not
more than twenty per cent, or one-fifth, of all the children arriving
at school age each year. In practice there may be more than twenty
per cent, there may be less. In the same way, I should expect that
not more than twenty per cent, or one-fifth, of all the children will
be found to be very bright. The number may be considerably less.
Of the remaining sixty per cent, which I call the ordinary children,
one-third, or twenty per cent, of the whole number are median or
mediocre; twenty per cent are bright, and twenty per cent of them
are dull, slow and not very intelligent. In other words, I offer a
preliminary classification of children into five equal groups: the
very bright, the bright, the mediocre, the inferior or dull, and the
very inferior or deficient, some of whom are so deficient in competency as to come within the social category of the feeble-minded.
To find the very bright children, therefore, we must look for the
most alert, the speediest, and the most capable of acquiring knowledge
and using it with efficiency to solve original problems presented by the
school curriculum and by the social, political and vocational requirements of community life.
The more competent children will rely on their alertness, their
quickness and their intelligence to solve school problems, but dull,
slow and stupid children will rely on then memory. The proficiency
standards of all the grades overweight memory. I do not advocate
changing those standards. Perhaps the ordinary child needs most to
have his memory trained but the very bright child needs more than
this; he needs to have his intelligence exercised, and his memory
trained, not in the mere reproduction of what he has learned, but
in putting his acquired knowledge to use. His knowledge must
become an organic part of his competency, and be employed, like
his congenital abilities, as instruments through which he achieves
success. I ask, therefore, that we should begin to train the very
bright child. We have never tried to train bright children. It is
only by accident and not by foresight or intent that a very bright
child ever gets the training he needs. The discovery of a group
of very bright children will be made as soon as intelligence tests are
employed. The prescription of an educational treatment must
take into consideration more than their special competency. The
rate of progress of a child from grade, to grade, and through the
high school, is determined not only by his competency and his
acquired efficiency; it is conditioned by another important factor,
94 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the rate of growth, the rate of physical and mental maturation. A
child who has not reached puberty is probably not yet fit for the high
school curriculum, no matter how intelligent, alert, intellectual and
efficient he may be. You can teach the very bright children, to
read before they are five years of age but, except in very rare instances,
this would be unwise. Before the age of six, many very bright
children haven't yet ripened into the ability to use phonics, so as to
synthetize the sounds of new words. The discrimination of form is
displayed by a child before he can discriminate color. He must
talk fairly well before he is ready to read and write well. He can
state the differences before he is able to give the resemblance of
objects. He is ready to learn to read and write before he is ready
to learn to cipher. The very bright children, therefore, must not
be hurried through the school curriculum, because the stepwise
advance of the school curriculum has, perhaps unconsciously, recognized this stepwise flowering of a child's competency.
The very bright children can learn ten things while some of the
group of ordinary children are learning one. The training of very
bright children should extend the range of their knowledge, power,
skill, alertness and efficiency. The time alloted to the school is
not sufficient to develop all the abilities of an ordinary child. We
must concentrate on those abilities necessary to acquire and to use
the three Rs, certainly during the first six years. If we spread our
aim over the entire field of the ordinary child's capabilities, we
run the risk of failing to achieve the dominant aim of the elementary school system, which is to raise the human being above the
level of illiteracy. But the problem of the very bright child is a
different one. He scarcely needs to be taught to read, to write and to
cipher, any more than he needs to be taught to walk and talk. If
we have trouble teaching him the three Rs, it is because we are not
teaching him well, or we are trying to teach him before he is ready to
learn. The three Rs are an insignificant element in his education.
The important element is the awakening of his congenital abilities;
the exercise of those abilities; the extending of his range of interests,
the general object being to lay the foundations so securely, that, as he
passes from grade to grade up the ladder of maturation, he will be
prepared to take in at each step an increasingly wider view. The
abilities we should chiefly train are alertness, speed, intelligence,
efficiency and those intellectual operations known as observation,
description, comparison, discrimination, analysis, generalization and
definition.
The only remaining question is whether it is possible for the
common schools to give the group of very bright children what they
THE TRAINING OF VERY BRIGHT CHILDREN. 95
need. I can tell you what they ought to get, it is for the school
administrators to determine whether it can be provided for them.
I advise, for the present, nothing more than tentative and sporadic
attempts, as neither the school administration, nor the supervisors,
nor the teachers, nor the public, are ready for an experiment on a
large scale. First, give the supervisor who would like to make the
experiment the liberty to make it under conditions that promise
success. Then let him wait until he has found the right kind of
teacher. All our teachers have been educated from their sixth
year on in the old system. Even if they are intelligent enough to
train very intelligent children, only a few of them will be able to
escape the mental trammels of their own training. The teacher of
this group of children must be very efficient as well as very intelligent,
alert and well informed. These qualities are not often combined
in one and the same person or system. The Montessori system, for
example, is a very intelligent but an extremely inefficient system of
education.
The time is very nearly ripe for successful experiments in educating the very competent. It should begin with children of from four to
seven years of age, and the first tryout can be made by providing a
clinic teacher to supplement either the ordinary kindergartener or the
first grade teacher. The clinic teacher will undertake at first, only
to find out what the children are really like, to measure and rate
their competency. I contend that it is possible to determine with
great precision before a child is six years of age, his individual competency to do the work of the first grade under prescribed conditions.
If our kindergartens were organized to do this work, I would say
that no child should be permitted to enter upon first grade work
until after his school competency had been ascertained. Under
present conditions I believe that the barrier had best be placed at
the end of the first grade. Let us treat the kindergarten and the
first school year as an opportunity to determine the relative competency of the children, and permit no child to enter upon second grade
work who has not been able to acquire first grade proficiency. In
some school systems, the barrier may be placed at the end of the
first half of the first school year. The work of the first half year
would be psychological exploration. It would give us a survey
of the abilities each child brings to school with him under his own
hat, and conclude with a grouping of the children into four different
classes or groups, i. e.:
1. The group of ordinary children who may be expected to
comprise about sixty per cent of all the children.
96 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
2. The group of very bright or very competent children who
would certainly not run much more than twenty per cent.
3. The group of inferior or relatively incompetent children, also
about twenty per cent.
4. A group of children so mentally deficient that they ought to
be cared for in special institutions for the feeble-minded and not in
the public schools.
On my scale of distribution, eighty per cent of all children are
assumed to be competent at six years of age to enter upon the work
of the first grade. If a child has first grade competency at the age
of six, he can easily acquire first grade proficiency at the age of seven.
Until he has first grade proficiency, he should not be permitted to
enter a second grade of ordinary children. The second grade teacher
has a right to know the kind of material which she is asked to develop
in one year into competent third grade material. If our school
administrators should ever discover how much the children of these
four groups differ in educational competency, they would cease at
once trying to enforce the same prescribed curriculum for all children.
At our model school last summer, at the University of Pennsylvania,
children whom our Psychological Clinic had diagnosed as feebleminded, were found in grades as high as the fourth grade, and the
"model" teachers were supposed to teach these children as though
they were ordinary children. And they were ordinary children
within the definition given in the practice of the Philadelphia school
system. They are to be found in the ordinary grades, although if
they should apply for admission to the Pennsylvania Training
School for Feeble-minded Children some of them would be rejected
on the ground that they are not only feeble-minded but also noneducable, for this school is able to differentiate its educable children
from the merely trainable or merely custodial, and does not undertake
the impossible task of educating uneducable children.
A farmer does not try to cultivate weeds and grain in the same
field; he even provides a different cultivation for his corn and
potatoes. Let us be very optimistic and confidently await the day
when education will be as scientifically and intelligently directed as
agriculture.
