A Case of Deficient Retentiveness
==================================

DIAGNOSTIC TEACHING
By Rebecca L. Leaming,
Senior, School of Education, U. of P.
Saul came to the clinic for examination the first time on February 1, 1919. The diagnosis given at that time by Dr Humpstone
was "Five years retardation but not qualitatively feebleminded."
The recommendation given was "Special training and diagnostic
teaching at the Psychological Clinic."
Saul is thirteen years and very small for his age. His face is
small and looks rather old. He has a constant worried expression
as if he were trying to fathom some deep problem. He reported
that he got a hundred every day in arithmetic in school, but that he
could not do spelling and reading at all. He said that he had missed
a lot of school in moving about from place to place, and that he was
always put down when he changed schools. He said also that when
he went back after being out he "Felt like a dummy and never caught
up to the rest of the children." At the time of his examination he
was in the second grade.
I made my first attack with Saul's memory span. I found it
to be six definitely, but I also found much to my surprise that I
could not get him to give seven even with an unlimited number of
repetitions. I then tried him out with number work and found
that he had a good idea of large and small numbers, counting, and
number combinations. He knew his tables up to seven and said
that they were learning the eight times table in school at that time.
He could add, subtract, multiply and divide with a fair amount of
accuracy, and on the whole I would say he had full second grade, if
not more, proficiency in arithmetic.
I next turned to his spelling and here I encountered difficulty
right away. I gave him a list of five five-lettered words to study
just as long as he wanted so as to know them well enough to spell
them correctly for me at the end of the time. At the end of six
minutes he said that he knew them. I asked him to spell them and
found that he had no idea at all of how to spell any one of them.
He would give ridiculous combinations of letters. Often there would
not be one of the right letters in the word present in the combination
that he would give.
268
DIAGNOSTIC TEACHING. 269
I next tried out his reading, and here I found several things.
First of all he recognized all of the letters and would spell out the
words to himself as he went along. Second, the letters conveyed no
sound idea whatever. He would spell out a word and then give it
a quite absurd name. The sounds of the letters did not influence
him in giving the word its name any more than if they had not been
there. Third, he would look at the pictures in the book, get an idea
of the story from the two or three words that he got with my help,
and then he would proceed to make up a story and read any
words that came to his mind regardless of whether they were in the
book or not.
I next tried giving him a thorough drill on three of the small
words in the lesson, having him spell the word, pronounce it, find
it in the lesson, build it with the Pittsburgh word-builder and write
it on the board. Then I gave him some alertness exercises for a
few minutes, to waken him up and to determine his ability in this
line. He knew his right and left hand and followed the exercises and
commands very well. Then I turned back to the words that I had
drilled on and found that they were absolutely strange to him. He
might just as well never have seen them before. This led me to
believe that one of his chief defects and reasons for retardation was
a very poor retentiveness. I tried him out on several other things
and found this to be true.
This completed my exploration examination. Having read
over the case history and the results of his examination in the clinic
very carefully I determined to spend my clinical teaching periods
with Saul in trying to determine how much progress he was capable
of making with his reading and spelling. I decided to leave arithmetic alone, for he was so much ahead of his reading and spelling in
that branch. Saul wrote legibly and with a fair degree of efficiency
so I decided not to work with his writing.
Since I had discovered that the letters meant nothing to Saul
as far as sound went I first of all gave him a good drill in phonetics.
This was absolutely new work to him, and he liked it very much.
He seemed to take great delight in sounding out the combinations
and words. After I had given him about thirty minutes of drill, I
took Book I of the "For the Children's Hour" series and had him
read the first story which happened to be the story of "Chicken
Little." I chose this particular book because it has a great deal of
repetition in it, and it enables Saul to become familiar with the words
by seeing them again and again, especially in the same sentences.
He did much better as a result of the phonetic drill he had had.
The improvement was remarkable. He still spelled out the words
270 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and often read words that were not on the page at all, but he made
a very real and earnest attempt to sound out the words, and although
he often got very curious results from his attempts still he got quite
a few words correctly from his sounding out process. He wanted to
read on and on and was much disgusted when I made him stop and
turned to spelling. First, I asked him to pick out five of the words
in the lesson that he had not known until he read the lesson. He
chose them and then I asked him to study how they were spelled
and sounded from the book and then to close the book and make
them for me with the Pittsburgh word-builder. He made three
errors in all but they were not the wild and foolish type of errors
that he had made before. He spelled chicken "Chickin" and
leaves ''leavs." But on the whole he showed that he had some
idea of the sound of the words in relation to their spelling. I was
anxious to see whether Saul would retain these words until the next
week when we had our lesson. I found to my surprise that he
remembered them fairly well. He still spelled chicken "Chickin,"
leaves "leavs," and rabbit "rabit" as he had done on the first day.
But he got the other two words correct and when I told him that
there was something the matter with the three words he corrected
them himself without any assistance from me. Later I had him
make with the Pittsburgh word-builder sentences about what he
had read, and he did this very well. For example?one day he read
the story of "Little Iialf-Chick," and when I asked him to write
some sentences about the story for me he made the following with
the letters on the table:
"Little Half Chick went in the woods."
"Little Half Chick went to the king."
"He would not help him out of the brook."
When I looked at his sentences the first time he had "wood" for
would. I told him that was not right. Then explained to him
what a "wood" was and asked him if he meant that. He said 110,
that he meant like "I would help you if you wanted me to." Then I
told him how to spell it and he corrected his sentence.
Altogether I had Saul for eight lessons of approximately two
hours each. On two of these occasions I had another child with
him and could not give him my whole attention. Each time I tried
to follow a kind of schedule. As a rule I followed this order of work
with him: Phonetic drill?Reading (while the phonetic plan was
still fresh in his mind). Alertness and Breathing Exercises?Short
Arithmetic Drill in number perception?throwing out large and
small numbers of colored straws and getting him to tell me how
many I threw out each time. Reading again?Spelling (orally, written
DIAGNOSTIC TEACHING. 271
and with the Pittsburg word-builder). Sentences about the reading
lesson of the week before and of the reading lesson of the day?and
finally reading again.
Saul certainly made progress in the short time that I had him.
When he first came to me he could not read at all?he had not
efficiency in reading. At the end of eight lessons he had not acquired
proficiency in reading but he had acquired a certain degree of efficiency
and I am convinced that with practice under careful supervision, in
order that he may be broken of his bad habits of spelling the words
out each time and reading words that make the story sound well but
which are not on the page, Saul can acquire proficiency in reading.
With his spelling, more drill is necessary on making him see that
letters have sounds and that the word is the summation of the
sounds of the letters. Also that he can discover in a large measure
how to spell words by sounding out the words and then using the
letters that have those sounds. I am not sure that there is not some
other specific defect that works against Saul in his spelling, but in
the time that I had him I was unable to analyze out any one defect
apart from his extremely poor retentiveness that would hinder him
from learning to spell with a fair degree of efficiency.
After working with Saul for eight weeks I am convinced that
the original diagnosis is corect?he is not qualitatively feebleminded
but is very much retarded. This retardation may be due to many
causes, some of which may be: poor home environment, lack of proper
care and nutrition, constant moving from one school to another,
lack of any real foundation of the fundemental operations in
the three R's and an attempt to pile up knowledge on a foundation
which is not there, specific mental defects (one of which is his poor
retentiveness and perhaps others which did not manifest themselves
in the short time I worked with him). All of these things may have
had a part in his retardation.
Saul gave promise of being able to make a good amount of
progress, and one was encouraged to go on working with him. He
had good persistent attention, energy enough to see him through
when he was interested. He had good planfulness, and his ideas
always appeared to be a step or two ahead of the game. He would
lapse into a kind of absentness or vacancy when he was not interested,
but this did not happen often. He insisted that he liked to learn
and said that he would rather come to the clinic to be taught than to
play, but that he hated to go to school for they "made him feel like
a dummy and treated him rough"?the exact meaning of which I
was never able to discover.
