An Analysis of the Proficiency and Competency of a Fourth Grade Class
======================================================================

By Gladys E. Poole, M.A.,
Clinic Teacher, University of Pennsylvania.
The Observation School conducted by the University of Pennsylvania during its summer session is regarded not as a model but as a
typical elementary school in which the pupils are representative of
the typical school group. These pupils are recruited from the
Philadelphia schools and accepted in the order of their application
until the grades are filled. A teacher of the fourth grade in this
school should expect to demonstrate methods in group teaching to
pupils having fourth grade competency and at least advanced third
grade proficiency. This means pupils having the ability to do the
work of the fourth grade and the education which should precede
fourth grade work.
At the close of the first week of the summer session the teacher
of this fourth grade felt like the old woman who lived in a shoe and
had so many children that she did not know what to do. Group
teaching seemed to be impossible. There seemed to be as many
individual problems in discipline and teaching as there were pupils
enrolled. The problems which confronted the teacher of this grade
are probably quite similar to those experienced by the majority of
teachers in our schools. This leads the writer to believe that a
number of teachers may be interested in seeing how the problem
was analyzed to determine the proficiency and competency of the
class in order to readjust the course of study to fit group and individual needs. This paper treats only of the results of the diagnosis.
No discussion of remedial treatment is attempted.
A preliminary survey of the class showed that the thirty pupils
were of nine different nationalities?Italian, Russian, Jewish, Hungarian, Bohemian, Spanish, Irish, Negro, Scotch and old-line American. There were four old-line Americans. The first outstanding
problem was a language difficulty. Four of the pupils neither understood nor spoke English. These pupils could not take directions
and were a source of constant interruptions and of disciplinary
questions. The ages of the pupils ranged from eight and a half
years to eighteen years. The median age was twelve, i. e., there
were just as many pupils over twelve years of age as there were pupils
under twelve. The average and mode were also twelve years. If
children enter the first grade when six or seven years old and advance
(51)
52 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
a grade each year we should expect the median entering age of fourth
grade children to be from nine to ten years. The fourth grade
teacher who has in her class pupils of normal age only has a much
easier problem than the teacher who has pupils ranging from eight
and a half years to eighteen years. This class should have been
classified so that pupils of the same experience, capacities and proficiency were reciting together. The wide age variations lead the
teacher to question that this had been done.
The first step in the problem analysis was to give certain standardized educational tests in order to determine the proficiency of
the group and to make possible comparisons from pupil to pupil.
The tests were given by the advanced students of the School of
Education under the direction of Dr. H. Updegraff, Professor of
Educational Administration, to all grades from the fourth through
the eighth. In a very few days after the tests were given a list of
the scores made by each pupil, arranged so that the pupil making the
highest score headed the list, was handed to each teacher. This
article is concerned only with the results obtained from the fourth
grade tests.
The tests used were: Standardized Research Tests in Arithmetic
Series B (for determining accuracy and speed in the fundamental
processes), Monroe Standardized Silent Reading Test (for determining rate and comprehension in silent reading), Courtis Standardized
Research Test in Reading, Thorndike Visual Vocabulary Scale A-2
(Y series), Ayres Measuring Scale for Handwriting, Ayres Measuring
Scale for Ability in Spelling. The results of these tests are shown
in the following tables.
Table II shows that in the Monroe Standardized Silent Reading
test the pupils in the Observation School read at the rate of fifty-four
words in three minutes, and comprehended 6.4. The scores in rate
ranged from fifteen words in three minutes to 108 words in three
minutes. This may mean that one pupil in the class could read
seven times as much as another pupil could. In comprehension the
scores ranged from zero to 17.2. As a rule the pupils ranking highest
in comprehension also ranked high in rate of reading. One pupil
who scored seventy-six in rate, scored zero in comprehension. He
apparently read the words without any comprehension of what he
was reading. The Observation class reads less rapidly but comprehends more than the average class as shown by the standard median.
They read two-thirds as fast and comprehend much less than the
standard set for fourth grade, but as well as the median reached
by the three hundred children in Philadelphia schools.
These facts are significant when we consider that nineteen out
AN ANALYSIS OF A FOURTH GRADE CLASS. 53
of thirty pupils enrolled had been promoted in June to the fifth
grade by their regular teachers on the condition that they did excellent
work in the fourth grade during the summer session.
Table I.
Scores of Fourth Grade Pupils in some Educational Tests.
Pupil
No.
Addition
Rate
Accuracy
Multiplication
R. Ac.
Division
R. Ac.
Monroe Reading
R. Com.
87
108
44
44
31
87
44
54
44
76
76
15
54
22
10
22
67
108
87
15
11.8
13.6
2.7
4.1
1.4
15.2
6.8
6.0
6.8
5.3
13.7
12.8
6.9
4.0
0.0
10.1
0.0
4.5
1.3
1.04
2.6
10.7
7.4
17.2
2.6
Courtis Reading
141
101
118
167
193
100
99
191
148
169
103
80
163
63
103
82
73
Com.
Vocabulary
95
100
28
57
Table II.
Monroe Silent Reading Tests Showing Median Scores Obtained in Fourth Grade
of the Observation School and Standard Scores.
Medians
Observation School:
Fourth Grade
Pennsylvania March Scores (1919):
Third Grade
Fourth Grade
Philadelphia Scores (March, 1919):
(For 300 children.)
Third Grade
Fourth Grade
Monroe Standards (May, 1919):
Third Grade
Fourth Grade
Pennsylvania, May and June.
Rate
54
Comprehension
6.4
3.5
5.0
6.4
9.0
14.5
Table III shows that in the Courtis Reading test the class made
a median score very little above the standard second grade median.
This means that in so far as the Courtis Reading test is a test of pro54 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ficiency in reading that class under discussion has attained second
grade proficiency. An examination of the individual scores (Table I)
shows a skewed distribution at the lower end of the scale.
Table IY shows that in rate and accuracy in addition, multiplication and division the median score made by the Observation
fourth grade falls considerably below the median score made by the
State of Pennsylvania and slightly below the third grade standard
as set by Courtis. On the whole the class was not far below what
Table III.
Scores Obtained by Courtis Reading Tests in the Observation School and
Standard Scores.
Medians
Rate
Comprehension,
No. of Questions
Answered
Index of Comp.
Observation School:
Fourth Grade
Courtis Standard (1919):
Second Grade
Third Grade
Fourth Grade
87
113
145
60
Table IV.
Courtis Standard Research Test, Series B.
Medians
Observation School:
Fo'irth Grade
Pennyslvania State (May, 1919):
Third Grade
Standard (1919) :l
Third Grade
Fourth Grade
General
Addition
Rate Accuracy
4.5
6.5
4.0
6.0
7.4
39.8%
50%
100%
41
100%
65
Multiplication
Rate Accuracy
40
6.1
5.0
6.0
6.2
74%
100
49
100
67
Division
Rate Accuracy
2.0
4.2
4.0
4 0
4.6
50%
61%
100%
100
57%
1 Schoolmen's Weekly Proceedings, pp. 97-101.
might be expected of a beginning fourth grade. Still the class was
unable to do fourth grade work because of the wide variations in
ability. The rate of addition ranged from one to twelve, in accuracy from zero to five; the rate of multiplication ranged from two
to nine, accuracy from zero to seven. Ten pupils scored zero in
accuracy of addition and five in accuracy of multiplication. Should
these pupils whose scores fell on the extreme lower end of the scale
in the proficiency test for the fundamental processes have been
AN ANALYSIS OF A FOURTH GRADE CLASS. 55
classified in the fourth grade where the emphasis is usually placed
upon long division and various types of thought problems? Accurate
work in long division must depend upon accuracy in multiplication
and addition.
The purpose of the visual vocabulary test is to show how difficult
words the pupils can read and understand well enough to classify
under proper headings, e., animal, flower. Of the words given
by the test the median number known by the pupils was thirty-three
and the median score was 4.5, the standard for third grade was 19.8
words correct and a median score of 3.83. The class excelled the third
grade standard but did not reach the fourth grade standard which
is 80.3 words correct and a score of 5.03. The median scores in the
spelling and penmanship tests slightly exceeded the standard set for
second grade but fell short of the third grade standards.
These educational group tests while planned primarily to test
groups, not individuals, show in general that while many in the group
lack the necessary proficiency for fourth grade work, the class as a
whole is not too far below the average beginning fourth grade but
is prevented from doing fourth grade work because of the skewed
distribution at the lower end of the scale. Furthermore, these tests
showed that the teacher's judgment of the pupil's proficiency cannot
be relied upon in the division of the grade into sections. At the
beginning of the session the pupils were placed in sections A or B
according to the regular teacher's recommendation. Later a re-division was made based upon the results obtained from these tests.
As a result of this re-grading ten of the pupils placed in section A
were advanced to section B and eight pupils in section B were placed
in section A. Other things being equal the nearer alike the pupils are
in proficiency the easier the teaching and the better the work done.
Before attempting to bring the backward pupils up to a fourth
grade proficiency level it was necessary to know why they were
below grade. Was their inefficiency due to poor teaching methods,
illness, lack of interest, or did they lack competency for fourth grade
work? Apparently the next step was to pick out the individuals
who were impeding the progress of the class or who were incorrigible
and analyze these cases individually. Children inherit certain capacities and defects which must be taken into account in their training.
It is not possible to determine the specific problems in the training
of a child until his ability to learn has been measured.
In order to determine why some of these fourth grade pupils
having only first or second grade proficiency had not attained the
proficiency required by their grade they were sent to the Psychological
Clinic where they were examined and their competency determined.
56 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
One of them who was pronounced feebleminded had not been suspected by the teacher because he looked intelligent and apparently
learned easily but his mind was a mental sieve. As a result of the
examinations, Dr. H. J. Humpstone gave a group test to the class.
This group test, like the educational group tests, was not intended
to be a measure of the competency of individuals, but it did do two
things at least: first it gave an estimate of the competency of the
group and second it showed up the pupils who were apparently
weakest in native ability.
As a result of this group test cases were selected for individual
examination. These individual examinations showed that each
pupil had specific defects which conditioned his performance in the
group test and which would interfere to a greater or less extent with
his acquisition of the content of the school curriculum under ordinary
conditions.
Report on Psychological Examination of Fourth Grade
Pupils.
As a first step in the solution of the problem some group tests
were given the class. These consisted of memory span for digits
and short words according to the method standardized and described
in my monograph,1 and three tests taken from the Terman series
and administered as group tests with written response. They are
the construction of sentences from the nine-year tests, the giving of
likenesses from the eight-year tests and the differences of the sevenyear tests. The scores from these tests were grouped and the pupils
arranged in rank order for purposes of further testing and comparison.
The scores made in the educational tests were treated in the following
way. The pupils were arranged in rank order on the basis of their
scores in arithmetic, in the Monroe reading test, in the Courtis reading test and in the spelling test. They are divided into quintiles in each
of these tests. Those in the highest quintile were given the mark of
five, in the high quintile the mark of four, in the middle quintile
the mark of three, in the low quintile the mark of two and in the
lowest quintile the mark of one. The four scores for each pupil
were then averaged and a new rank order made on the basis of thees
averages. The comparison of these ranks is shown in the following
table:
1 "Some Aspects of the Memory Span Test," H. J. Humpstone, Psychological Clinic Press, Philadelphia, 1917.
AN ANALYSIS OF A FOURTH GRADE CLASS. 57
Comparison of Grades in Educational and in Psychological Tests.
Pupil Number
Quintile Grades
Educational Tests
Psychological Tests
Difference in Gride
4
5
ab
ab
1
3
4
ab
5
1
ab
2
3
4
3
5
2
ab
3
4
5
5
3
ab
2
2
1
1
1
The column headed " Difference in Grade" gives a rough index of the correlation between the two sets of tests.
There are seven who rank the sane in both tests. There are nine whose grade only differs by one point. There
are three whose grade only differs by two points. Three differ by three points and one by four points. The Pearson
coefficient of correlation is r = +0.31. Number sixteen whose grade differed by four points was unable to do the
group tests in Psychology satisfactorily because of his extremely defective vision. Number six is handicapped by
language difficulty and did not understand what he was to do. The other two whose grade differs by three points
(numbers five and eight) have a native ability as shown in the Psychological tests, but do not apply themselves
in the school work.
A number of pupils were then brought to the clinic for analytic
diagnosis. The criterion on which they were selected was principally
the result of the memory span tests. No. 19 is a Russian Jew. He
has a language difficulty complicated by a speech defect and has dull
hearing and lacking in attention. No. 27 has specific defects of
memory span, memory and distribution of attention. No. 11 has
very limited vision and poor distribution of attention. He also has
a speech defect which affects his understanding of language. No. 1
has a slow rate of energy distribution. There is a suspicion of glandular dystrophy. He might do the work if the had plenty of time.
No. 16 has normal mentality except as conditioned by his vision.
He has congenital myopia which is very severe. No. 29 has a
language defect and environmental handicap. No. 24 has specific
defects of memory span and distribution of attention. His distractibility is partly due to lack of interest. No. 12 gives evidence of eye
strain and should be immediately examined for possibility of cor58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
rection. He shows a lack of attention which is partly due to the eye
strain and partly to lack of interest. No. 4 is definitely feebleminded,
an institutional case. No. 6 has a specific language difficulty, speaking Italian for the most part. No. 23 is normal but dull, lacking in
energy and interest. No. 2 has specific defects of distribution and
analytic concentration of attention, defective visual and auditory
memory. No. 5 is above normal in ability, but does not like school
and does not work. No. 19 is normal, but lacking in planfulness
and energy. No. 8 has low trainability and retentiveness. No. 13
is normal but handicapped by language. She was born in Argentine
and Spanish is spoken in the home entirely. No. 9 speaks only
Polish at home, and has a slight speech defect which interferes with
his understanding. No. 10 has deficient concentration of attention.
No. 17 is retarded, partly as a result of illness. She lacks energy
and concentration of attention. No. 21 is feebleminded. He is also
defective in hearing and seems to be an institutional case.
H. J. Humpstone.
Some of these pupils absolutely lacked fourth grade competency.
To attempt to give them fourth grade proficiency was a waste of
money on the part of the district, of time and energy for the teacher,
and took from the child of fourth grade competency instruction
that rightly belonged to him, for no others should be admitted to the
fourth grade. Pupils lacking fourth grade competency should not
become problems for the fourth grade teacher to handle. Rather
their competency should have been determined during their first
school year, and no children lacking first grade competency such as
cases No. 4, 2 and 21 should be allowed to encumber the second,
third and fourth grades. These psychological tests should be repeated
from year to year, and other children possessing only the second or
third grade competency sifted out and kept on their competency level.
Special classes should be provided for pupils below the average
in competency. No child lacking third grade education should be
promoted to the fourth grade. Proficiency tests should be given
and the child's proficiency accurately determined before promotion.
Children showing superior competency and proficiency should be
advanced one or more grades until they reach their competency
and proficiency levels.
