Some Problems at the Work Age Level
====================================

By G. G. Ide, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.
The school law of the State of Pennsylvania requires that from
the age of eight until the age of sixteen years each and every child
residing within the limits of the state shall be a regular attendant
at school, whenever school shall be in session, unless such child
shall have reached his fourteenth birthday and have completed the
sixth grade, in which case he may satisfy the requirements by attend-
ing continuation school one day per week. If an attendance officer
reports a child not in school and a sufficient excuse is not forthcoming,
provision is made for the punishment of the parent by the imposition
of a fine.
This law was framed with the idea of preventing the exploitation
of children in industry during the formative years when the require-
ment of an education and the establishment of habits of correct
living only are possible, and also to avoid the dwarfing of body and
mind through too early an application at monotonous tasks to which
children in their immaturity are particularly likely to be set. In
this way foreign-born parents have been prevented, to a certain
extent at least, from placing their children at work at an early age,
or from exploiting them themselves by labor performed within the
limits of the home, and native-born fathers and mothers have been
required to place their children in school and to join the ranks of wage
earners themselves instead of living on the earnings of a numerous
brood, able by reason of their number rather than by their skill to
support their parents and themselves. Vigilant attendance officers
have co-operated with social agencies in the elimination of both of
these groups from society, and with the aid of a growing public
opinion, the school, employer and parent are moving together as
one unit toward the great goal of public education for all.
The law specifies that each and every child between the stated
ages shall be in school. The tendency among social workers inter-
ested in the problems of education in the United States today has
been to urge an increase in the number of years of school attendance
required rather than to accept the present limitation. Just now a
strong movement is being initiated to require eighteen years rather
than sixteen years as the minimum age for leaving school. So far
no one has suggested that it might be possible that this law, if passed
under present conditions, might prove even more of a boomerang
(75)
76 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
than the present law?a boomerang which would react upon society
through the fields of adolescent crime and non-conformity.
At the present time the law requires the child to remain in school
until his sixteenth year. It presupposes the ability of the child to
profit by such school training as he shall receive, and presupposes
further that each child is able by reason of this ability to do such
school work. Just here is where the joker lies. Notwithstanding
the attitude of the American people towards ideas of inequality,
there is no question of equality in the physical and mental characters
supplied to children by their ancestors. Men are not born equal.
They are born most unequal in both mental and physical character-
istics, and this inequality is further increased by differences in
environment and training.
At the present time schools are reporting figures for retardation?
whatever each and everyone may mean by the term?varying any-
where from twenty-five to fifty per cent. This indicates that some-
what less than half of the children entering school are not making
normal progress, that is, are not being promoted regularly at the
end of each promotion period. Some of these, of course, are legitimate
retardations due to illness, changes of schools, late entrance and the
like. None of these are to be considered here. A large number of
children, varying in estimates from five to twenty-five per cent of
the total number of children entered in school, are definitely retarded
and do not overcome their backwardness even under the best of
conditions. Either sitting in the regular class with their mates or
occupying a seat in a room devoted to the special class, they do not
learn to read and write as other children do, or if they do succeed
with these subjects, they are not able to make use of them as tools
for daily use.
It is this group of retarded children which is the source of much
of the unruly element of adolescent age both in school and out, and
which increases enormously the cost of education through the added
number of classes which are required in the school, or which lessens
the efficiency with which the class work is done because of the
increased numbers in the classes. The group falls naturally into two
divisions. The first includes those who are obviously feeble-minded;
the second those who may be diagnosed as mentally deficient, without
meaning by that term anything other than that these children
are so equipped mentally that they are unable to learn the funda-
mental operations in reading and arithmetic in such a fashion as to
make them available as tools.
Two grades in the public schools retain more of these children
than any others. These are the third and the fifth grades. Many
SOME PROBLEMS AT THE WORK AGE LEVEL. 77
a child who is able, after several repetitions of the first and second
grades, to reach the third grade, where the four fundamental opera-
tions of arithmetic are emphasized and where the reading is expected
to be fairly done, finds the third grade an impassable barrier. Many
of these children, if tested by a teacher who knows her business, will
be found to be not near the proficiency level of the third grade.
After stranding in the first two grades for a time age and height tend
to promote them, and they are passed along to the third from which
the conscientious teacher finds it impossible to dislodge them. From
this point they are sent to a special class if there is one, and if not
they sit in the third as long as it is possible to retain them in the seats,
when they automatically move on to the next grade. The fifth grade
children do fairly well on the memory diet which has been theirs
in the acquiring of their educational tools. The applications required
of them, however, are their points of deficiency. They are utterly
unable to make use of these tools in the acquiring of new knowledge.
Because of this they remain in the fifth grade or are pushed into the
sixth merely because the school finds it an easy solution of the
question.
The law permits a child who has finished the sixth grade to go to
work, providing he is fourteen, and providing further that in case
he is less than sixteen years of age he shall attend continuation school
one day per week. The mentally deficient child almost always fails
to reach his fourteenth birthday and his sixth grade class at the same
time, owing to the fact that the school usually makes no effort to
get rid of him so early. It is the next two years that are the critical
point for the school and the child as well. It is the next two years
that often finish the habits and practices begun in the lower grades
and now at this point just reaching their fruition.
Well-to-do parents of children retarded in their progress are
apt to make some other provision for a child obviously growing
beyond the opportunities of the school. A private school or a tutor
helps to supply the deficiencies, while recreation and boy or girl
activities add lessons of value to the child. Where no extra-school
care can be provided the mentally deficient child is left to get along
as best he can with the school work as it is. He is left to clog the
system with his presence, and to such an extent does this happen
that at present the schools have within their precincts a large number
of children who are not receiving the sort of training they are expected
to receive because they are utterly incapable of taking this training
for use to themselves. Because of the curriculum about which so
much is being written at the present time, the children are not offered
in the school the sort of training they are capable of receiving, that is,
78 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
they are not offered manual work of a kind which will give them
training suitable as a foundation for their future means of livelihood,
or a training in some line of endeavor such as will be of direct future
financial aid?a not undesirable aim from schools claiming themselves
as a preparation for life. Trade schools and manual training schools
for either boys or girls require a higher standard for entrance require-
ments than is possible for the deficient child to attain, and in conse-
quence he is denied the only sort of training he is capable of receiving
and utilizing. The feeble-minded are even worse off, for their school
training is neither education or training but a hodge-podge of the
three R's which offers nothing as a supplement to either a fuller life
expression or an aid in the earning of a livelihood. In passing, it
may be well to remark that certain schools in the United States have
offered to their feeble-minded children such excellent courses that they
are directly able to extract financial profit from them at the close of
their school career, and in consequence even the normal children
of the grade schools are passed up by industries for the better trained,
though mentally inferior, children. Socially this works out to the
disadvantage of the community, as it places a premium upon the
mentally ill-equipped and permits the official sanction of the group
to be placed upon them.
The mentally deficient child finds himself handicapped all
through his school career by the conditions in school which fail to
offer him anything that he can assimilate and use. He finds himself
as the years roll on seated in rooms with children who are not nearly
his size physically but who surpass him mentally. He finds himself
the butt of his class, and although he may seek those of his age on the
playground and in his youthful social group, he finds himself handi-
capped in his contact with them because of his position in school.
As he approaches his fourteenth year, he has a healthy desire to
encounter the world in all of its aspects and especially in that of
finance. He is anxious to earn his own living. Early adolescence
has thrust its problems upon him, and his inability to do work plus
the extra urge which comes at this period of life is apt to induce
in the child a feeling of restlessness not likely to be desirable in the
school room. It is here that the small, petty misbehavior becomes
so troublesome to the teacher, especially in the regular classroom
where so many children require her care that there is plenty of oppor-
tunity for the one or two older children in the room to perform those
small acts of annoyance so well known to the average teacher. After
a few months, if possible, the child is transferred to the special or
disciplinary class where a stronger autocrat of the schoolroom holds
sway. With a large number of such children much of the work
SOME PROBLEMS AT THE WORK AGE LEVEL. 79
becomes more or less perfunctory, so that it is found that the prin-
cipal job of the teacher is to keep the children, as one principal put
it, "from jumping out of the window." The question of education
is quite lost sight of in the necessity of maintaining discipline.
Under the conditions which the average child of this sort
encounters there is a strong tendency for him to become unruly.
Not all the children of the mentally deficient type are unruly, but
even those children who are well-conformed often become wards
of the state or of social agencies because their great suggestibility
renders them peculiarly liable to certain kinds of mal-adjustments,
while those who tend toward lawlessness almost always require the
help of the social agency or the court in their care. Part of their
insubordination comes from their contact with the school which fails
to maintain its discipline through proper expression, and which thus
unknowingly promotes habits of inattention and laziness through its
improper curriculum. Coupled with the usual environmental con-
ditions which offer to these children more temptations than come
to the ordinary lot of children, the situation reaches a point where
the child refuses longer to recognize the authority of the school, and
often includes within this proscription the authority of the parents
also, although often enough the latter side with the children rather
than with the law.
Many a case of stealing, of running away and of bagging school
may be traced back to the unsatisfactory relationship which the
school has built up between itself and the child. Many children
get a job with the intention of casting off the yoke only to find them-
selves in the clutches of the law. Others refuse to attend school
and, when sought by the attendance officers, are secreted by relative
or friends. Others attend school just often enough to avoid being
dropped where attendance officers are not over-zealous in looking
after those whose attendance does not involve three consecutive
days of absence. By this system many children are able to get along
with not more than two days of attendance at school each week.
In this way they avoid the attendance officer and are even enabled
to work a little on the side.
The greatest difficulty comes with those who involve themselves
with the law. Oftentimes a parent is dragged into court to answer
for a child who is not in school attendance, when the parent is not
really to blame except in so far as he is unable to solve the problems
which center around his child. Institutional care does not answer
the question either, for the difficulty is more fundamental than the
institution can solve, the whole situation being attacked as it is some
six years too late. There is no reason to suppose that any given
child could not have been trained in such a fashion as to have become
80 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
a useful citizen, but six years of spoiling are not to be atoned for in
a night, and the institution, no matter how good, has never been
considered exactly a place for atonement. The difficulty must be
solved from some other standpoint.
It is certain that the schools will have to face the question sooner
or later. It is the public school which says that a child must go to
school, and back of the school is the taxpayer who ought to be expect-
ing that some good result is to come of this requirement. It is he
who is going to ask why the law has worked out as it has for this single
group, and it is he who is going to expect an answer. Since the war
we have really learned how very poor our educational system is, and
at the present time there is a tendency toward demanding reformation,
a tendency to ask why we do certain things and a tendency to ask
for results. Out of this tendency there ought to come, full-fledged
at least, this one judgment. Many of our children are not receiving
the sort of education they require in our public schools. What can
be done about it? Several things may be done.
In the first place, without permitting unscrupulous persons to
exercise the power, it is possible to permit children who have reached
their fourteenth year, and who are not receiving the full benefit
which they have a right to expect from their school experience, to
leave school on the basis of the judgment of some duly qualified
person, and to permit them to engage in some field of labor designed
to be remunerative both in experience and money. This is not an
ideal way, because the children who would be candidates for this
treatment need training of a kind which the school does not offer
but which, under pressure, it should be induced to offer.
In the second place, it is an unnecessary waste for the schools
to be burdened with children who are going to do badly in school
without learning about it a great deal earlier than they do. Unless
a child remain several years in a grade, little or no effort is expended
to discover why it is retarded. The sheep are never separated from
the goats, so that at times it is very evident that the teacher is forced
to labor in a specified way with a class most of whose members
are obviously unfitted for the treatment. The sensible thing to do
would be to differentiate the group from the beginning. Time and
money would be saved by the process, for each child who is kept in
school or in a grade beyond the allotted time is a source of extra
expense. This early differentiation is essential to success with any
other sort of school work than that regularly given. After this
comes the curriculum which also must be differentiated. The mini-
mum amount of the three R's is all that is necessary, and, let me
whisper, all that is ever received either, and after this should come
the real work which is manual entirely in its character. For both
SOME PROBLEMS AT THE WORK AGE LEVEL. 81
boys and girls should be provided manual training and domestic
science, agriculture and any other sort of work which is suited to
the life of the community and will therefore have a direct bearing
upon the training for adult life. There should be work of both kinds
for both sexes, since part of the aim of this sort of education is the
building up of homes; and, where early marriages are the rule and
the children quite unlikely to marry exclusively from among their
own schoolmates, it is wise indeed to give to both sexes work in the
fields necessary for each child to become a propaganda committee
of one to increase the general efficiency of the household and to
make of that household a distinct asset to the community not only
in itself but in that of its descendants. Besides this, girls and boys
now enter the same fields of industry to earn a livelihood, and the
schools need to supply the sort of training which shall directly
assist in the earning of a living. While the manual work need not
be a direct training for a trade, it will nevertheless train in the handling
of tools and machinery, valuable indeed as an asset in industry. It
may, however, deal directly with some phase of work calculated to
fit the child for remunerative labor.
With training directed along lines calculated to be immediately
fruitful from the family as well as the industrial standpoint, the
mentally deficient child may hope to enter some line of work with
equipment likely to be of immediate value to him?value calculated
in dollars and cents. Besides this, his school training, of interest
and with an aim in view, avoids that ennui which is so common an
effect today, especially with the group under discussion, but not
entirely unknown among those of higher grade mentally. Habits
of industry, perseverance and concentration are built up in this sort
of school?habits which will function positively in the years to come.
Alertness and interest displace dullness and apathy, well-trained and
co-ordinated muscles displace flabby ineffectiveness, and joy in
useful work displaces stupid application at a job. The mental
deficient can be made effective. Why not try to make him so?
Many of the cases brought to the Psychological Clinic for
examination show retardation in school of three or four years. Most
of these are found by analytic diagnosis to have defects which warrant
the prognosis that no matter how long they stay in school they never
could do the work of the fifth grade as it is now given. A few of
these cases are given here for illustration of the type, and as samples
of the facts upon which the statement of the problem is based.
Ernest.
Ernest stood on the corner with an unlighted cigarette hanging
from a pendulous lower lip. His bold narrow eyes sized up the
82 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
passers-by as he lounged around with hands in his pockets. Con-
siderably undersized for his fourteen years, unwashed and unkempt,
he looks like the tough lad he tries to be although his ideas are so few
that of himself he could never achieve so lofty an ideal. By imitation
he can acquire toughness and does. By breaking windows, petty
thieving and shooting craps with boys older than he does he maintain
his reputation. A poor, weak mother has failed in her early attempts
at discipline, and now Ernest and his younger brother, fast following
in Ernest's footsteps, are both shaping their lives with little reference
to the family at home.
Ernest sits in the fifth grade. After repeated attempts it might
have been possible for him to pass into the sixth this year if he had
worked at all, but he added to his other accomplishment that of
bagging school and has played fast and loose the entire year. Without
actually missing enough days at any one time to bring down more
than a reprimand on his mother, he has yet evaded more than half
of the sessions.
At a psychological examination Ernest gave an excellent per-
formance with any sort of mechanical material. His memory span,
retentiveness and trainability while not of the best type are never-
theless distinctly adequate. But he has no ability in the use of words,
his vocabulary is very limited, and in consequence any test requiring
language as a factor in its answer is never successfully performed.
Ernest has remained at practically the same level in regard to language
as he would have had he never entered school, if comparison with
his mother is evidence. Ernest is much dissatisfied with school.
The habits he is acquiring there and on the street corner are not
assets in the field of industry. He is surely being taught to be lazy,
to be vicious in his talk, to be contemptuous of the law and to be dis-
respectful toward authority. He is acquiring tastes which are too
expensive for a boy in his financial straits to gratify but which will
enslave him and require their gratification as surely and completely
as it is possible.
This boy is capable. He might have been made into a good
worker, even a skilled one. He has no deficiencies so great as to
eliminate him from the field of the skilled industrial worker. His
inherited background is a weak one but in no sense vicious, and its
weakness lies in the same plane as does that of Ernest?in bad training
or in none at all.
What can be done for Ernest? He has nearly two years more of
school ahead of him. No special class, no manual training, nothing
but the same old routine which he has already experienced for the
two years past. Will it do him any good to remain longer in school?
What would you recommend?
SOME PROBLEMS AT THE WORK AGE LEVEL. 83
John.
John came into the house, slamming the door and stamping his
feet. His face was white with anger as he told his mother of indig-
nities he had suffered at the hands of the "old man" as he termed him.
The "old man" was the principal of his school, and the trouble was
over the arithmetic which John said he could not do, and which his
teacher and finally his principal rather insisted upon his attempting.
Thin and aenemic, the nervous offspring of a nervous mother, con-
stantly under stimulation from her and from his teachers, John found
it impossible to satisfy the conditions which they imposed, and in
order to avoid them had finally learned to work himself into a passion
such as would eliminate the question from the books for the time
being. John would go to bed for a day or two with a bad headache.
His mother would retire with smelling salts and a dozen handkerchiefs,
his father would beat a retreat from the over-charged atmosphere,
and the rest of the family, two smaller children, would remain in the
back yard talking with bated breath until the trouble had blown
over.
The trouble lay in the fact that John was quite unable to do the
work which he was expected to do. He was a normal boy, of rather
superior imagination, but he lacked intellectual capacity in the sense
that he found it difficult, in fact all but impossible, to solve the
problems expected from him in the fifth grade. Ambition at home
and pressure at school could not produce what was not in the boy.
The psychological examination determined without a doubt that he
was a normal boy deficient in the intellectual field. His home sur-
roundings were very bad, and their effect was felt in the constant
nervous excitement induced and did not primarily account for the
difficulties in school.
John finally rebelled against the whole situation and got a job
with a gas company. He gave his age as seventeen and cautioned
his mother not to report him to the attendance officer who soon
appeared. Some statement of hers challenged the interest of the
officer, and John was soon notified to appear at school. Further
rebellion at home, more nervous attacks, and a place was found for
John in Maine where he worked for a doctor for his board and room
and some instruction. John was much dissatisfied with this proposi-
tion for he did not like farmwork but he remained at this place until
he had reached his sixteenth birthday when he returned home, took
a good job and has been getting along very well at it. His health
has improved wonderfully and he seems much better satisfied with
the world in general.
84 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Alice.
A tall, husky raw-boned girl bent over the washboard wrestling
with the family washing. As she sloshed the clothes in the hot
water she smiled and sung snatches of the popular songs of the day.
No one would have judged her to be a day less than eighteen years
of age, but like the chickenhawk over the hen yard silence and anger
descended over the happy face, when an attendance officer put in an
appearance and required an answer to the question "Why is Alice
not in school?" This sounds easy but is really a hard question to
answer when a mother knows that the reason her well-grown daughter
is not in school is because she won't go. Even the father had found
it hard to look into the level eyes of his daughter, whom he topped not
more than an inch, and threaten bodily force if she did not go to school.
Alice did not like to go to school and sit in the fifth grade with the
other children when she was larger than any of them and the teacher
besides. In spite of her fifteen years Alice was a woman and looked
it. Her parents reported her a good girl and an excellent worker in
the home. The school found no fault with her behavior, but she was
not bright and did not learn, and her impatient teacher stated that
she did not "apply herself." Alice turned sullen through it all and
refused to have anything more to do with it.
A social agency was called in. Their worker, being a young
woman of bookish tendencies who could not understand anyone
who could not take an interest in academic matters, insisted upon a
psychological examination. The mental examination revealed a
girl of good manual ability. Her memory span was but four digits
her learning ability poor, and her judgment, according to the Terman
Revision of the Binet-Simon tests, was ridiculous, yet this girl was
able to do the family marketing, to care for the younger children
and to cook for a family well above middle size. She had held one
job in vacation time where her work was satisfactory to her employers
?in fact, her entire social history seemed to show a girl of normal
tendencies but of low intellectual capacity entirely incapable in school.
Still the law required her to remain there. The only possible recom-
mendation that could be made was that she be permitted to go to
work as soon as possible. Since the recommendation could not be
legally carried out until her sixteenth year, she went back to school,
staying out every time she thought it possible to get away with it,
and at the end of the fourth month of this sort of trifling, her six-
teenth birthday being attained, she left school and went to work.
Harvey.
Harvey has been in school since he was six years old and he is
now fifteen. In that time he has been promoted from four grades
SOME PROBLEMS AT THE WORK AGE LEVEL. 85
but has really learned the work in the first two. He can read, but
only simple material, and he is quite unable to remember it to retell.
His trainability and retentiveness of memory are wholly inadequate
for educational purposes. Even with a special teacher Harvey
found it impossible to retain material from one period of teaching to
the next, and for that reason the Psychological Clinic which was
dealing with the case deemed it unwise to insist further on efforts
which, by experiment, had proved to be of no avail.
Harvey's mother is a widow with five children under her care.
She is aided by the state, but the efforts of every member of the family
are necessary to keep four children in school. The older son is inde-
pendent and helps a little at home, and the mother works to supple-
ment the income. Harvey wishes to help, but the law requires him
to remain in school, and, as hopeless as it is, Harvey has continued
his attendance. There is no special class in his school, and Harvey
sits in a regular grade, where he is accepted only because he is quiet
and well-behaved. Well-disciplined as he is Harvey really presents
a more difficult problem than if he were misbehaving. Of initiative
he had possessed little, and thorough disciplining has reduced thai
which he had. Sitting in classes where the work done was much
beyond his depth, he has developed habits of inattention and of
laziness which are going to be stumbling blocks to him all the rest of
his life. The training which should have developed habits of industry
and perseverance in the boy has been lacking. What little ability he
had is as undeveloped as it was the day he entered school, while in
the place of the training he expected has grown this crop of mental
weeds which offer the boy nothing for his future, and which he will
find only a disadvantage to him in his adult life. The school did
not fit this boy, and the only effort made has been to fit the boy to
the school, his needs entirely unconsidered. Society has thus lost
what might have been a productive member through its own wasteful
methods.
Ella.
Ella could pass for a girl of twenty years anywhere. She is
physically mature, good looking, well above middle height and quite
prepossessing. She is, however, but fourteen years of age and in the
fifth grade. Since she outgrew the rest of her class early she has
objected very much to going to school at all, and on six different
occasions has gone out by herself and secured six positions, any of
which she could have retained but for the skill of the attendance
officer who was armed with a record of her birth date. None of her
employers suspected that he was dealing with a girl under school age.
86 . THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Ella utterly refused to go back to the fifth grade, so as an experi-
ment she was accepted by a school that caters to those who wish to
learn a trade. This school ordinarily demands that its girls reach
seventh grade proficiency before they are admitted. Ella has done
fairly well at this school since she has been there, but she is not
qualified to do the work that the other girls do, and the school is not
satisfied with her. Because the school wished to know more about
her, Ella was brought to the Psychological Clinic by the social worker
from the school.
At the clinic Ella gave good performances with the mechanical
tests. She was co-operative and responded very well whenever she
was able to do so. She read mechanically a story of about fifth
grade level, but was unable to retell it or to answer questions about
it which she was asked. A simpler selection was given her, but she
was unable to return more than one sentence out of five. She had a
good memory span and apparent trainability of memory, but her
retentive power was very slight. She had little language ability
but neither her home nor the school offered any training along this
line. Notwithstanding these deficiencies Ella could not be called
feeble-minded in any sense of the term. She is able to hold her own
with other members of her own group, and in respect to initiative
she is probably better than many of them.
No reasonable recommendation could be made in Ella's case.
With her maturity, both physical and mental, there was little value
for her in the guidance which the school was exercising over her.
The social worker who came with her thought she ought to be taught
how to get a job, but a girl who has successfully negotiated six jobs
needs no instruction in that line. The school offered her little that
she could assimilate, and her instincts and tendencies were all directed
toward activities calculated to interest a person older than her
fourteen years.
Peter.
Peter has difficulty in accommodating himself to the presence of a
stepfather. In fact, Peter is having difficulty just now in accommo-
dating himself to anybody or anything. Peter wants to do something.
He doesn't know just exactly what but he knows some of the things
he doesn't want to do, and one of these is to go to school, another is to
remain at home under the present conditions. Peter's dissatisfaction
of course lies deeper than would appear on the surface.
It is only recently that Peter has not been getting on well with
his stepfather, and it is only recently that Peter's stepfather has been
called in by the school. Today Peter and the school are distinctly
SOME PROBLEMS AT THE WORK AGE LEVEL. 87
at "outs," so much so that Peter refuses to go to school whenever
it is possible for him to arrange any other sort of amusement, and the
school is equally positive in its statement that Peter shall not remain
a member of the fourth grade. There is no special class in this school,
and the teacher of the fourth grade, with fifty other children, has no
time to waste on Peter's peculiarities. If he won't be good, he must
get out. Peter agrees perfectly with the teacher's judgment in this
case and is ready to leave at the earliest possible moment.
Because of the situation in school and the one at home the prin-
cipal of the school referred Peter to the Psychological Clinic. There
the boy was judged to be not feeble-minded but of low grade normal
mentality. He is retarded in school development and shows the
same mental retardation that he does in school retardation?about
three years in both cases. The examination showed that he had about
fourth grade proficiency in school, that he gave fairly good per-
formances in mechanical tests, had a sufficient memory span and
retentiveness of memory for a boy of his years but that his knowledge
of language and his ability to answer questions involving judgment
are distinctly lacking. At school these disabilities prevented his
conforming to the requirements of his grade in behavior, although
he proved quite able to do the work. In the same way the emphasis
placed on school accomplishments by his stepfather had quite alien-
ated the boy although previously he and his stepfather had been on
good terms.
Now Peter's situation might not be so serious if it were possible
at this time to change his environment and arrange for a different
sort of training in school, but this is impossible. The school situation
can not be changed since there is no other place or course of study
for the boy, and the finances of the family do not admit of his place-
ment in some other home or of sending him to the country. In
short, there seems to be no possible solution for Peter's problem.
His mother is anxious but is burdened by three young children and
has little time to watch the playmates and take care of the morals
of her older son.
The school has placed "thumbs down" on the boy and is pushing
the burden off on someone else. The whole defiant attitude of the
boy is being increased by the very evident spirit displayed by both
the school and parents. The boy pretends that he wants nothing
so much as to get away from it all and nobody is helping him. A
school curriculum adjusted to his needs would help the situation
materially. At the present time there is no possible recommendation
that can be made to aid him.
