Diagnostic Teaching. A Case of Deficient Energy
===============================================

By G. G. Ide, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.
The Psychological Laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania
maintains a Speech Clinic and Class for instruction under the direction of Dr Edwin B. Twitmyer. Children who suffer from any
sort of speech difficulty are brought to this clinic for diagnosis, and
if the case is a normal, healthy individual who promises to be co-operative, arrangements are made for teaching half an hour one day per
week. At that time instruction is given to the parents so they will
be able to continue, in part at least, the drill in the home.
John was brought to this clinic by his kindergarten teacher.
At that time he was said to be four years old getting along well
with children of his own years. Except for his infantile speech his
teacher had no complaint to make of him. His father had had trouble
with his speech in childhood and had suffered four operations on his
tongue but had recovered from his speech defect. John, also, had
had some sort of operation on his tongue at two years but had not
begun to speak correctly. He had had whooping cough, measles
and two attacks of pneumonia during his short life and was reported
to have had concussion of the brain in infancy, but no details of this
were available.
The prognosis made at the Speech Clinic was so hopeful that
John was regularly enrolled in the speech class. He came once or
twice and then did not show up again. An inquiry at the home
brought out the fact that several members of the family had been
ill but at that time were fully recovered. The mother promised to
return the boy to the class but failed to do so, and after a second
inquiry by letter, which elicited no response, the case was dropped.
Four years later John and his parents appeared again at the
Psychological Clinic. This time they were seeking not the Speech
Clinic but the clinic which deals with children having other sorts of
defects than those of speech. They were in trouble and were looking
for .help and moral support.
John had been in school during the entire four years first in the
kindergarten and then in the first grade. In that time he had
59
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
failed to be regularly passed from the 1A class to the IB class, but
owing to his size the principal of the school had decided to pass him
on anyway. He had proved totally unfitted to do the work of the
IB class, whereupon the principal had consulted the parents by letter,
and after permission had been received the child had been sent to
the Orthogenic Class for Backward Children. Most of the members
of this class were boys from two to six years older than John, and they
immediately began to make life miserable for the boy. One night
be had appeared at home without his cap which some older lad had
snatched from him. John's mother called at the school, observed
the schoolmates of the boy, and immediately refused to permit him
to remain in the class. She demanded his return to the regular
grade which the principal refused.
John was a fairly nice looking blond child, tall for his age and
very thin. He was pale and rather listless looking with vacant
eyes fixed on the opposite wall. He was never observed to smile.
He spoke very little. His mother was a large, strident woman,
positive but none too exact in her statements; his sister was of the
same type but as yet well under the control of and over-shadowed
by her mother; while the father, a large, rather pompous individual,
was the only one of the trio really concerned about the boy. Surrounded by his family John appeared rather insignificant, a smaller
and paler copy of his mother in appearance but without her striking
personality.
With performance tests John did very well, in fact as well or
better than many children of his age. He did not plan well and was
afraid to try out his ideas, but he made good time neverthelsse.
He had a memory span of five digits, adequate for a child of his
years. In school work there was almost no efficiency. He could
write his name and one or two simple words but did not know how
to make one of the letters when asked for it by name. His mother
reported that he could draw well, but on trial his effort was not better
than any six-year old would make. He could not read and knew
only two letters when asked for them from a group. He was taught
the first four letters but at the close of the period did not give more
than two correctly.
Dr Lightner Witmer, Director of the Laboratory, who had
charge of the examination, did not return a diagnosis on the examination as given. It was obvious that the child did not have first grade
efficiency, and to test the matter and determine whether the difficulty
lay with the boy or with the school arrangements were made to teach
the child at the clinic four hours per week, the mother to supplement
this teaching by drill at home.
DIAGNOSTIC TEACHING. 61
Because the boy appeared so frail he was taken to the dispensaries
at the University Hospital where two physicians gave as their opinion
that he was suffering from mal-nutrition and some glandular difficulty.
The mother was told to give him cold baths, plenty of good nourishing
food, out-of-door play and a tonic. For a short time the cold baths
were given, but the mother reported that the boy struggled a great
deal in the tub and it made her too nervous to force him to take the
bath. Nothing more was heard about the matter, and no further
co-operation was secured in attending to the physical welfare of the
child.
A competent teacher was given the task of bringing John up to
par so that in the remainder of the year?some three months?and
the summer school John might be prepared for second grade work
in the fall. The mental examination had been good enough to
warrant the assumption that the difficulty lay largely with the conditions under which the boy had been placed in school and not
with some innate mental deficiency.
John liked his teacher and did well with her. The first period
he learned fourteen letters. He had all the combinations in addition
up to twelve already and had begun the multiplication tables. He
was able to tell the story about the "Three Bears," putting in many
details, but speaking so softly and in such a monotonous tone as to
remove from it all the dramatic element. His speech was very poor,
the "th" and "t" being missing and final endings and many other
sounds absent or slurred.
For more than two months John continued under the care of the
same teacher. During that time he learned to read twenty-three
pages of a Mother Goose primer, to spell thirty words from this
same primer, to give all the number combinations up to twelve, and
to count by 2's, 3's, 5's and 10's to 100. He wrote freely and legibly
the words he could spell and was able to set down his small sums in
arithmetic. In speech work, he seemed to have improved remarkably, the "t," "th," "ch" and "sh" being clearly given. He still spoke
in a monotone and in a low voice. He seemed to be lacking in "pep,"
never springing up and walking around as does the normal child,
and in no way appearing interested or excited about anything. He
did his work when it was placed before him, never asked questions
and was apparently willing to sit down and accept what the world
happened to give him.
At this time his teacher left, and another one had to be provided.
On examination before the new teacher came in it was noted that the
boy was an adept at watching for cues, and that he did not go ahead
on his small tasks without having to be encouraged at every turn
62 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and that he followed directions only when given one at a time. A
strenuous effort on his part would produce for a moment responses
to two directions, but under the pressure of school work he could not
maintain attention or retain orders long enough to carry them out.
In fact this was so prominent a symptom that alone it would have
been sufficient to have rendered him unfit to compete in a class of
normal children. Any task which required longer than a few seconds
for its completion was not completed alone, even though the process
was perfectly familiar. In other words, the boy had not come to
rely upon himself at all, but his teacher had furnished for him all the
support he had needed.
A month's vacation during June gave John an opportunity to
get well rested up for the summer's work, when he was given one hour
per day formal instruction with some outside drill from his mother, as
had been done before. lie appeared a little bit better physically than
he had been at the end of May. He had grown taller, but he still
looked pale and coughed croupily. His mother said he was not sleeping well, often waking with a loud scream and complaining of terrible
dreams. During the day he was very nervous.
John was able to read sixteen pages of his primer when he came
back. He missed a word or two on the last few pages, but he got
along very well. He had forgotten some of the letters when he
attempted to write them, and his good pronunciation had entirely
disappeared. His speech was as slovenly as it had been when he
first began work. He responded correctly to one command, but
his movements were so slow that several seconds elapsed before there
was any apparent attempt to respond. He had forgotten how to
count by 3's, 5's and 10's although he could still do so by 2's, and he
had to begin over again with his multiplication tables. He had lost
all of the words he had learned to spell.
By the end of the summer he had read forty-six pages in the
primer. He had completed the 2's in the multiplication table and
some of the 3's. He had learned to write the numbers up to 1000,
and he could add and subtract simple numbers involving carrying
by 10's. He had about thirty words upon which he was certain in
spelling, and he wrote legibly.
There had been regular drill on speech work during the summer,
but at the close of the session John was still unable to use his initial
consonants properly. He would do so under compulsion only, and
then only when he had been reminded just before he started to speak.
If he made a mistake, he would not try to correct it himself but would
wait for directions from his teacher. So far the gain was so slight as
to be negligible.
DIAGNOSTIC TEACHING. 63
What sort of a diagnosis can be made in the case of this boy?
He looks normal enough except for an inert expression. His parents
are normal. His sister is entering high school at fifteen. She is a
strong and husky looking girl, well conformed and bright enough for
her age. John does not seem well. He is thin, and he lacks that
something we call energy. He never seems to have strength to give
to his tasks. His mother reports that he has plenty of energy at
home, but the sort of energy she is talking about is not the kind
which lies behind initiative. John has a temper and occasionally
has stubborn fits. He often kicks and yells when he is required to
do something he does not like to do because this sort of objection
has been found successful in avoiding those things he has found
undesirable. His behavior at these times is not a display of energy
in the sense of being supplied with that mysterious asset which makes
for initiative. John makes no effort to do school work for himself.
He has no interest in it, but neither does he show interest in anything
else. His attitude toward the world is a negative one. His teachers
are attempting to stoke a furnace in which there is no fire. He
accepts, but he as readily rejects. The material he is taught does
not stick. There seems to be nothing in the boy to appeal to, nothing
to reach. He is not in revolt, at least as far as his teaching in the
clinic was concerned. His mother reported that he refused to work
for her during the summer, but he showed no tendency of that kind
to his teacher.
The determination of this boy's status is a difficult one. On the
Binet scale he is easily normal, as his mental age very closely approximates his real age. lie has acquired some school work, and there is
every indication that further pushing would result in his acquiring
more school work. His relations with other children are reported
normal, and he must have some competency with his fellows as he
does fairly well at catching and throwing a ball. Many of his
activities are curtailed by over-anxious parents. He has not been
permitted to learn to swim because of their fear of his drowning, and
it seems possible that the dominant personalities of the people at
nome may over-shadow the one weakling and limit to some extent
his natural abilities. It is impossible, however, to account for all
of his defects on this score. Probably it is unwise at this time to
call the boy-feeble-minded, but the prognosis on the basis of what
he has shown intellectually is certainly not that of a normal child.
The boy cannot be expected to make normal progress in school.
He has not done so so far. The attempt to place him in the second
grade this fall has failed, as he did not complete during the spring
and summer enough work to make it possible to certifv him for a
64 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
grade higher than IB, and it seems doubtful whether his proficiency
after a month's vacation will be even IB. There is another reason
why John should be graded lower than IB in his proficiency. A
child who is proficient in IB work is proficient to do that work in a
group. Now John is barely proficient by himself under the constant
eye of his teacher. Will he be able to do his tasks when they are
assigned and he is left to do his work alone? He has never shown
that he is able to do work alone at all. His wavering attention and
general lack of interest will prevent him from doing anything by
himself, even if he has the energy to try. He has never learned to
work alone. He does not do so at home. His mother assists him
in the mornings to dress, and takes care of him as if he were several
years younger. He is not permitted to do things alone.
John's speech defect is also a decided handicap in his school work.
Until the teacher becomes accustomed to hearing him speak, it is
difficult to understand all that he says, and his low tone in speaking
is not satisfactory for the school room. He can do better, but it
takes all of one teacher's time to make him do better. He will not
be able to get that teacher's time in the school room. A speech
defect is also an added disadvantage in that it is difficult for a child
who is not very bright to learn to read properly, for the teacher,
hurried as she is, has to take too much for granted. Words are mispronounced and misunderstood because she does not understand what
is said but hopes they are right. Mostly they are wrong, and the
child never does get his work straightened out.
There is no use suggesting that John should take his place in a
public school. He ought not to be placed among children much
older than he is as he would be in a special class. He cannot compete
with his own age and class. The only thing that can be done is to
place him in a school where children are handicapped as he is, or to
provide a tutor for him. The former scheme has its advantages, as
it will bring out the best initial efforts the boy has, and will not
emphasize the differences between himself and his mates. It will
also remove him from a home environment which cannot but be a
handicap to a child as poorly equipped physically as this boy is, and
who is not able mentally to do more than object to the edict of
creatures so much stronger than is he. He is either over-indulged
or over-dominated. The tutor will teach him, but will not give him
the best opportunity to develop himself.
Such children as John have no place in the public school. The
chance of their further successful development is not great. They
lack the physical stamina which is necessary for those who have to
fight to maintain themselves in this world. If they survive the
DIAGNOSTIC TEACHING. 65
pitfalls of disease, they possess so little initiative that they must
rely upon somebody else to stand between them and the stresses of
life. Whether this boy is placed in an institution for the feebleminded or not, or whether he is adjudged feeble-minded or not, makes
very little difference in the prognosis of the case, for the present
indications are that as he has been a failure in his child's world in the
past, just so may he be expected to prove a failure in the adult world
of the future. He can perform, but he cannot produce. He can
take, but he cannot give.
