A Case of Chronic Bad Spelling? Amnesia Visualise Verbalis, Due to Arrest of Post-Natal Development
====================================================================================================

By Ligiitner Witmer.
In March, 1896, a boy, wliose identity I shall conceal under
the name of Charles Gilman, was so fortunate as to attract to
himself the personal attention and active interest of the grade
teacher of a Philadelphia grammar school. Children in this boy's
class, then designated as the Ninth A Grade, are supposed to be
in their fifth school year. The normal age for this grade is as-
sumed by the school system to be eleven years. Charles Gilman,
however, was fourteen years old. If his classmates were in the
fifth school year, and it is assumed that he entered school at the
normal age of six, he was then in his eighth school year. He had
thus irretrievably lost three years in eight, more than one-third of
his school life. He was seventeen when, in 1899, he had com-
pleted the work of the secondary school, having taken eleven
years to accomplish the work of eight. If we measure intellectual
development in terms of the school progress of the average child,
as appears to be justifiable, Charles Gilman at seventeen years of
age manifested a retardation that amounted to an actual loss
at the end of his school career of three years in eleven.
As a matter of fact, Charles actually began his school career
before he was six years of age. He was, moreover, endowed by
nature with somewhat more than average mental ability, as will
presently be shown. The public funds, the time and labor of
the administrators of education, had been expended in his case
with a return about one-third less than wo have a right to expect
from the results of school instruction. My report will show that
the retardation in school work and the relative ineffectiveness of
the school system in the case of this boy were due to causes that
could havo been removed early in his school life. It indicates
the necessity for the assumption of new functions by the school
authorities in order to meet cases presenting special difficulties.
The bare fact of retardation, when once established, as in
the case of Charles Gilman, should be sufficient to arouse the in-
quiring attention of the grade teacher and principal. It was not
the general retardation, however, that attracted his teacher's at-
tention, but the specific inability to acquire the correct spelling
?f English words. To determine the causes of this persistent bad
(53)
54 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
spelling and to obtain assistance in teaching him. to overcome his
deficiency, his grade teacher, Miss Margaret T. Maguire, brought
him at the age of fourteen to the laboratory of psychology.
In view of his teacher's statement of this deficiency, my ex-
amination naturally had reference to his trouble in spelling. I
asked him first to spell the word "crowd." He spelled it c-r-o-u-d.
Without telling him that this was wrong, I asked him to spell
the word "loud"; he gave this correctly, l-o-u-d. If l-o-u-d spells
"loud," the boy who says c-r-o-u-d spells "crowd" is not deficient
in intelligence, however insufficient may be his training in orthog-
raphy. I then asked him to spell "crow." He gave it correctly,
c-r-o-w. I told him to put a d at the end of this word, and asked
him what the letters c-r-o-w-d spelled. He told me they spelled
'crowed." Again he had made a perfectly logical inference from
a combination of the phonetic elements of the English language.
In this and many other tests, he showed himself to be a boy
above, rather than below, the average in intelligence. Ho was
able to reason; he understood questions and gave satisfactory
answers to them, although the questions involved matters of fact
that had probably never before been brought to his attention. His
powers of expression through spoken language were good.
His reading, however, was as deficient as his spelling. In-
deed, in the accepted meaning of the term, he was absolutely in-
capable of reading a single sentence. The only words that he was
able to pronounce without first spelling were "an," "the," and a
few other monosyllables of not more than three letters. All
other words were spelled letter by letter before he was able to com-
prehend what the symbols stood for; the hesitation was noticeable
as he articulated, either to himself or aloud, the name of each lit-
eral symbol before he combined the sounds in the utterance of
the words they represented. Even such a simple word as "house,"
which he must frequently have met, he was unable to recognize on
sight.
Thus we have to do with a boy of fair intelligence and gen-
eral information commensurate with his age, whose progress in
written language was not greater than that usually attained by
children in the second school year, and whose reading was no better
than that of a child at the very beginning of the acquirement of
this function. He read not only with great slowness, but with
many mistakes. He never read for pleasure, and never took up
a newspaper to see the news. That ho got on as well as ho did
in school work, despite this retardation in written language, was
a tribute to his general intelligence.
A CHRONIC BAD SPELLER. 55
By questioning him and his teacher I learned that his spell-
ing lesson was prepared at home with the help of his mother and
sister. Although he spent hours in preparation, he would mis-
spell more than half of the lesson when dictated to him the follow-
ing day. When copying from the blackboard his teacher reported
that he could never take down more than one syllable at a time,
and his copy showed many blunders. Thus, he would write cone
for "come," and hone for "home,"?a blunder the significance of
which I did not appreciate at that time.
It appeared to me that the retardation in spelling and read-
ing might be due to some special disability of memory. It is
well known that many children have no ear for music, and are
incapable of remembering accurately the sequence of musical
sounds. In other respects, the memory for sounds may be good.
This boy was shown by appropriate tests to have no deficiency
in remembering the sequence of the sounds of letters. He pos-
sessed also an adequate visual memory for simple geometrical fig-
ures and for colors. Thus he could shut his eyes and imagine a
square, or the color blue. He could also visualize, according to
his statement, the appearance of separate letters, but he could not
visualize the appearance of words. It was only with the greatest
difficulty that he could imagine even the short word "cat" as it
looked when written or printed.
Excepting this difficulty in reading, writing and spelling,
geography was the only school subject that gave him trouble, his
teacher thinking that he lacked the visual memory necessary to
locate places correctly on the map. But, as an offset to this ap-
parent deficiency in visualization, ho was good at drawing, which
would seem also to require a degree of visual imagination. In
history, he was reported to be remarkably good, as he followed the
logical sequence of events readily. He was apt in science work,
being quick at finding causes for observed effects.
My examination had, therefore, revealed,?
1. That he was equal to, if not above, the average boy in
general intelligence.
2. That he was able to express his thoughts adequately in
sP?ken language.
3. That he had a good memory for sounds.
4. That he had a good visual memory for color and simple
geometrical figures and even for separate letters.
5. That he had no visual inemorv of words, and could not
read.
6. That he spelled correctly only such words as ho could
spell from the sound of the component letters.
56 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
When I first saw Charles, he was a fine-looking boy, fairly
strong and healthy, rather large for his age, for he came of a
family in which the men averaged six feet. He was of German
descent; his parents were educated and provided amply for the
care and education of their children. The boy was well-mannered
and respectful, evidencing satisfactory home training. There
was no history of any physical disorder, disease, or accident, likely
to account for his defect. His pedagogical history showed that
he had been first sent to a public kindergarten, and from there he
proceeded to the primary school. Here he did not get on well, and
his mother, thinking this was on account of the teacher, placed
him in the kindergarten for another year. From there he en-
tered the public school system again, and passed on from grade
to grade, until at the time I saw him he had reached the second
half of the fifth school year, being in the Ninth A Grade, with a
record of having failed of promotion three times. His teachers
affirmed that he was serious and industrious in all the work of
the school.
I first thought that inefficient school training was responsible
for the deficiency in spelling and reading. This conclusion seemed
to be evidenced by the report of his teacher, which showed that
since the second school year he probably read on the average not
more than one minute a day. He prepared no reading lesson at
home, and had not taken a reading book home since he had left
the primary school. He had never written a spelling exercise;
he studied his spelling lesson orally. "When we undertook his
training he was compelled for the first time to write his spelling
lesson, and to copy over and over again words that he had mis-
spelled.
These considerations suggested the necessity of a special
training of his visual memory to develop correct habits of spell-
ing; in order to improve his reading, he was given exercises also
in the rapid apprehension or perception of words. During tho
spring of 1896, the effort was made to give him this training in
connection with his school work. His grade teacher, however, was
not able to devote sufficient time to this one boy to make an
effectual attempt at overcoming his deficiency. In the fall of
1896, he began to come regularly to the psychological laboratory
for instruction in spelling and reading. Pedagogical treatment
had no sooner commenced than his absurd mistakes in reading
(for example, he would read "was" as saw, "weather" as water),
and his uncertainty in pointing rapidly to individual letters led
me to suspect some ocular defect. I soon discovered that the
A CHRONIC BAD SPELLER. 57
steady fixation of a finger, especially when held within a distance
of three feet, caused the finger to appear double. If I held up
two or three fingers before him at an easily recognizable distance,
he showed great difficulty and hesitation in distinguishing the
number. Only after my discovery of this fact did he inform me
that in trying to write, the letters of a word he was tracing would
frequently double under his pen; in looking at a printed page, let-
ters would often double and the page usually looked blurred and
indistinct. He had never mentioned this trouble to his teachers
or parents; he no doubt thought it was a natural phenomenon
of vision. ITo one suspected an ocular defect, for his work in
drawing at school had been good, and at home he exercised con-
siderable skill in fine embroidery work. I did not myself inquire
into the possible existence of an eye defect until I began to
teach him to read and spell. Superficial tests of each eye sepa-
rately had shown that his vision was not sufficiently below normal
to account for his deficiency in spelling and reading. I appreciate
at the present time what I may perhaps be pardoned for having
been slow to recognize at the beginning of my work with these chil-
dren, that the school record alone was sufficient to justify the
recommendation of a visit to the oculist. In fact, I would ven-
ture this opinion to-day in the case of a boy who persistently drops
a stroke in the writing of certain letters, as for example the m
in "come," especially if this occurs in writing from a copy before
him.
As soon as I discovered the condition of double vision, he
was sent to Dr. Posey, who found that the boy had practically
normal vision in each eye, but that he saw double because he
lacked the power to direct the two eyes co-ordinately upon the
same point in space, e. g., a letter, the left eye looking lower than
the right. This was due to a defect of the external muscles that
control the movements of the eye-balls in their sockets. The mus-
cular insufficiency was corrected, as nearly as was possible at the
time, by the wearing of proper glasses. This improved his visual
perception. He was now able not only to see clearly individual let-
ters, but also to distribute his visual attention over several words.
To see a word or a phrase requires a greater mental and
physical effort than to see an individual letter. By making a great
effort, he had been able to control the co-ordinate direction of the
two eyes, so as to see a letter single, even though only for a moment.
The least fatigue or relaxation of visual attention allowed the
eyes to deviate and caused the letter to appear double. When he
attempted to distribute his attention over an entire word or a group
58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of words, he could no longer make the effort necessary to overcome
the muscular weakness and preserve the co-ordinate direction of
the two eyes. If the muscular defect had been greater, it would
have been better for him; he would then have had a permanent
squint and learned to overlook or suppress the images of one eye,
as I believe he must have done when exercising his skill in em-
broidery and drawing.
Visual perception was now approximately normal, but he
could not yet read or spell any better than he had done before.
Visual imagination was still in the same state of retardation. It
is through the training of visual memory and imagination that
we acquire facility in reading and spelling. Reading, for exam-
ple, requires more than good eye-sight: the posterior lobes of the
brain (the visual centers) must be stocked with the memories of
words and trained to the ready apprehension (called technically
apperception) of the literal symbols of language. The brain
of this boy, so far as reading and spelling were concerned, had
received practically no training during his entire school career.
He was fourteen years of age, but the centers of the brain which
are concerned with the function of spelling and reading were as
undeveloped as those of a child of six or seven. It was as neces-
sary as ever to teach him to read and spell, but this instruction
could be undertaken with some hope of success. lie could now
see words, and his brain could be trained to store and use the
visual images of the words that he saw.
The special training, which had been interrupted during the
examination and treatment of the eyes, was again undertaken
through weekly visits to the psychological clinic, and almost daily
instruction by Miss Maguire. For six months a persistent course
of instruction was given in rapid reading, in order to induce him
to "jump" at words without previously spelling them. Some
attention, but not quite so much, was given to spelling. It seemed
to me that the ability to read was more essential to continued prog-
ress in the school room than the ability to spell. A careful record
was made of the work undertaken and accomplished from week
to week and frequent tests were given to determine the amount
and character of progress. Even after regular treatment under
my direction had ceased, he continued to come to the laboratory
at intervals for examination. I am able to present the following
brief history of progressive improvement by selecting a few sig-
nificant details from my recorded data.
The reading lessons began in the latter part of November. At
first the fourth reader was used. In two hours he had read only
A CHRONIC BAD SPELLER. 59
two pages. It was still necessary for him to spell every word
before its recognition. The effort to get even a short word with-
out spelling it was accompanied by great mental fatigue. In the
second lesson an easier reader was employed in order to familiar-
ize him with such words as could, may, would, should, have, etc.
In this lesson, he recognized at sight had, am, spring and gave.
Was, however, was frequently called saw, and for was read of.
In the lesson of a week later, the tendency to spell phonet-
ically was slightly less marked, although no decided improvement
was to be observed. A trial of Hawthorne's "Wonder-Book"
proved this simple text to be too difficult for use as a reader.
In copying from his note-book, he wrote soas-bubble instead of
"soap-bubble." lie took one minute to discover his mistake,
although he wrote soap correctly when asked to write the word
separately.
On December 7th, he recognized at sight happy and following.
This was the first successful attempt to grasp at sight a word of
more than one syllable and was considered an encouraging im-
provement.
On December 15th he misspelled six of fifteen words, though
they were all words that had occurred in his reading lesson of
the previous days. This, however, was thought to be a very flat-
tering tribute to the methods employed, in view of the number
of words he had previously been accustomed to misspell after care-
ful preparation.
On December 19th he was tried without his glasses. He was
compelled to spell over a large number of words and seemed
unable to phrase at all. The word "leaves" he called heaves
three times, and was surprised when he found that the first letter
"was I instead of h.
On January 19th he read in three minutes 203 words with
bis glasses and 120 without them.
On February 4tli he read a page and a half in eight minutes.
In reading the last half page a second time he stopped only four
times to spell words, reading otherwise in a natural and easy,
though slow, manner. On this day he recognized at a glance and
Pronounced correctly all of the following words: observe, depends,
discoveries, qualities, progress, creature, knowledge, house, suc-
cess, products, beautiful.
On February 9th he was tested by exposing single words for
one second only. The words service, poor, never, master, notice,
anywhere, scarlet, again, he recognized on a single exposure. The
words interested, busied, warming, reflect, leaned, require, were
recognized in two exposures, and the word applaud required three.
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
In March his improvement in spelling was very marked and
his ability to read underStandingly greatly advanced. He reported
with elation that he had even read to members of his family
something of interest from the newspapers.
In April his special training ceased, because other interests
occupied the time of his instructors.
He was given exercises for home practice, and was directed
to read aloud, either to himself or to others, provided he could
persuade them to listen to him. He came to the laboratory after
this only at infrequent intervals. When I saw him in May, he
told me that he could get his lessons much more easily than he
used to. He reported that he was beginning to read at times for
pleasure, and his grade teacher, of whom I inquired, said that liis
spelling was somewhat improved. I noticed that in reading ho
often hesitated when he thought he did not know some long word,
but if I insisted on his making the attempt to pronounce it with-
out spelling, he would be surprised to find that he could read the
word perfectly. He still showed at this time some of the curious
confusions and transpositions that I have observed in many cases
of this kind. Thus he would read "especially" as particularly, or
vice versa. In spelling the word "that" he would write litat.
When seen on October 20, 1897, he complained that his
eyes were not much better than when he first put on glasses.
Examination revealed the continued presence of rather severe
ocular symptoms, and he was again sent to the oculist, who found
it necessary to perform an operation.
On December 31, 1897, he showed a little, but not much, im-
provement over the stage of development that he had reached the
preceding April, when the special training ceased. He required five
minutes to read 2G8 words of an editorial in a newspaper printed
in not very clear type. He was able, however, to read instantane-
ously many difficult words, as resolutions, opposite, etc. Boylike,
he had neglected to follow out my instructions to read aloud daily
and write out his spelling. As a spelling test, he wrote a para-
graph of an editorial, which is reproduced with the spelling of
each word as he wrote it down from dictation.
We aften hear it said that such people have oncly themselves to
blaim for the irksomness of their existance. Strong and encgoratic
natures can scarcely fanin (fathom) weelcness and certainly find it
hard to simpathise with or exchusc them. They lay the entire blame to
the indervidual that suffers himself to be thus overcome and if they
pity him it is with a pity largely minglicd with contempt. Now whilo
it ia undoutaly true that much of such misery may be distinctly traced
A CHRONIC BAD SPELLER. 61
to suflfiness (selfishness) or shallowness or lethoge (lethargy) of the
indevedual it is also true that others that have come into personal
contract with him generally have a decide share in the responsibility.
On January 15, 1899, he was seventeen years of age and in
the Twelfth Grade, from which he expected to be promoted in
vJune. He had not failed of promotion from the time when wo
"undertook his training. He reported that he did not find reading
very difficult, that he was fond of Cooper's novels, and he spoke
with enthusiasm of a poem which he had recently read. He, how-
ever, did not think that lie could read well enough to ask anyone
to listen to him.
After graduating from the grammar school in June, 1899,
Charles went to a school of industrial art, where his talent for
drawing enabled him to do excellent work in one of the textile
departments. He was compelled to leave the technical school owing
to the fact that lie developed tuberculosis of the muscles and joints.
When I saw him on July 9, 1903, his physical condition was
pitiable. He was over six feet tall and weighed only 120 pounds.
He was compelled to walk with a cane, and walking fatigued him
greatly. In his disabled condition, he found a great deal of
pleasure in his recently acquired ability to read. He said that
he preferred to read a book himself to having someone read
to him. He had read Dumas and Balzac, and claimed to have
read a novel of about 250 pages in the course of an afternoon,
lie no longer needed to spell any word letter by letter before
lie could pronounce it; if he had difficulty, as sometimes hap-
pened with long words, lie could usually get them by combining
the syllables. In reading a long and rather difficult passage, he
failed completely with only one word, "unctuous," and this he
could not pronounce even after he had spelled it. His conver-
sation was tliat of a very well-informed and entirely normal young
*nan. A letter written to me about this time was well phrased,
contained no mistakes in spelling, and the handwriting was good.
In January of this year, he died of the malady from which
he suffered during the last six years of his life.
I think it well to consider a few points that present them-
selves in the study of this case and the conclusions that may
he drawn from them.
It is not unusual to find a case of chronic bad spelling cited
to instance the inefficient work of the school system, or to dem-
onstrate the ineffectiveness of some special method of instruc-
tion. I cannot make too emphatic the statement that a single case
of bad spelling, or even many cases, does not furnish a legitimate
62 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
basis for the criticism of school systems and methods. For one
boy who is backward in learning to spell, there are fifty boys sit-
ting with him in the same class room who acquire this facility
readily.
Although the grade teachers and school system cannot be held
responsible, there are underlying causes which may be discovy
ered and removed, and these causes are operative in a large num-
ber of cases. Thus, when this boy was in the Twelfth Grade,
the grade teacher reported that there were five or six other boys
in the class as deficient in spelling as Charles Gilman.
Some satisfactory method must be devised for the discovery
of these cases and for the study of the causes of retardation in
each individual case. Until such a system is devised, the most
effective means to discover and treat these cases is a rigid in-
sistence upon the requirements of promotion. If these children
are held in a given grade until they have performed the work
of that grade, no matter how many times they fail of pro-
motion, teachers, principals, superintendents and parents will
awaken to a recognition of the problem that confronts the school
authorities in certain cases and a realization of the possibility
of its solution only through the study and special training of
the individual child. This will lead necessarily to the forma-
tion of ungraded classes. In time it will be found that every
school with an enrolment of one thousand children requires at
least one ungraded class. These classes should be in the hands
of especially expert teachers; the number of pupils to one teacher
should be limited to not more than fifteen or twenty, and the
object should be to study and train the children with reference
to their special deficiencies. If Charles Gilman had been kept
in the first or second grade until he had been taught to read as
well as a boy in those grades should read, his ocular defect would
have been discovered. If the mother or teacher had possessed
the knowledge and experience that the study of cases like his will
give, he would have been sent early in life to the oculist, his defect
of vision could have been entirely corrected, and he would have
made normal progress through the grades. Ilis history shows the
presence of ocular deficiency from the first school year. Not hav-
ing been then removed, by the time he had reached fourteen years
of age it was too late for him to make up all that lie had lost.
He never acquired normal facility in reading and spelling. He
was in the position of the adult who endeavors to acquire a
new language. Except in very unusual cases, no one can acquire,
after adult age has been reached, the same facility and finish in
A CHRONIC BAD SPELLER. 63
a foreign language tliat he has attained in his native tongue or in
a foreign language learned in early childhood.
The case presents certain points of psychological and physio-
logical interest. A boy of fourteen years is shown to be deficient
in spelling, in reading, and, as appears from my record, in the
intellectual apprehension of ideas obtained from reading. There
were no symptoms, however, of other deficiencies of intellect.
The study of injuries to the adult brain shows that if the injury
affects a definitely restricted portion of the brain, the result
may be a loss of the ability to read, with the preservation of
other functions connected with the faculty of language. The
patient who has lost the ability to read, a condition known as
alexia, may be quite able to understand others when they speak or
read, and to express his ideas through articulate language. This
partial loss of the faculty of language is the result of the loss of
the acquired memories of the visual symbols of language.
Aphasia, as a loss of the faculty of speech is called, is in these
cases a partial amnesia, or loss of memory. In some cases the
amnesia may be limited to the loss of a few words only. In other
cases it extends to all letters and words. This boy had not lost
any of his memories of words. He had never acquired them,
and seemed incapable of acquiring them in a large and sufficient
measure. Ilis defect of language did not extend to the memories
of words which lie heard or which he himself spoke. He under-
stood perfectly spoken language and expressed his ideas in appro-
priate articulate speech. He manifested what I think we have a
right to call a visual aphasia, dependent upon an arrest in the
development of visual memory for words,?that is, he showed a
visual verbal amnesia. His visual memory for other objects than
"words, and even for letters, so long as the letters were not to be re-
membered in a given sequence, was good. The degree of visual
aphasia from which this boy suffered at fourteen years of age and
from which he had not entirely recovered at the time of his death,
ls quite normal in a child of six or seven years. This condition in
the normal child is overcome by training, an important feature of
^hich is the stocking of the brain with the visual memories of
M'oiVls. The history of the case which I have recited presents a
30y whose brain did not acquire these visual memories, and could
n^t receive the training necessary to a normal exercise of the
Visual functions of language.
The cause of this failure to acquire the visual memories of
^ords I have already indicated. The clear visual image of the
Word is essential for the storing of the brain with verbal mem-
64 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ories and for training in the visual functions of language. His
ocular defect made the formation of clear visual images of words
impossible. When this defect was removed at fourteen years of
age, the formative period was past, the time when the brain most
easily retains and elaborates its impressions. The arrest of visual
development for a period of nine years could not be entirely over-
come at this later period by even the best of training. Many
physical defects, which are in no way directly related to cerebral
deficiency, will make it difficult or impossible for the brain to
pass through the various stages of normal development. Defects
of hearing and naso-pharyngeal obstruction, especially when they
lead to defects of articulation, frequently cause a retardation
or arrest in the acquisition of the articulatory, auditory and even
visual elements of language. I would characterize the condition
of Charles Gilman as a case of visual aphasia, or visual verbal
amnesia, due to an arrest of post-natal development, the result of
a defect in the sensory visual process.
There is, however, another possible explanation which has
been suggested in a number of cases that I have seen. The visual
centers of a child of six years must not only be subjected to
training in order to evoke normal development, they must also be
susceptible of training. Some brains may be congenitally incapa-
ble of developing the normal visual functions of language. If such
cases exist, the condition is exactly analogous to one that is fre-
quently found with respect to the function of hearing called
musical audition. There can be little doubt that many otherwise
normal brains give evidence of lacking musical capacity. Those
who possess such brains, we say, lack a musical ear. It may bo
that perfectly normal children lack the spelling eye, as other chil-
dren lack the musical ear, and that the former can be as little
trained to spell correctly as the latter to play or sing; but if such
children exist, I have yet to meet the first clear case. My experi-
ence leads me always to examine the eyesight of a bad speller
who is otherwise free from mental or physical defect and who has
enjoyed satisfactory school training, even though such examina-
tion appears to be unnecesary and a mere matter of form. I have
found in such cases that the chronic bad spelling is invariably
associated with some form of defective vision. I am not con-
vinced, however, that the bad spelling is necessarily caused by the
eye defect.
