Retardation Through Neglect in Children of the Rich
====================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. I. No. 6. November 15, 1907.

By Lightnee, Witmek.
Mental retardation must not be considered as the equiv-
alent of mental defect. In many cases, doubtless, retardation
rests upon a defect of the brain or some other physical defect, the
result of heredity, accident or disease, but in some cases the re-
tardation is purely functional and may be a consequence of disuse
through neglect. A normal child of six years is possessed of a
group of mental and moral qualities characteristic of his age and
sex. These qualities change into others through the acquisition of
new or the loss of old qualities and through modification due to
growth. The normal child of nine years of age differs from the
normal child of six. If a child who was entirely normal at the age
of six remains in the possession of the same mental and moral
qualities when he has reached the age of nine, he presents the con-
dition of retardation. This retardation may involve one or more,
possibly the entire group of qualities. A single quality may have a
very potent influence upon the course of intellectual develop-
ment. Thus, the central mental process determining the course
of intellectual evolution is attention. The development of concen-
trated attention results partly from the genetic process alone,?
that is, it is a growth from within,?and partly from the environ-
ment in the form of school training and home discipline. Through
neglect of proper training, the young man of twenty-one may find
his poAvers of attention inadequate for the proper fulfillment of the
requirements of a college course and more appropriate to a child
of eight or ten. He -is suffering from a partial arrest of devel-
opment, the result of neglect. An arrest in the development
of attention will carry with it an arrested development of the
intellectual processes.
The children of the rich and especially of the very rich,
are as apt to show the results of neglect as are the children
of the very poor. According to Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler,
the child of rich parents is often too seriously handicapped
(157)
158 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
by the effects of home life and school training to profit by the
opportunities afforded by the college, into which in Dr. Butler's
words, "he is hoisted over the entrance examinations," through
the aid of special coaches and "then left to his own limited and
rather dingy resources." "The rich boy," he says, "who receives
a good education and is trained to be a self-respecting, responsible
member of the body politic, might in time share on equal terms
the chance of the poor boy to become a man of genuine influence
and importance on his own account. Just now, by the neglect
or worse of his parents, the very rich boy is apt to be relegated
to the limbo of curiosities and too often of decadents." The
responsibility rests primarily, in Dr. Butler's opinion, "upon the
folly and indifference of the fathers and the vanity and false
pride of the mothers." But this responsibility is shared by the
fashionable private school and the private tutor. With Dr. Butler,
I believe that the home and school, chiefly through neglect of
discipline, permit the minds of many children to remain un-
developed during the formative period. The discipline that is
required is not merely that which makes for obedience. It is
the discipline of work and strenuous effort, the discipline that
trains the memory, the will, the attention, and forms habits of
work which permit the children to assume progressively more diffi-
cult tasks.
The motive that inspires President Butler's criticism is social,
and has in view a high standard of citizenship; he desires
the children of the rich to exert an influence upon society and
feel a responsibility commensurate with their wealth. The prob-
lem of the child psychologist and trainer of individual children is
comprehended within somewhat narrower limits. It is training
to the highest degree of efficiency and adaptability. Each child
receives at birth a brain endowed with possibilities of mental and
moral development up to a theoretically assignable limit. Like
a field, the brain must be tilled and cultivated to bring forth a rich
harvest. Bather like a race horse, it must be nourished and exer-
cised, disciplined and trained, in order to develop all its latent
capacities. The better our methods of brain or mind culture,
the more efficient will be the product. The community suffers
a great loss if brains of unusual capacity, or if brains of
even average capacity, are allowed through neglect to arrive at
maturity?after which time little can be done?with capacities
much below what we have a right to expect from our knowledge
of the conditions of heredity and environment.
It is through a study of individual cases that I believe we
RETARDATION THROUGH NEGLECT. 159
shall be able to point out the causes of this deficiency, or perhaps
I should call it inefficiency, at maturity. The case that I propose
to report will present a history of failure, but failure may be as
instructive as success, provided the conditions have been care-
fully studied and the nexus of causes and effects subjected to
adequate analysis.
In October of last year a well-known physician invited me
to consult with him concerning the appropriate mental and
physical treatment to be accorded a puzzling case which had
come under his observation. A young man, then twenty-one
years of age, had made three successive efforts to pass the entrance
examinations of   College and had failed. The third and
last effort had been made in the summer of 1906, after he had
spent a complete year at what is rightly regarded as one of the
best coaching schools in this country. His ordinary conver-
sation revealed no trace of mental deficiency, nor would his
physical appearance awaken any suspicion of degeneracy. It
seemed that a careful mental and physical examination ought
to reveal the treatment required to enable him successfully to
pass these examinations.
With the physician I made a mental and physical examina-
tion extending over several days. Ilis pedagogical history re-
vealed that he had first attended a fashionable school conducted
by a woman principal, and that he had then gone to one of the best
and most fashionable college preparatory schools in the country,
where he had spent four years. Boys'wlio had been in his class
at this school were then in the sophomore class of   College.
Ilis retardation was ascribed to the fact that in 1903 he had
suffered severely from grippe, and one lung had become affected.
This compelled him to leave school, and to pass the winters
of 1903, 1904, and part of 1905 in the South. Here he spent
a great part of his time in outdoor life, and was supposed to
be preparing for entrance to college under the instruction of
private tutors. His tutors were not regarded as very efficient',
either by himself or his father. In the spring of 1901, with this
private preparation, he first tried the entrance examinations and
failed in all branches except history, in which he obtained and
continued to hold two credits. In 1905 he took all the examina-
tions except history, and failed in every branch. In June, 1906,
after one year's attendance at the coaching school, he tried every
subject in the spring examination, excepting that for which he had
credits, and failed in every branch attempted. In the fall, how-
ever, after a complete rest during the summer and with only
160 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
one week's review, lie tried tlie examinations in English, algebra
and geometry, and succeeded in making a pass mark in the last
named subject.
His intelligence appeared to be normal, as revealed in ordi-
nary conversation. If one engaged him in what approached a
more serious conversation, he was found to be wofully ignorant,
but this would not be considered worthy of special comment by
any one who is acquainted with the stock of general information
possessed by many young men who are thought to be fitted for
college, and by young women who are presumed by the teachers
of fashionable schools to be trained for social life. This young
man was well able to conduct himself with credit at an afternoon
tea.
His memory for names and dates was reported to be very
deficient. Thus, his father claimed that he was often unable to
give the names of persons with whom he was well acquainted,
for example, guests who were staying at his father's house, al-
though he might bo able to describe their individual characteris-
tics accurately. He had presumably been prepared for three dif-
ferent examinations in Latin, and yet when I asked him what he
had read, he was able to tell me little more than ''Vergil, Cicero,
and Cassar." He could not name any oration of Cicero ho had read.
He said he remembered the oration against Catiline, and that he
had read three books of the Aeneid, and all of Caesar's Commenta-
ries, but he gave me this information only in answer to specific
questions, in which I first named what I supposed ho must have
studied. At the time I saw him he was reading with his instruc-
tor in English, Pope's Epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot, but ho could not
tell me anything more about it than that it contained some refer-
ence to Addison.
This verbal amnesia prepared mo for the discovery that he
was deficient in spelling. In a brief dictation I found such words
as scpcrale, antisipate, purspirc, and hcven. His writing was
poor, unformed, and slow. It bore distinct marks of lack of train-
ing. I asked him to write croud, and crowd. He was not certain
which was the correct spelling, but inclined to crowd. He spelled
correctly ivhich and witch, and knew the proper use of each form.
He did not know whether rehaf, relief, or rclcif was correct, but
inclined to releaf. I gave him the correct spelling of these words
in the morning, and found that he spelled them all correctly
in the afternoon. lie said that he remembered them from the
drill I had given him in the morning.
His reading showed the same remarkable lack of efficiency
RETARDATION THROUGH NEGLECT. 161
and drill as his writing and spelling. He delayed over even very
small words. His reading was that of a child in the third school
year, devoid of all expression, with frequent substitution of words
that were not at all like the words on the page. Thus, he read
threshold for shoulder, open for upon, and heel for hill. These
errors suggested deficient eye-sight, badly trained attention, and
bad tutoring. His articulation in reading was very poor and
quite different from that which he employed in conversation.
The mental examination had shown easy distraction of atten-
tion. I tested this with numerals, calling out groups of five, six,
seven, and eight numerals. He never failed in a test of thirty
consecutive trials on a group of five numerals, but he often failed
on a group of six numerals, and never succeeded in getting a
group of eight numerals correctly. I considered the results of
this test showed that his memory span was normal, but that atten-
tion and interest rapidly flagged.
This deficiency of attention was shown in a more striking
manner in testing him with a line of verse,?the iambic penta-
meter of Milton's "Paradise Lost." I covered up the printed
page and exposed one line at a time for a fraction of a second.
The first time I did this he read the line perfectly; in fact, he
made no mistakes in the first five lines read, but on the sixth line
he made a mistake, and during the entire test he never after-
ward was able to hold his attention to the task of reading cor-
rectly the words of a line.
This condition is one that has been called aprosexia, an
inability to give sustained, concentrated attention. It is more or
less characteristic of the attention of the young child, but school
training and the progress of mental development should bring
with it a capacity to sustain and concentrate the attention.
Aprosexia was first described as a mental symptom associated with
adenoids. This young man's attention was, therefore, one of
arrested development, and led immediately to the suspicion of
the possible existence of adenoids. The condition of aprosexia,
however, is indistinguishable from fatigue. The child whose
attention wanders and who loses interest quickly may be the
victim of a rapidly generated fatigue which may come from other
causes than arrested development or adenoids. In this case,
however, adenoids had been present for many years, and had been
removed only two years before, when he was nineteen years of age.
Following the removal of the adenoids, he grew from three to four
inches in height, and his weight increased from one hundred
and five to one hundred and forty pounds. At the time of the
1G2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
examination lie was somewhat under weight, his height being
five feet eleven inches. He had formerly suffered from ear aches,
but not for the last two or three years. Before the removal of the
adenoids he was a mouth breather, and much troubled with colds.
His digestion was poor, and he complained of stomach phe-
nomena, especially of black spots before the eyes. He slept
well. He was fond of exercise and fresh air, and believed that
city life caused him to diminish in well being. He said he still
had affected tonsils on coming to the city. Knee jerks were
normal, or but slightly exaggerated, the right slightly greater
than the left. He had good station and gait, though the body
was rather poorly balanced on the hips; there was some asym-
metry of the trunk and a slight compensatory lateral curvature of
the spine. He complained of nervousness, but it was more like the
restlessness of ennui. The only marked sign of nervousness was
a state of mental confusion, sometimes approaching collapse when
he was called upon for any kind of mental test; as for example,
to pass an examination. He thought that in this condition he for-
got what he knew quite well. He considered himself handicapped
in his examinations by his limited vocabulary, his deficiency
in spelling, and his lack of facility in writing.
Expert opinion is desirable in almost every case of retarda-
tion. In this case it was especially called for, owing to the absence
of any pronounced mental or physical symptom indicating a lead-
ing cause for retardation. The examination of specialists showed
the naso-pharynx to be hyperaemic but free from obstruction, and
the tonsils were not much enlarged; no adenoids were recog-
nizable on ordinary examination. There was slight retraction of
the ear drums, a catarrhal otitis media non-progressive, caused by
adenoids. Hearing for the voice was normal, as shown by the
whisper test. For the watch it was reduced to for each ear;
there was slightly reduced bone conduction for all forks. Exam-
ination of the eyes showed nothing but a slight far-sightedness,
for which the constant wearing of glasses was recommended, long
enough at least to note the effect. Examination of the heart
and other organs gave no indication of defect.
Physically, therefore, he was given what amounted to a
clean bill of health. This made a further mental examination
all the more necessary. I therefore spent two days in the coaching
school, during one of which I observed him at his work in the
several class rooms. Even if he had been a clever and hard-
working student, he required, in my judgment, at least two or
three years' preparation in order to pass the entrance examinations
RETARDATION THROUGH NEGLECT. 163
of any reputable college. His instructors, however, were unani-
mous in the belief that after a year's work he could be admitted
to College, at least with conditions, if he would only devote
himself exclusively to his studies. That his coaches could enter-
tain this belief when the boy was deficient in even the elementals
of a common school education came as a startling revelation to
me of the ease with which boys, having no real preparation for
academic life, can yet be trained to jump the barrier of the
entrance examinations.
The instructor of mathematics insisted that his work in this
branch was good. He claimed that he knew enough to pass the
entrance examinations in algebra and plane geometry, and that
if it had not been for stage fright he would have passed both
these examinations the previous June; whereas he had failed in
both in June and had passed the examination in geometry in
September, only after a summer's rest. The instructor thought
him better prepared in algebra than in geometry; he denied that
he had observed any noticeable lapses of memory, nor had he
observed the attacks of fatigue. The chief complaint was directed
to a lack of steadiness in his work and to the distraction of his
attention by his family, his sports and his social obligations.
The instructor of French was very optimistic. He felt that
Elmer (as I shall call him), was able to read French well, but
that he had a phonetic difficulty, which he had observed in very
many boys. He did not think that Elmer's case was worse than
that of other boys; he felt that he could get him through his exam-
inations in elementary and advanced French on five hours of
instruction a week. It is probable that Elmer had made so little
progress in French that the instructor failed to observe the limita-
tions of his memory.
The hopelessness of endeavoring to get him into college
was brought home, to me at least, when it came to his Latin. He
had prepared a written exercise which required him to use a
number of verbs in the first person. He gave them all in the
third person, and seemed quite indifferent when his error was
pointed out. Toward the end of the hour I asked the instructor
to have him translate a passage from Csesar. His knowledge of
the vocabulary appeared to me very deficient, and the evidence
of defective memory was conclusive. His Latin instructor did not
believe that he could prepare him to pass the entrance examinations
in Latin if he kept 011 with all the other work he was then taking
at the school. He claimed that Elmer had an ability to translate,
but no ability to acquire the exact grammatical forms. I per-
164: THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ceived from my examination that lie was an exaggerated type of
the boy all teachers dread. Such a boy translates a passage flu-
ently and with a quite commendable approximation to its meaning,
but he will make a few glaring mistakes that show a faulty knowl-
edge of the grammar. A future participle, let us say, is translated
in his flowing, slipshod fashion as a past participle, despite the
fact that the sense of the passage as well as the construction
suffers. A review of the conjugations of the verbs suggests itself
as desirable. Teach him the first conjugation and he learns
this satisfactorily; teach him the second and he learns this with
apparent ease; teach him the third and then review him on the
first, the discovery is made that he has already lost some of
this. After he has learned the fourth conjugation, it will be
found that he has lost very much of the first and some of the
second and third. lie is then taken through all the conjugations
again and, depending upon the amount of patience possessed by
his teacher, he will receive a more or less protracted drill in the
grammar. Finally the task of teaching him the exact grammatical
forms- will be given up for the time being, and he is put to trans-
lating again, in the hope that his memory, by some happy accident
of growth, may overtake his understanding.
This difficulty is either a specific form of amnesia, an ina-
bility to establish a memory for the paradigms of a language,
or else it is due to faulty methods of education and to deficient
attention. It is not an easy matter to prove the existence of a
specific form of congenital amnesia verbalis. It would require
us to find a boy whom in early years we had attempted to train
by aid of the most approved methods and with whom we had,
nevertheless, failed. I have under my care at the present time
a boy who appears to present this condition; he seems quite
unable to acquire the visual forms of language, although he is
facile enough in ordinary conversation and has fair intelligence.
But in the case of this young man, the matter is not clear, owing
to the fact that we have a positive history of inefficient educa-
tional methods and of defective training of the attention. The
experiment had never been satisfactorily made to determine
whether there was in his case a real inability to memorize gram-
matical forms; he had always pressed on to translation before
he had acquired the elements of the grammar.
In his English work the defect of memory, which appears
as an amnesia verbalis, was well marked. He could not form a
simple sentence. He had practically no knowledge of grammar
and it seemed almost impossible to teach him any. He was
RETARDATION THROUGH NEGLECT. 165
extremely deficient in spelling, and no amount of training
appeared to increase his accuracy. In addition to the lack of
memory for spelling, he had a lack of personal conviction that
he was right. If he spelled a word correctly, and I asked him,
"Are you sure it is right ?" I could always make him uncertain,
and this was the case with the most common words. It seemed to
me that it would be necessary in teaching him orthography, or
indeed any other branch of instruction, to train him into some-
thing like self-reliance. He did not offer active resistance; there
was no evidence of what is called negativism, but resistance came
in the shape of apathy.
This indifference, apathy, or lack of mental energy, was
partly temperamental, but it appeared also under conditions that
suggested fatigue. On the day that I followed him about from
room to room, I observed that he did fairly good work the first
period, and held out almost for the entire hour. His teacher was
an excellent one, interesting, rapid in the moves that he made
to attract the attention, and able to draw a good deal out of a pupil
in the way of energy. The second hour, the boy was less alive
at the start, and very rapidly lost interest in his work. Before
half of the hour was gone, he was mentally inert, apathetic,
mechanical in his answers, easily confused, and really indifferent
as to whether he was right or wrong, and yet non-resistive,
patiently following as well as he could. During the third hour
his instructor was again one who was unusually capable of
awakening interest and attention, and for a brief period, about
fifteen minutes, the boy seemed shaken into life, but soon a
condition of mental somnolence, almost of stupor, ensued. The
tutor kept on with his work, every bit of it in my opinion worse
than useless. At the end of the morning's work the boy's face
lacked all expression, his eye, lustre. He had the dull, vacant
expression of one afflicted with dementia prsecox. It was only
when he was about to go, and I spoke to him of his week-end visit
to his family, that his face brightened and regained a look of
intelligence.
His day's work at this forcing school consisted of four hours
in the morning and two in the afternoon. I resolved upon a
decided change of program. In the first place, I cut off the two
afternoon hours, leaving him the four hours of the morning only.
This cut out two subjects in which he would be required to pass
examinations. I felt that we could not afford to take the risk
with all six subjects. It also appeared to me that he could not
stand a period of one hour. I therefore instructed his tutors
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to consider a full period's work as forty-five minutes. The remain-
ing fifteen minutes of each hour were to be devoted to gymnastic
work in the gymnasium, light exercises in the school room with
the windows open, or to relaxation and rest. If the fifteen
minutes in each hour did not suffice to overcome the effects of
fatigue, then I advised a further encroachment on the study
period; and I gained the father's consent to have him excused
for the day at any time when his condition seemed to unfit him
for work. Skilful as these tutors were in the work of cramming
knowledge into an unwilling brain, they were incapable of judg-
ing when the moment of fatigue arrived, and on subsequent
occasions I saw the boy working under conditions which I con-
sidered far from hygienic.
The afternoon was to be devoted to his physical well-being,
and to the preparation of his studies for the next day. There
was every reason to believe that the hour and a half which ho pro-
fessed to spend in preparing his lessons for the next day was
perhaps unconsciously wasted. I therefore engaged a young man
as tutor in the afternoon. I took a great deal of care in his
selection, and mapped out a definite program. My instructions
were that Elmer should get his lunch at one o'clock on the com-
pletion of the morning's work and should meet the tutor at two
o'clock. The tutor was to go with the boy to his country home,
to see that he spent as much of the afternoon as possible in the
open air and that he gave two hours during the afternoon to the
preparation of his work for the next day. The tutor was to
arrange his work to suit the actual conditions; if Elmer was work-
ing well, he was to keep him at it; if he appeared to be mentally
fatigued, he was to take him for a walk, play tennis, wrestle,
box, or engage in whatever exercise suggested itself as desirable.
A physical trainer gave him resistive exercises at his country
home for a half hour every afternoon. The tutor and physical
trainer ^occupied the boy's time from two until half past five.
This gave him plenty of time to rest before dinner, and to dress.
In the evening he was left to himself, with the understanding
that he would spend an hour in preparation for the next day's
recitations.
The change to this new program was made on the first
of November. By the middle of November his instructors noted
an improvement in his work, the English instructor in particular
observing a marked improvement in attention and ability to
grasp ideas. Elmer reported that he no longer experienced the
RETARDATION THROUGH NEGLECT. 167
feeling of lassitude and tliat he was mueli less apt to fall into a
state of mental confusion.
In two important particulars, the young man refused to
co-operate. He would not wear glasses except in the class room ?
in the course of a couple of months, he stopped wearing them
altogether. He also refused to allow the tutor to go with him to
his country home; this appeared to him as too much like having
a nurse or keeper. He was a young man already of independent
income, and it was important to obtain his hearty co-operation.
A compromise, which I regard as in many ways unfortunate,
seemed necessary. The tutor, therefore, helped him at the school
with his lessons for the next day; this naturally resulted in the
study period being more or less of a fixed exercise. I believe
also that the tutor failed to carry out my instructions to let the
young man off entirely when he was not feeling in good condi-
tion.
Other difficulties appeared which tended to emphasize cer-
tain factors as perhaps the most important in the causation of
his- retardation. An admirable glimpse into his mode of life
at this time and throughout his entire youth is given in a report
to me from the headmaster of the school. "One great difficulty
with Elmer's work is that he has a good many other things to
think about. We are to have a football game with   next
Saturday, and excellent tickets have been scarce. Elmer desired
six tickets, and he early became concerned as to whether he was
going to get six good ones. He has, therefore, had to spend time
visiting the various ticket agencies in town, telephoning to them,
and talking over with friends out here the possibility of getting
six good tickets. He got them through the kind offices of one
of my clerks to-day, but he would have been about as sure of get-
ting them had he not given the matter a moment's attention. No
assurances, however, would convince him of this; he wanted six
tickets and he must have them right in hand almost the day that
the tickets were issued by the Athletic Association to the orig-
inal applicants. . Now that he has obtained the tickets, he is
obliged to start for   011 the one o'clock train to-morrw,
so that he may meet his family and arrange with them for going
to the game. The necessary preliminaries to getting the one
o'clock train will cause him to miss some of his recitations to-
morrow, and he will miss all of those on Friday. His father
does not realize how serious an interruption things like this are.
Although I have not questioned Elmer about the matter, I pre-
sume the tickets are for the use of his family; he certainly cannot
168 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
be going to take five men friends to the game, and lie lias arrived
at the age when he would hardly take five ladies, he would proba-
bly prefer to take one and possibly a chaperon. The result is
that he has had here a week which is practically worthless, and
that is one-thirtietli of his working time before next June. The
other boys who are studying here are all going from here Saturday
morning with me in a private car; they have not had to take any
thought as to how they were to get to , and I do not intend
that they shall take any thought as to how they will get back.
They have each been provided with a ticket, and although all their
tickets were not so good as those of Elmer, some of them were.
They will lose but very little work, and the game will come to
them as a very enjoyable Saturday outing. It will be nothing
more than that; they will have all their work done for Monday
before they leave for , and there is not the slightest chance
that, barring some entirely unexpected accidents, they will not
be ready for work on Monday morning. I mention these things
not because I am unwilling that Elmer should accompany his
family to the game, but because I want you to realize that the
difficulties in Elmer's work do not every one of them arise from
his physical condition or from his backwardness. Admission into
College is a businesslike matter, and demands the same
devotion that any other successful business enterprise does."
Elmer was one of those young men, and there are many, who
find it extremely difficult to get their attention down to work,
if there is any cause for emotional excitement. Many young men
find it impossible to think of aught else than the coming football
game or the social engagement for some future evening. It is
only after adult life has been reached that engagements which
excite considerable emotional interest cease to have this effect upon
the attention. In Elmer, this emotional distractibility of atten-
tion was combined with a temperamental tardiness. The
tardy boy or adult is one who lets the interest of the moment pre-
vent his looking forward and arranging for the next piece of
work on hand. Elmer was supposed to be 011 hand for his lesson
in English at nine o'clock, and to work for forty-five minutes,
which gave him a fifteen minute intermission before taking up
the work of the next period. E1*0111 November 30tli to December
20th, inclusive, there were seventeen working days, which gave
him 765 minutes of work. During this period he lost, through
absence and lateness, 399 minutes, more than one-half of the time.
The following record of these days is an instructive and not
uninteresting document:?
RETARDATION THROUGH NEGLECT. 169
Date. Time of Arrival. Record of Recitation.
Nov. 30 9.47 Too much Thanksgiving.
Dec. 3 9.07 Interested in "The Rivals."
4 11.30 (30-minute Still interested. Play read aloud. Mistakes
period by his of Mrs. Malaprop underlined, and conjectural
arrangement.) emendations made in margin.
5 9.23 Writes in class a paragraph headed "My Im-
pressions of Mrs. Malaprop," in which he con-
founds that matpon with Lydia Languish
and writes about her.
G 9.26 (stormy.) Given same subject for outside work. Com-
position not done?forgotten. Writes in class
again on Mis. Malaprop. Forgets entirely what
her chief distinction to fame is. When her mis-
use of words is suggested, says, "Oh, yes."
" 7 9.02 Recitation satisfactory.
" 8 Absent (train stalled).
" 10 9.15 Composition,poor; misspells afraid, "busy, copy,
door, floor, scio, sour, sugar, xvliom.
" 11 9.20 Composition not re-written on account of head-
ache.
" 12 9.10 Work incomplete,?not feeling well.
" 13 Absent (machine breaks down).
" 14 9.15 Good composition. Writes out Browning's
"Incident of French Camp" in his own words.
" 15 Absent.
" 17 Absent.
" 18 9.10 Good composition. Reads "King Robert of
Sicily" and writes story of same.
" 19 9.15 Examinations.
20 9.1G Finishes "The Rivals." Reads unintelligently.
The physician who was overlooking the care of Elmer's
health, considered him to be in good condition. He believed that
he needed exercise only as all young men need it. He inclined
to look upon his difficulty as one entirely due to lack of early
training. He told me that he had known a number of sons of
the very rich, some of whom had succeeded in getting through
college, who had exactly the type of mind possessed by this young
man. His fatigue he attributed entirely to the strain that was
put upon a mind incapable of endurance through lack of training.
This view makes the case all the more interesting and instructive.
If his deficient powers of attention and memory were due solely
to lack of home and school training, the case becomes a purely
psychological and pedagogical one. We have to do with a young
man of twenty-one who has the powers of attention of a boy of'
six or seven. If we should ask a boy of this age to attempt the
work that we were forcing upon Elmer, he would undoubtedly
soon show signs of fatigue and he would manifest this in aprosexia
and in periods of mental torpor. Through the study of this case,
I am inclined to lay greater stress upon the lack of proper mental
training than upon the symptoms of physical deficiency, the ade-
noids, etc. But I do not feel that I am warranted in excluding
the physical factor entirely. Despite the medical opinion, I think
170 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
there is reason to believe that the boy was physically below par
and that he needed outdoor exercise to put him in condition to
resist fatigue. I was also very careful of his diet, and insisted
upon his eating a satisfactory lunch and taking a sufficient amount
of time to it.
Another difficulty, resulting in passive resistance, was the lack
of ambition, especially the ambition to excel in intellectual work.
He had no real desire to enter college. Life for him was a series
of trivial amusements; he did not participate keenly in even his
father's ambition to have him enter   College in order that
he might become a member of the various social clubs. Neither
thought of college as an educational institution. To inspire the
youth,?sugar-coat the pill,?college was put before him, in
Dr. Butler's words, as "an agreeable country club, where one
takes his valet, his polo ponies, liis bull dog, his motor car."
During the Christmas holidays, in an interview with the father,
at which time my suggestions for the pedagogical treatment of the
case were passed in review, I found occasion to distinguish between
getting an education and getting into college. If the father had
wished his son educated, I should have recommended an entirely
different procedure. I would have outlined a two years' course at
least. lie would havo been kept on elementary language work in
English for at least a year before the attempt was made to prepare
him for his entrance examinations. This procedure would have
ensured an education as well as entrance to college; but it was
not for this that my advice had been sought, and I continued to
direct my efforts to planning his daily life in such a way as to
give him the best possible chance of passing the examinations in
enough branches to admit him to college with the least number of
conditions.
It was agreed that the boy should take up his residence at the
school, where his whole time, his meals, and his sleeping hours,
would be under tho supervision of his tutors. With the beginning
of tho new year this plan wont into effect, and he entered upon
the long pull of the spring months under as favorable conditions
as I could obtain for him. Even the distracting interest in his
automobile abated, and the machine was shortly afterwards sold.
In May, when I again visited the school, I found that all of his
tutors felt more hopeful of his ability to pass the examinations. It
had proved necessary, however, to give up the attempt to prepare
him in Latin, but in English ho was reported to have made great
improvement in sentence structure and expression. Ho seemed
to have a wider intellectual outlook and greater power of choice
RETARDATION THROUGH NEGLECT. 171
in the material used for his compositions. He got more vivid
impressions, got them more quickly, and acted upon them with
more independence. Without exception, his instructors believed
that he would he able to pass the examinations for which he was
studying, provided he did not become nervous and lose his head.
He appeared to be in excellent physical condition. I feared only
that he might approach the examination period in a condition
of reduced mental vigor; I dreaded the panic,?almost collapse,?
which preceded the previous examination.
The point of view of the psychological trainer and that of
the professional coach differ on this important question. The
coach is interested in getting as much work out of the boy as he
possibly can. As the examination approaches he expects him to
sit up late at night and study harder; he arranges extra hours of
special coaching; the last week before the examination is a period
of great activity. During the examinations, every hour not spent
in the examination room is given over to preparation for the next
examination. I insisted upon the importance of refraining from
this strain upon Elmer's energy, even to the extent of suggesting
that if he fell into a state of fatigue a week or so-before the
examinations, he was to be allowed to drop everything and go
into the country. I felt it would be safer to risk his taking the
examinations without the last finishing touches which the coach
always considers so important, than to risk his coming up for the
examination overtrained and worn out with anxiety and extra
work. I carefully outlined a daily plan to be followed during
the examination week, and I strongly advised that he be given no
coaching on the days on which he was to take an examination.
To accustom him to the ordeal of the examination, he had
during the year passed several sets of regular examination papers
under conditions approximating those which obtain at the real
test.
I saw Elmer again on the first day of the examinations. It
appeared to me that despite the care that I had taken to warn
his tutors, he approached the examinations in what seemed to
be a rather poor physical condition. They all denied this, how-
ever, and still believe that he entered upon and passed through
the examination period in the best physical state. He did not
appear to have the same fear of the examination room, and I
observed no sign of panic, no physical collapse. Our work with
him during the year had been effective on this point. The result
of the examination was a lamentable failure. He passed in only
one branch (elementary algebra). In advanced French he got a
higher mark than in elementary French, and in English his mark
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
was lower than it had been the year before. To his coaches the
reason for this?and perhaps they are right?appeared during
the months of April and May in a gradually increasing interest
in the construction of a boat. Scarcely a day passed, I was told,
that he did not write a letter of instructions, lie left the school
on visits to the boat builder; and on one occasion he went to his
home from Friday to Monday without even notifying the head-
master of the school that he proposed to go. Instead of working
harder as the examinations approached, he made less effort and
seemed to care less about succeeding. However this may be, I
believe that his instructors erred at the beginning of the year in
thinking that he could be made to pass the entrance examinations
as the result of a year's work.
It would not surprise me if my analysis of the interdepen-
dent social, psychological, and physical factors involved in this
case should provoke entirely opposite conclusions. Viewing this
history from the educator's standpoint, many will find in Elmer
only a common type of difficult case, the boy of normal mentality,
whose failure is due to lack of interest in his work. This con-
clusion would overlook the psychological characteristics, which,
as I have shown, border on the pathological. Those who arrive
at the opposite conclusion, that there existed a congenital mental
defect which no amount of training could overcome, would also
fail of a right understanding of the case.
In my opinion, the history shows that we have to do with a
child, mentally and physically normal at birth, endowed with
mediocre but not deficient intellectual capacity,?enough, at least,
to enable him to hold his own in school and college. We find this
child at the age of twenty-one with insufficiently developed intellect
and character. The adenoids were his only physical handicap to
normal development. Their tardy removal at the age of nineteen
left him with a susceptibility to fatigue, and doubtless also
contributed to the mental retardation which he manifested at the
age of twenty-one His history would probably have been different
had they been removed when he was twelve or thirteen years
old. However, the failure to remove them earlier in his career
was not the only cause of arrested mental development.
I have emphasized as a cardinal mental symptom, the fluctu-
ation of his attention due to inability to sustain and con-
centrate it. Some fluctuation of the attention is found in every
adult normal mind. In Elmer, its pathological character appeared
in the extremely short period during which concentrated atten-
tion could be sustained. This type of attention, i. e., aproscxia,
is not only characteristic of adenoids, but also of the normal child
RETARDATION THROUGH NEGLECT. 173
in tlie first years of school life. Elmer's aprosexia may therefore
rest upon the physical basis of the adenoids, or it may be con-
sidered a symptom of infantilism,?an arrested mental develop-
ment due to lack of adequate home and school training. This
latter interpretation is supported by the fact that his attention in
other respects resembled that of the yet untrained child. He was
unable to get his mind down to his work, or to keep it there for
any length of time; he continually thought of other things, notably
future engagements. If we succeeded in keeping him at a task,
a pathological fatigue ensued, from which there was no imme-
diate recovery. An hour or two of work would cause him to fall
into a condition that suggested mental stupor. In this condition
he appeared to lose clear consciousness and followed a lesson with
acquiescence but with no active co-operation. In exaggerated
form it became mental confusion, or a lapse of memory, perhaps
even of consciousness. In doing a problem in mathematics, he
might carry out the work correctly and intelligently up to a certain
point, when an entirely wrong number would be set down, despite
the fact that the right number stared at him from the page. The
error is one which a teacher is apt to attribute to carelessness op
"not thinking," but is probably due to a momentary lapse of con-
sciousness, or at least of memory, and is a phenomenon of fatigue.
Another symptom of doubtful import is the amnesia verbalis,
which showed itself in the inability to remember the names
of persons and places and to acquire an accurate knowledge
of orthography and syntax. He could not convey a simple
thought in a succession of sentences properly formed and correctly
spelled. This condition may rest upon a congenital and incurable
defect of the brain; it is found, however, in so many children who
are subsequently trained out of it, that I believe we must assume
its survival in a boy of twenty-one years to be due to neglect of
proper training in the early years of school life.
There is little necessity for hesitation or doubt in forming an
opinion as to the cause of his repeated failures to pass the college
entrance examinations. These were due to faulty educational
methods, or perhaps more correctly to defective educational ideals
and insight. The last two failures were each made after a year
of the best coaching this country can afford. The instruction,
however, was unintelligentlv applied to a case unfitted to profit
by it. Instead of attempting to prepare him for college in one year,
a course extending over two or three years should have been out-
lined. I am convinced that at any time after he had passed
his fifteenth year he could have been prepared for college in, at
the most, three years. Probably it would have been necessary
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to take liim from his social environment and place liim in a school,
perhaps in a camp school, where he wonld have been under con-
stant medical, physical, and educational supervision. His
coaches cannot be blamed for failing to appreciate the complex
character of the educational problem which presented itself in this
case. ]STor can they be expected to educate the parent as well as
instruct the boy.
Secondary schools, however, which are supposed to educate
their pupils, as well as prepare them for college, must in time be
expected to have a professional opinion which will be accepted in
these cases as authoritative. Their convictions of what is neces-
sary for the acquisition of proper mental discipline must be ex-
pressed even in the face of a rupture with socially powerful
and wealthy families. The situation presented by this case is
not unique. Two boys for whom I recommended this fall a
camp or farm school, both at the critical period of from four-
teen to sixteen years, both mentally retarded, and one presenting
moral symptoms, are, despite my opinion, the one at a fash-
ionable city preparatory school, the other under a private tutor.
The training of such powers of attention as are necessary
for intellectual work is the peculiar task of the secondary school.
The school, however, cannot adequately fulfil its function unless
the child comes to it disciplined to some extent in mind and con-
duct. In some families, that training of the child's will, which
is to serve him in good stead during his school life, begins as soon
as the child is born. In others, the child is turned over to servants,
governesses, tutors, and schools that fail to impress upon him
the serious nature of school work, with the result that he advances
from year to year with no strengthening of the will and attention,
no habits of industry, no established ambitions toward an intel-
lectual career.
There is reason to believe that a large number of children,
without any congenital or acquired physical defect, arrive at
maturity with imperfectly developed faculties. This retardation
or arrest of development may occur in children as well of very
rich as of very poor parents and may in either case result from
neglect originating in the exigencies of the parents' social envi-
ronment. A child may be provided with expensive tutors, or
sent to schools of the highest reputation, but this may not save
him from retardation if the home training has failed to establish
a mental and moral character that will enable him to profit by
these opportunities.
