A Psychological Analysis of Three Delusional States 
====================================================

Reference Type:  Journal Article
Record Number: 16553
Author: Balfour, J. B.
:Year: 1855
:Title: Case of a Gentleman Who Was Born Deaf and Dumb, and Subsequently Became Insane
:Journal: J Psychol Med Ment Pathol
:Volume: 8:
Issue: 32:Pages: 591-594
:Epub Date: 1855/10/01:Date: Oct 1
Short Title: Case of a Gentleman Who Was Born Deaf and Dumb, and Subsequently Became Insane:PMCID: PMC4962136
Accession Number: 28907059:Notes: Balfour, James B
Journal Article
J Psychol Med Ment Pathol. 1855 Oct 1;8(32):591-594.
Author Address: Edinburgh.
Database Provider: NLM
Language: eng



By Clara Harrison Town,
The Belief in the Control of Thought from Without,In the Un- Reality of the External World, and in the Unreality of the Self.

Resident Psychologist at Friends' Asylum for the Insane, Frankford, Pa.
There are three symptoms, which, though of frequent occurrence in the insane, have never been given an adequate psycho-
logical interpretation. They are intimately related psychically,
as I hope to show in the course of my analysis, although they are
not always found to be associated together in the same individual.
These are: (1) The belief that one's thoughts and feelings
are guided and controlled by some outside power, whether this
power be God, an electric machine, a malicious enemy or a hyp-
notist makes no intrinsic difference; (2) The feeling of the un-
reality of the external world, objective experience; and (3) The
feeling of the unreality of one's self, subjective experience.
Before attempting an analysis, I shall briefly describe a num-
ber of cases, which present these symptoms in various forms.
The first condition, the belief that one's thoughts and feelings
are controlled by some external agency, is well illustrated by the
following cases:
Case 1. A woman of refinement and culture, with a naturally
alert and inquiring mind, who, however, had not found any special
field in which to exercise her mental powers. The conditions of
her life forced her to be much alone, while they allowed her
abundant leisure to do whatever her inclination dictated. Unfor-
tunately, some of the popularly-styled psychological literature fell
into her hands. This interested her greatly. She read it con-
tinuously, took it most seriously, and finally resolved to discover
for herself whether it were possible to communicate with "the
other world." She put herself into a passive attitude and waited
expectantly for the communications. She succeeded in securing
them, succeeded so well that she would sit up night after night to
enjoy this wonderful intercourse. She was told many delightful
stories about all sorts of objects which happened to attract her
(198)
THREE DELUSIONAL STATES 199
attention, and at times her actions were guided by the advice she
received. For instance, she was passing a shop window one day
in which was exhibited a curiously constructed parasol. She was
bidden to go in and buy it; she did so, although she needed no
parasol, and was subsequently told a fanciful little tale about a
Japanese lady who had made it. She could scarcely believe that
her own mind conceived these tales, as they were in knowledge
beyond her experience, and in literary quality beyond her ability.
She believed that they were direct revelations from God.
It is of interest to note that I was able to convince this patient
that her revelations were merely products of her own mentality,
and moreover to fill her with a wholesome sense of the clanger
involved in encouraging, as she had done, the passive states of
consciousness. I accomplished this by building up in her mind
a rational conception of the mental conditions which led up to
the experiences, to her so mysteriously inexplicable, and by mi-
nutely analyzing for her the experiences themselves.
Case 2. This case is not unlike the previous one. The patient,
a man, suddenly became aware that God was talking to him. All
he had to do thereafter when he wished enlightenment on subjects
in which he was interested, such as astronomy or electricity, was
to lie back passively and attend to the ideas on the subject which
God would send to his mind.
Case 3. This patient was a woman whose mind teemed with
delusions of the most vivid sort. Moreover, she experienced audi-
tory hallucinations almost constantly. In every tick of a clock,
creak of a shoe or chirp of a bird, voices were heard. These voices
discussed with her questions of which she was thinking. Visual
sensations also produced voices, and organic and tactile sensations
were accompanied by words. Her hands, feet and all parts of her
body talked to her, she experienced shooting sensations running
the length of her fingers and believed that a thought wrote itself
out there. "When she touched any object, words would come to
her which she believed entered by telepathy through her fingers.
She was commanded what to do and what not to do, and lived in
constant dread of doing the wrong thing.
The passivity of most of her thought she recognized fully
while still in the hallucinatory condition. She at that time argued
with me that these thoughts could not be her own, as she had
no control over them and as they were totally different from any
she had ever experienced. She believed firmly that the thoughts
were impressed upon her by telepathy, and further, that by the
same means her thoughts were made known to others.
200 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
This patient made a complete recovery and I cannot but feel
that it was hastened by her final acceptance of my explanation of
the voices and her consequent persistent effort to keep lier mind
actively engaged and to resist the inclination to adopt the passive,
listening attitude. After her recovery she told me that she had
never for a moment lost her power of reasoning, but that her
mind was so taken up with the vivid sensations and ideas which
were forced upon it, that there was continual war between her old
self and these new experiences.
Cases 4, 5 and 6. These three cases are all young girls,
and are all cases of dementia pnecox. They are all alike annoyed
by organic sensations and unwelcome thoughts. One asks me
what they mean and how we put them into her. Another thought
for a while that Christ and the devil }vere contending for her spirit,
and that the devil sent the thoughts which bothered her. She
then had great faith in Christ, called herself His child and prayed
to Him to help her. From that phase she passed into one where
she cared no more for Christ, and now she considers herself a
child of the wind, and believes that the wind puts the ideas into her
mind. The sixth case believes the thoughts and feelings to be
impressed from without, but does not seem to have formed any
distinct idea concerning their source.
Case 7. The seventh patient is a woman suffering from her
third attack of melancholia. In speaking of her condition, she
says that she is perfectly rational, but that she worries a great deal.
This worrying, she claims, is beyond her control, as she is hypno-
tized and the worry put there.
Case 8. Another melancholic woman believed her thoughts
and will were controlled by a little child; and after the death
of the child she felt that it must be the devil who guided them.
Case 9. A third case of melancholia frequently makes
remarks relating to her past life or the past of her friends. She
afterwards begs us to believe that they are untrue (as they are),
saying that the words come entirely without her wish, that she
knows nothing about them and cannot understand it all.
Case 10. Still another woman tells me that some people
work on her mind from a distance with electric batteries and take
her thoughts, her knowledge, and her will from her, using them
as their own and gaining all the credit that is really her due,
while she is left without her music, her songs, her Latin and
Greek. The process, however, works both ways, and she gets the
thoughts of these other people; she does not at all enjoy the
exchange, and when writing a list of words for me she carefully
THREE DELUSIONAL STATES 201
omitted all those which came from some other source than her own
mind.
Case 11. The next patient tells us that she is made to do,
say and see queer things, that she has no control over herself, either
in thought, speech or action. She asks whether I do not think it
is the devil putting these ideas into her. Iler trouble being largely
motor, she is compelled not merely to think but also to speak out
her thoughts. It is interesting to note that she recognizes the
enforced character of the utterance of the words, i. e., her own
passivity, for she is persuaded that there is an electric machine in
the room above her dragging out her thoughts.
Case 12. I have chosen for the next illustration a young
woman suffering from the maniacal form of manic depressive in-
sanity. She says that she is continually talked to by the Holy
Spirit. She explains that she does not hear a voice, but that
the words are in her head just like thoughts, that just as we
expect our thoughts to be heard in heaven, she hears the thoughts
of God. When she wrote a list of words for me, she said that
she was entirely irresponsible for what she wrote, that she did not
know, when she started a word, what it would be, that her hand
was inspired.
Case 13. The thirteenth patient thinks her thoughts are
controlled by drugs given by the physician. She says that she
cannot think of things when she wishes, but only at certain times;
and that all this is brought about by the action of drugs.
Cases 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18. Five cases present conditions
similar to those already described.
In illustration of the second symptom, the feeling of the
unreality of the external world, I present the following cases.
Case 3 (above). To this patient the world seemed entirely
changed. Tor months there were neither stars nor moon for her,
and when she finally recovered, her surroundings were a wonder-
ful surprise, they differed so completely from her previous idea
of them.
Case 14. A woman to whom the world seemed to be in a
state of perpetual confusion. The people around her appeared
ill and changed and varied greatly in appearance from day to
day. The trees, the sunshine, all looked strange to her.
Case 19. Complains that not even the food is real,?the
potatoes are not real potatoes, the apples not real apples, etc.
Case 20.?Believes that the biblical prophecy has been ful-
filled, that there is now a new heaven and a new earth and that
202 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
the people here have all died and risen again. "It is all so com-
pletely different," she says.
Case 21. Another woman was greatly bewildered by her
surroundings. She volunteered: "I don't believe my eyes see as
yours do." I answered that I believed she was right, but sug-
gested that in order to make sure of it we both describe what we
saw. She insisted that I do so first, and when I had finished she
said, "I seem to see the same, but it is different." I asked her
on what she was leaning. She answered, "It seems to be a bed,
but I don't feel that it can be. I think I am out of doors and
far away."
Case 22. This woman could not believe that the world any-
where was as it used to be. She was taken a long drive through
parts of the country that she knew well, but even the children
on the streets looked strange to her.
Cases 23, 24, 25, and 26. Four other women all complain
that everything is altered and strange.
The third symptom, the feeling of the unreality of one's
self, was manifested by several of the patients already cited.
Case 3. This patient experienced great changes of bodily
sensations. She at one time felt that she was embodied in a little
pet dog.
Case 16. This woman believes that her brain and soul have
departed and that she is horrible to look upon. She does not wish
people to see her on account of her frightful appearance.
Case 24. Believed that her head had been removed and
another one put in its place, that her teeth were stone and her
body gradually changing to iron. She said she had no eyes and
wondered that she could see; she felt that she was very, very
small (she was a large woman) and every one else looked large to
her in comparison.
Case 25. Believes that she is no longer human, that her
organs are all gone and that therefore she can never die. She also
thinks that her face is entirely changed and that she is horrible
to look upon.
Case 26. Felt she was some one else; said she was not sensi-
tive to cold or to weight.
Case 27. Another woman with practically the same delusions
as Case 25.
On account of the greater simplicity of the processes involved,
I shall describe the last two phenomena first, though, in point
of fact they usually appear last in the development of an indi-
vidual case, the more complex, volitional processes breaking down
first
THREE DELUSIONAL STATES 203
First we will attempt to reach an understanding, through an
analytic description, of the feeling that the external world is
unreal. When the adult human being experiences a perception,
the experience is not so simple a phenomenon as one would at
first suppose. For example, when a man who is accustomed to
apples, sees one, or in other words has a perception of one, what
is comprised in the experience ? He sees the color, size and shape
of the apple, and over and above all that he sees, he knows it is an
apple, that it is eatable, that it is rather hard, and he has also
an idea of its taste, smell, hardness, etc. Now the first time that
he saw an apple he knew nothing of its name, its use, its taste
or its hardness; the appearance of the apple told him nothing of
this. He knows these facts now only because he has experienced
them formerly in connection with the sight of the apple, and
its appearance now recalls them passively without the slightest
effort on his part. When any two perceptions or ideas have once
been experienced together in consciousness, the presence of one
tends quite automatically to recall the other. Thus all our percep-
tions are enriched by our past experience, and this in a perfectly
passive manner without the slightest effort on the part of the
individual. Without this contribution from the past, the per-
ceptions aroused by external stimuli would be very inadequate
experiences. . ^
The physiological explanation of these phenomena is as fol-
lows. The brain cells are all connected one with another by nerve
fibres. When one cell is stimulated strongly enough, the excita-
tion spreads to the surrounding fibres and cells. Each excitation
of cells and fibres increases their instability so that they thereafter
tend to respond more readily to stimulation. When two cells are
stimulated simultaneously, the excitation from both cells spreads
along the fibres connecting these cells, which are thereby rendered
doubly unstable so that future excitation of either of the cells
tends to spread along their connective fibres rather than in other
directions. It follows that when one brain area is stimulated,
the excitation tends to spread to those areas which have been fre-
quently stimulated simultaneously with it.
Each cell excitation is accompanied by a mental experience
which recurs when the cell excitation is repeated, and in this way
it happens that sensations, perceptions and ideas have the power
of recalling other ideas which have been previously simultaneously
experienced.
In many pathological subjects, the fusion of the new sensa-
tions with the recalled sensations and ideas fails to take place;
204 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
there is a dissociation of the past and present experiences. In the
language of the physiological theory, the excitation of certain
centers does not spread to those centers formerly associated with
them. Something arrests the purely passive associative process
and the individual experiences only the group of sensations im-
mediately aroused by the object. Thus every perception is a
novel experience 'for them, and the whole environment is strangely
new each day.
To them the trees, the sun, the houses and people all seem
changed. They tell us that we differ in appearance from day to
day; and they are in constant anxiety because everything about
them seems so strange and wrong.
The feeling of unreality in relation to the patient's own
body lends itself to a similar explanation?in fact it is simply
a special phase of the same condition. In the condition just
described sensations aroused by external objects failed to call up
past mental experiences; in the condition under consideration, the
sensations aroused by bodily movements and organic functioning
fail to excite the associated sensations, with which they are ordi-
narily fused. When this fusion fails to take place, owing to a
pathological disturbance of association, the patients are strangely
aware of all their organic sensations. They stand out in conscious-
ness distinct and isolate, and are not, as under normal conditions,
merely undefined elements in the general coenesthesia. The or-
ganic sensations then seem queer and unnatural, and some patients
develop from such experiences the idea that they are not human
beings, as did Cases 25 and 27, cited above. These women
both believe that they have no digestive organs, no circulation, etc.,
and in consequence that they can never die.
This theory bases the feeling of the unreality of the self,
chiefly (in some cases perhaps solely), upon a defect of association
in its most simple and elementary phase, that of the fusion of
bodily and organic sensations with similar sensations secondarily
aroused through the reflex functioning of the nervous system. The
association process pathologically affected is a purely physiological
one, and may be referred to the cerebral cortex but also to lower
centers. The tendency among psychiatrists has been to find the
explanation of the feeling of unreality in anomalies of sensation
or in a dissociation between sense perceptions and muscular or
organic sensations. Of late, however, the evident absence of sen-
sory or organic disturbance in many patients presenting the symp-
tom, and the presence of anaesthesias and profound circulatory
THREE DELUSIONAL STATES 205
disorder in many patients who do not present it, have led investi-
gators such as Janet, Sollier, and Packard, to seek for a central
theory. Janet inclines to the belief that the condition is due to
a general lowering of cerebral activity, Sollier attributes it to a
functional change in the cerebral cortex, and Packard to a defect
of association.
The feeling of unreality often exists with reference to exter-
nal objects without extending to the personality of the patient;
it is also frequently expressed exclusively in relation to the sub-
ject's self. One patient, Case 20, told me that the whole world
had been changed in the last year, that there was a new heaven
and a new earth quite different from the old, but that she herself,
strange to say, was not changed at all, excepting that her voice
was softer. Others find themselves strange and inhuman, but the
world quite natural.
To reach an understanding of the first symptom, the belief
that the thoughts are controlled from without, it is necessary to
trace a little further the association theory. Each perception or
idea has the power of recalling all other mental experiences with
which it has been associated. It is quite evident, however, that
it does not in any particular instance recall all others. In the
course of ordinary experience each sensation, perception and idea
has become associated with such a large number of others, that
the limits of possible associations would seem to be set only by
the limits of the past mental experience of the individual. The
limit to the number of recalled ideas is really set by the limita-
tions of the field of consciousness. Only a small number of per-
ceptions and ideas can be experienced simultaneously, therefore
only a few will be recalled; these will include those which fuse
immediately with the sensation and make up the perception (which
process has already been described) and one or more others, which
have a more or less intimate connection with the perception, but
are in themselves quite distinct. Just what these last will be is
determined, on the one hand, by the recency, frequency and in-
tensity of the previous existence of the recalled ideas and, on the
other hand, by what factor or factors in the recalling idea act as
agents of recall. If the recalling factor is simply the sound or
visual form of a word, the recalled idea may have no logical con-
nection with the recalling; for example, money may bring forth,
bunny, funny, Monday or monotony. If, however, the recalling
factor is an idea conveyed by the word or one of its elements, the
ideas recalled will have some logical connection. To effect such
logical associations, it is necessary that the recalling iden shall
206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
be interesting enough to hold the attention. The idea must domi-
nate the consciousness.
When the train of thought is determined by such a dominant
idea the process is known as active apperception. It is always
marked by concentration of attention. When there is no concen-
tration on one idea, and the association process is let alone to
bring forth what ideas it may, the process is known as passive
apperception. This is merely a different phase of the process
which results in the fusion of the new with the old in perception;
the absolute fusion in perception being due to the fact that all the
elements of the fusion had previously been associated together,
and together localized in some definite external object or bodily
part.
In the normal individual, thought is made up of both forma
of apperception, sometimes one predominating, sometimes another.
With some insane persons, however, the power to concentrate on
an idea is so greatly reduced that the train of thought is made up
almost entirely of such ideas as passive association calls into ex-
istence. All sorts of irrelevant and, what seem to them, extra-
ordinary ideas come into their minds. They know that they
have come without effort on their part, they recognize that they are
quite different in character from their former thoughts as they
remember them, and it is natural that they should conclude, as
they usually do, that some external agency is responsible. Among
the examples quoted above, three believe God to be speaking to
them, three that friends or enemies communicate with them by
means of telepathy, one that she is under the power of a hypnotist,
two that they are acted upon by electric machines, while one and
all realize that their thoughts are largely beyond their control.
Although these patients are unable to guide their thoughts,
which often proceed in leaps and bounds from subject to sub-
ject, associative connections can usually be traced throughout; the
power of association remains intact, in fact a hitherto undis-
covered ability and ingenuity in rhymes and other verbal asso-
ciations often manifest themselves. The disturbance is distinctly
not one of association, but is entirely the result of inability to
control association and hold it in check by concentrating the at-
tention on some one idea. It is a disturbance of active apper-
ception caused by a failure of attention.
In many cases this passive thought is almost continuous,
and the patient can rest from the torrent of ideas neithor by night
nor by day. This would naturally be expected, for with the loss
of the power of concentration the power of inhibition disappears,
THREE DELUSIONAL STATES 207
as no idea can be held uppermost long enough or strongly enough
to inhibit other ideas.
To reduce the study of the kinds of association used by the
patients to experimental limits, I require them to write during
fifteen minutes a list of words. They are asked to write con-
tinuously, and to write without hesitation whatever words first
suggest themselves. The lists are then analyzed, and the associa-
tions found therein grouped into two large classes, the first embrac-
ing all those associated words which were suggested by the meaning
of the recalling word, including judgment, contiguity, similarity,
and sentence form associations, the second embracing all formal,
mostly verbal associations, such as rhymes, sound associations, allit-
erations and associations resulting from speech habits. The first
group with the exception of some sentence form associations
represents active apperceptive thought; the second group and a
certain variety of the sentence form association represent passive
apperceptive thought, or simple association.
Lists of words were obtained from sixteen of the eighteen ?
cases presented to illustrate the belief in the external control of
the thought, and in all of these lists, save one, associations of the
passive, superficial type predominate.
Briefly stated, the patients who believe their thoughts are
controlled from without, are suffering from an inability to con-
trol their thoughts by dominant ideas, owing to a disturbance
of active apperception, the result of a defect of attention. The
patients to whom the external world seems unreal are suffering
from an inability to recall past associations, when an accustomed
sensation or perception is experienced; this is a disturbance of
passive apperception. The patients to whom the self seems unreal
are suffering from an inability to arouse by organic sensations
those secondary sensations with which they are normally asso-
ciated ; this is also a disturbance of passive apperception. The
first defect is one of attention, a variety of aprosexia; the second
is one of association, a form of amnesia, and may be called amnesic
dissociation; the third is also a defect of association,?a physio-
logical dissociation.
Defects of association may exist without any derangement,
of the active apperception. This is very evident in cases where
the defect is limited to the fusion of sensations of one modality,
say olfactory sensations, with their past associates. Such limited
defects of association may exist without in the least interfering
with the power of concentration, in which case active apperceptive
thought is possible along all lines excepting those crossing the
208 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
restricted association field. A total loss of associative power would
of itself make all connected thought impossible, for concentration
of attention would be futile were there no associated ideas through
which to guide the thought. If, however, there is a loss of power
of concentration in conjunction with the limitation of association
ability, which is more often the case, the associations will be
superficial in character within those fields where the association
process is normal; beyond their limits associative thought will be
entirely absent.
On the other hand, a derangement of active apperception
manifested in a loss of the power of concentration, may exist with-
out any defect of the associative process. In this case the result
will be superficial and illogical associations, but not necessarily a
reduction in the number of associations or in the rapidity of their
recall.
The conclusion that a belief in the external control of thought
is based upon a defect of attention, leads me to formulate certain
definite methods of treatment. The problem is similar to, yet
very different from that presented to all teachers of young chil-
dren. The problem in both instances is that of training an in-
dividual who is deficient in the power of concentrating the at-
tention. The cause of this deficiency, however, is quite different
in the two cases. In the child it is due to a poverty of rele-
vant and connected ideas; every object is of about equal interest
to him and he presents a typical case of aprosexia, or flighti-
ness of attention. The teacher's task is to build up in his
mind groups of related ideas, and gradually, as his stock of in-
formation increases, an interest in certain things will be devel-
oped, and the aprosexia will disappear. The insane patient incapa-
ble of concentration is not distracted as is the child by external
objects and happenings, nor is his lack of interest dependent
upon lack of knowledge or poverty of ideas. He has plenty of
ideas, but is incapable of controlling, of regulating them; they,
'on the contrary, seem to control him.
The task here is not to present new ideas but to re-preSent
the old ones in such sequence that order will be reestablished.
Some active interests must be built up for the patient; he must
be given such employment as seems most suitable and such con-
stant supervision that continuous and intelligent performance
of the task will be assured. In several cases I have found it
quite possible to develop in the patients an adequate conception of
their true condition, and to convince them that its cause was not
the control of their thoughts from without, but lack of control by
THREE DELUSIONAL STATES 209
themselves. They have not only accepted iny explanation but
exerted themselves to assist in their own treatment by endeavor-
ing to keep their minds employed in a way that would discourage
passive unregulated thought.
The conclusion that the feeling of unreality of the external
world is based upon a lack of power in the sensations to recall
past associates is also suggestive of a certain line of treatment.
The perceptions must be thoroughly rehabilitated for such patients.
The ideas which the appearance of an object should recall must
be drawn out by questions, or if this fails, the object must be
presented to them through the different senses. This process must
be repeated again and again until the group of experiences has
become reestablished in the mind of the patient. This memory
training is, however, less likely to succeed than the training of
attention outlined above.
Still less hopeful is the attempt to treat psychically the feel-
in o- of unreality of the self. This feeling I have attributed to
the failure of organic sensations to arouse the usual associations.
If this interpretation is the correct one, a method of treatment to
be successful must, wThen a certain organic or kinesthetic sensation
is experienced, arouse in consciousness its accustomed associates.
It is obviously impossible to do this by suggestion, as these asso-
ciates are such obscure sensations that we are ignorant of their
nature The only treatment that suggests itself is the physical
stimulation, through drugs or otherwise, of the organic functions,
with the hope that this induced excitation may, through diffusion,
result in the arousal of those secondary sensations and other asso-
ciations which have dropped out of the experience.
Wliile my analysis indicates that what I have called physio-
logical dissociation is the most likely cause of the feeling of the
unreality of the self, it does not preclude the possibility of an am-
nesic dissociation being a contributory factor. Similarly the feel-
ing of the unreality of the external world may, in some cases per-
haps, be conditioned by a physiological dissociation.
references to the literature.
TTofb \ueust. A review of some recent papers upon the loss of the feel-
in^ of reality and kindred symptoms. The Psychological Bulletin, Vol.
II No. 7. pp. 232-241.
Fred II The feeling of unreality. The Journal of Abnormal
rsicholofv, Vol. I. No. 2. pp. 00-81.
Sollier, Paul. On certain cenesthetic disturbances. The Journal of Abnor-
mal Psychology, Vol. II. No. 1, pp. 1-8.
Tanet Pierre. The psyclioleptic crises. Boston Mcdical and Surgical Jour-
nal Vol. CLII, No. 4, pp. 93-100.
