News And Comment
================

The Department of Child-Study and Pedagogic Investigation of the
Chicago Public Schools is, during the present year, devoting three days
a week to the practical work of establishing accurate classifications
of the subnormal children in the schools. The remainder of the time is
spent in the laboratory giving a psyclio-physical examination to those
children who require special training or treatment in the school system
those to be entered in the rooms for deaf, blind, crippled and subnormal
children, truants and incorrigibles for the parental school, normal children with individual peculiarities, and in addition for the juvenile court,
certain cases of delinquency and dependency.
Dr. Charles Hubbard Judd, the author of "Genetic Psychology foi
Teachers," has been promoted to be Professor of Psychology at Yale
University.
Dr. Ernst Meumann has been called to the chair of Philosophy at
Miinster. Professor Meumann is one of the ablest of Wundt's pupils, a
graduate of the Laboratory of Psychology at Leipzig. As the editor of
"Archiv fur die Gesamte Psychologic," he has made this representative
psychological periodical an important medium for the report of investigations in Child Psychology.
The Fourth National Conference on the Education of Backward,
Truant and Delinquent Children will be held at Minneapolis, Minn., commencing Monday, June 10, 1907, and continuing until Wednesday evening, June 12, 1907.
The School of Pedagogy of the New York University has established
a course of lectures on the Education of Defectives. Among the lecturers are: Elias G. Brown, Department of Physical Education, New
40 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
York City; Martin W. Barr, Superintendent of the Pennsylvania Training School for Feeble-Minded Children; E. R. Johnson, Superintendent
of the New Jersey Training School for Feeble-Minded Boys and Girls;
Walter E. Fernald, Superintendent of the Massachusetts School for the
Feeble-Minded, Waverly, Mass.; Luther M. Gulick, Director of Physical
Education in Public Schools of New York; James P. Haney, Director of
Education in Manual Arts in Manhattan and the Bronx; Alexander
Johnson, Lecturer in New York School of Philanthropy; Thomas M. Balliet, Dean of the School of Pedagogy, New York University.
The Second International Congress of School Hygiene is to be held
August 5-10, 1907, at the Royal Sanitary Institute, Margaret Street,
London, W. There will be a section devoted to the Physiology and
Psychology of Educational Methods and Work.
Dr. Shepherd Ivory Franz has accepted the position of Psychologist
at the Government Hospital for the Insane, Washington. He will also
fill the Professorship of Physiology in the George Washington University.
The Netherlands Psychiatry and Neurology Society is organizing
an International Congress on Psychiatry, Neurology, Psychology and
the Nursing of Lunatics, to be held at Amsterdam, September 2 to 7,
1907. A circular inviting co-operation has been issued to psychologists,
psychiatrists and neurologists in this country. Anyone taking an interest in psychology, psychiatry, neurology or the nursing of lunatics may
become a member of the Congress, for which the membership fee is
sixteen shillings eight pence. Members intending to present papers aro
requested to send a synopsis before the 1st of May, 1907, to the secretary's office, who will see to the printing and translation thereof and will
hold copies at the disposal of each member of the Congress. Information concerning the Congress may be had by addressing the General
Secretary's office, Prinsengracht 717, Amsterdam.
A public kindergarten for children with abnormal speech was opened
October 17, 1905, at Frankfort-on-Main, Germany. This is the beginning of a movement that it is hoped will grow to some proportions. One
cannot begin too early in the child's life to diagnose the causes and
attempt the correction of speech defects.
Mr. George Herbert Locke, recently Dean of the College of Education of the University of Chicago, and editor of "School Review," has
been appointed Dean of the School for Training of Teachers, in the
Macdonald College, founded by Sir William Macdonald, and affiliated
with the McGill University, Montreal.
