The Dancing Mouse
==================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

The Animal Behavior Series, Vol. 1. By Robert
M. Yerkes. The Macmillan Company, 1907. Pp. xxi-{-290.
In this book the author not only presents the results of his own inves-
tigations on the dancing mouse, but he also tries to give as complete
an account of this animal as possible on the basis of the literature.
The dancing mouse has received this name for its curious capacity
in the execution of quick, graceful, bizarre and oft-repeated movements,
which are somewhat similar to our way of dancing. These mice are
frequently kept as pets and they are, as the author says, inexhaustible
sources of amusement as well as invaluable material for studies in
animal behavior and intelligence. The dancer did not make its
appearance as an object of scientific study before 1890. Naturally con-
siderable interest was taken in the origin of this race, because the
animals by their peculiar movements are unfit for the usual conditions
of mouse-existence, so that they are thrown on human care. It can not
be definitely settled when and where the race originated; very likely
it is several centuries old.
The dancers are imported from Japan, where they are known as
Chinese mice. From this one may conclude that the race originated
in China, although nothing definite could be settled by historical re-
search. The variation is now firmly established and breeds true to its
type, so that one cannot call it pathological, although there is evidence
that dancers appear sometimes among common mice.
After some remarks on the feeding, breeding and development of
the animals, the author proceeds to give the results of his study of the
dancing movements. It is curious to note that the previous investi-
gators disagree in their descriptions of the movements of the dancer,
although this is the most striking feature of the behavior of these
animals. By observing the movements of a large number of animals
at regular hours of the day the author found that the activity of the
dancer increases steadily from the morning to the evening, when it
reaches its maximum, and there exist large individual differences
as to the execution of the dancing movements. There are three kinds
of dancers: those which whirl almost uniformly to the right, those
which whirl to the left, and those which whirl almost as frequently
in one direction as in the other. It seems that there might be some
sex differences in this respect, the males being more frequently left
whirlers, whereas the females seem to be more frequently right whirlers;
the evidence, however, is not conclusive. The author remarks justly
at the end of this chapter, that one of the most interesting results of
his study of the movements of the dancer is the fact that in even so
simple a matter the truth cannot be discovered except by long and care-
ful observation, and that the method of getting knowledge of the
(183)
184 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
behavior of animals by impressions, verified by a few observations, is
worse than valueless.
Chapters IY and Y contain a study of equilibration and dizzi-
ness in the dancer and of the relation of these phenomena to structural
facts. Besides the dancing movements the following peculiarities of
the dancer demand an explanation in terms of structural facts: rest-
lessness, and quick jerky movements of the head; lack of responsiveness
to sounds; greater or less deficiency in equilibration and orientational
power; lack of visual dizziness and lack of rotational dizziness. It
seems very natural to refer these facts to structural peculiarities of
those portions of the body which are-supposed to control movements
and to be the cause of the phenomena of dizziness and of the ability
to perceive sounds, i. c., to some deviation from the type of the mam-
malian ear in the structure of the semicircular canals and of the
cochlea. A considerable amount of time has been spent to establish
a significant difference of these organs of the dancers from those of
the common mice. The discussion of the results obtained by Rawitz,
Panse, Baginski, Alexander and Kreidl, and by Kishi, shows that no
structural peculiarity was discovered which accounts satisfactorily for
the behavior of the dancers. There is no doubt that the peculiarities
of the behavior are caused by some structural differences, but it is
certain that they cannot be accounted for by differences in the sense
organs alone, and it seems to be doubtful whether they can be accounted
for in terms of the structure of the peripheral and of the central
nervous system. The author comes to the conclusion that the structure
of the entire organism will have to be taken into account.
The next chapter gives the author's own investigations on the sense
of hearing of the dancers. The results of previous investigations seem
to have shown almost without exception that the dancers lack the sense
of hearing. Those experiments, in which reactions of the dancer
to sound stimuli were observed, are open to criticism in so far as the
possibility that the mice did not react to other stimuli was not ex-
cluded. A close study of the animals shows that the adult dancer is
totally deaf, but the young dancer perceives sounds for a few days of
the third week of his life. Shortly before this period the young dancer
becomes very excitable and pugnacious.
Chapters YII-XI are devoted to the study of the sense of sight
of the dancer. These chapters cover 108 pages, or almost one-half of
the book, and they contain exclusively the results of the author's
experiments; references to the literature are given only when it is
necessary to define the relation of the author's results and conclusions
to those of previous investigators. The results refer to brightness
vision, to color vision and to the role of sight in the daily life of the
dancer. The labyrinth method was used with the greatest advantage.
The dancer's tendency to avoid disagreeable external conditions, its
need of space to dance freely and its abundant activity make this animal
extremely fit for study by laboratory methods. The author expresses
the view that the dancer may take the same part in comparative psy-
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 185
chology as the frog in physiology. The labyrinth method as used by the
author differs in one respect from all previous experiments with the
labyrinth, in so far as punishment instead of reward was used as the
chief motive for the proper performance of the required act. The pun-
ishment applied was a slight induction shock. This method is not
only less cruel, because it avoids subjecting the animals to extreme
hunger, but it is also more effective, because a hungry animal is
in a state of discomfort and it is impossible to keep the conditions
even fairly constant. The results of the experiments on vision show
that the dancer possesses the ability to discriminate brightness dif-
ferences of reflected light as well as of transmitted light, but that it
has not a color sense like ours. The animal probably discriminates
colors of the red end of the spectrum from those of other regions by
differences in the stimulating value of light of different wave lengths,
red having a very low stimulating value; the stimulating effect of dif-
ferent wave lengths for the dancing mouse, is radically different from
that of different wave lengths for the human eye. The retina of the
dancer is reported to contain only one type of retinal element, but no
details 011 this point are given. The role of the sense of sight in the
life of the dancer is not very great; movement and differences in bright-
ness are the only visual conditions which to any considerable extent
control the activity of this animal.
The rest of the book deals with the question of how the dancer may
profit by experience, and with problems which are related to this ques-
tion. It contains interesting remarks about the different methods of
training and about their efficiency. One chapter gives some observa-
tions on the question of relearning; an acquired habit it lost only
gradually, and even after a very long interval the process of relearning
requires less time than the original acquirement of the habit. Chapter
XVII describes some observations on individual, age and sex differences;
this investigation is not completed because in the course of the exper-
iments almost all the animals were lost by disease. The last chapter
contains some remarks about the inheritance of forms of behavior;
the author comes to the conclusion that there is no evidence of an
inheritance of acquired habits.
For the student of human psychology two parts of the book are
of special interest: the chapter where the author discusses the results
of the anatomical observations 011 the ear of the dancer, and the one
where he describes his "Weber's law experiments." The observations
011 the peculiarities of the dancer were put to a very interesting use
by Cyon, who used them as a basis for his theory of space. This
physiologist remarked several difficulties in the definitions of space,
among them the difficulty of finding a reason why we conceive space as
three-dimensional. Cyon gives the answer that the source of this diffi-
culty is the fact that space is a sense quality and therefore indefinable,
just in the same way as blue or red is indefinable. He then proceeds to
find the organ of this sixth sense, and chiefly 011 the basis of some obser-
vations 011 the abnormal structure of the ear of the dancer he comes to
186 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the conclusion that the semicircular canals are the organ of this sense,
and that we conceive space as three-dimensional, because the three
dimensions of space correspond to the three canals. Since the appear-
ance of Yerkes' book another article of Cyon has come out in which the
author continues the building up of his theory, and one may expect
the publication of a full account of his theory in the near future. Many
of those who are interested in the theory of space have not an oppor-
tunity to follow the development of physiological and anatomical
questions, and Yerkes' excellent account will be very welcome to
them. Cyon's theory is very ingenious, and for this reason it is
important not to forget that it rests only on a meagre empirical basis.
The chapter on Weber's law is probably the least satisfactory in
the book. In these experiments the mice were trained to recognize a
box which was distinguished from another only by a different intensity
of light. The smallest difference of intensity where an effect of the
training could be observed was taken for the just perceptible difference.
The difficulty consists in defining what an effect of training is. The
results of the experiments are given in figures which show how many
times a certain event occurred in a total number of cases. The question
arises when do these numbers indicate an effect of training? This
question, by its very nature, cannot be answered definitely without
laying down an arbitrary limit, because the numbers of relative fre-
quency would show some variation also if the experiments were re-
peated under exactly the same conditions. It is doubtful whether
the question as to the applicability of Weber's law for animals can be
answered at present, and it does not seem that the author materially
advances the problem by his results, chiefly because of the lack of
an adequate definition of a just perceptible difference for experiments
with animals. The sober attitude of not asking a question which can-
not be answered by our present means would seem to be in better
agreement with the general spirit of this excellent book.
