The Hospital School
=====================

:Author: Lightnek Witmee

In an article on clinical psychology in the first number of this
journal, I described the beginnings of the psychological clinic
at the University of Pennsylvania in the year 1896 and the general character of the work during the subsequent ten years.
During the past year, the demand upon the resources of the
clinic for the mental examination and educational treatment of
children has greatly increased. Last summer I organized a daily
clinic at which I saw, from the first of July to the middle of
August, an average of from three to four new cases a day. These
children were given a psychological examination by me and a
neurological examination by Dr SD IT Ludlum. Mr Stevenson Smith, a former student of the psychological department of
the University of Pennsylvania, and now professor of psychology
at the Hampden-Sidney College, took charge of the examination
and treatment of speech defects, especially stuttering. In the
psychological examination of such children as were brought to
the clinic, I was assisted by Mr. Edward II. Huntington, principal of special school No. 3, who is one of the first members of
the teaching profession of Philadelphia to devote himself to the
scientific study of these cases and to the removal of such physical
defects as are found to interfere with school progress. I was also
assisted by Mr. J. D. McCallie, a supervising principal in Trenton,
K J., who has given much time during the last year to the study
of defects of vision and audition in school children, and who has
devised a clinical audiometer that promises to be of service in
examining rapidly the hearing capacity of large numbers of children. Another assistant in this examination was Mr. J. D. Ileilman, a student of psychology and pedagogy at the University,
who is engaged on a special investigation of the causes of retardation in school progress.
In many cases it is impossible to make a satisfactory diagnosis of the mental status of a child after seeing him once or indeed
after several visits. The child's capacities and failings only become apparent after an attempt is made to teach him something
beyond his known acquirements. For this reason no psychologist would risk, in many cases, a statement of the child's mental
(138)
status with suggestions for treatment, nor would he risk a prognosis, unless he is able to place the child for observation and instruction in the hands of one or more competent teachers. For
many years I have had in mind the establishment of a training
school in the nature of a hospital school for the temporary treatment
of all classes of children suffering from retardation or physical
defects which interfere with their school progress. Such a training school, if properly conducted, is an expensive experiment, but
it is an experiment which must be made if we are to understand
these children, classify them, and. prescribe efficient methods of
treatment. The hospital school must provide a home for the
children where food, baths, sleep, massage, open-air life and physical training may be adequately supervised. The best of medical
care must also be supplied, not only for the examination and treatment of eyes, ears and naso-pharyngeal obstruction, but also for intestinal disorders, malnutrition, etc., which in some cases seriously
interfere with a child's mental progress. The school mustbeprovided,
therefore, with one or more trained nurses. There must be one
or more teachers especially fitted for the training of young children
and interested in helping children of deficient capacity.
The hospital school, or experimental training school, has
not only its raison d'etre as an independent institution; it is a
necessity for diagnosis and prognosis. In many cases, I desire
to keep children under training for several days, in some cases
a month, in others six months, and in a few cases, perhaps a year,
before the child is classified and before it can be determined just
where the child had best be sent, and what methods of instruction are best adapted for its individual treatment. Since the
establishment of the hospital school in July of this year, I have
found it extremely serviceable in doubtful cases in making my
diagnoses. Several cases taken into the training school for purposes of diagnosis during the summer were still doubtful cases
after two or three weeks of examination. The work of the psychologist differentiates itself from that of the neurologist in this
respect. It is true that in many branches of medicine to-day
a diagnosis is avoided, especially in chronic cases, until after the
patient has been kept for some time under observation. This is
absolutely essential in most cases of retardation. The more carefully I study these cases, the more surprises I encounter, not only
in uncovering unrecognized deficiencies and hindrances to normal
progress, but also in discovering unsuspected capacities.
Through the liberality of Mrs. J. Lewis Crozer, the Univer140 THE 

sity of Pennsylvania was provided with a fund which enabled
the department of psychology to make the experiment in establishing a hospital school. I obtained a house in West Philadelphia near the University where I was able to board ten children
and two trained nurses. The chief nurse whom I employed for
this work was Miss Anna L. Stanley, who obtained leave of absence for the purpose from the Visiting Nurse Society, and who
had been employed by that society during the past winter as a
school nurse. Miss Stanley shows unusual devotion to this kind
of work, and if the school nurse becomes an accepted institution
in the Philadelphia schools it will be largely owing to her pioneer
work and to the support given the work by the Visiting Nurse
Society.
The nurses brought the children to school every morning,
supervised their daily life when not in school, their diet, their
sleep, gave baths and massage, and carried out such medical treatment as was prescribed by the physicians in attendance. The
hospital school enjoyed the assistance of a number of physicians,
to whose clinics children needing the services of a specialist were
taken by a nurse. For the general medical care of the children,
the school was indebted to Dr. Alfred Stengel, who has taken
a great interest in the work and was kind enough to put at the
disposal of the school the facilities of the Pepper Clinical Laboratory, where examinations of urine, blood, etc., were made. In
the afternoons those children who were not needed for special
work, or were not to be sent to a clinic for special treatment, were
taken to Fairmount Park, where they were taught to play and
were able to enjoy the open air.
Every morning from 9 to 12 the children spent at school.
During the six weeks of the summer session the school was held in
the College Ilall of the University, where three rooms were set
aside for the purpose. Miss Town had charge of the regular
school work, in which she was assisted from time to time by several
teachers of Philadelphia and other schools, who were students of
psychology at the summer school of the University. Children
suffering from speech defects and children who show easy distraction of attention must, in the beginning at least, be treated individually for part of the time. This work with individuals or small
groups, these student assistants are quite able to carry out satisfactorily under direction, and thus the instructor was able to devote
her efforts to the more difficult cases. Miss Edith Boughton, a
sloyd teacher in one of the special schools of Philadelphia, had
THE HOSPITAL SCHOOL. 141
charge of the sloyd room, where children were given work with
carpenters' tools, raphia and other light manual work, and gymnastic exercises. This is an extremely important department of an
experimental training school. One would undoubtedly obtain
a false impression of the capacities of many children, if they
were seen only in intellectual work. Children who are totally
indifferent, uninterested, and apparently without sufficient visual
memory, attention or mental energy, to learn to read and cipher,
become keenly interested, develop considerable effort, and improve mentally when given manual work.
Important as it may be, to advance such children as are
backward, and appear to be subnormal, to a stage of intellectual
development where they become capable of making normal progress, and to improve the condition of such children as are trainable only within circumscribed limits, still the chief benefit that
will accrue to society from this kind of work will come from the
scientific results that are obtained from the study of these children. In all work of this kind it is, therefore, the first consideration to see that the work is done under such conditions that the
results are permanently recorded and the records published.
For this reason, I have felt that if the work is to be established on a satisfactory basis, some such journal as The Psychological Clinic should be brought into existence, where the
results of the work may be presented and discussed for the benefit
of those directly interested?physicians, teachers, social workers,
and parents. The development of the work also requires that
competent persons shall be trained to observe and work with these
children. I consider the efficient teaching of the methods and
results of clinical pliycliology as important as the actual prosecution of the work. During the summer session of the University
of Pennsylvania, the psychological department offered lecture and
laboratory courses, furnishing a foundation for this work in the
science of psychology. In addition, a psychological clinic was
given daily, where children were shown to the students, their
deficiencies and capacities demonstrated, the causes and methods
of treatment commented upon. This method of instruction in
psychology, which I introduced at first with some misgivings,
has proved very helpful to my students, and I now feel that the
psychological clinic is as important a department of practical work
in psychology as is the regular laboratory instruction.
About the middle of August the summer session closed, and
the work of the training school at the University of Pennsylvania
142 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ceased. Most of the children were sent to their homes, but a small
group of four children (later five) were sent to Dr. Ludlum's
house in Merion, where they were placed in his care and under
the direct training of Miss Hose Tierney, a teacher of thirteen
years' standing, who has had the training of a nurse in mental
cases. On the first of October the children were installed under
the care of Miss Tiemey in the house in West Philadelphia, where
the training school will be continued as long as the department
of psychology is able to obtain the funds to carry on the work.
From the cases that came under our care and training in the
hospital school, I select that of a girl of Russian Jewish parentage, eight years of age, whose history will serve to illustrate in an
admirable fashion the co-operation that is coming to exist
between school authorities and various special agencies for the
amelioration of the condition of many school children. This
child had been for two years in the first grade of a Philadelphia
school and had made in that time so little progress that there
was no possibility of promoting her to the next grade at the end
of the school year. She was brought to the psychological clinic
by Miss Stanley, a school nurse whose work was supported by a
private organization, the Visiting Nurse Society of Philadelphia,
in the hope of stimulating the city to undertake this most important work on behalf of children. The medical instructor for the
district, Dr. Newmayer, had also taken an interest in her and had
consulted me concerning her physical and mental condition.
When I first examined her she appeared to be a child who
took very little interest in her surroundings. She was poorly
nourished, dull and sullen, unwilling or unable to answer simple
questions. I soon discovered that she was deaf and that this was
one cause of her retardation. The tonsils were much enlarged,
adenoids were suspected; the eyesight was defective; she had
strabismus. I recommended that she be taken to Dr. Packard's
clinic at the Polyclinic Hospital to be examined for nasopharyngeal obstruction and operated upon if this appeared necessary.
Dr. Newmayer refracted her eyes and prescribed glasses, which
she has since worn. Dr. Packard operated upon her for adenoids
and enlarged tonsils.
The child had been brought to my psychological clinic for the
first time on March 23d. On May 4th I saw her again. Her
adenoids and tonsils had been removed about two weeks previous.
The child already showed a marvelous improvement in appearance.
Her skin was in much better condition and she appeared stronger.
THE HOSPITAL SCHOOL. 143
Her expression had improved likewise; the mouth was still open
as it had been before, bnt she looked more alert and took greater
interest in her surroundings. Miss Stanley, it seems, had been
advising the family as to proper diet, in consequence of which
she had been given more nourishing food.
The examination showed that she was very deaf both for
words and sounds, but especially for spoken language. We found
in her case, as in that of most children suffering from deafness
due to adenoids, that it was difficult to ascertain the degree of
deafness, owing to her inability to give attention. She was wearing the glasses that had been prescribed; her eyes were still somewhat crossed.
May 29th she appeared at the psychological clinic looking
mentally much brighter and physically improved. Examination
showed her hearing to be about one-fourth what normal hearing
should be. Her speech had much improved. Her teacher reported that she was now able to understand almost everything
that the child said, whereas, before the tonsils and adenoids had
been removed, it was quite impossible to understand her on certain
days. Examination showed that slie was able to write a few words,
but she had made very little progress in mastering the work of the
first grade.
I determined that she was a satisfactory case for the hospital
school. She was under special care and training for six weeks
in the hospital school on Walnut Street, and subsequently was
sent to Merion, whence she returned to the Walnut Street house
about the first of October.
Good food and air alone would have accomplished a great
deal for this child. She is one of seven children living with their
parents in an alley, in two small rooms about 9 x 14. The living
room, which has one window, contains a table, a few chairs, a stove
and lounge, no carpet, dirty clothes piled in one corner, many flies
and a barking dog. The table is covered with a piece of black oilcloth on which there are usually to be found pieces of brown bread
and glasses of tea. The family never sit down to table; no meals are
prepared. Their diet consists chiefly of bread and tea and sometimes fish. Bread is always on the table and the children take it up
when they feel like eating. The front of the house looks out
on a board fence which divides a double alley; in the rear is a
small brick yard; one hydrant at the entrance suffices for the
differeiit families; there is underground drainage, but an offensive
odor comes from the water closets.
144 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Although removal to a more favorable environment, good
food and medical treatment, even without mental training, would
have made some improvement in this child's physical and mental
condition, she showed mental characteristics which at the start
made it difficult for her to progress. . She was not only deaf and
subject to a speech defect,?both the direct result of adenoids,?
but she manifested also inefficient attention and appeared to be
subject to fits of sullenness, both of which may have been directly
due to the adenoids, but were probably also causally related to
insufficient nourishment, bad air, and poor home training. The
fits of sullenness were of special interest. They came on frequently and even now she is subject to them, although she is greatly
improved in this respect. It is somewhat difficult to distinguish
between inability to give attention, sullenness, deafness, and a
temperamental shyness. She often refuses to answer a question
which she will sometimes answer readily and intelligently if the
question is repeated in a louder tone of voice. At other times she
refuses to answer even though it is thus repeated, unless the question is put to her by her teacher or some one with whom she is
quite familiar. At other times she will even refuse to answer
the trainer. In the school room during the summer work, Miss
Town found that in the first minutes of the school session it was
often quite impossible to obtain the child's attention or co-operation in any school work. If the child were let alone for from
fifteen minutes to half an hour, she appeared to become ready
to take up her co-operation in the work of the class. If Miss Town
insisted on her taking part in the class work at the beginning
of the day,~ the child refused, and the time of her ultimate submission to school work would be more or less postponed. This
peculiarity alone would have made her a difficult case to handle
in the ordinary first grade of a public school. She was, therefore, pre-eminently a child for special work. Toward the end
of the first six weeks, under our care, she began to take more interest in her work, and would often begin the work of the day without
the preliminary period of mental dulness.
Miss Town reports on her six weeks' work with the child as
follows:
"F. is the natural result of the combined poverty and ignorance of her
parents. Her impoverished physical condition, the result of improper
nourishment, led to a sluggish mental development. The parents had no
understanding of her condition, or the means of alleviating it, even if
they had known what to do for her.
"Her faults lay chiefly in the emotional field. She was sluggish
THE HOSPITAL SCHOOL. 145
and difficult to interest and approach. She appeared obstinate, but the
obstinacy I judged was not so much a wilful one, which could be met
by strict discipline, as an uncontrollable psychic state, a temporary
clouding of the consciousness, which it was best to ignore. When so
treated, she would gradually brighten up and be ready to receive instruction quite easily. She did not evince rapid fatigue. Her dullest
period was the first of the day, before her interest was aroused.
"The strabismus almost disappeared while her attention was centered
on an object. The deafness also varied in degree with her attention.
The difficulty in articulation is partially due to the labored breathing,
resulting from adenoids, and partly to her difficulty in hearing. Not
hearing sounds clearly, it is impossible to reproduce them correctly.
She is capable of repeating most of the sounds that she really hears,
though her mouth breathing has resulted in a habitual slurring of many
sounds. She has a good visual memory and very readily learns words
as symbols of objects.
"In reality F. was bewildered for some time after she came to us,
by the absolute change in her environment. She passed through a
period of gradual unfolding of her emotional nature. She did not seem
to understand affection, and when another little girl, who was homesick
and needed a petting, grew demonstrative, she sat and laughed in surprise and absolute lack of understanding. She learned, however, and
before the term of six weeks was over she had grown demonstratively
affectionate herself.
"In conclusion, Fanny's chief faults were a general slowness and
lack of ambition, and a defect of articulation. The educational methods
used were, first, an effort to win the child's good will and interest, and,
secondly, to make her hear clearly every sound combination she was
required to pronounce."
During the six weeks at Merion, under Miss Tierney's instruction and Dr. Ludlum's medical care, the child made more
rapid improvement. The adenoids, which had been removed early
in the spring, again developed, and the child was operated upon
in the early part of July and again in August. The association f
of mental dulness with adenoids was easily traced in her case. In
the latter part of August the child became extremely dull and
heavy mentally; her breathing showed increased obstruction, the
mouth was again held widely open. These unfavorable conditions
wrere all removed through an operation. The obstructed breathing
did not disappear more quickly than the obstructed intellectual processes. The operation made her again a fairly bright child.
By the first of October I felt convinced that the child was
capable of making normal progress in the first grade of a public
school. I am not convinced, howrever, that the child is free from
146 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
some permanent reduction in mental capacity. She lias a permanent reduction in hearing, due to the adenoids, and she may
have a similar reduction in mental capacity due to the same
cause. I am inclined to the belief that she is a normally bright
child, and that if she is kept in a healthful environment and properly instructed, she will grow into the average young woman with
no other handicap than a considerable degree of deafness. Even
the deafness will diminish as her powers of attention and her
capacity to apprehend language increase. Lessons in articulation
will improve her hearing, as well as lessons in training the attention. If she should be returned to her home at the present time,
and placed in the ordinary first grade, she will have to contend
against her deafness and also against the depressing home environment and its insufficient support. I cannot regard my experiment as completed at the present time. I have therefore determined to keep her under observation in my hospital school for at
least another period of six months. We can control her diet,
give her adequate medical care, watch for a possible recurrence of
adenoids, see that nose breathing is firmly established, train her
in articulation, improve her voice, and assist her in her school
work. To determine whether such a child can maintain herself
in an ordinary class in the public schools, I have entered her in
the first grade of a neighboring school, where she will be taught
with other children. It is our hope that we shall enable her to
complete the work of the first two grades in one year. If we
succeed in accomplishing this result, the problem will then confront us as to what ultimate disposition is to be made of her
case. But the problem will then have become a social problem,
as medical care and psychological training will have done their
full work in restoring her to health and normal mentality. She
will be discharged from the hospital school cured. But will society
see to it that she does not again become the victim of lier environment ?
