News And Comment
=================

Americans have been familiarized to the point of satiety with the
dogma that more and more children should be brought into the world
in order that the race may not languish and die out. The older nations,
by safeguarding the lives of the children that they have, are adopting
the wiser principle of economy. They act upon the belief that if the
rate of infant mortality can be lowered, the birth rate may be allowed
to take care of itself. Germany and France have in recent years
organized societies to educate mothers in the care of young children
and to provide for them medical attendance and, if necessary, proper
food.
The movement in England is of more recent inception. In London
it is now entering upon its second year, the results of the first year's
work having been decidedly encouraging. The Marylebone Health So-
ciety in co-operation with the Marylebone General Dispensary has been
running for a year its scheme for training mothers and furnishing
medical advice. Their first annual report shows that 98 babies were
treated, 58 were brought regularly, and of these 4G made good progress.
The report proves that while poverty is sometimes the cause of a high
infant mortality, the chief cause is ignorance of what ought to bo done
for the child, and in these cases ignorance is much moi*e easily remedied
than poverty.
A conference was held on July first by the St. Pancras Mothers' and
Infants' Society, at which a school for mothers was organized. Train-,
ing is to be given to married women and to girls in the feeding, bathing
and clothing of infants and the treatment of the minor ailments of
childhood. With the aim of inducing mothers to nurse their own
children, the society will provide nourishing dinners at nominal ex-
pense for the mothers, while those who have been advised not to nurse
their children will be given instruction and help in the preparation
of suitable artificial food. Benevolent people in London who are inter-
esting themselves in the movement expect it to relieve the excessive
infant mortality, the chief cause is ignorance of what ought to be done
civilization of their country.
At the meeting of the National Education Association held at Los
Angeles last summer, the board of directors authorized the appoint-
ment of a committee of investigation into the Provisions in Public
Schools for Exceptional Children. Other committees authorized at the
same time were: On the Culture Element in Education; on a System
of Teaching Morals in Public Schools; on Industrial Education in
Rural Schools; on Shortage of Teachers; on a National University;
on Courses in Manual Training for Elementary Schools.
(154)
NEWS AND COMMENT. 155
Miss Grace Helen Kent, formerly a student of psychology at tlie
Iowa State University and later at Harvard, has returned to Philadel-
phia and will spend the winter in psychological work at the Philadelphia
General Hospital.
Dr. Karl Stumpf, professor of philosophy at the University of
Berlin, and the author of several well-known works on psychological
subjects, has been elected rector of the University of Berlin for 1907-08.
The position is filled each year by a different member of the faculty,
and is much coveted, not only for the sake of the honor and prestige
it confers, but also because the rector's fees accrue to the holder, and
amount to about twenty thousand dollars for the year.
The Riverside School, of Pittsburgh, Pa., has just succeeded, after
a campaign of ten years, in inducing the school board to equip the build-
ing with baths. The baths will be used by the pupils during the day,
presumably under the supervision of a school nurse. After school hours
mothers living in the neighborhood will be permitted to use the baths
for themselves and their younger children.
Edwin Grant Dexter, Ph. D., professor of education in the Univer-
sity of Illinois, who has been appointed commissioner of education in
Porto Rico, has gone to that island to enter upon the duties of his new
position.
The work done in the public schools in the past four years by the
Visiting iNurse Society of Philadelphia, through the activity of its
school nurse, Miss Anna L. Stanley, has yielded results of such impor-
tance that the society has resolved to extend its influence to a larger
field this winter. Four assistant nurses have been engaged for a term
of three months. Under the direction of Miss Stanley each nurse will
have charge of from three to five schools in the poorer sections of the
city. The nurses will co-operate with the medical inspector at the
schools, and will visit the homes of the children to see that his direc-
tions are carried out, and to assist the parents in improving sanitary
conditions at home.
It is well known that the summer camps for boys and for girls
have increased notably in numbers and efficiency during the past ten
years, there being now some four hundred. Probably over twenty
thousand children went into summer camps during the past season.
Eight years ago Winthrop Tisdale Talbot, M.D., the director of the
oldest camp for boys, established a winter camp school at Holderness,
N. H., as a means of continuing the training which had proved valuable
for many years during the summer. Permanence and solidity are now
being given to this institution by its becoming incorporated under the
laws of New Hampshire under the name of Camp Asquam, and by
the co-operation of well-known young men, alumni of the camp, as
156 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
members of the corporation, and by the enlistment of a number of lead-
ing educational authorities in America to act as an advisory council.
The routine of the daily life at Camp Asquam is the result of
years of experiment in making boys healthy, strong, and efficient.
Experience has proved the value of long hours of early sleep in the
fresh air, careful selection of food and its proper preparation, deep
breathing exercises, which resulted last winter in an average increase
of over thirty per cent in lung capacity, concentration upon a few sub-
jects instead of many in school work, teaching at an early age the best
methods of acquiring information quickly and thoroughly, and study-
ing the physical causes imderlying application and concentration. All
book study is done in four morning hours with as little formal recitation
as possible and with intervals of intellectual relaxation and muscular
exercise. After dinner there is a short period of rest, and the after-
noon is spent out of doors, or in stormy weather in the shops. Supper
is at dusk during the winter, and in the evening there is no book study,
but the time before the early bed hour is taken up with interesting
physical and chemical experiments, music, charades, and games. Horse-
back riding and the care of horses, wood chopping, work on the farm,
and rifle practice as a means of improving nervous control, enter
largely into the educational plan. The efficient results gained by this
mode of living have thus far amply justified Dr. Talbot's departure
from conventional methods.
The Triennial Convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church,
which was opened in Richmond, Va., on October 2d, is still in session.
On October 11th the House of Bishops adopted a resolution presented
by Bishop David H. Greer, of New York, calling upon all churchmen
to join in fighting child labor in the United States. It reads as fol-
lows:
"Whereas, The evil of child labor is apparently on the increase
in the United States, and it is known that the employment of children
in factories, mines and shops reduces wages, disintegrates the family,
deprives the child of natural rights to a period of training and depre-
ciates the human stock, and
"Whereas, We recognize the profound responsibility of the Church
for our ethical as well as o\ir spiritual standards;
"Therefore, We call upon employers and parents to use their in-
fluence to better legislation and better enforcement of the laws, to
the end that the exploitation of the labor of children shall become
impossible in this Christian country."
The resolution was presented to the House of Deputies and adopted
by that body on October 12th.
