Clinical Psychology
===================


By Lightner Witmee.
The Psychological Clinic
Vol. I. m. 1. Mae

During the last ten years the laboratory of psychology at the
University of Pennsylvania has conducted, under my direction,
what I have called "a psychological clinic." Children from the
public schools of Philadelphia and adjacent cities have been brought
to the laboratory by parents or teachers; these children had made
themselves conspicuous because of an inability to progress in school
work as rapidly as other children, or because of moral defects
which rendered them difficult to manage under ordinary discipline.
When brought to the psychological clinic, such children are
given a physical and mental examination; if the result of this
examination shows it to be desirable, they are then sent to specialists for the eye or ear, for the nose and throat, and for nervous diseases, one or all, as each case may require. The result of this
conjoint medical and psychological examination is a diagnosis of
the child's mental and physical condition and the recommendation
of appropriate medical and pedagogical treatment. The progress
of some of these children has been followed for a term of years.
To illustrate the operation of the psychological clinic, take a
recent case sent to the laboratory from a city of Pennsylvania, not
far from Philadelphia. The child was brought by his parents, on
the recommendation of the Superintendent of Schools. Examination revealed a boy ten years of age, without apparent physical
defect, who had spent four years at school, but had made so little
progress that his ignorance of the printed symbols of the alphabet
made it necessary to use the illiterate card to test his vision. Nothing in the child's heredity or early history revealed any ground
for the suspicion of degeneracy, nor did the child's physical appearance warrant this diagnosis. The boy appeared to be of normal
intelligence, except for the retardation in school work. The examination of the neurologist to whom he was sent, Dr. William G.
Spiller, confirmed the absence of conspicuous mental degeneracv
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and of physical defect. The oculist, Dr. William C. Posey, found
nothing more serious, than a slight far-sighted astigmatism, and the
examination of Dr. George C. Stout for adenoids, gave the child a
clean bill of health, so far as the nose and pharynx were concerned.
On the conclusion of this examination he was, necessarily, returned
to the school from which he came, with the recommendation
to the teacher of a course of treatment to develop the child's
intelligence. It will require at least three months' observation
to determine whether his present pedagogical retardation is based
upon an arrest of cerebral development or is merely the result of
inadequate methods of education. This case is unequivocally one
for the psychologist.
My attention was first drawn to the phenomena of retardation in the year 1889. At that time, while a student of psychology
at the University of Pennsylvania, I had charge of the English
branches in a college preparatory school of Philadelphia. In my
classes at this academy I was called upon to give instruction in
English to a boy preparing for entrance to college, who showed a
remarkable deficiency in the English language. His compositions
seldom contained a single sentence that had been correctly formed.
For example, there was little or no distinction between the present
and the past tenses of verbs; the endings of many words were
clipped off, and this was especially noticeable in those words in
which a final ending distinguished the plural from the singular,
or an adverb from an adjective. As it seemed doubtful whether
he would ever be able to enter college without special instruction
in English, I was engaged to tutor him in the English branches.
I had no sooner undertaken this work than I saw the necessity
of beginning with the elements of language and teaching him as
one would teach a boy, say, in the third grade. Before long I discovered that I must start still further back. I had found it impossible, through oral and written exercises, to fix in his mind the
elementary forms of words as parts of speech in a sentence. This
seemed to be owing to the fact that he had verbal deafness. He
was quite able to hear even a faint sound, like the ticking of a
watch, but he could not hear the difference in the sound of such
words as grasp and grasped. This verbal deafness was associated
with, and I now believe was probably caused by, a defect of articulation. Thus the boy's written language was a fairly exact replica
of his spoken language; and he probably heard the words that
others spoke as he himself spoke them. I therefore undertook to
give him an elementary training in articulation to remedy the
defects which are ordinarily corrected, through imitation, by the
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 3
time a child is three or four years old. I gave practically no attention to the subjects required in English for college entrance, spending all my time on the drill in articulation and in perfecting his
verbal audition and teaching him the simplest elements of written language. The result was a great improvement in nil his
written work, and he succeeded in entering the college department
of the University of Pennsylvania in the following year.
In 1894-95, I found him as a college student in my classes
at the University of Pennsylvania. His articulation, his written
discourse and his verbal audition were very deficient for a boy of
his years. In consequence he was unable to acquire the technical
terminology of my branch, and I have no doubt that he passed
very few examinations excepting through the sympathy of his
instructors who overlooked the serious imperfections of his written
work, owing to the fact that he was in other respects a fair student.
When it came to the final examinations for the bachelor's degree,
however, he failed and was compelled to repeat much of the work
of his senior year. He subsequently entered and graduated from
one of the professional departments of the University. His deficiencies in language, I believe, have never been entirely overcome.
I felt very keenly how much this boy was losing through his
speech defect. His school work, his college course, and doubtless
his professional career were all seriously hampered. I was confident at the time, and this confidence has been justified by subsequent experience with similar cases, that if he had been given
adequate instruction in articulation in the early years of childhood,
he could have overcome his defect. With the improvement in
articulation there would have come an improved power of apprehending spoken and written language. That nothing was done
for him in the early years, nor indeed at any time, excepting for
the brief period of private instruction in English and some lessons in elocution, is remarkable, for the speech defect was primarily owing to an injury to the head in the second year of life,
and his father was a physician who might have been expected to
appreciate the necessity of special training in a case of retardation caused by a brain injury.
The second case to attract my interest was a boy fourteen
years of age, who was brought to the laboratory of psychology
by his grade teacher. He was one of those children of great
interest to the teacher, known to the profession as a chronic bad
speller. His teacher, Miss Margaret T. Maguire, now the supervising principal of a grammar school of Philadelphia, was at that
time a student of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania;
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
she was imbued with the idea that a psychologist should be able,
through examination, to ascertain the causes of a deficiency in spelling and to recommend the appropriate pedagogical treatment for
its amelioration or cure.
With this case, in March, 1896, the work of the psychological
clinic was begun. At that time I could not find that the science
of psychology had ever addressed itself to the ascertainment of the
causes and treatment of a deficiency in spelling. Yet here was a
simple developmental defect of memory; and memory is a mental
process of which the science of psychology is supposed to furnish
the only authoritative knowledge. It appeared to me that if
psychology was worth anything to me or to others it should be
able to assist the efforts of a teacher in a retarded case of this kind.
"The final test of the value of what is called science is its
applicability" are words quoted from the recent address of the
President of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science. With Huxley and President Woodward, I believe that
there is no valid distinction between a pure science and an applied
science. The practical needs of the astronomer to eliminate the
personal equation from his observations led to the invention of
the chronograph and the chronoscope. Without these two instruments, modern psychology and physiology could not possibly have
achieved the results of the last fifty years. If Helmholtz had not
made the chronograph an instrument of precision in physiology
and psychology; if Fechner had not lifted a weight to determine
the threshold of sensory discrimination, the field of scientific work
represented to-day by clinical psychology could never have been
developed. The pure and the applied sciences advance in a single
front. What retards the progress of one, retards the progress of
the other; what fosters one, fosters the other. But in the final
analysis the progress of psychology, as of every other science, will
be determined by the value and amount of its contributions to the
advancement of the human race.
The absence of any principles to guide me made it necessary
to apply myself directly to the study of these children, working
out my methods as I went along. In the spring of 1896 I saw
several other cases of children suffering from the retardation of
some special function, like that of spelling, or from general retardation, and I undertook the training of these children for a certain number of hours each week. Since that time the psychological
clinic has been regularly conducted in connection with the laboratory of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania. The study
of these cases has also formed a regular part of the instruction
offered to students in child psychology.
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 5
In December, 1896, I outlined in an address delivered before
the American Psychological Association a scheme of practical work
in psychology. The proposed plan of organization comprised:
1. The investigation of the phenomena of mental development
in school children, as manifested more particularly in mental and
moral retardation, by means of the statistical- and clinical methods.
2. A psychological clinic, supplemented by a training school
in the nature of a hospital school, for the treatment of all classes
of children suffering from retardation or physical defects interfering with school progress.
3. The offering of practical work to those engaged in the professions of teaching and medicine, and to those interested in
social work, in the observation and training of normal and retarded
children.
4. The training of students for a new profession?that of
the psychological expert, who should find his career in connection
with the school system, through the examination and treatment of
mentally and morally retarded children, or in connection with the
practice of medicine. ^
In the summer of 1897 the department of psychology in the
University of Pennsylvania was able to put the larger part of this
plan into operation. A four weeks' course was given under the
auspices of the American Society for the Extension of University
Teaching. In addition to lecture and laboratory courses in experimental and physiological psychology, a course in child psychology was given to demonstrate the various methods of child
psychology, but especially the clinical method. The psychological
clinic was conducted daily, and a training school was in operation in which a number of children were under the daily instruction of Miss Mary E. Marvin. At the clinic, cases were presented
of children suffering from defects of the eye, the ear, deficiency in
motor ability, or in memory and attention; and in the training
school, children were taught throughout the session of the Summer
School, receiving pedagogical treatment for the cure of stammering
and other speech defects, for defects of written language (such as
bad spelling), and for motor defects.
Erom that time until the present I have continued the examination and treatment of children in the psychological clinic. The
number of cases seen'each week has been limited, because the
means were not at hand for satisfactorily treating a large number of cases. I felt, also, that before offering to treat these children on a large scale I needed some years of experience and
extensive study, which could only be obtained through the pro6 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
longed observation of a few cases. Above all, I appreciated the
great necessity of training a group of students upon wliose assistance I could rely. The time has now come for a wider development of this work. To further this object and to provide for
the adequate publication of the results that are being obtained in
this new field of psychological investigation, it was determined to
found this journal, The Psychological Clinic.
My own preparation for the work has been facilitated through
my connection as consulting psychologist with the Pennsylvania
Training School for Feeble-Minded Children at Elwyn, and a
similar connection with the Haddonfield Training School and Miss
Marvin's Home School in West Philadelphia.
Clinical psychology is naturally very closely related to medicine. At the very beginning of my work I was much encouraged
by the appreciation of the late Provost of the University of Pennsylvania, Dr. William Pepper, who at one time proposed to establish a psychological laboratory in connection with the William
Pepper Clinical Laboratory of Medicine. At his suggestion,
psychology was made an elective branch in what was then the newly
organized fourth year of the course in medicine. At a subsequent reorganization of the medical course, however, it was found
necessary to drop the subject from the curriculum.
I also desire to acknowledge my obligation to Dr. S. Weir
Mitchell for co-operation in the examination of a number of cases
and for his constant interest in this line of investigation. I have
also enjoyed the similar co-operation of Dr. Charles K. Mills, Dr.
William G. Spiller, the late Dr. Harrison Allen, Dr. Alfred Stengel, Dr. William Campbell Posey, Dr. George C. Stout, and Dr.
Joseph Collins, of New York. Dr. Collins will continue this cooperation as an associate editor of The Psychological Clinic.
The appreciation of the relation of psychology to the practice
of medicine in general, and to psychiatry in particular, has been
of slow growth. The first intelligent treatment of the insane was
accorded by Pinel in the latter part of the eighteenth century, a
century that was marked by the rapid development of the science of
psychology, and which brought forth the work of Pereire in teaching oral speech to the deaf, and the "Emile" of Rousseau. A few
medical men have had a natural aptitude for psychological analysis. From them has come the chief development of the medical
aspects of psychology,?from Seguin and Charcot in France, Carpenter and Maudsley in England, and Weir Mitchell in this country. Psychological insight will carry the physician or teacher
far on the road to professional achievement, but at the present day
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 7
the necessity for a more definite acquaintance with psychological
method and facts is strongly felt. It is noteworthy that perhaps
the most prominent name connected with psychiatry to-day is that
of Kraepelin, who was among the first to seek the training in
experimental psychology afforded by the newly established laboratory at Leipzig.
Although clinical psychology is closely related to medicine,
it is quite as closely related to sociology and to pedagogy. The
school room, the juvenile court, and the streets are a larger laboratory of psychology. An abundance of material for scientific study
fails to be utilized, because the interest of psychologists is elsewhere
engaged, and those in constant touch with the actual phenomena
do not possess the training necessary to make their experience and
observation of scientific value.
While the field of clinical psychology is to some extent occupied by the physician, especially by the psychiatrist, and while I
expect to rely in a great measure upon the educator and social
worker for the more important contributions to this branch of
psychology, it is nevertheless true that none of these has quite the
training necessary for this kind of work. For that matter, neither
has the psychologist, unless he has acquired this training from
other sources than the usual course of instruction in psychology.
In fact, we must look forward to the training of men to a new
profession which will be exercised more particularly in connection
with educational problems, but for which the training of the
psychologist will be a prerequisite.
For this reason not a small part of the work of the laboratory
of psychology in the University of Pennsylvania for the past ten
years has been devoted to the training of students in child psychology, and especially in the clinical method. The greater number
of these students have been actively engaged in the profession of
teaching. Important contributions to psychology and pedagogy,
the publication of which in the form of monographs has already
been begun, will serve to demonstrate that original research of value
can be carried on by those who are actively engaged in educational
or other professional work. There have been associated in this work
of the laboratory of psychology, Superintendent Twitmyer, of
Wilmington; Superintendent Bryan, of Camden; District Superintendent Cornman, of Philadelphia; Mr. <T. M. McCallie, Supervising Principal of the Trenton Schools; Mr. Edward A. Huntington, Principal of a Special School in Philadelphia; Miss Clara H.
Town, Resident Psychologist at the Friends' Asylum for the
Insane, and a number of special teachers for the blind, the deaf,
8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and mentally deficient children. I did not venture to begin the publication of this journal until I felt assured of the assistance of a
number of fellow-workers in clinical psychology as contributors
to tho journal. As this work has grown up in the neighborhood
of Philadelphia, it is probable that a greater number of students,
equipped to carry on tho work of clinical psychology, may be found
in this neighborhood than elsewhere, but it is hoped that this
journal will have a wider influence, and that the co-operation of
those who are developing clinical psychology throughout the country will be extended the journal.
The phraseology of "clinical psychology" and "psychological
clinic" will doubtless strike many as an odd juxtaposition of terms
relating to quite disparate subjects. While the term "clinical" has
been borrowed from medicine, clinical psychology is not a medical
psychology. I have borrowed the word "clinical" from medicine,
because it is the best term I can find to indicate the character of the
method which I deem necessary for this work. Words seldom
retain their original significance, and clinical medicine, is not
what the word implies,?the work of a practicing physician at the
bedside of a patient. The term "clinical" implies a method, and
not a locality. When tho clinical method in medicine was established on a scientific basis, mainly through the efforts of
Boerliaave at the University of Leiden, its development came in
response to a revolt against the philosophical and didactic methods
that more or less dominated medicine up to that time. Clinical
psychology likewise is a protestant against a psychology that derives psychological and pedagogical principles from philosophical
speculations and against a psychology that applies the results of
laboratory experimentation directly to children in the school room.
The teacher's interest is and should be directed to the subjects which comprise tho curriculum, and which he wishes to impress upon the minds of the children assigned to his care. It is not
what the child is, but what lie should be taught, that occupies the
center of his attention. Pedagogy is primarily devoted to mass
instruction, that is, teaching the subjects of the curriculum to
classes of children without reference to the individual differences
presented by the members of a class. The clinical psychologist
is interested primarily in the individual child. As the physician
examines his patient and proposes treatment with a definite purpose in view, namely the patient's cure, so the clinical psychologist
examines a child with a single definite object in view,?the next
step in the child's mental and physical development. It is here
that the relation between science and practice becomes worthy of
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 9
discrimination. The physician may have solely in mind the cure
of his patient, but if he is to be more than a mere practitioner and
to contribute to the advance of medicine, he will look upon his
efforts as an experiment, every feature of which must indeed have a
definite purpose,?the cure of the patient,?but he will study every
favorable or unfavorable reaction of the patient with reference to
the patient's previous condition and the remedial agents he has
employed. In the same way the purpose -of the clinical psychologist, as a contributor to science, is to discover the relation between
cause and effect in applying the various pedagogical remedies to a
child who is suffering from general or special retardation.
I would not have it thought that the method of clinical
psychology is limited necessarily to mentally and morally retarded
children. These children are not, properly speaking, abnormal,
nor is the condition of many of them to be designated as in any
way pathological. They deviate from the average of children only
in being at a lower stage of individual development. Clinical
psychology, therefore, does not exclude from consideration other
types of children that deviate from the average?for example, the
precocious child and the genius. Indeed, the clinical method is
applicable even to the so-called normal child. For the methods
of clinical psychology are necessarily invoked wherever the status
of an individual mind is determined by observation and experiment, and pedagogical treatment applied to effect a change, i. c.,
the development of such individual mind. Whether the subject
be a child or an adult, the examination and treatment may be conducted and their results expressed in the terms of the clinical
method.
