News And Comment
=================

Dr. John H. Musser, Professor of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, recently held at his residence in Philadelphia a meeting
for the consideration of the organization of social work in connection
with dispensary practice. To this meeting he invited representatives
of the various departments of the University Hospital, Miss Marion E.
Smith, superintendent of the hospital, a representative of the department of psychology at the University, a representative of the department
of sociology, and representatives of the University Settlement. Those
present listened to the account given by Miss Ida M. Cannon, of Boston,
of the social work department of the Massachusetts General Hospital.
Dr. Musser has already obtained one assistant, who will visit cases
in their homes, give lessons in hygiene, cooking, etc., and endeavor
to carry out the directions of the physicians. It is his desire to organize a corps of social workers, in part made up of students of sociology
and psychology, and working in conjunction with the University
Settlement for the district in which the settlement is located. It is
probable that this work, which is thus being begun under Dr. Musser's
influence, will increase in importance very rapidly.
Such has been the history of the work established at the Massachusetts General Hospital through the efforts of Dr. Richard C. Cabot.
The first annual report was published only last year, but in that report
the staff for social work includes a general secretary and assistants,
a volunteer teacher of hygiene, nine volunteer assistants at the outpatient department, and five paid assistants outside the out-patient
department. There is also a large suburban tuberculosis class organized
with two physicians in charge, with a large number of volunteer visitors
and several paid assistants. In addition to the work in the tuberculosis
class, social work has been organized to include the teaching of hygiene
in the many cases where this is necessary; demonstrations and directions
to mothers on infant feeding and the care of delicate children; the
providing of vacations and country outings for those who need them as
part of their treatment; the care of unmarried girls who are pregnant,
morally exposed, or feeble-minded; help for patients needing work or
a change of work; provision and provisions for patients "dumped" at
the hospital; assistance to patients needing'treatment after discharge
from the hospital wards. In administering general relief, the social work
department endeavors to make available for its patients the resources
of the charitable organizations already in the field, and undertakes
relief on its own account only in those cases for which no proper or
adequate disposition can be found.
The socialization of medicine presents an important problem, analogous to that of the socialization of education, for which The Psychological Clinic is a spokesman. Miss Cannon emphasizes the fact
that what dispensary patients need is education quite as much as
medical treatment. The social workers connected with the Massachusetts General Hospital have outlined a plan-of education in the
proper mode of living and in the care of the sick. For the socialization
(187)
188 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of education we need first to instruct teachers that the educational
problem is only part of a larger social problem, and then to win their
interest to assist in working out a solution.
Asheville, N. C., is about to organize a class for truants. Superintendent R. J. Tighe is looking for a suitable person, preferably a man,
to take charge of this first class. It is probable that the work will
extend to backward children, as this has been the history of such work
in other cities.
The psychological training school, or hospital school, seeks to obtain
one or more student assistants. The assistant will live at the school
and receive instruction in psychology, in nursing, and in special work
with backward children, as part compensation. Those who graduate
from the hospital school as trainers of backward children should be
able to obtain for the training of private cases the compensation of
trained nurses, in the neighborhood of one hundred dollars a month
and expenses. The work is of a character to recommend itself to
college graduates who require financial assistance while pursuing graduate work in psychology or sociology. Inquiries should be addressed
to Dr. Lightner Witmer, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa.
Dr. J. Carleton Bell, Instructor in Experimental Psychology, Wellesley College, has been appointed to take charge of the new psychological
laboratory in the Brooklyn Training School for Teachers.
