Child and Educational Psychology
==================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

Tlie Psychological Bulletin. Vol.
Ill, No. 2, Nov. 15, 1907. Edited by M. V. O'Shea.
The leading article of this number of the "Psychological Bulletin" is
a critical and historical survey of recent work in education and child
psychology from the pen of its editor, the Professor of the Science and
Art of Education in the University of Wisconsin.
Speaking for educationists in this country, Professor O'Shea says:
"The belief is growing very strong among us that education can and
ought to be treated as a phase of biological and psychological science,
and this attitude is manifest in much of the current American literature
on the theory of education and the principles of teaching."
In commenting upon the importance of the direct observation and
study of the developmental processes in children, he continues: "Educationists are convinced that they cannot discover the thoughts, emotions, attitudes, and impulses of a boy of five, say, by simply turning
their vision in upon themselves. The boy must be observed as a natural
object in all his reactions; and he must also be subjected to special
stimulations, so that his responses can be accurately determined. Most
educationists among us are now students to some extent of children
or of the theories of child development, and educational writing is to a
constantly increasing degree reflecting the developmental attitude."
While emphasizing the importance of child psychology to the
teacher, O'Shea observes with favor the disappearance of the spectacular
element in the child study movement. Undoubtedly this represents an
early phase of the development of child psychology. Let us hope that
child psychology is now ready to enter upon a strictly scientific stage
with a more adequate terminology. It is disappointing to find O'Shea
constantly using the silly expression "child study" in the body of his
article, although he employs the more appropriate "child psychology"
in its title. Children in the elementary grades are supposed to pay
some attention to "nature study"; an important group of scientists are
also students of Nature, but they commonly refer to their branch of
inquiry as Biology. Even a child may pursue "nature study," and the
entirely untrained mother or teacher may pursue "child study." Let
us hope we have reached the end of the "child study" period and have
advanced to the stage of a scientific child psychology, for the prosecution of which adequate training and experience will be required.
It will be interesting reading for Dr Stanley Hall, who has filled
the "American Journal of Psychology" and the "Pedagogical Seminary"
for many years with the results of the syllabus method, to learn that
although "there is some of this sort of thing yet ... no one pays
much heed to it."
(30)
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 37 <
It is also news to some of us to learn that the study of children
has been carried on almost wholly by educationists and teachers actually
in service. We have been under the impression that child psychology
had been developed in this country by those who were primarily psychologists, going out from laboratories of experimental psychology into the
laboratories of experimental pedagogy,?the school rooms of the country.
O'Shea's review gives in this respect an entirely wrong idea of the history of work in child psychology, unless he desires to restrict child
psychology to the diluted article that is practiced under the title of
child study in many parts of this country. It is true he emphasizes
the necessity of skilled observers, but the only line of investigation which
meets his hearty approval is that which follows an individual child or a
group of children for several years from day to day or week to week.
As a matter of fact, biographies and autobiographies are the least scientific of records, and this method has been least productive in accurate
results of all the methods of child psychology. While Professor O'Shea
is right in emphasizing the relation that subsists between the psychology
of the individual and the education of classes or groups of children, he
mistakes the problem of public education, which is not how most successfully to educate an individual child, but how to teach groups of forty
or more children. The psychology of the individual differs from the
psychology of the mass, and methods that are found eminently successful
m the training of an individual child are not necessarily successful
when applied in class work. On this account, the scientific study of the
psychology and pedagogy of groups of children should be of equal if not
more importance to the teacher than the psychology and pedagogy of
the individual.
With Professor O'Shea, we view with favor the passing of formal
psychology as an introduction to the study of education, and we hope it
is true,?though we doubt it,?that this formal psychology is being restricted "to the mechanical type of normal schools where nothing will
be tolerated which is not perfectly systematized and formal and easily
memorized." As Professor O'Shea points out, the only psychology worth
while to the teacher is that which brings him to the point where he
can actually see his psychological principles illustrated in the activities
of the pupils about him.
But this is no reason for minimizing the importance of the experimental method, nor can we see any justification for the contention that
Thorndike in his "Principles of Teaching" abandons the exact methods
which Thorndike in his "Educational Psychology" proposes for 1he purpose of measuring mental traits and changes as affected by educational
processes. The "Principles of Teaching" does not lay the same stress
as the "Educational Psychology" upon the experimental method, simply
because it was written with a different object. It deals, as the author
says, with the "How" of actual teaching, not with the "Why," or the
What." Nevertheless, even in the "Principles of Teaching" teachers
are given the benefit of the results of applied experimental studies. The
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
argument in the chapter on "Individual Differences," for example, is
based entirely upon exact results obtained by tests in spelling and arithmetic, and presented in the form of a series of tables and curves. Instead
of turning away from the exact experimental method, Thorndike's most
recent book raises the method to a more important place by demonstrating its practical necessity as a basis for a rational system of teaching.
He is very insistent that all special methods of teaching should be subjected to exact scientific experimentation. Only when this is done can a
final result be reached in demonstrating which of a number of methods
is the most successful. In this manner he proposes to reach certainty as
to the most effective method of teaching spelling, grammar, or arithmetic.
As typical of such study of methods, he cites Rice's and Cornman'.s investigations of spelling in the elementary schools. We fail to see in all this
where Thorndike abandons his exact methods.
Professor O'Shea fires a blank cartridge at physiological psychology.
He says that the principles of physiological psychology and of the study
of the nervous system are useless to the teacher. As a matter of fact,
the psycho-physiological standpoint in psychology is more securely established to-day than ever, and education is compelled to give increasing
heed to its teachings. How, for example, will Professor O'Shea explain
to his students the function of the senses, and the relation of sensation
to the development of memory and imagination; how will he make clear
to them the nature of the instincts and emotions; how will he interpret
the phenomena of impulse and will; how will he even make attention
an intelligible problem; and, finally, how will he treat education as a
"phase of biological science" and yet make no reference to the anatomy
and physiology of the sense organs and brain, and to the developmental
relation of complex psychical reactions to inherited instincts and reflexes ?
Physiological psychology, Professor O'Shea thinks, may help in some
particular situations, as in understanding and dealing with abnormal
manifestations, for example, in fatigue, etc. In this admission alone
he has sufficiently acknowledged its importance to educational psychology.
Abnormal mental manifestations are not restricted to children in schools
for defectives. There are few classes of first, second, or third year children that do not contain a number of children who manifest some form
of abnormal mental functioning. Without an intimate knowledge of the
close relation between physical and mental conditions, a teacher may
fail to discover a defect that is retarding or will later retard the child's
progress. The oft reiterated appeal of a teacher to the children in her
class to "pay attention" is in most cases amusing, in some cases pathetic
to those who know the psychological antecedents and the physiological
conditions of the state of attention. If the teacher has some knowledge
of physiological psychology, and knows the relation between the power
of attention and such physical conditions as digestive disturbances, nasopharyngeal obstructions, eye and ear defects, and temporary or permanent nervous disability, she will substitute for the appeal to "pay attention" an examination of her children, and on finding defects of vision
NEWS AND COMMENT. 39
or hearing she will place the "inattentive dullard" nearer to the blackboard and herself, and if necessary endeavor to secure medical assistance.
Work of this kind is being carried on in our schools to-day to a
greater extent than ever before, and through this work physiological
psychology is making itself increasingly felt in the educational field.
The syllabus method, the method of exact experimentation, and the
methods of physiological psychology are in reality those methods which
are responsible for most that is of value in the educational psychology
of to-day, and they may be expected to give rise to such a treatment of
education as, in the words of Professor O'Sliea, "can and ought to be
made," i. e., the treatment of education "as a phase of biological and
psychological science."
