Public Day Schools for Backward Children
=========================================
 
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
:Author:  Clara Harrison Tow,
Resident Psychologist at Friends' Asylum for the Insane, Franlcford.

At the termination of two years' experience in teaching a
class of backward children in one of the Philadelphia Special
Schools, I find myself convinced that the results of the work might
be greatly increased by the adoption of three new measures. The
attempt to train backward and defective children in day schools
is a very recent movement in this country, and only gradually,
through repeated efforts to solve the many problems involved, will
effective methods of training these children be developed. In
Philadelphia, as in many other cities, teachers and the school
authorities are beginning to appreciate the necessity of making
some effort to solve these problems, but they find the conditions so
complicated that, lacking the necessary training, they feel powerless to cope with them. At the present time the problem is really
in the stage of initial consideration. One cannot expect an adequate system to be organized for some years to come. With the
purpose of calling attention to three conditions which seriously interfere with the effectiveness of the work now being done in the
Philadelphia schools, I present this paper.

The first condition of which I wish to speak is.the close relation existing between the classes for backward children and the
classes for truants and incorrigibles. In Philadelphia the backward classes are always placed in the special schools, which are
primarily intended for the training of truants and disciplinary
cases. In fact, in many of these schools the backward children
are placed in the same classes with the disciplinary cases. They
mingle freely with the incorrigible boys at recess and at the noon
hour, and are thus subjected to contaminating influences. The
backward child is one who has not had force enough to hold his
own under ordinary school conditions. IIow much worse is it,
then, to subject him to the influence of an environment such as
this!

Moreover, the methods of discipline in a special school are
necessarily severe and strictly enforced, and it is not possible to
exempt one class from the regular requirements without creating
(81)

the feeling that injustice is being done, and thus jeopardizing
the general discipline of the school.

One example will serve to illustrate how this condition of
affairs hampers the teacher in her training of the backward child.
The retardation of one of my boys was due chiefly, if not entirely,
to a very pronounced speech defect,?so pronounced that most
of his talk was unintelligible. I was giving him individual training in articulation, for which I could spare but a brief period
each day, and when one day's lesson was omitted the effect was
evident. This boy soon became friendly with some truants, and
with them absented himself from school. The following day the
boys were all punished alike, for they had all committed the same
offense. The result was that my boy's indignant mother kept
him from school for an entire week,?in fact until I had paid a
visit to his home,?and much valuable time was lost. This boy
was very suggestible; he was ready to follow the lead of other boys
into any kind of mischief; and he was constantly among boys
who did not fail to urge him on. Had he associated with ordinarily well-behaved boys, no such trouble would have arisen.
It is true that many boys who are mentally retarded are at
the same time fit subjects for the disciplinary classes. The unruliness is in many instances the direct result of keeping the child in
a class of normal boys. His mind, being utterly unable to grasp
the class work, is left idle and wanders off to the most enticing
mischief at hand. Placed in a class where lie is kept constantly
employed with work adapted to his abilities, the mischievous tendencies of such a boy soon disappear.
The first and most crying need, then, of these backward
classes appears to be entire separation from the disciplinary
schools. This could most readily be accomplished by establishing
such classes in the regular schools. In the majority of graded
schools there are sufficient backward children to form a class,
which, for effective work, should not number more than twelve
or fifteen children. In schools where the number of backward
children is not so large, one class might suffice to accommodate the children from two neighboring schools. Unfortunately
this change would mean, under the present regime, a deprivation
of the sloyd training which, when guided by an efficient teacher,
is well adapted to the needs of a backward child. This loss, however, could be largely made up by additional handwork of other
kinds, such as basketry, raffia work, and hammock making. The
loss of the sloyd period would, I am confident, be far outweighed
by the gain from the improved environmental conditions.
Tlie second point to wliich I wish to call attention is tlie badly
nourished and underfed condition of these boys, and the impossibility of training any children, even exceptionally endowed ones,
under such conditions.

An experienced social worker tells me it is a difficult and
almost impossible task to find out the nature of a child's diet from
a visit to his home. Questions are answered evasively, and the
reported bill of fare is usually the recollection of a holiday feast,
not an everyday meal.

The special schools furnish an exceptional opportunity for
discovering the nature of a child's diet. The session is from nine
until two, with a noon recess for lnncli, which the boys are supposed to bring with them. Many of my boys brought none at all.
Others brought such a lunch that none at all might have been
less harmful. Rank coffee proved to be the chief staple. This
they brought in little bottles and placed around the stove to heat.
Upon questioning them, I found that the breakfast of many consisted of a cup of coffee and some bread. Boys but feebly endowed in the first place, and fed on such food, we expect to sit
quietly through a long school session and put forth something in
the way of mental effort! It is most unreasonable and even cruel
to expect it.

Such boys are listless and inert, and, though often most willing, have not the vital energy to accomplish anything. Their written work bears striking testimony to this fact. The first problem
in an arithmetic paper will be neatly and correctly solved, while
the last problems will be so illegible as to render examination impossible. In physical exercise the same condition is manifested.
The first movements will be executed with some degree of force
and precision, but before the end of the series the muscles grow
lax and the movements lifeless.

Unquestionably, many of our pedagogical failures may be
traced directly to the feeble physical condition of the boys.
During the second winter, I prohibited coffee and substituted
hot soup. This was gladly welcomed by the boys, and doubtless
did some good, though it was far from supplying the three good
meals a day, to which every growing boy is entitled.

Mr. Luther Burbank is of the opinion that he can apply to
the subject of child training the conclusions at which he has
arrived through the cultivation of plants. He believes that three
things are absolutely essential for the training of plant life and
human life as well,?sunshine, good air, and nourishing food.
He would not attempt to cultivate a plant without these three
aids; and why, he asks, should more care be lavished on an orchid
than on a child ? lie further expresses himself strongly to the
effect that not only the children of the well-to-do should have these
three necessities of normal growth,?sunshine, good air, and nourishing food,?but that every child of the nation, the poor as well
as the rich, is entitled to its share, and failure to furnish it will
affect not only the child, but the welfare of the nation itself. "To
the extent that any portion of the people is physically unfit, to
that extent the nation is weakened. To the extent that we leave
the children of the poor to themselves, and their evil surroundings, to that extent we breed peril for ourselves. The only way
to obviate this is absolutely to cut loose from all precedent and
begin systematic state and national aid, not next year, or a decade
from now, but to-day."

We are still a young country, and fortunately economic conditions have not yet forced us to face these facts as the older
nations have been compelled to do. Our compulsory education
laws, however, are already informing the public of the existence
of the evil. If action is taken at once to improve these conditions, the widespread degeneracy now prevailing in England as
the result of underfeeding need never exist in this country. The
people of the working class in England are noticeably inferior to
those of the wealthier class both in height and general physique.
Mr. Rowntree states that a comparative study made in the town
of York of the height and weight of boys of thirteen years of age
belonging to the well-to-do working classes and those of the same
age belonging to the poorer working classes, revealed a difference
in average height of three and one-half inches, and in average
weight of eleven pounds. This physical degeneracy has reached
such a point that in one year 54,000 of 92,000 applicants failed
to meet the physical requirements for army service.

This alarming condition of affairs has led to several governmental investigations into the probable cause of such physical
degeneracy. The reports of four of these investigations agree that
underfeeding is the chief cause of both physical and mental
degeneration among the poorer classes. Dr Alfred Eichliolz has
expressed the opinion that insufficient food is at the bottom of all
the evils of child degeneracy, and that if the children were properly fed the evil would rapidly disappear. He reports that sixteen per cent of the children of the London elementary schools
are underfed.

Dr Collie, a London medical inspector of schools, also believes that underfeeding is a direct cause of mental defectiveness.
He calls such children functionally defective and attributes their
condition to a starved brain. He thinks that many children who
are judged to be dull or slow are really suffering from this functional defectiveness. A number of my boys, I feel sure, belonged
to this class of defectives. In one of them I could discover no
special defect of any kind to account for his apparent inability
to progress. I therefore took him to the clinic in child psychology
at the University of Pennsylvania for examination by Professor
Witmer. He considered the case a physical one, and sent the boy
to Dr Burr, who attributed the condition to improper feeding,
and prescribed a special diet. Fortunately the mother of this
boy was able to follow the physician's directions, and there was a
marked improvement in a very short period of time. This was a
case of malnutrition and mental enfeeblement due to improper
feeding, and hence more easily overcome than cases due to underfeeding, where poverty often raises an insurmountable barrier.
The English authorities agree in the belief that the condition
of such children is rapidly improved by nourishing food. During
a Parliamentary debate on free meals, March, 1905, it was stated
that the children in the day industrial schools, where three meals
a day are furnished, grow bright and intelligent and develop rapidly. In our own country the experiment has not been tried in
day schools, but the results of the experiment in the Chicago Hospital School are equally convincing, and the experiment made on
the prisoners at the New York State Reformatory at Elmira seems
to prove beyond a doubt the dependence of both intellectual and
moral development on physical health.

Mr. Z. Iv. Brockway, then superintendent of the Elmira Reformatory, established in 188G "an experimental class in physical
culture." Twelve criminals, none of whom had made any progress
in school work for periods varying from one to two years and all
of whom seemed quite incapable of it, were made the subjects of
this experiment. They had all committed grave crimes and all
presented marked stigmata of degeneracy. A special dietary was
substituted for the prison fare, and massage, physical training,
and baths were given regularly, while the school work was increased in amount and changed in character so as to call forth
greater mental effort. At the end of five months of this regime,
says the report, "the aimless, shuffling gait gave way to a carriage inspired by elastic muscles and supple joints. The faces
parted with the dull and stolid look they had in the beginning,
assuming a brighter and more intelligent expression." A decided
mental awakening was evidenced by an increased interest in study,
and an earnest effort to progress, which resulted in an average
mark for the five months of 74.16?a great increase over the
45.25, the average for the previous five months.

When such wonderful results as these have actually been
attained with this apparently hopeless set of matured degenerates,
what could not be accomplished with children taken before the
slothful or evil tendencies have settled into fixed habits ?
Recognizing the relation between underfeeding and physical
deterioration, and between malnutrition and mental and moral
degeneracy, it is but a step to the conclusion that many of our
underfed children will find their way to the special and backward
classes.

The teachers in the special schools recognize the deplorable
physical condition of many of the children, and often try to add
a little to their noon-day meal. Such efforts, however, are entirely
inadequate and pecuniarily wasteful. A concerted effort to supply for these classes a good, hot dinner every day would be a
much more intelligent and satisfactory method of meeting the situation. It would result, undoubtedly, in a higher grade of school
work, and in the development of young men better able physically,
mentally and morally to take their places as useful citizens.
Many persons oppose the feeding of hungry children, feeling
that by so doing we are perpetrating a wrong against the parents.
They believe that by relieving the poor of the absolute necessity
of feeding their children, we are depriving them of the greatest
of all spurs to industry. From a humane standpoint, it seems
hardly fair that for such a negative good to the present generation we should blight physically, mentally and morally the future
generation. From an economic standpoint, all experience points
to the fact that results attending efforts directed toward the training of children for efficient manhood are infinitely greater than
the results obtained by attempts at adult reformation.
While the parents are left unassisted to provide for their hungry children, these same children will necessarily develop into
another generation of incapable parents, and a similar tragedy
will be enacted in the lives of their children and their children's
children, until the evil reaches such vast proportions that it becomes a menace to the nation.
On the other hand, if the present generation of children is,
by proper food and training, brought to a healthy, normal manhood, it will undoubtedly provide for its own children. The evil
will gradually dwindle -away, and in each succeeding generation
the community will be called upon to provide for a smaller number of little ones.
With our backward children placed in a suitable environment
and properly fed, the more subtle question of awakening their
intelligence could be approached with far greater chance of success. The mode of attacking this problem is the third point on
which I wish-to speak. The only practical way of approaching it
is by a thorough examination of each individual child. In even a
small class of backward children, the most varied forms of mental
deviation reveal themselves, and the peculiar defect of each child
must be discovered before any intelligent attempt can be made to
educate it. In many cases defective eyesight and hearing are
among the chief causes of mental retardation; in others, the children are necessarily handicapped by the presence of adenoids;
while in still others, stuttering or stammering so pronounced as to
make the speech unintelligible is the evident cause of the backwardness. More profound mental defects of the will or attention are
also frequent.

The average teacher has neither the training nor the time to
make such a thorough examination of her pupils. The average
physician, experience has proved, is no better able to cope with
the problem. The trained psychologist is, at the present day,
the one person properly qualified to make such a diagnosis. He
can, in many cases, point out the only avenue through which
education would prove effective. lie can often determine the
defect which is the cause of the difficulty, while the educator can
see only the difficulty. lie can further suggest certain lines of
training designed to remove special defects, and by following
these suggestions results may be obtained in a short time which
would never be reached without such initial expert diagnosis and
advice.

In my class were four cases of speech defect; in two of these
I look upon the defect as the main cause of a marked mental retardation. There were two cases in which the chief defect was a
volitional one,?possibly a form of abulia. These boys were
willing and able to do anything habitual, anything that needed no
mental effort, but any attempt to force them on to an untried field
of mental action caused sullen opposition. With two others the
mentality was quite normal with the exception of an excessive
slowness in every sort of reaction, which made it impossible for
them to do any but individual work. With several the trouble
seemed to be centered in an inability to concentrate their minds
on anything for more than a few moments; they were typical
examples of aprosexia.

Each one of these defects must be reached by different
methods, and if the root of the evil is discovered early, the progress
made will be incalculably greater.

How much can be done for certain forms of speech defect
by articulation training, was illustrated by the case of infantile
stammer, reported in the March number of The Psychological
Clinic. Such cases emphasize the importance of basing the instruction of backward children on a thorough psychological examination of each individual child. The education of such children
is a difficult pedagogical problem, and its only chance of solution lies in the discovery and adoption of the particular method
especially adapted to the needs of each individual child.
When our school environment is improved, our children well
fed, and the instruction given to each child' is based upon a
thorough psychological examination of that child, we will find
our measure of success growing larger, and our schools for defective children more nearly approaching that ideal towards which
we are striving.
