Nervous and Mental Diseases of Children
========================================

Reviews And Criticism.

Die Geisteskranldieiten des
Kindesalters, mit besonderer Beriicksichtigung des Schulpflichtigen
Alters. By Professor Th. Ziehen, 3 Parts, Berlin: Reuther und
Reichard.
Defective children, their nature, care, and training are to-day the
subject of scientific thought and experiment. A large and ever growing literature bears striking testimony to the interest in this work
shown by medical men and alienists. Germany, more than any other
country, has comprehended the diversified character of the problem; and
under each of the numerous rubrics of defective children sense defects,
juvenile delinquents, mental arrest, and the varied neuroses common to
the young?German psychologists have made notable contributions.
Professor Theodore Ziehen, now of the University of Berlin and
formerly at Jena, is well and favorably known to students of physiological psychology and psychiatry and his recent monographs on the nervous and mental diseases of children will be read with interest by students of child psychology and allied subjects.
Hysteria, which, as Professor Ziehen notes, increases up to the fifteenth year and reaches its height at the time of puberty, can only in
a few cases be traced to organic brain disease or spinal paralysis. While
characterized by an abnormal increase in the bodily expression of emotions, the emotions do not always produce this increased activity. Its
marked physical symptoms are speech defects, particularly stuttering,
convulsive contraction of the eyelids, trembling of the extremities, and
paralysis of the muscles used in walking. The hysterical child is often
depressed before he is conscious of the cause of his depression. Egotism is even more apparent with hysterical children than with hysterical adults. Although the child so afflicted may make a temporary
sacrifice' under the influence of an extraordinarily strong idea, he is in
general incapable of objective, impersonal interests. He himself is the
customary central point of his changing emotions. This possession of a
single dominant idea is noteworthy. He lacks power of voluntary attention and logical thought, and his recollections are often modified or
false; but his capacity for deception and treachery suggests mental
power of no mean order.
Falsehood comes naturally to hysterical children, but they are often
able to draw the line between pathological inventions and conscious untruths. The chief motives for falsehood seem to be the desire to make
themselves interesting, to gratify some active desire, or to avert punishment. Vanity likewise plays a leading role. They like to say that
they have already accomplished that which they really hope to accomplish in the future. These phantasies are often concerned with the writ(121)
122 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ing of dramas, novels, and poems. They come to hysterical children
with great frequency and cause them to neglect school work, play, food,
and sleep.
Sense delusions are common to hysterical children. Generally they
occur in the form of visions, illusions, and hallucinations. The dreamlife, likewise, is abnormally lively, resulting frequently in somnambulism. The desire to pilfer dainties and sweets, as well as money,
is also common; and the latter is not infrequently stolen for no other
reason than the pleasure gained from stealing.
With reference to the treatment of hysteria, Professor Ziehen maintains that it is generally safest to withdraw the child from its immediate family. Parents often foster the disease unconsciously by offering
the child a bad example in their own neurotic tendencies. Tie does not
believe in the congregation of hysterical children in sanitariums or special schools, but suggests that they be placed in healthy families, and
preferably in the families of physicians. So far as school work is concerned, the hysterical child can be trained in the same way as the normal
child.
Neurasthenia, notes Professor Ziehen, is caused by tho fatigue of
the central nervous system and it may be due (1) to a weak nervous
system, (2) to nervous strain, (3) to insufficient sleep, (4) to malnutrition or (5) to a chronic toxic condition. He makes two statements
which do not tally with the reviewer's experience: (1) That neurasthenia
is less common among school children than hysteria, and (2) that it
occurs more frequently among boys than girls.
A characteristic symptom of neurasthenia is motor exhaustion,
although paralysis, which is so common in hysteria, seldom occurs.
The child tires easily in walking, playing, writing, and the like. When
reading the print becomes blurred, the eyes ache and the body trembles
with exhaustion. Such children have restless and disturbed nights owing
to a habit of talking continually in their sleep.
The progress of the disease is remittent, progressive, or retrogressive, depending upon the effectiveness of the treatmeiit. If the parents
are careful to follow direction, the neurasthenic child need not be
removed from the home. Constant attention must be given to his food
and rest. The diet should consist of milk, eggs, fruit and vegetables;
tea, coffee and meat should be excluded. After study periods, he should
have long rest periods. Walking and other forms of active exercise
should not be allowed until ho is gradually habituated to such forms of
activity.
Chorea, which is so insidious in its development, is apt to be overlooked by parents and teachers until it has reached a rather serious
stage. In its incipient stage the power of motor inhibition is its chief
symptom. Choreic children become angered easily; they are singularly
sensitive, and they arc more easily frightened than normal children.
Loss of the power of voluntary attention is early apparent, and even
in conversation such children are apt to lose the thread. As the disease
NEWS AND COMMENT. 123
develops they become passionate, disobedient and quarrelsome. Suicide
and juvenile crime are not infrequently the result of such impulses.
Isolation and rest are what the choreic child most needs.
Mania and allied mental and nervous diseases are discussed in the
same simple but helpful manner. The work of Professor Ziehen is
intended primarily for teachers and parents who are ignorant of the
technicalities of medical science; and considered from this point of view
his book is a praiseworthy contribution to the literature of the psychology, pathology, and hygiene of childhood.
Will S. Monroe.
Slate Normal School, West-field, Mass.
