The Fifteen Months' Training of A Feebleminded Child
=====================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. 1. No. 3. May 15, 1907.

By Ligiitnek Wither.
The little 'girl who is the subject of this psychological sketch
came into the world a delicate but normal child. For the first fifteen months of her life, the child developed normally in body and
mind. She cut her first tooth at nine months, walked at one year,
and in her fifteenth month could say, "papa," "mamma," and
"kittie." She was at that time a lovable, bright and active child.
Iler sisters and three brothers have always been mentally sound
and fairly healthy. Iler parents were intelligent and well-to-do.
When-fifteen months old, she passed through eight weeks of
severe illness, having in rapid succession, typhoid fever, pleurisy,
pneumonia and chicken-pox. Though her life was saved by medical skill and careful nursing, this protracted period of illness
reduced her to a Weak, emaciated and helpless infant. The power
of voluntary movement was lost for all but the simplest functions;
not even the ability to creep remained. Nutrition was seriously
impaired, as the condition of her skin witnessed. The development of her mental faculties was abruptly arrested. Physical
growth almost ceased. The two following years were marked by
epileptoid convulsions, which began during her severe illness.
These convulsive attacks affected her health and seemed to prevent mental progress. At the end of two years they became less
severe, but had not ceased, when, in her sixth year, she was placed
in Miss Marvin's care for mental and physical training. Some
improvement in walking was observed during the fourth and fifth
years, and feeble though unsuccessful attempts had been made to
talk.
The sixth year of the child's life found her an idiot of most
repulsive appearance. An open mouth was flanked by flabby,
puffy cheeks. Above were heavy eyes and a bridgelcss nose, while
below ?i weak chin was sore from constant drooling of saliva.
The teeth were much decayed and the odor from the nose and
(G9)
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
moutli was most offensive. Her skin and the boils from which she
was never free evidenced impoverished nutrition. Her muscles
were weak and her movements uncertain and inco-ordinate. She
could not take more than a few steps without falling to the ground,
and for days she could neither crawl nor even sit upon the floor.
She spent hours whining, or dull and silent, in her mother'3 arms.
Her personal liahits were such that she had to be cared for like an
infant. Her wants were made known by crying and other simple
emotional expressions. The nursing bottle, which she continued
to use up to the day that she entered Miss Marvin's home, seemed
to be an absolute necessity for procuring sleep.
No attempt had been made to control her by the force of an
external will, much less to develop her own powers of self-control.
She was exceedingly stubborn either by virtue of her natural disposition or in consequence of continual indulgence. If she saw
any evidence of an intention to thwart her wishes, a violent temper manifested itself. She would dash to the floor any object
within reach, stamp her feet, and jabber away unintelligibly, but
yet in a most threatening manner. When tears came in the outbursts of rage, they introduced hours of crying and sobbing.- She
violently resisted bathing, dressing and all attentions to her personal welfare. When evening came, she was allowed to play
around the room until, fatigued,, she fell asleep. She was then
undressed without being fully awakened and put to bed.
Fortunately, she possessed an affectionate disposition. Her
love for her doll, which was shown by her manner of holding and
patting it, proved her not devoid of an incipient maternal instinct.
It also showed that she possessed to some extent the instinct of
play and imitation. She was fond of music and could hum two
tunes with moderate success. She observed the moon or a bright
light with evident delight. Affection, play, imitation and aesthetic
sensibility are powerful aids in the development of even normal
children.
Articulate language was restricted to (lie word "mamma,"
but even this word was uttered in a way that manifested little comprehension of its meaning. Simple questions like "where is the
pretty light ?" "where is the moon ?" were apparently understood,
for she would direct her gaze toward the designated object. Her
ability to understand language seemed therefore somewhat greater
than her facility in employing it. Nevertheless, as the years
passed, she gave 110 sign of improvement, in either tho understanding or expression of language. She never babbled, playing
TRAINING OF A FEEBLE-MINDED CHILD. 71
articulation, as normal children do; lier nearest approach to such
play was a sound in the back of the throat resembling the grunt
of a pig. She often jabbered in anger and sometimes in play, but
the performance was always very crude and there was no increase
in precision of execution. Intellectually she had not progressed
beyond the stage of development reached at the time of her first
illness, that is to say, she was in mind little more than a year old.
As time brought no amelioration in her mental or physical
condition, the parents had recourse to the skill of the neurologist.
On the advice of Dr. S. Weir Mitchell, the child was placed, on
December 3, 18 OG, in Mi ss Marvin's home for defective children,
where her training came under my observation as consulting
psychologist. It was the opinion of all who saw the child that
her condition gave practically no hope of mental improvement.
Special training was recommended with the hope that it would
render her more amenable to hygienic and other simple requirements of daily life.
The day she entered Miss Marvin's home, without suggestion
on the part of any one, she stopped using the nursing bottle which
had hitherto been her inseparable companion. The cause of this
important but unexpected improvement is not easily explained.
Possibly the journey to Philadelphia, the new environment and
the intimate association with a personality other than the mother,
shocked the child into a sudden manifestation of normal progress.
Such phenomena have been observed in normal children. For
example, I recall the case of a child of five years, apparently
devoid of imagination and imitation, who outdid his companions
m fanciful and imitative play on being brought from Boston to
live in Philadelphia. It is difficult to believe that the atmosphere
?f Philadelphia is more stimulating to the imagination than that of
Boston, and I must, therefore, attribute this long step forward to
the influence of the shock of the journey and the new environment.
Such shocks seem at other periods of life, notably at adolescence, to
usher in unwonted mental habits and attainments.
The first training of the child had as its object the establishment of what may be called the "pedagogical rapport." The child
must obey the will of the instructor or it will become the sport
?f its own caprices. Discipline, guided by tact and knowledge, is,
therefore, a necessity with mentally feeble or backward children.
^ lie parent of a defective child moved by sympathy for its condition will commit the. fatal error of indulging it more than the
formal child. This excess of tenderness is a serious obstacle in
72 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINlo.
the way of the child's progress. The feeble-minded child, for the
very reason that the usual motives to disciplined behavior are less
likely to guide and control its impulses, needs all the more that
firmness which develops obedience to the instructor's will. The
love of pleasure and the fear of pain in whatever guise they may
present themselves to the mind, are after all the two motives by
which every parent or instructor gains the child's affection, disciplines its will and establishes the "rapport." Neither motive can
be overlooked, nor can too much discretion be shown in the choice
of the media through which an appeal is made to the one or the
other. The sugar plum and the rod may be preferred by some;
the kiss and its denial by others; both sets of alternates appeal
to these two primitive emotions. Constant nagging, threatening
or slapping should be discouraged, especially with nervous and
fretful children, yet when a slap of the hand is needed, it should
be hard enough for the pupil to know that the teacher herself is
not a creature of wavering purpose. The child should learn to
fear punishment and to love the instructor. No child is of such
feeble intelligence that it cannot be won and held by affection;
but the display of affection, to be effective, must be under the inhibitive guardianship of the reason and judgment. Indiscreet affection will smother with an embrace the small spark of self-control
the child may have originally possessed. The mother of a defective child, however, can hardly be held blameworthy if maternal
love and personal sensitiveness make her unable to inflict misery
upon herself through the firm treatment of her child.
The first attempt to control this child demonstrated the effectiveness of a simple pedagogical remedy. In a fit of anger, she
took a cup from the drawing-room table, and threw it against the
wall. The instructor took her to where the cup lay broken, and,
pointing to the pieces, slapped the offending hand. Apparently
stunned by the newness of the treatment, she hesitated long enough
to show that the cry with which she ran to her mother, who was
present, was one of anger and not of pain. At the instructor's
suggestion, the mother exercised sufficient self-control to manifest
110 active sympathy. The result was that the child never again
touched with destructive hand an object upon the table. A similarly rapid improvement was shown after her old habit of going
to sleep on the floor was broken. When bedtime came she was undressed and put to bed. She cried lustily for a time, intermittently jumping from the bed only to be put back again. Less
than a week had passed before she could be undressed, bathed
TRAINING OF A FEEBLE-MINDED CHILD. 73
and put to bed without offering any greater resistance than is the
natural right of every child.
Her affectionate disposition and love of music were powerful
aids in forming habits of obedience. She learned that if she were
naughty she would not be sung to or petted. At first the wish to
please her instructor was doubtless the result of a selfish interest
in what the instructor could do to minister to her comfort or pleasure. But soon this interest changed into a wish to please for the
instructor's sake; then appeared the close conning of the instructor's face for signs of the displeasure or approval she might have
caused. Obedience was then no longer a matter of enforcement.
The child obeyed because it could not help carrying out the wish
that its awakening powers of observation saw pictured on the
teacher's face. In the spring when the child was advancing in
the comprehension of words by leaps that were often surprising,
an incident occurred illustrating the power of the teacher to make
her will the effective agent in determining the child's action. The
child had been insisting, in her characteristically obstinate fashion,
upon having her own way and was spoken to by Miss Marvin in
the following words: "Do you know what naughty girls have to
do? I want you to go into the house just as fast as your little
feet can carry you, and right upstairs to bed." It was not expected that she would understand, much less obey, the command,
and the words were uttered more for the moral effect of a reprimand couched in gesture and tone than to give an order for execution. The child, however, did not wait for the nurse who usually
accompanied her, but turned toward the house without a negativing look or gesture, and did as commanded.
Complacent affection, on the other hand, yielding to a child's
every whim, defeats itself. Whereas in a short time the instructor
had won the child's interest, obedience and love, the mother had
failed to gain any of these, because she herself lacked the determination necessary to awaken in the child's mind a motive strong
enough to dominate its passing fancy and emotion. The mother
must have been for the child merely a source of sensuous gratificat]?n, or a willing slave to administer to her wishes and commands.
The child did not even notice the mother's departure, when, after
a week, she was left entirely to Miss Marvin's care, although up
this time the mother's lap had been a haven of refuge for selfindulgence in emotionalism.
This rapport which causes the child to form its every action
upon the teacher's word and gesture, conduccs to the unconscious
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
obedience that is an antecedent condition for gaining concentrated
attention. As soon as the attention can he held, it is possible to
appeal to imitation. The effort was first made to produce slight
modifications in movements already familiar and pleasing to the
child. Thus the instructor played with the child's doll, caressing
it and patting it, rocking it and putting it to sleep, singing and
talking to it; the child did the same as far as her limitations in
natural play permitted. The instructor then emphasized a few
simple movements just a little beyond what the child seemed able
to perform. She naturally attempted to follow through unreflective imitation, awakened by interest. Thus was the child
slowly taught to cross the leg and kick with one or both feet, while
she sat upon a chair rocking her doll. Now and again some action
would be risked far beyond the child's powers of muscular coordination but attractive to her fancy. Thus with one leg over
the other, the doll would be placed on the swinging foot and lifted
up and down, "riding piggy-back," in nursery parlance. The child
was fond of "riding piggy-back" herself, and although she could
not treat the doll in this way, the instructor's action proved a powerful incentive for persistent efforts to attain what was then the
impossible.
With the same dependence upon the play instinct, the teacher
clapped her hands, shook them up and down, here and there,
nodded her head, walked, danced, moved her foot forward and
backward. These actions gained the child's interest, compelled its
attention and called forth attempts at imitation. By such means
the power of co-ordination was developed and voluntary control
over the muscles increased.
Next in order came the employment of imitation to arouse
the child to articulate speech. Persistent training of the function
of speech began December 9th. The child was fortunately fond
of music and liked to be rocked and sung to. She would even
try to hum the time herself. Her favorite song,?"Baby, baby,
dance my darling baby," was repeated over and over again. As
her interest grew, she tried to sing as well as hum, and her attention was directed to the movement of the lips. In ton days (December 19th), she could say "baby" distinctly, and in three days
more (December 22d) she could hum the tune, inserting the word
"baby" in its proper place. Soon efforts were directed to the imitation of words and elementary sounds.
The circumstances under which she made the first attempt at
articulation by the free exercise of her own will arc podagogically
TRAINING OF A FEEBLE-MINDED CHILD. 75
suggestive. In the fifth week (January 2d), she was watching
an older pupil give as an articulation exercise the sound "ah."
Without suggestion, she imitated him closely, and gave the sound
clearly and forcibly, opening her mouth and even assuming the
required pose of body with her hands behind her back. But
nothing would induce her to repeat the attempt, although efforts
were made to this end for several weeks. She understood apparently what was wanted, but obstinacy or sluggishness of will
caused her to resist every stimulus. When she finally yielded,
she did it as the result of personal choice and desire, presenting
thereby the first clear manifestation she had yet given of a voluntary action determined by complex motives. She was being
cliided for some mischievous act and was trying to win the instructor over by kisses and caresses. As her efforts seemed unavailing, she stood for a moment as though pondering; her face
then brightened into a smile of intelligence; she put her hands
behind her back, opened her mouth to the fullest extent, and
brought out an "ah" that would have satisfied the most critical
articulation teacher. This was the eighth week (January 29tli),
six weeks after the first word "baby" had been sung. By the end
of the tenth week (February 17th), she could give the phonic
elements "m," "e," "i," "all."
The first word that she used with an adumbration of meaning
was the word "more." This word was wrung from her by its
emotional environment. A distasteful medicine was frequently
offered her with the inviting supplication "to take just a little
more." She soon learned to point piteously to the bottle, saying
"more" with a shake of the head that clearly meant "no."
It is well not to take too much for granted with respect to a
child's deficiency. Miss Marvin always insists upon treating
defective children as in many respects normal. She sings to
them, talks to them in the language of the adult, tells them stories,
and is constantly doing what she feels is lost on them. And yet
experience justifies her belief that even the weakest mind is surprisingly affected and unexpectedly improved by some factor
selected by the child itself from the normal environment in which
^ is placed.
With the approach of spring, progress became more rapid.
She made the very considerable advance of pointing to things she
wanted, and toward particular places to which she wished to be
taken. Iler table manners improved so much that she was allowed
her own cup and saucer, and she was able to pass her plate, asking
76 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
insistently and intelligently for "more" of what pleased her palate.
The improvement in her personal appearance was marked. Drooling had almost ceased; lier mouth and chin were thus kept dry and
free from irritation. This was accomplished in part by pointing to
her wet dress, appealing to the vanity which she was fortunate
enough to possess in the amount due her sex. Her countenance
was also losing a little of its blank idiocy of expression.
In the fifth month, April, she learned to throw and roll a
ball, to snap her fingers, to hunt for hidden objects, and to show
how big she was. She could stand firmly on one foot and kick
quite high with the other. A curious limitation in motor capacity
was shown in an inability to move any part of the body forward
and backward. She could shake her head in negation, but not in
affirmation; she was also unable to say "good-bye" with her hands,
although apparently more difficult movements were repeatedly performed. She now said "cat," "ball," "doll" and "hello," and
could imitate the "meow" of a cat and make the difficult sound of
clucking. She also one day surprised the family by passing a
spoon in the self-assumed response to a request made by someone
at the table.
Iler Easter gifts awakened her enthusiasm and appreciation.
They were placcd on the breakfast table about her plate. As her
gaze wandered from one gift to another her eyes grew large and
bright until, clapping her hands with excessive joy, she burst into
laughter. An attractive red ball and a doll at first had the largest
share of her attention, but the feeding of a toy dog by some one
at the table soon absorbed all her interest and awakened successful
efforts at imitation.
The sixth month of training, May, found her able to walk
without fatigue about as far as a normal child. She learned to
climb, impelled by curiosity to grasp things placed out of her
reach, and stimulated by pleasure in the unwonted muscular exercise. She was developing sufficient strength and manual dexterity to pick up a chair of light weight and carry it about the
room. She spent much time before the mirror, watching the
movements of her lips in articulation practice. She could imitate
so closely the positions of the lips in speech that looking at her
one would think she had normal powers of language. Left alone,
she kept up a continuous jabbering, quite unintelligible for the
most part, but now and then a group of words clearly enunciated
would startle the hearer. Interruptions caused her spontaneous
language play to cease abruptly. By means of it, however, she
TRAINING OF A FEEBLE-MINDED CHILD. 77
learned most of the words of her favorite song, "Baby, baby,
dance my darling baby."
It would be unfair to Miss Marvin's pedagogical discernment
to give the impression that the child's improvement was due solely
to the skilful appeal made to its mind. From the first, cold and
hot baths followed by alcohol rubbing had been given nightly.
Her circulation improved under this treatment and the skin became free from sores. At the same time the shock of the baths
seemed to have a beneficial mental effect and improved her sleep.
Milk at first had formed the greater part of her diet. So fond
was she of this that it was necessary to wean her from the bottle
to the enjoyment of solid food. A few weeks showed the good
result of changing to a varied and nourishing diet. Her flesh
became more solid; her cheeks and body grew thinner, but firmer.
A severe attack of bronchitis with its consequent treatment
served to emphasize the necessity of medical treatment for the
reduction of the tonsils and the removal of the adenoid growths
which almost filled the naso-pharynx. In the seventh month,
June, two operations removed these obstructions. On the day following their final removal, the little girl seemed unusually bright
and active. In playing with her, the instructor happened to say
the word "boy." "Boy" the child repeated clearly and distinctly,
without a moment's hesitation. Asked to say it again, she repeated the word many times over and over. If we consider that
heretofore not less than two or three months of arduous work
had been necessary in order to teach her a new word, one can understand the feeling of the instructor that something like a miracle
had been wrought when the child almost with nonchalance successfully essayed a word never before attempted. This marked
nn epoch in the child's career, a position gained and ever afterward maintained in this heroic struggle to overcome the obstructions of disease. On the same day at dinner, when she was about
to place her hand upon the tea-pot, she was warned that it was hot.
Instantly she repeated "hot" in an inquiring tone of voice.
It was now possible to form the habit of keeping the mouth
closed and of breathing through the nose. The verbal injunction
close your mouth," combined with firm pressure to hold the lips
tightly together, enabled her to comprehend what was desired and
forced her to breathe through the nose. Effort in this direction
was not relaxed until she could sleep quietly at night with the
mouth closed. This not only added to her personal attractiveness
but also gave to her mind the freedom of action which so often
78 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
manifests itself after the removal of naso-pharyngeal obstruction.
The distinguished anatomist and medical specialist, the late Dr.
Harrison Allen, never wearied of insisting upon the stimulating
effect that the removal of adenoid growths exerted upon the mind.
He was able during his lifetime to prove himself a benefactor to
many children and to justify his belief in the mental reaction that
follows these operations. He lias not reported a case in which the
mental response was more immediate and pronounced than it was
with this little girl.
A month at the seashore during the summer proved a wonderful tonic. Loving the water, she played in the sand at the
water's edge, enjoying the waves as they rolled her over and over.
This emotional stimulus and the warm sea air may account for
her rapid progress during the summer and autumn months. A
factor of greater significance, however, was the child's constant
association for four months with two normal children of her own
age. Imitating them, she grew more natural in her play. Thus
they inspired her to envy and emulation as they ran up and
down stairs. The noise they made was an auxiliary if not the
chief fascination. When she found herself unable to run as they
did, she bent her energies to outdo them in the production of noise.
In this she succeeded, striking each step many times as she slowly
descended, and so determined and persistent were her efforts that
it was not many weeks before she was able to go up and down
stairs with alternate steps. These normal children also taught
her to dance, and, through imitation, her carriage and gait manifested improved co-ordination. Many words were added to her
vocabulary, among them "Emma," "Gertrude," " Auntie," "Mary"
and "stop."
The four months following this outing showed a great increase in the power of comprehending what was said to her, and
also in the ability to follow directions verbally given. At the
end of this period she could, when asked, run and fetch the
newspaper, although she might be obliged to remove a book before
she could lift the paper from the table. Sho also refused to wear
a dress if it was slightly soiled, and instead of fretting during the
operation of dressing, she was now anxious to be dressed and
would stand comparatively quiet. For this self-denial she rewarded herself by many looks of self-appreciation in the mirror.
If thirsty, she could go into the kitchen, take her enp from the
nail and ask to have it filled.
Finding herself in the sewing-room, she determined to climb
TRAINING OF A FEEBLE-MINDED CHILD. 79
upon a coucli where the pile of garments was highest. As fast
as she was pushed from the couch she stopped only long enough
to scold and stamp her foot before making another attempt. Hearing the uproar, her nurse went in and asked what the matter was.
The child immediately went to the couch and placed a hand on it,
pointing with the other to the floor and then to the person who
had pushed her off. Through it all she kept up an incessant jabbering. This first attempt at an elaborate pantomime gave promise of a greater advance in language and thought. In the afternoon of the same day she was looking at a picture book, which
was taken from her and held between her nurse's teeth in order to
let the child try to pull it away. For a while this only served to
tease her, causing her to scold and cry. Suddenly she stopped,
looked up into the nurse's face, and said "ah," as though she
wanted her to do likewise. The nurse followed the child's suggestion, and as her mouth opened the book naturally fell to tho
floor. The child instantly picked it up and ran away as fast as
she could.
She could now distinguish between the door bell and the dinner bell. Xo matter how interesting her occupation was, tho
sound of the dinner bell caused her to drop everything and start
for the dining-room, saying "more," the word she now used
restrictedly for something to cat. ITer appetite was becoming
selective, and under the guidance of her improved powers of observation, she refused rice pudding without raisins if she noticed raisins in the portion allotted to others at table. Asked to say her lessons, she would walk over to the wall, place her hands behind her
back and repeat all the words she knew. When compelled to stand
m a corner as a punishment, she always preferred to choose her
?wn corner. Her persistence in voluntary effort was shown in
her first attempt to pick up a pin. Before accomplishing it she
worked fifteen minutes without a sign of anger or discouragement.
Practice soon gave her facility in this difficult bit of manual coordination. During the fall months she had learned to say "Peeka-boo," "towel," "ribbon," "ring," "box," "stew," "Eddy," and
Hattie," and while shaking hands she could say "How do you
do ?"
She spent Christinas at home. Although she had failed to
remember her former life, 011 her return to Miss Marvin's home,
the joy with which she greeted each member of the household
bore evidence to the strong impression that the experiences of the
preceding year had made upon her memory. Tho beginning of
the second year was devoted more particularly to the development
80 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of her capacity for persistent concentration of attention and effort.
Iler progress was noticeably accelerated and at times a hope was
expressed that the child might ultimately attain to normal mentality. Unhappily at the end of the third month of the second
year misguided maternal instinct, deeming itself capable of undertaking the further development of this child's mental life, summoned her home to become the victim of a solicitude which sought
to make enervating affection fulfil the office of knowledge and discernment. The task of education appears very simple and even
easy to those who see the results obtained by the natural talent and
acquired skill of the successful teacher.
What had been done in fifteen months for this still defective
child ? The repulsive countenance had been transformed into
almost a thing of beauty; curly hair covered a naturally wellshaped head, the mouth was closed, the cheek firm and healthful
in appearance, the bridge of the nose was beginning to be noticeable. The dull lifelessness of the eyes and general vacancy of
expression alone betrayed the mental deficiency. The irritable
infant lying helpless in its mother's arms was now an active child,
revealing the potentialities of a progressive mental existence. The
child, absorbed in its own bodily distress, and seeking only selfgratification, had become a favorite of the household through her
affectionate and sympathetic disposition. The infant who could
barely crawl now walked upstairs with alternate steps and with
both arms heavily laden. The speechless child now used connected
words, and could say "More tea, "More potatoes," "I love you,"
"I love my baby," "I love my mamma," all distinctly articulated.
The child, who possessed so little intelligence that her mother's
highest hope had been to see her able to point to what she wanted,
could now select with discrimination the clothing she wished to
wear, and could execute with precision the details of simple commands verbally given. In the last days she was worrying a
visitor for a cornet he had brought with him. The mother said to
the child: "Perhaps if you will give the doctor your doll, he
will let you have the cornet,"?a verbal suggestion which the
child instantly carried out in action. Originally lacking in persistence, her capacity for continued effort was shown when she
placed, at the first attempt, one hundred of the smallest pegs used
in kindergarten work into the holes of the pegging board. The
sport of every passing whim and emotion had now developed a
will power capable of resisting its own impulses and of yielding
obedience, and had begun to manifest the foreshadowings of a
moral sense and a self-respecting personality.
