News And Comment
=================

The Problem of Defective Children as Discussed in the International
Congress on School Hygiene. By Anna J. McKeag, Ph.D., Professor of Pedagogy, Wellesley College.
At the International Congress on School Hygiene, which held its
triennial meeting in London, August 5-10, about five hundred delegates from governments and societies and fully fifteen hundred other
visitors were in attendance. The range of topics discussed in the general and sectional meetings included almost every phase of hygienic
science: the Physiology of educational methods and work; Medical and
hygienic inspection in schools; the Hygiene of the teaching profession;
Instruction in hygiene for teachers and scholars; Physical education
and training in personal hygiene; Out-of-school hygiene; Contagious
diseases; Special schools for feeble-minded and exceptional children;
Special schools for blind, deaf and dumb children; Hygiene of residential schools; the School building and its equipment.

The medical and educational treatment of children who are
physically, mentally, or morally defective, received a large share of
the attention of the Congress, not only in the sections especially devoted
to this subject, but also in many of the papers read in the other sections. There was abundant evidence that not only educators and
physicians, but legislators and municipal officers as well, recognize the
duty of the state to children who are subnormal, and who are therefore unfitted to profit by the methods of instruction in the regular
elementary schools. Mr. J. Willis Bund, Chairman of the Worcestershire education committee, in a defense of the bills for medical inspection under consideration in Parliament, stated clearly to the members of the Congress the logical outcome of compulsory attendance
laws in regard to the abnormal child:
"As the case now stands, all children, unless taught elsewhere in
a way that satisfies the magistrates, must attend the elementary school.
. . . There is no excuse that the child is unhealthy or delicate,
unless it is actually suffering from some infectious disease. . . .
As every child can prima facie be made to attend school, what is
wanted is to get, as far as practicable, some idea of the lines on
which each child's development should proceed?in fact, to educate the
body exactly as the mind is educated. . . . We have at last recognized that the same treatment cannot and ought not to be applied
indiscriminately to all children, but that there should be classification,
and a proper course of treatment applied to each class. . . . Each
child on coming to school should be submitted to a thorough examination as to whether it is or is not in a condition other than normal,
and whether it has any tendency to any spocific abnormality.
"It is obvious," continued Mr. Bund, "that the method hero indi(210)
cated would involve a great change in our present educational system, as it would necessitate a large number of special schools. At
some of the special schools the children would have to be boarders.
. . . But it must be borne in mind that if these abnormal children
are allowed to grow up without some attempt at cure, it means that
it is only a question of at what time in their lives they will have to be
included in the class supported by the rates."

The economic waste resulting from neglect of physical and mental
defects was emphasized in several of the papers read before the Congress. Dr J. T. Cronin, assistant chief medical inspector, department
of health, New York City, presented some interesting statistics on
the subject. He states that in a school population of 650,000, 30 per
cent of the children are from one to two years behind the proper class
for their age. The cost per day of education for one child is about
twenty cents. If 195,000 children lose one year out of the six years of
compulsory attendance, the state really loses $1,666,666 every year.
"Ninety-five per cent of these backward children," says Dr Cronin,
"were defective in eye, ear, nose, throat or nutrition. In one school a
special class of 150 backwards showed 100 per cent defective. This class
was studied collectively. Fifty-six of these children were operated
upon at a private hospital and thirteen fitted with proper glasses;
ci, ty- o ne were operated on in the school building. ... The previous history of these children was very bad as to class conduct, effort
and proficiency. A number of these children were sent to the country
after operation. ... A report on 76 of the children six months
later showed that without exception all had improved in conduct,
effort and school efficiency as measured by their promotion to a higher
class."

Further evidence of this economic waste was found by Dr Cronin
in his investigation of the physical condition of inmates of the truant
school. Over 90 per cent of the truants showed marked physical
defects of such a character as to interfere with school work. In 70
per cent of the cases the defect was one of eyes, nose, or throat. Many
of these children would never have become truants had these defects
been corrected at an early stage in school life.

There was general agreement among those who discussed the subject that the chief agency for the detection of physical and mental
abnormalities is to be found in the medical inspection of schools. The
results of the medical examination should be recorded in permanent
form. In many French schools two records are kept for each child:
the livret sanitaire, which contains anthropometric data, vaccination
record, list of absences on account of illness, etc., and which is the
property of the pupil; and the fiche sanitaire, containing more detailed
information concerning general health, family history, condition of
eyes, ears, throat, nose and general medical observations: this is the
property of the school physician. Although compulsory attendance
laws coupled with rigid medical inspection allow few cases of abnormality to go undetected, it may be desirable to arrange for systematic
exploration of the poor quarters of a city to detect cases not reached
by the schools; and to bring about co-operation among philanthropic,
educational and civil agencies in this work.
The paidological laboratory, now established in several European
cities, has been found of the highest value in the determination and
classification of defectives, as well as in the solution of problems connected with the physiology and psychology of general school room
methods.

The relation between the sociological condition of children and the
percentage of physical defects was pointed out in many of the papers
read before the Congress. Dr Clement Dukes presented a record of
the physical examination of one thousand boys at their entrance to
the English "public schools." These schools are attended by the children of the middle and upper classes, who, supposedly, have had
proper physical care in their homes. It is interesting to notice that
only 3.4 per cent of these boys were defective in hearing, and only 5.7
per cent had defective (neglected) teeth. The percentage of eye defects
was greater?20.8 pr cent. About half the boys were of approximately
normal height and weight. In striking contrast to this record of wellto-do children is the report of Miss Ivens on the result of an examination of one thousand East London school children. Nearly one-third of
these children were defective in hearing and about 74 per cent of
these showed morbid conditions of the throat. Dr H. W. Thomson
found that 35 per cent of 52,493 school children in the elementary
schools in the poorer parts of Glasgow have defective vision; and in
many cases there is evidence that this is due to malnutrition. In a
detailed examination by Dr C. E. Wallis of the teeth of 245 children
in a London school in a poor district, only four children were found
to have the normal number of healthy teeth. Such facts as these
demonstrate the necessity of improving the general hygienic conditions of the homes in which these children live, and of supplementing
in some way the inadequate nutrition furnished by the home. The
"Provision of Meals Bill" passed by the last Parliament authorizes
local school authorities to furnish free of charge to children one meal
a day where it is deemed necessary. In Finland such a law has been
in operation for some time.

Parents and teachers are often ignorant of the existence of defects
of sight and hearing in school children until these are revealed
through medical inspection in the schools. Dr Stackler, of Paris, states
that in almost half the cases of defective sight discovered by him as
medical examiner in schools, the parents were unaware of the defect;
and in all of the cases of defective hearing (3G per cent of 753 boys
examined) both parents and teachers were ignorant of the fact that the
child did not possess normal hearing.

It is impossible within the limits of this article to give an adequate
account of all the important papers dealing with the educational treatment of defective school-children; a few are selected as illustrative of
the work of the Congress.

A most interesting report on the mental characteristics associated
with blindness of various causation was presented by Mr. N. B. Harman, oculist of the London County Council Blind Schools. From five
years' study of the partially and totally blind children of London, Mr.
Harman believes the following to be a useful clasification for medical
and educational purposes: (1) The blind from accidental causes, about
44 per cent of the total number, are usually normal except in sight,
and may profitably be educated at the ordinary schools for the blind,
using embossed type, etc. (2) The blind from constitutional disease,
about 30 per cent of the total number, present serious physical and
moral defects, and should be given only very elementary work, all nervestrain being avoided. (3) The blind from congenital deformity, about
20 per cent, are usually dull and incapable of education in academic subjects. (4) The blind from purely ocular causes, about 5 per cent, are
usually only partially blind, being highly myopic. They should be taught
to work with the hands without the use of the eyes.

Dr Adolph Bronner, of Bradford, accepting the usual definition of
blindness, that "the vision of both eyes is so bad that the patient cannot
see well enough to find his way about in daytime, or to count his fingers
at twelve inches distance," estimates that of the children under fifteen,
in England and Wales, 423 out of every million are blind. But for school
purposes those also who cannot see well enough to read school books
are blind. There should be adopted "a universal standard of defining the
various degrees of weak sight," so that statistics may be uniform. For
teaching purposes, children are divided at present into two classes, the
seeing and the blind. There should be an intermediate class for those
who can see a little. From this class some children would, in time,
pass into the "normal sight" class, and some into the "blind" class.
Dr James Kerr Love, of Glasgow, presented a plan for the educational treatment of the deaf and the partially deaf. He points out
three chief stages in the history of the education of the deaf. The
first was the demonstration, by the Spanish monk, Ponce de Leon, of
the fact that "deafness in a child is no necessary bar to the acquisition
of speech." The second was the discovery by the Abbe de l'Epee of
the fact that not only picked scholars, such as those experimented on
by Ponce de Leon, but also "the average unpicked, unselected deaf child
could be taught language." In recent years, "the great net of compulsory education has swept into the schools the poor deaf mute. . . .
Ragged, underfed, badly-housed children, scrofulous, half-blind, defective
deaf children, who were thought hardly worth keeping alive, much less
worth educating, must now go to school, even if they be driven to it
in a municipal carriage, or be led to and fro by a municipal nurse."
The third stage in the history of the education of the deaf, according to Dr Love, is "the scientific classification of the deaf for educational purposes." In the clinical examination of deaf-mute children
there are two important questions: When did the child become deaf ?
How much hearing has he left ? Dr Love presents the following scheme
for the education of deaf children who have been properly classified by
clinical examination:

1. Hard of hearing children! _ . , . . , . _ .
, n ? t X 1. ii r Special classes m hearing schools,
f Semi-deaf, better cases.. j
o o Zo *?
l " worse cases.. | Special day school or oral residenDeaf mute (average)... J tial school.
" (oral failures) ) Separate classes of manual alpha3. 60%
4. 15% Deaf mutes {defective).) bet school (residential).
The advantages of institutional life for the deaf child are very
great. Sixty per cent of the deaf children in Glasgow have defective
sight; 30 per cent have adenoid growths. The institution provides
medical care for these cases. The residential institution is especially
desirable in such a city as Glasgow, where the deaf come largely from
districts where bad housing prevails. Of seventy-eight homes of deaf
children in Glasgow, only twelve showed proper sanitary and moral conditions. Only five could be called "excellent."
In his record of cases, Dr Love uses the following schedule: age
of reported onset, assigned cause, deaf relatives, remnants of hearing
(especially within the speech area), condition of tympanic membrane,
hearing of speech, speech used, and intonation. According to Dr Ferrari, of Rome, the condition of the teeth of the deaf child should also
be noted, as successful oral speech depends upon proper facilities for
articulation.

Another class of defectives, epileptic children, formed the subject
of a discussion by Dr F. J. Poynton, of London. These, according to
Dr Poynton, cannot be dealt with by grouping them into two great
classes, the mild and the severe cases, the former attending ordinary
schools and the latter being sent to an epileptic colony. A large number of cases are intermediate between these classes, and should be dealt
with in a separate school.

In dealing with epileptic children, two considerations should be
kept in mind: the frequency and character of the epileptic fit, and the
general mental condition of the child. As a general rule, the frequent
recurrence of fits damages the mind. Mental degeneration may be
counted on as a concomitant of epilepsy. Sometimes strange mental
states follow immediately upon the fit, and are more or less transient,
the most dangerous being mania.

Children originally normal, but who have become permanently
damaged after some sudden brain disease, should receive, according to
Dr Poynton, individual treatment. The medical officer of the school
may be greatly assisted in such cases by a certificate from the medical
attendant of the child "acting on this certificate to the best of his
power, sometimes making use of a special school, or again, curtailing
the hours of study."

There was general agreement among those who discussed the subject
that children of markedly defective mentality or morality should be
segregated, and not taught with children whose defects are chiefly of a
physical nature. In the cases of moral defectives especially, elimination from ordinary schools is imperative. Such children are hopeless,
so far as ordinary school influence is concerned; and they do great harm
to other children. The fact that they are often alert and quick in
academic subjects should not deter school authorities from placing them
in special institutions.

Existing classifications of mentally deficient children are still imperfect, and we need a more accurate terminology. For children properly
called feeble-minded, Miss Dendy, of Manchester, who has made a special
study of these cases, believes literary education to be a waste of time.
"Special schools should be a step to permanent life-long care. These
cases must be permanently segregated and employed."

The term backward children is not found to be coextensive with the
children one year or more behind their class. In an inquiry made by
the medical inspector of the school of Dunfermline, 11 per cent of the
children were found to be a year or more behind their class; only
about half of these were cases of mental retardation, the others being
due to irregular attendance, physical defects, migration and late enrollment.
In one of the papers on the training of the feeble-minded, the interesting suggestion was made that teachers in schools for this class should
be required to include, as part of their preparation for this work, a
course of training in a college for the deaf, in order to obtain an extensive knowledge of the principles of articulation.
A special phase of the treatment of defective children in London
was presented by Dr Reginald Elmslie in his report on the "Invalid
Centres," recently opened in London, "for the instruction of children
who, owing to chronic ill-health or to physical defect, are unable to mix
with their fellows." There are at present 1,802 children enrolled in
these schools, which are to be found in various parts of London. A
mid-day meal is served to all these children. Dr Elmslie has personally studied 1,050 cases in these schools. He estimates that 20 per
cent of these on leaving school at sixteen years of age will be able to
earn a living in ordinary occupations; 50 per cent may earn a partial
living in special occupations, and 30 per cent are likely either to die
or not to be able to work. All these children are backward in their
studies. "Schools of this kind," says Dr Emslie, "may aim at either
of two objects: (1) simply to educate the children as far as possible,
then to turn them out into the world ignoring their defect; or (2) to
do the utmost to arrest, alleviate or improve the physical defect, and
by improving the child educationally and physically, to place him in
such a position that he can support himself." In London the first
aim has been adopted, though with some modifications and improvements. It is highly desirable that the city or the state should adopt
the second policy, since otherwise it will have left upon its hands a large
number of physical defectives whose condition might have been improved.
Among the methods advocated in the Congress for the improvement of the physical condition of poor children in cities, great stress
was laid upon the establishment of country camps and vacation schools.
Denmark especially has made great progress in this matter, as was
shown by the report of Thomassen, Copenhagen. In 1906, 17,400 children of Copenhagen were sent to the country. The distinctive features
of the Danish plan are (1) the placing of children singly in homes, as
far as possible, (2) the granting of free transportation by railway and
steamship companies, and (3) the establishment of camps for children
who cannot be cared for in private homes. In return, country children
are given transportation to the city for a day or two of sight-seeing.
In England and France, also, this work has developed in importance.
Manchester built in 1903, at a cost of $3,000, a country school for town
children, to which children from the elementary schools of Manchester
are sent for two weeks at a time. Board, lodging and car fare cost
lis. 6d., of which the parents pay 7s. The school is open from April to
October. The improvement in the physical condition of the children
has abundantly justified the establishment of the school.

While there was unanimity in the Congress as to the desirability of
medical inspection of schools, there were differences of opinion as to
the methods by which the recommendation of medical inspectors should
be carried out, and the extent to which the state should relieve the
family of responsibility. In thirty German cities, for instance, free
dental service is furnished to poor school children. Some French schools
provide shower-baths. The school nurse is already finding a place in
English cities. Dr Stocker, of Luzerne, advocates the establishment of
"school polyclinics" in every city for the treatment of physical defects
discovered by the school physician. "School dispensaries" are advocated
by many. Dr Bronner and many others believe that the state should
provide glasses in all cases where children with defective sight are
unable to pay the optician. A more conservative attitude in this matter was represented by one of the speakers who declared that "it is
not the province of the school to provide spectacles, but to discover the
educable and to educate, and to see that by other means and other agencies the deficiencies which make children ineducable are remedied."
The most important results of the Congress are, doubtless, (1) the
unmistakable emphasis placed upon the responsibility for the physical
well-being of the child, which the state, in making education compulsory,
has tacitly assumed; and (2) the demonstration of the necessity for a
better classification of children on the basis of physical, mental and
moral characteristics.
