The Hawkspur Experiment
=========================

By W. David Wills.
George Allen & Unwin, Ltd. pp. 193. bs.
The author of this book has long been
interested in the training of delinquent youths
and has worked in various institutions, including
Borstal. He has been a Y.M.C.A. Secretary,
a Boys' Club Leader, and Warden of an
Educational Settlement in South Wales.
Hawkspur Camp was started by the Q Camps
Committee in May 1936, and the author was
appointed Camp Chief, but in January 1940 the
war made it impossible to continue the experi-
ment. The book is an account of the work
done in this period and expounds the principles
upon which it was carried out.
The aim of the Q Camps Committee was the
training in a free environment on sympathetic
and individual lines of young people who,
mainly through environmental causes, presented
difficulties in social adjustment, or had been in
unfortunate circumstances, whether or not they
had been actual law-breakers.
The main object of the camp was to encourage
the most effective form of discipline, namely
self-discipline, on sound scientific and religious
principles, and the Camp Chief and the staff
were assisted in their purpose by a Selection and
Treatment Committee which was mainly com-
posed of medical psychologists. The day to day
problems of camp management were considered
by the Camp Council which was more a vehicle
for the expression of camp opinion than a
governing body. Its authority was limited to
the domestic affairs of the camp, and was
concerned primarily with the personal relations
of the members and the day to day conduct of
family life. The members shared with the staff
the business of running the camp, and the staff
accepted the jurisdiction of the Camp Council
on those matters with which the Council was
concerned. No punishments were inflicted by
the Council except for bullying, and the Camp
Chief acted as counsel for the defendant in all
cases except where he was one of the principals.
The author does not attempt to give a com-
plete clinical picture of any case, and in one or
two instances purposely combines two or more
histories in his presentation. This offers
difficulties to the reader, and although a series
of cross-sections serve to illustrate particular
points, horizontal views are necessary for the
reader who wishes to focus a case accurately
and form an independent judgment of the
situation.
It seems that the number of young people who
passed through the camp was small, and it
would have been interesting to know their
length of residence. It is to be hoped that the
Q Camps Committee will be able to follow up
their after-careers and publish the results. The
author does not suggest that all our State
institutions for the treatment of adolescent
offenders can be managed on precisely the same
lines as Hawkspur Camp, but he modestly
suggests that this pioneer adventure contained
the germ of an idea.
The book should be read by all those who are
interested in the welfare of socially maladjusted
adolescents and many will regret that the
experiment was unavoidably terminated.
W. IN OR WOOD iiAST.
