The Factors of the Mind
==========================

:Author: Cyril Burt.
University of London Press, Ltd. 21s.

The book deals with the logical and meta-
physical status of factors in psychology, the
relations between different methods of factor
analysis and the distribution of temperamental
types. Subsidiary arguments, illustrative
examples, and abundant footnotes are provided
and printed in smaller type for the convenience
of the reader. Statistical theory is not discussed
but working methods for computers and an
analysis of a matrix into its latent roots and
vectors are given as appendices.

The book is concerned with methods rather
than results. The author holds the view that
many of the criticisms laid at the door of the
" factorist " prove, when closely considered, to
be criticisms, not of the mathematical method of
analysis adopted, but rather of the logic, or lack
of logic, the factorial arguments display, and
unless we can fit factor-analysis into its true
logical setting we shall utterly misconstrue its
nature and be continuously led astray. " I hold
it to be far more important," Dr Burt writes,
" that the student of a particular science should
appreciate the logical method of his science than
that he should memorise a mass of details
about the facts and the latest fashionable
theories."

The thesis is developed that the factors
arrived at, from the statistical analysis of and
correlation between mental test measurements
are not, in reality, psychological entities but
result from the principles of classification
and method of analysis employed by the
investigator.

From the data discussed the conclusions are
drawn that we use factors in psychology as we
use rectangular co-ordinates in other sciences
merely because such simplified descriptions
enable us to organize our facts and help us to
state our arguments more cogently. The value
of such factors must consist in their utility for
purposes of systematized description. Whether
or not any factor actually extracted happens to
have a psychological significance is a problem
that must depend upon the proper and relevant
selection of traits and persons.

There will undoubtedly be a general agreement
with Dr Burt's view that the current treatment
of factors as causal abilities implies an antiquated
attitude towards both scientific and meta-
physical issues. On the other hand we cannot
help feeling that his warning would have been
more explicit had it been expressed more briefly-
He illustrates the need for supplementing
statistical analysis with case study but one
wonders whether, after all, the writer has really
escaped from the inevitable tendency of psycho-
logists, to treat the creative qualities of mental
activity as having properties capable of measure-
ment with reference to rectangular co-ordinates
and one feels that in the later sections of the
book, the writer is still mastered by the machinery
of the statistician.

After a highly technical discussion concerning
the different methods of analysis Dr Burt asks
if temperamental characteristics are, like intel-
lectual characteristics, distributed in accordance
with the normal curve. He discusses evidence
to show that there can be no such things as
mutually exclusive temperamental types, and
that resemblance to the idealized type is essen-
tially a matter of degree. It therefore only
becomes necessary to devise some practical
means of measuring the degree. For statistical
purposes it is proposed to measure approxima-
tion to type by the inverse hyperbolic tangent to
the saturation coefficient, for by so doing the
more typical introverts and extraverts appear in
the main to be merely extreme cases taken from
the opposite tail ends of a normal, or nearly
normal, distribution.

The " self", the causal factor .which gives a
unique bias to every psychological event, slips
unobserved between the meshes of statistical
technique. Its influence is evident throughout
the book although, as a factor of the mind, it
remains outside the field of enquiry.
J.C.R.
4
