Occupational Therapy in Wartime
================================

42 MENTAL HEALTH
f

By ELIZABETH CASSON, M.D., D.P.M.
The decision to continue the publication of this Journal is the result of
many holding the belief that the only hope for humanity depends on mental
health and, therefore, to a large extent on the understanding of what mental
health means. *
On the first day of this war, I listened to the conversation of a colonel and a
member of the Indian Civil Service. Both were retired men whose whole lives
had been spent in unselfish service to others, who had brought particularly able minds
to each problem that had occurred in their work. The colonel had started as a
youngster in the South African War and his life work had been governed by his
desire to put to an end all that could lead to war. His outlook was that of a doctor
who fights disease. The Indian Civil Servant had spent all his working life in thinking
out and guiding the development of good government and of all that was best in the
district where he had served. To both, the outbreak of another war meant the break
up of most of that to which their lives had been devoted?but both realized that the
war had been caused by a failure of mentality. As the judge put it: " We, none of us,
have the necessary mentality to prevent war?none of us knows how." We all know
that humanity is capable of thinking out how to live at peace if we could only learn
how to use the intelligence that could solve the problem, but we are either mentally
defective or we use our intelligence wrongly. It is surely worth while, therefore,
to bring to every problem that confronts us any psychological knowledge we have
managed to collect, so that in time we may manage to use well the best there is in us
to help the world to better use of what intelligence we have. We all feel equally
helpless at first in the face of our problems, but it is just here that a knowledge of
how to use our minds should help us.
The war has brought many problems of ill-health and inefficiency that need all
our intelligence to combat, but there is no doubt that in trying to overcome its horrors,
men and women of goodwill do advance the treatment, not only of those who suffer
because of war, but also of those whose sufferings still go on long after the war is
over. An instance of this is found in the application of Occupational Therapy*
which was developed scientifically during the 1914-18 years.
Beginnings of Occupational Therapy
The regular occupation of mental patients was well organized before then, and
doctors and nurses knew from experience that a well-occupied patient recovered
more quickly than one who was idle and bored, so that some of the best of the old
"asylums " were real hives of industry. It was in France, during the last war,
that one of the Canadian surgeons instituted organized occupations among the
surgical patients and this was quickly followed by others, English and American,
*
MENTAL HEALTH
43
but the effort was sporadic and there was no time to develop this seriously in the
English army. The American casualties, however, returned to their country where
there was an opportunity of providing craftswomen ready to work under the surgeons,
and Occupational Therapy was applied intensively to those who needed help. So
successful was this that rehabilitation centres were soon developed for the treatment
of civilian industries, and schools of Occupational Therapy were founded. To these
was brought the best tradition of those already engaged in occupying mental patients
?a tradition that had originally come from England.
After the 1914-18 war the new Occupational Therapy Schools propagated this
knowledge and expanded it, and soon all the American mental health services realized
that no hospital could be considered complete without its Occupational Therapy
Departments where qualified graduate workers carried out the doctors' prescrip-
tions. These hospitals became centres for study which were visited by European
doctors.
In 1927, when I visited America, I was much impressed. Really beautiful
buildings were provided for printing, bookbinding, joinery, pottery and weaving?all
work in which the mind could be absorbed, directed by those who were trained to
set sick minds to the occupations needed to promote recovery.
I visited also the Boston School of Occupational Therapy, where students were
trained, and some of the State Mental Hospitals, T.B. Sanatoria, etc.
Occupational Therapy in England
It was my privilege to help to bring back to England some of what I learnt in
America. The Philadelphia School of Occupational Therapy offered a scholarship
to Mrs. Owens, now Chairman of the Association of Occupational Therapists in
England. She became the first principal of the Dorset House School of Occupational
Therapy, where a large number of students have completed their course. Other
schools were founded in London and Edinburgh, and many doctors who visited
America have become equally enthusiastic as to the help which Occupational Therapy
can give, so that there has been a constant demand for the students to start new work
in Mental Hospitals as they qualify. One of the earliest activities of the National
Council for Mental Hygiene was to hold a conference of those interested in Occupa-
tional Therapy and the Board of Control has done much to encourage it. Each
Annual Report of the Board shows that Commissioners constantly notice what is
being done to occupy patients, and they carry on from one institution to another
any original ideas or improvements that they have noted.
The Royal Medico-Psychological Association is another body which has done
much to spread accurate teaching. On several occasions they have arranged study
tours, an outstanding one being a visit to Sandpoort Hospital in Holland where two
days were needed to see all the Occupational system that absorbed 90 per cent, of
the patients. The Hospital estate was large and gave an opportunity for much
out of door work, gardening, excavating sand for new buildings, cement work,
joinery and crafts for men and women. From these study tours medical
*
44
MENTAL HEALTH
superintendents returned to develop similar schemes in their own hospitals, some
of the first to become well known being in Exminster, Chester, and the West Riding
of Yorkshire.
Effect of War on Occupational Therapy
The war, bringing a very great opportunity for expanding the work has also,
unfortunately, interrupted much that was doing well. This was made almost
inevitable by the taking over of many Mental Hospitals for Emergency Casualty
Hospitals, and the consequent overcrowding of others. Thus in one hospital, the
really spacious and excellently equipped occupation departments, which served as
models for others, have been taken over as extra wards and nurses' quarters, and
the mental patients have to suffer not only the overcrowding in their wards but
also the curtailment of the work and recreation that aided so definitely their
recovery.
In other hospitals, however, the result of the war has been to increase the scope
of Occupational Therapy. In some, which have been taken over as complete war
units, the Occupational Therapist and her department, have been made available
for Service and for casualty patients, while in other instances, the mental patients
have remained in part of the hospital, and the Emergency Medical Service has
appointed an additional Occupational Therapist to treat their patients.
In some instances Institutions for Mental Defectives have been taken over as
general hospitals, making well-equipped workshops and trained craft teachers
available for the use of the war patients sent there. Many people have realized, for
the first time, how excellent is the organization of a colony where all the work is
done by people quite incapable of managing themselves who can, under guidance
and control, produce food for thousands of people, and make themselves far more
useful than many of those of high intelligence who do nothing for their neighbours
and have never learnt that they might.
All of this has meant not only an increased appreciation of the good results
obtained in cases of war injury or illness, but has introduced the advantages of this
form of treatment to doctors until then unfamiliar with the good results obtained
by it.
The Army, Navy and Air Force, and Emergency Medical Service, have all
appointed Occupational Therapists since the war began, partly through the demand
of the psychiatrists who had learnt at such hospitals as the Maudsley and in America
to value their help, but the orthopasdic surgeons are equally insistent in being supplied
with those trained to provide not only the occupation that will exercise a special
injured joint or muscle, but which will shorten the cure by the improved morale of
those intent on carrying through their daily job in the carpenter's shop or the games
provided as occupational treatment.
Training for Occupational Therapy
The supply of trained workers is now far below the demand. In normal times
all have been absorbed, so that special methods of training must be made available
MENTAL HEALTH
45
to supply the present need. The Association of Occupational Therapists has
instituted examinations for masseuses, experienced mental and orthopaedic nurses
and craftswomen after they have received intensive training, but the bombing of
Bristol has for the present much limited the Dorset House School, and the London
schools have closed. Every effort is being made to get intensive training going.
There are well qualified people available for this who can then direct the work of
those less experienced. There will then also be an opportunity for making use of
partly trained auxiliaries and of a number of voluntary workers whose work in the
fields of music, lectures, recreational crafts and games will be invaluable.
Work is already being done by the University of London to organize educational
activity in hospitals, which comes under the heading of Occupational Therapy, and
the London County Council classes in air raid shelters must be doing much for the
mental health of those in attendance.
Those who would like to study the subject further are referred to the Association
of Occupational Therapists, c/o Messrs. G. E. Holt & Sons, 201 Victoria House,
Southampton Row, London, W.C.I, or to Miss E. M. Macdonald, the present
Principal, Dorset House School of Occupational Therapy, Clifton, Bristol, 8.
Several valuable articles have been published lately in the Lancet on Occupational
Therapy as applied to war conditions, and many are finding TheTheoryof Occupational
Therapy, by Haworth and Macdonald (published by Bailliere, Tindal & Cox at 6s.),
a useful handbook.
As in all other conditions found in wartime, problems must be met as they occur.
We are faced by many problems in the field of Occupational Therapy. Some of these
are: the large number of patients in need of it, the psychological casualties among
the Services, patients depressed by air raid and black-out conditions, and the wounded
whose interest in recovery is not being stimulated. To meet these we have a few
well-trained workers, and many willing to help, both among the authorities who
want to get the best, and those who have not yet quite grasped the nature of the
need. We have a splendid number of untrained people wanting to alleviate the
sufferings of others. Surely our intelligence should be enough to guide all these
into the right channels where the best work can be done.
An interesting story was told the other day in the Manchester Guardian of how a
gang of big boys who had been a " problem " in the public air raid shelters became
thoroughly helpful when the heavy raids on the city last December brought them in
contact with danger and suffering. They looked after elderly people, carried messages,
fetched water, brought first-aid equipment, and made themselves generally useful.
All of which goes to emphasize the point, so long ignored, but now becoming more and
more recognized, that the older adolescent needs the stimulus of reality to bring out
the best in him. Activities devised for his entertainment often fail to evoke a response
because, however interesting, they are still artificial, in the sense that they are specifically
provided and not compelled by circumstance. The innermost secret of the success of
the East Suffolk and other youth squads is that the jobs the members do are real
jobs. ...
Times Educational Supplement
(22.2.41).
*
