Lectures on War Neuroses
==========================

90 MENTAL HEALTH
Book Reviews

By T. A. Ross, M.D.,
F.R.C.P. Pp.116. Edward Arnold & Co.
6s.
Very little that is new about War Neuroses
emerged during the first eighteen months of the
present struggle. Wars change their pattern.
Medicine progresses by fits and starts. And no
one is yet entitled to say in what way, if at all,
concepts of mental illness will be modified by
the experiences of the present war years.
Dr. Ross, whose sudden death occurred just
after this small book went to press, was specially
qualified to speak to those battalion medical
officers and general practitioners for whom these
lectures were designed. He had worked as a
general practitioner himself. He had been a
medical officer in the last war, and he had
treated patients suffering from neuroses, mainly
army officers, in the present war. In the period
between the two wars he had established himself
as one with a practical and direct approach to
mental illness which featured the individual's
reaction to his situation rather than an emphasis
on unconscious conflicts.
The plan of the book is simple and it contains
much that is good sound common sense. A
preliminary chapter gives the author's views on
the causes, symptoms, including somatic
symptoms, and diagnosis of neurosis. The next
chapter is entitled Acute War Neuroses, and
here several pages are devoted to the subject of
prevention, Colonel Rogers's description of the
duties of a battalion M.O. being quoted. There
are special sections dealing with the treatment
of specific phenomena such as paralysis, mutism
and amnesia. The two final chapters on Chronic
War Neuroses follow the same general scheme
with sections on symptoms followed by others
on treatment.
Some of the explanations put forward are not
very convincing. To say for example that
neurotic exhaustion is an indication that the
patient is bored, or has a fear of consequences,
or even that it is a sign of emotional distress,
does not seem to do more than to classify it as
a symptom. And Dr. Ross was apt to be
critical of the use of certain medical or psycho-
logical terms without always suggesting what
should take their place. Shell-shock, of course,
D.A.H. understandingly, and Effort Syndrome
less effectively are condemned. He would
apparently tell patients with functional tachy-
cardia that there was nothing whatever the
matter with their hearts, but he does not attempt
to suggest any reason why the heart should be
singled out for disturbance, except to say that
there are fashions in symptoms.
In conclusion a few special points may be
referred to. Dr. Ross is insistent on the
importance of not allowing cases of acute
neurosis to become chronic. As to in-born
factors he says, " We cannot alter heredity, but
we can do much to correct errors of education."
He points out that there are neuroses of army
life as distinct from warfare. An individual may,
for example, break down when he finds himself
called upon to undertake duties which his
civilian experience, his ability or his lack of
ability has not fitted him. And he suggests that
the reason why there is more neurosis in the
R.A.F. among the ground staff than the flying
personnel is the responsibility felt by those who
service the planes for the safety of those who
fly them. H.C.S.
