How Can the Nurse Help the Refractory Patient?
==============================================

:Author: Eileeen B. Mason
^ster, De La Pole Hospital, Willerby, Hull; winner "Lord" Memorial Essay
Prize, 1940

It is necessary, in Mental Hospitals, to gather together into one ward those
Patients who are impulsive, disobedient and the like, or whose presence in other
wards gives rise to fights, quarrels and indiscipline. Such trouble-brewers ,
who have been labelled " Refractory Patients unquestionably need stricter
discipline, and it is not in the interests of the other patients to subject them to the
firmer rule.

The Refractory ward is a most satisfying ward in which to work, for the task
showing these patients the error of their ways and of directing their ebullient
energies falls chiefly to the nurse. Because they are so very much alive and usually
fairly intelligent, they are good material to handle.

Refractory behaviour is a single entity, but it manifests itself in a great variety
Ways which are predetermined by early experiences of life. Hence, while it does
^?t really matter what form misbehaviour takes, the important question is, Why
^0es this patient behave in this manner ? " Since the causes of refractory behaviour
are> potentially, as numerous and complex as there are men and environments,
must, to find the answer, study the psychology of each patient individually and
gravel the threads of her life from the cradle to the present moment. The child
ls > indeed, " father to the man."

Whilst the helpless babe is completely at the mercy of its surroundings, it is the
function of the parents to engender those feelings of love and confidence from which
later springs a sense of security. They prepare the growing child to co-operate
increasingly with others and, eventually, to assume its share of responsibility in the
world. Thus she acquires that fearless independence so indispensable from adoles-
cence onwards, and, if she has learned to accept denials from those she loves without
feelings of disturbance or animosity, she is prepared to face life's inevitable set-backs
and disillusionments.

Learning to live is a process of trial and error. Mistakes and difficulties are
bound to occur, but in normal people these are quickly evaluated and the necessary
readjustments made in the light of the experience gained. Now, if the child is
neither helped nor allowed to develop normally, she soon becomes a prey of conflicts
and complexes arising from the mismanagement or repression of her innate urges.
Feelings of uncertainty and insecurity permeate her subconscious mind and under-
mine her self-confidence. When some major difficulty comes along, she is afraid
to face it and may react, mainly, in either of two ways: she may give up the fight and
go right under; or she may subconsciously compensate for her weakness by a great
show of aggressiveness which, carried to its extreme, results in refractory behaviour;
in the expression of feelings and emotion, she regresses to the level of a naughty child.
It follows that the nurse ought to cultivate such a relationship with the patient
that, in spite of her unfortunate early experiences, she can be helped to develop a
balanced judgment and a feeling of self-reliance. As Dr. Kimber says, " the task
of the nurse corresponds with that of the parents, and this implies that normal
methods of training, encouragement and re-education in its broadest sense will be
most successful

A good first impression is essential. A patient cannot be indifferent to the
nurse, and how she reacts depends on which of her earlier experiences are stirred.
Do we evoke memories of the kind people she knew ? From the genuine pleasure
we show at talking to her she should infer that we are going to be friendly and helpful-
New admittances, apart from being shaken in their self-esteem at being taken from
home, have probably had unnerving experiences and will project their fear into their
surroundings. Do not make her feel her position. She has not her liberty and she
knows it. Keys should be handled unostentatiously, not flaunted like handbells-
Share her loneliness and aching to be with her own folk by talking about them-
Allay any unfounded fears she may have about hospital practices by explaining
beforehand the reasons for doing a thing. It may be useful to recall our own
tremblings on the dentist's doorstep. One patient broke down completely when the
technician approached to do a blood-count, but became quite interested when a nurse
begged for a count on herself?as a favour. The patient was invited to assist the
technician to take the nurse's blood and then cheerfully co-operated when her own
turn came.

Never allow a " refractory " reputation to follow a patient. In a new atmosphere
she must get a fresh start, otherwise she will feel that every man's hand is against her-
When Nancy was first brought to my ward, she was given a frightful character.

" Utterly hopeless," they said, " a waste of time trying." Eventually Nancy told
roe her version, because I listened sympathetically. She used to work in the laundry
ar>d, one day, accidentally splashed another patient. Words, then blows, ensued.
In the melee the other patient slipped on the wet floor, fracturing her thigh. She died
later of hypostatic pneumonia. From that moment, Nancy was regarded as " re-
fractory ", and in spite of her pleadings was no longer allowed to work in the laundry.
But was she so intractable that for four years she had to be penalized for an accident ?
The more she protested, the worse name she got. No wonder she kicked against
the goad. " That's all over and done with now, Nancy," I said. " You stay in
Uty ward, tidy yourself up and help me to get my work done." But Nancy didn t
stay. She eventually won her discharge.

To be able to help the patient to build up those factors wanting in her character,
we must know what difficulties she has encountered. This means setting out to win
her confidence, so that she will pour out all the unpleasant emotions festering within.
Further, we must judge her acts by her own moral standards, not ours. In that light,
the very facts of her experiences will reveal how she thinks and what stirs her emotions,
and how, thus giving us sufficient insight into her attitude to life to start re-education.
Now, we have to re-educate our patient in two spheres, that of the working
^orld and that of social life.

The bad mental effect of idle hands is well known. Idleness favours self-pity.
The mind must be kept busy. In addition, there is the obligation of earning one's
living and contributing to the common good. A patient s contribution to the
hospital from which she derives so many benefits should normally be through the
e*ercise of her personal talents. Everyone has certain aptitudes: e.g. one has a
flair for cooking, another for bargaining, and so on. As Lowell writes, " No man is
horn into the world whose work is not born with him. There is an extremely
wide range from which to select, in the ward, the kitchen, the laundry, the garden,
the sewing-room. ... I know one old person who is happiest when cleaning
the Chapel. Work which interests the patient should be allowed to begin with,
hut later it must be more utilitarian. In either case it must be within her powers
to do it, or she will be discouraged. Work well done sows the seeds of confidence
in other matters. If the task is not too well done, or is not finished, the nurse should
c?mplete it without fuss, thanking the patient for her help. It need hardly be said
that a nurse must never ask a patient to do any work which she is not willing to do
herself. Finally, we must acknowledge that the patient is pulling her weight by
giving canteen tickets, privileges or extras, according to the value of the work done.
^?r example, if a group of our patients completes some useful undertaking recently
a dozen of our refractories cultivated half an acre of grassland they are given a
sPecial tea-party at one of the villas, a treat which is greatly appreciated.
Monotony of work, and in many cases lack of just a little bit of responsibility,
^re harriers to progress. They stifle the striving forces and repress interest. Equally
arigerous are those long hours when the day's work is over. The patient has earned
leisure but cannot be allowed to hang around aimlessly under the pretext of
resting . . . day-dreaming, moping and fretting are sure to set in. To counteract
this, and to provide relaxation, each patient ought to be induced to have a personal
hobby?sketching, painting, needlecraft, knitting for the Forces (this has a great
appeal these days). One of my patients actually looks after the laboratory animals
as a hobby. Most people will read if their tastes are consulted and the appropriate
type of book or magazine provided. It is surprising how many refractory patients
prefer instructive books. Ellen D., for example, will only read books or papers on
horticulture.

To help to readjust the patient to social life, the hospital provides many forms
of communal entertainment which bring patients and staff together under convivial
circumstances?eurythmics, games, dances, whist drives, concerts, rambles, the
cinema, etc.?and it requires very little persuasion to attract the shy patient and to
get her to take an active part. In our own hospital, a " Keep-Fit " class under a
qualified instructor was made available. As people derive benefit from such
exercises in proportion to the gusto they put into it, the patients find a ready means of
using their spare energy in a competitive atmosphere and prove keen pupils. Within
a few months most of the patients from the refractory ward were attending at their
own request and with most inspiring results.

A hospital Guide Troop is a valuable means of securing both group co-operation
and individual achievement. Guiding requires free and friendly social contacts,
and the code, based on the principle " Help your Sister ", has such an appeal to one's
better nature that few fail eventually to respond to it. In addition, the variety of
activities it embraces enables each one to find her own metier. Badges can be won
for cooking, needlework, laundering, first aid, etc. Those induce friendly rivalry
and are something worth working for.

A word about punishment. There are two types of nurse?those who have the
faculty of controlling, and those who have not. Those who lack the natural ability
tend to use force, which is a confession of weakness and, except in very rare cases
where a patient has to be restrained, must never be used. Leadership is a moral
force and can be acquired by practice. It is largely a matter of tact. One has to
insist on certain regulations which condition health and discipline, but obedience can
usually be obtained in a friendly way by explaining the reason for the rules, and by
good example. Punishment, when necessary, must be positive, not negative.
Forbidding to carry out an intention is a stimulus to increase the energy put into
the act. An opportunity for acting in a different way must be provided. Instead of
" seclusion " or " isolation from the group ", the patient should be made to do
something useful for the group. Punishment must result from the misdemeanour
and be commensurate with it. Badly done work must be repeated, the aim being
good work. The patient who tries to upset a ward will lose privileges, not because
she is pugnacious, but because privileges are the wages of good behaviour.

Finally, patients will be irritable if they are ill or even if just " off colour "?
Of primary importance, then, is a knowledge of each one's physical condition. The
nurse must faithfully carry out such remedial measures as the disease requires and
the doctor indicates. She must see that her patient eats sufficient, and regularly-
Food must be wholesome and served in an appetizing manner; hot meals are meant
to be served hot, not tepid. Irregular movement of the bowels is a critical factor in
producing ill health. If the waste products are not removed, the system becomes
intoxicated and the nerves irritated. Habit is more natural and quite as effective
as medicines. A frank talk with the patient will often secure her co-operation.
Tranquil sleep, " nature's soft nurse ", has a most beneficial effect on excitable
patients. Provided the patient's day has been well planned, she generally drops off
into a refreshing slumber. If, however, she is not able to sleep well, a warm bath
and a hot milk drink before retiring help enormously. Frequently a lazy, homely
chat has a most soothing effect. Sedatives should be used very sparingly. Bedrooms
must be quiet, well ventilated, and feeble illumination is preferable to pitch darkness.

Bedclothes are adapted to the season but must always be light and cosy. Personal
cleanliness has a far-reaching effect on mental outlook, and in this respect it is the
details which count. It means working harder, but it is well worth the effort to give
the patients constant individual attention, manicuring, dressing the hair, suggesting
some little alteration in the clothes, noticing and approving any spontaneous
improvement.

In conclusion, upon the nurse's understanding, objectivity, sympathy and sense
?f humour depend the patient's progress. Her experience with the nurse will
condition her idea of the ideal personality, her growing confidence will reflect her
growing feeling of security and ability to face life afresh. We are their friends and
their hope of recovery. We can bring happiness and peace to their turbulent minds
and hearts, or misery and abjection. The choice is ours, and to strengthen our
resolve we have His words and example who said, " Greater love hath no man
than this . . . "

