The Nursing Couple
====================

By M. P. Middlemore,
M.D. Hamish Hamilton, Ltd. Fp. iyx
7s. 6d.
This book is quite unique in its approach to
the subject of breast feeding. The title shows
first the emphasis that the author places on the
mutual influence both partners in breast feeding
exercise on one another, indeed she shows
throughout the book that breast feeding, if
successful, is always the result of a mutual
adaptation of mother and babe to one another.
Dr. Middlemore examines in detail the causes
of failure in this mutual adaptation and shows it
92 MENTAL HEALTH
to be due, in many instances, to the mother's
emotional reactions and consequent behaviour
to the particular kind of suckling with which she
is confronted.
The conclusions reached in this book are
based on the author's observations of the Nursing
Couple in the early weeks of breast feeding, and
the main body of the book is devoted to a
description and classification of the different
types of sucklings observed. Suggestions are
also put forward as to the best ways of dealing
with the difficulties that are encountered. The
satisfied sucklings?active and sleepy?are first
described and then the unsatisfied sucklings?
excited, ineffective, simple inert, irritable inert.
The influence and role of the nurse is described
in another very interesting chapter.
The book is unique in a second way, in that
the author has brought to bear on her observa-
tions of breast feeding not only her medical
experience but her psychological knowledge of
unconscious impulses and motivation.
If Dr. Middlemore emphasizes one thing above
anything throughout this book, it is the right
and necessity for both mother and babe to
obtain enjoyment during breast feeding, an
attitude which has been overlooked in much of
the work done on this subject, to the detriment
of both mother and babe when precept has been
put into practice.
Although the book is primarily a scientific
study of suckling, and as such is of most interest
to doctors and nurses, yet it is so full of indirect
advice to mothers, that few thinking mothers
would not be relieved to have such light thrown
on the oft thorny path of breast feeding.
The wealth of detailed and interesting observa-
tions ahd conclusions that Dr. Middlemore has
brought to light in this book were only made
possible by patient work over a long period on
this subject which enthralled her.
There is an introduction to the book by
Dr. Edward Glover and a foreword by Ella
Sharpe and Joan Mallinson who were entrusted
by the author with the manuscript of the book.
