Child's Discovery of Death
============================

By Mrs. Sylvia
Anthony. Kegan Paul. lis. 6d.
The writer of this book is to be congratulated
?n having undertaken an original piece of
^search, one which needed a most careful
Planning of approach to the groups of children
observed in order to get as spontaneous a
resPonse as possible to the tests used, i.e. story
completion test and an intelligence test with
modifications. In addition, "home records"
were made by parents and others with due
safeguards.
Mrs. Anthony shows that reference to death
appears in children's fantasies, even though no
mention of the subject may have been made by
the parents or others. In certain children the
death of a member of the family or of a near
relative may cause emotional upset resulting
from death-wishes and such children will need
careful handling, all the more so in that few
adults can consider the idea of death with
equanimity.
Passing on to the idea of death in the child's
directive thought, results of a test as to the
meaning of the word " dead " fell into five
categories which had a significant correlation
with both chronological and mental age, the
majority showing application to humanity and
elaboration of cultural-symbolic aspects of
death.
From the home records, Mrs. Anthony
concludes that the child can attach no meaning
to the word " dead " until it reaches the " why "
stage, but this conclusion takes no account of
the fact that even the young child may " feel "
that someone is dead. Early ideas are limited
and erroneous; primitive ideas with regard to
the dead are manifest in some children who abhor
the idea of touching anything dead. The killing
of insects may satisfy a desire for power in some
children?but this is not necessarily cognate with
a desire to kill.
In discussing the development of emotion with
the idea of death in the mind of the child, Mrs.
Anthony follows closely the school of psycho-
analytic theory as to birth anxiety and aggressive
impulses, and this leads us to the idea of magical
thinking about death. With the development of
conscious logic, however, the child learns that
natural law prevails over human will and he may
now pass through a stage when he will seek to
allay anxiety aroused by the association of death
with the self by denying that he will die. This
attitude may help the child to assimilate the
painful idea of death into his consciousness.
It will be seen that Mrs. Anthony's book
develops a most interesting theme and in a short
review it is impossible either to do full justice
to the material provided or to raise the many
points that will without doubt cause much
discussion.
The importance of research in this subject
cannot be doubted since it is already known that
the child's uncertainty as to the implications of
death and the frequently obscure rationalizations
which he forms on the subject are responsible
for subsequent emotional maladjustments.
