Juvenile Delinquency and the War
==================================

A Critical Survey of Current Comments
Compiled by the Staff of the Child Guidance Council
Much space is being devoted in the daily press to the question of the increased
incidence of juvenile delinquency since the outbreak of war.
In surveying the present problem it has to be borne in mind that juvenile delin-
quency was increasing year by year for about ten years up to 1937 and that, after
the passing of the Children and Young Persons Act in 1933, the increase became
much more marked for the following reasons (adduced in a recent survey?Bagot,
1940) :
1. Changes in police procedure.
2. Increasing reluctance on the part of constables to deal on the spot with
minor delinquencies.
3. Increased interest in the subject as a result of the 1933 Act, and a greater
readiness to bring children before the Court.
4. Changes in methods of salesmanship.
MENTAL HEALTH
67
Statistics
Then followed a decrease, to be succeeded on the outbreak of war by a sudden
leap upwards, as the following Home Office figures show*:
January-April January-April Increase per cent.
1939 1940
Children under 14 .. 5,328 8,644 62-24
Age group 14-17 .. 4,387 6,198 41-29
Age group 17-21 .. 3,238 3,761 16-51
May-August May-August
1939 1940
Children under 14 .. 5,809 1,139. 33-84
Age group 14-17 .. 4,353 5,471 25-68
Age group 17-21 .. 3,126 3,430 9-72
It will be seen from these tables that the increase in the second four months of
1940 is less than that in the first four months.
The reason most generally assigned to the decrease in the second four months is
the increased possibility of outdoor activities in the summer months, but other
factors doubtless play a more important part, such, for instance, as the gradual
decrease of opportunities for stealing when the black-out period is shorter, cessation
of the worst ebb and flow of evacuation, and last but not least the general settling
down of the nation to war conditions.
Inadequacy of Available Records
The significance of the Home Office figures quoted cannot be gauged accurately
until information is available as to several factors including the intelligence of the
children charged. Was a greater proportion of these children dull and backward,
feeble-minded or defective as compared with pre-war figures ? A report, referred to
at greater length elsewhere in this Journal, is available from a child guidance clinic,
to which approximately one-third of the children charged at a juvenile court were
referred. Although this figure represents only a small proportion of the socially
unsatisfactory and incompetent group in the population, it is large enough to be
significant. The report indicates that there was a noteworthy increase in the number
of delinquent children with I.Q. 70-85 in the year 1940-1 as compared with the year
1939-40, and there was a 74 per cent, increase of delinquent schoolchildren with I.Q.
ranging from under 55 up to 85, i.e. from certifiable M.D. up to dull. It is pointed
out that " the seriously dull and backward children (i.e. I.Q. 70-85) have more drive
than those in the more defective group, but their drive is often uncontrolled and
undirected. It is not surprising, therefore, that the main increase in juvenile
delinquency comes from this group of cases ".
* A memorandum just published by the Home Office and Board of Education gives the following
figures for the first year of war as compared with the previous year:
Children under 14.. .. .. .. .. 41 per cent, increase
Age group 14-17 22 per cent, increase
Age group 17-21 ..  5 per cent, increase
68
MENTAL HEALTH
In a recent paper, a psychiatric social worker stated that in a badly bombed area
the incidence of psychosomatic symptoms was highest in the 11-14 age group. This
indicates that war conditions affect this, the group at the age of puberty, most
strongly, hence there must be an increased risk of behaviour disorders.*
The following figures for various areas have been quoted in the press:
i
Reception Areas
Chester. (Annual Report of the Chief Constable.)
Juveniles before the Court in 1940 .. .. 167
Juveniles before the Court in 1939 .. .. 45
Of this number 101 had not previously been before the Court, 33 once and 26 more
than once.
Lancashire.
Juveniles before the Court in 1940 .. .. 2,518
Juveniles before the Court in 1939 .. .. 2,093
The age group mainly affected was the 11-13 group.
Caernarvonshire .
Juveniles before the Court in 1940 .. .. 147
Juveniles before the Court in 1939 .. .. 49
In Lancashire it is stated definitely that the increase in delinquency is not due
to the influx of evacuees. Were the resident adolescents upset by the changed
conditions caused by the advent of strange children ?
Chester and Caernarvonshire both received evacuees from Merseyside. Were
these the culprits or how far was lack of provision for the dull and backward and
defective children already resident in the areas responsible for the outbreak ?
If it were true that the dull and backward group among " natives " are the chief
recruits to the Courts, it might well be that the advent of brighter and tougher
evacuees from the towns evoked a compensatory aggressiveness which, owing to their
deficiencies in foresight and control, led them into the clutches of the law. This
question would well repay investigation.
Cities
Leeds.
Juveniles before the Court in 1939 .. .. 365
Juveniles before the Court in 1940 .. .. 460
In 1939, 81 of the cases were " breaking and entering ", in 1940 these cases increased
to 163.
Petty thefts increased from 243 in 1939 to 352 in 1940.
Sheffield.
Juveniles before the Court, year ended 31.3.39 437
Juveniles before the Court, year ended 31.3.40 460
Breaking and entering increased from 3 to 42 cases.
* The Home Office and Board of Education memorandum referred to in a previous footnote
states that the increase in juvenile delinquency reaches its peak at age 13. This surely is most
significant.
MENTAL HEALTH
69
The Director of Education claims that there has been no substantial increase?
only 6 per cent, on the year, confined entirely to young persons over school age, while
there is a decrease of 5 per cent, compared with the year ended March 31st, 1938.
Cardiff.
Juveniles before the Court in 1939 .. .. 207
Juveniles before the Court in 1940 .. .. 271
Abertillery, Ebbw and Blaina.
It will be seen from the figures given that the increase in reception areas and in
the cities is approximately equal. In the reception areas, normal conditions of social
life for juveniles has been disturbed by the invasion of evacuees into both homes
and schools; in the cities, normal conditions have been disturbed by lack of school
facilities for considerable periods.
Causes to which the Increase in Juvenile Delinquency is Popularly Ascribed
The causes to which the increase in juvenile delinquency is ascribed are
numerous, but some of them existed prior to the war, in addition to those
enumerated by Bagot and referred to above. They can be classified as follows:
(a) Poverty, Bad Housing and Malnutrition
Poverty would appear to be a less potent factor in wartime when so many
mothers are wage-earners and unemployment is less rife. The bad housing conditions
of normal times have their counterpart in the badly bombed areas where children
suffer from broken sleep and from life in shelters. They are able to truant from home.
One worker in charge of a shelter for children states that they are entirely out of
control, and cannot be persuaded to give any help in running the shelter. The
rationing of foodstuffs so promptly and various schemes for the feeding of school-
children should have lessened the danger of stealing for the sake of obtaining food,
though the shortage of sweets and confectionery may lead to petty larceny.
(b) Lack of Parental Control, Broken Homes and Absence of the Father
It is a platitude that the young need the framework of an ordered and disciplined
environment in which to develop, and for this the home surroundings are of the
utmost importance. Many homes are " broken " during wartime by the absence
of the father in the Services and few women can combine within themselves the roles
of loving mother and authoritative father which are necessary for the welfare of
the child. However, it is reported that in 30 per cent, of the cases, the absence of
the father is not the cause of the trouble. Some homes are without either father or
mother for the greater part of the day, as both are on war service of some kind.
Juveniles before the Court in 1939
Juveniles before the Court in 1940
75
117
Glasgow.
Juveniles before the Court in 1939
Juveniles before the Court in 1940
3,141
3,261
70
MENTAL HEALTH
(c) Evacuation and Constant Change of Environment
It was to be expected that the removal from their homes of thousands of children
of all ages and types would lead to misdemeanours in some instances. There do not
appear to be any figures available to show, for example, what proportion of children
charged in a given reception area were evacuees and how many belonged to the
normal population. It would be interesting to learn whether the influx of evacuees
upset the latter and to compare the type of delinquencies committed by the two
groups. Reports from at least two reception areas indicate that the evacuees are
not the culprits.
From the figures given in the preceding table it will be seen that the increase in
delinquency is highest amongst the children under fourteen, i.e. among the children
who were eligible for evacuation. Those who were evacuated suffered both from
the emotional disturbance of removal from home and from decreased opportunities
for attendance at school, while those who remained at home were " running wild "
owing to the closing of the schools and clubs. Were misdemeanours more numerous
amongst those who went away or among those who stayed at home ? In reception
areas, if evacuees were the culprits, were they " old lags " or " new criminals " ?
If " new can misdemeanours be ascribed to destruction of tone of school by
splitting up on evacuation ? How many of the culprits had been " warned " and
how frequently, though not charged ?
(d) Lack of Religious and Moral Teaching
This may result in a decreased resistance to temptations such as to thieve from
open counters, to steal parcels from unattended cars, to make off" with bicycles.
On the other hand, temptations have probably increased. Dark nights and the
black-out have increased the possibility of avoiding detection of all sorts of nefarious
activities. It may be noted that while thefts of cars are said to have decreased in
one city at least since the " immobilizing " order was enforced, the increase in thefts
of bicycles may be due to the fact that many more are in use at the present time
owing to transport difficulties, petrol restrictions and so on. It has been stated in
a juvenile court in London that numbers of children, delighted with the opportunities
provided for games amongst ruins, have been prosecuted for looting perfectly useless
articles which might have been lying there for months. Such a temptation does not
occur in normal times, but it is doubtful in these cases whether the child realized fully
that he was doing wrong.
(e) Increased Leisure and Lack of Ability to make use of it
Presumably this cause relates more particularly to the older child and young
persons up to the age of 21. Lack of ability to use leisure is primarily due (i) to
defects in home training, (ii) to defects in the educational system, (iii) to the modern
craze for passive and mechanical forms of recreation as opposed to creative and
cultural recreation. But in wartime recreational facilities for children have been
diminished by (1) the commandeering of halls, etc., which formerly housed clubs,
MENTAL HEALTH
71
(2) the digging up of playing fields for allotments, (3) the transfer of children from
schools commandeered for various purposes to makeshift quarters.
(/) Ever-increasing Desire for " Pleasure " on part of Older Boys and Girls
This has probably been increasing for some time throughout the community
but may be intensified by the desire for romanticized adventure which is always
present in children in wartime, a desire which should have outlets provided for it.
For boys, the A.T.C. answers the purpose to some extent, as witness the immediate
response to the call for volunteers. In girls, the sense of adventure is less marked.
This spirit of aggressive adventure is doubtless partly responsible for the increase in
" breaking and entering At the same time there may be thefts to pay for amuse-
ments where there is boredom. Hence the need again for providing healthy
recreational facilities.
%
(g) Increasing Employment of Children resulting in Non-attendance at School
These children are suddenly thrust from an ordered routine at school, where
every moment is planned out, into the atmosphere of the wage-earner. They may
be led astray by adult workers, or yield to a desire to demonstrate their newly-won
independence in illegal ways. A revival of the apprenticeship system in a form
suitable for modern conditions for these young people would bridge the gap between
school and adult life.
Methods of Treatment Proposed
Various methods of dealing with the problem of juvenile delinquency are the
subject of discussion at the present time:
1. The Raising of the School Leaving Age to 15 and Compulsory Part-time Education
for Older Children
These plans do not appear to be feasible during the war, when there is a shortage
of building materials, of labour for building, and a dearth of teachers. An extension
of training schemes for industry might solve the problem meantime.
2. Increased Interest by Local Education Authorities in the out-of-school hours of the
Children
This is being effected by the formation of Youth Service Squads and so on.
It is of the essence of such schemes that they should bring the child into contact with
the world in which he must live when he leaves school, and provide a means whereby
he feels himself to be accepted not only among his colleagues but in adult society.
Social and other activities connected with the school are not sufficient. They cannot
widen the child's background and too often are conducted by teachers whose training
does not fit them for the work. Neither is it fair that teachers should be expected
to give their out-of-school hours to children?they need to refresh themselves by
mixing with adults in other occupations, by the pursuit of various activities away
from children, otherwise their lives are cramped and they do not adjust easily to
normal adult society.
A
72
MENTAL HEALTH
3. Reformatories for Parents, the Children being cared for in Welfare Centres
Meantime
It is doubtful whether such a proceeding, which has been suggested but which is
in fact not practicable, would result in a happy home atmosphere. It might succeed
if the parents were very young and the home not too bad. But if the home is really
bad, the children would be better off in a specially selected foster home or at an <
approved school.
4. The Establishment of Child Guidance Clinics
It is noted that in some cases Education Authorities are conferring with Juvenile
Court Justices to discuss ways and means of dealing with the juvenile delinquents
and are urging the establishment of child guidance clinics. These, alone, cannot
solve the problem of juvenile delinquency. The question is a much wider one,
beginning with education for parenthood, 'followed by the optimum training of
children in day nurseries, nursery schools and throughout school life, the promotion
of suitable recreational activities for each individual child and ending with his estab-
lishment in a job for which he is fitted and which gives him a prospect of advancement
in the future.
The child guidance clinic can, however, be of assistance in re-adjusting children
who are beginning to show signs of anti-social tendencies, thus decreasing the number
of children who become actually delinquent. The clinic staff can help by advising
parents, teachers and probation officers 'and others who have to deal with the child
on methods of upbringing. The child's intelligence can be ascertained so that it is
possible to determine whether he is easily led into mischief by the bad influence of
others. Assistance can be given to the child himself in facing up to his difficulties?
the value of this process has been realized in at least one district where it has been
remarked that " forcible detention has proved to be a very inadequate alternative to
the corrective influence available within the environment Psychiatric advice is
essential in such cases, otherwise incalculable harm may be done to a sensitive child.
5. Formation of Panels of Teachers with Special Experience in Child Guidance Clinics
It is doubtful whether such experience could be obtained except in child guidance
clinics and very few teachers would be able to devote time to the special study of
delinquent children. Attendance at courses is useful in arousing their interest in
the subject but cannot be held to train them to deal with such children by themselves.
It is true that certain centres, notably Glasgow and Sunderland, are already attempting
this plan, and the experiment will be watched with critical attention.
6. Residential Child Guidance Clinics
The results obtained by the first residential child guidance clinic for delinquent
children which has been set up at Nerston will be awaited with special interest. Such
a clinic may have the same disadvantages as an approved school, namely the removal
of the child from home and his upbringing in a rather artificial atmosphere. Will the
fully trained staff of such a clinic be successful in preparing the child to return more
MENTAL HEALTH
73
quickly to normal life, and will the child be easily adapted to normal life if supervised
by the staff of the clinic in the district where he lives ?
7. Suggestions put forward by a Conference called in Ayrshire by a Woman J.P.,
and Parallel Criticisms
These are to be found in full in The Times Educational Supplement of May 3rd,
1941, and May 24th, 1941.
The suggestions represent on the whole enlightened opinion, but certain of the
criticisms made by another J.P. are justified. The suggestions betray the fact
that the procedure of Juvenile Courts is not always carried out with due regard to
the letter of the law and vary very much in different parts of the country. That
there are deviations from the Home Office regulations has been indicated by Bagot,
and a recent survey of some Juvenile Courts in Yorkshire has confirmed this finding.
8. Increase in Approved School Accommodation
The Home Office has advised Local Authorities that an increase of at least
50 per cent, on pre-war accommodation should be provided. There can be no
question nowadays of the value of the training given in these schools, though the
standard varies from place to place.
What is open to criticism, however, is the assumption that committal to an
approved school is the best method of dealing with many juvenile delinquents,
especially with those whose delinquency is an outcome of the war. As Miss Fry
points out, "it is individual affection and control, even the feeling of individual
importance in the tiny community of the household, which is what they need ".
9. Foster Home Placement
Several of the Education Authorities who take their duties under the Children
and Young Persons Act 1933 seriously, have shown a welcome tendency to try to
find foster homes for certain types of delinquent children. The difficulties of finding
foster parents able and willing to take these children during wartime are of course
enormously increased by evacuation. Billeting Officers are obliged to seize on each
and every vacancy they find, whereas foster parents suitable for the task should have
been reserved for the care of these special children. A wide field lies open to the
Joint Register of Foster Homes and Schools for Nervous, Difficult and Retarded
Children and, were funds available now, it could usefully employ workers acting in
co-operation with the Regional Representatives of the Mental Health Emergency
Committee to carry out this specialized billeting. To quote Miss Fry again, " From
such a home (the child) takes a natural place in a world already familiar, as an
adolescent, and later as a grown-up person, without the. dislocation which too often
follows the end of education in an approved school. Many boys and girls come to
grief again after excellent careers in such schools, probably because the change of
surroundings and discipline is too sudden. The gradually loosened control of good
foster parents gives a more natural transition period."
*
74
MENTAL HEALTH
10. Corporal Punishment
Already in one area an Education Committee has recommended to the Juvenile
Court Magistrates that they should introduce the use of the birch in order to ascertain
whether it has a deterrent effect. There are signs in two or three other areas of a
desire to take a similar step. Such action is to be deprecated on the ground that the
procedure of birching by a policeman in a police court is undesirable and likely to
cause more harm than good. In those few cases, if such exist, where corporal
punishment is really necessary, it should be possible to ensure that it is carried out in
the home or, if the parents prefer, at school, though the latter course would doubtless
have to be carefully considered, since the school does not normally punish for
misdemeanours committed outside school.
In Glasgow, 94 boys were birched in 1940 as compared with 10 in the previous,
year. It remains to be seen whether there will be a considerable decrease in juvenile
delinquency in 1941 as a result. Moreover, if there is a decrease, it may not
follow that it is in any way directly connected with the re-introduction of corporal
punishment.
Conclusions
This survey shows that:
1. There has been a definite increase of juvenile delinquency since the war began.
2. Many influences pertaining to the war may be responsible.
3. There is no certainty how far one or more of these influences are causally effective.
4. It is not certain whether delinquency is more rife among " natives " or evacuees.
5. There is no exact knowledge as to whether the increase is caused by an increase
of past offenders or recidivists.
6. There is increasing faith in some quarters in the efficacy of child guidance as a
contribution towards the solution of the problem of juvenile delinquency.
7. There is a regressive tendency in other quarters to the apparently easy way out
of the difficulty by using the repressive deterrent type of punishment which has
proved ineffective in the past.
8. Public interest in juvenile delinquency is increasing, but there is still much loose
thinking and sentimentalism rife in relation to this subject.
9. There is great need and ample opportunity for research which will crystallize
ideas and build a firm foundation of facts on which future policy may be based.
Note.?The official Home Office and Board of Education document referred to
in two footnotes has just been received, and deals with the subject under the following
headings:
Statistics; Causes; Preventive Measures; Treatment of Offenders: juvenile
courts, probation, remand homes, approved schools.
