Psychiatric Social Work
=========================

By L. M. French.
rublisned by the Commonwealth rund,
1940. 13s. 6d.
This is, I believe, the first book to be devoted
wholly to the subject of psychiatric social work.
It is to be expected that it should come from
America, where the experience of psychiatric
social work extends over a period of thirty years
and whose workers still are more articulate
concerning the trends of their work and their
essential roles than we are here in Britain.
Much of the book is devoted to a historical
survey of psychiatric social work, dealing with
the developing role of the workers, not only in
the specialized field of Child Guidance Clinics,
State Mental Hospitals and Mental Hygiene
Clinics, but also their influence on general
social work. This is a theme of first importance
to us in these days of wartime, when psychiatric
social workers have so often left their old
relatively well-defined spheres and have been called
on to fill posts of ever-increasing responsibility
in work created by wartime stresses. We need
constantly to remind ourselves of the discipline
imposed by our specialized approach.
A chapter in Miss French's book is devoted
to " Social Work in Relation to Psychiatry "?
a subject of renewed interest to us to-day, when
social workers are so often being forced to deal
with mental health problems with little or no
guidance from or collaboration with psychiatrists.
There is a danger in this situation; without this
active collaboration and under the pressure of
work, the psychiatric social worker may tend
to neglect her psychiatric function, falling back
on practical adjustments, or on the other hand
MENTAL HEALTH 91
she may attempt to assume the responsibility
for therapy even in cases of gross disturbance.
The psychiatric social worker, as Miss French's
book clearly shows, is a therapist, but her
sphere is limited.
Miss French shows how the mental health
training of workers who were returning to other
fields of social work has influenced and modified
the modern approach to general case work. Yet,
as she points out, a specialized technique is not
necessary or applicable to every case. Not
every case arises from or is blocked by emotional
disturbances or personality difficulties and many
will respond to a removal of obstacles or to
practical assistance given. I think it can be
allowed, however, that psychiatric social work
has made a real contribution to social work in
general by the increased respect it gives to the
individual client.
Probably the most interesting and relevant
section of Miss French's book to British
psychiatric social workers is the one dealing with
" Some Trends in Social Treatment " (pp. 199-
241). She discusses the early conception of
treatment through study of the data, diagnosis
and plan of treatment, which was carried out
mainly through the interview where the chief
function of the worker was "to make the client
see." She shows how the frequent failure of
this method with the resultant closing down of
cases as " unco-operative " challenged workers
to evolve new techniques. We are perhaps too
diffident to speak of our efforts in the same
direction as "attitude therapy" or "relation
therapy " but the terms represent something
every worker will have experienced in her own
social work development, an increasing need
to allow the client to be self-determining, to act
as an instrument through which he can clear
himself of emotional blocks and can then go
forward to making his own plan. A quotation
from Miss Marcus makes this point succinctly :
she says, " He (the client) is accessible to
treatment only of problems which he himself
feels and has an urge to work out. Whatever
the personal or social consequences may be,
the client controls, or more accurately, is
unconsciously controlled by, his own problems,
and therapy may assist him in solving them
only in the way and to the extent his own
desire and his own capacity dictate." N.A.
