Work for Air Raid Victims
===========================

The Editorial Board does not hold itself responsible for the opinions of contributors
yol. II. No. 1 JANUARY 1941 Price lOd. (1/- Post Free)
Some Preliminary Notes on Mental Health

:Author: Priscilla Norman

Chairman, Mental Health Emergency Committee

These notes cover the whole period of the Blitzkrieg and therefore deal, in part,
Wlth conditions which have by this time either been remedied or are now in process
of being remedied. As one new area after another is attacked, increased experience
ls acquired as to the best method of dealing not only with those who are rendered
homeless but with the much larger number whose daily lives are seriously affected
by the temporary suspension of vital services. We are concerned here only with
?ne particular aspect of the whole problem and it may therefore appear that undue
Prominence has been given to it, but we fully recognize that during the actual Blitz
Period, the first concern of public authorities and voluntary helpers must be in the
direction of rescue work for its victims, including the provision of shelter, warmth
and food, and that only after these essential widespread needs have been met, can
Mention be paid to the special problems of exceptional individuals.

The information which follows is derived largely from the Mental Health
emergency Committee's workers in Rest Centres and Reception Areas, from the
0cial Case Work Department of the Central Association for Mental Welfare which
w?rks in close touch with the Committee and to which many emergency cases are
referred direct, and from reports of members of the Committee and of its other
c?nstituent bodies.

Our experience of bombing and its aftermath has now been extensive enough to
fnable us to make some estimate as to its immediate effect on mental health, although
ultimate effects must continue to be unknown until a further period of time has
^Psed. It is proposed in this article to give some idea of the problems with which
ental Health workers have been called upon to deal in raided areas, of the lines
?n which they have attempted to solve them and of the further measures which it is
Proposed should be taken before the need is fully met.

On one point there is striking unanimity, viz. that there are unexpectedly few
Cases ?f severe emotional or mental disturbance following immediately on the
experience of being " bombed out One worker in a large East End Rest Centre
comments on this as follows:

" In some cases, excitement and mild hysterical outbursts showed themselves
amongst the little parties of people coming from a bombed house or street. In others,
apparent indifference, slight irritation, bewilderment or boastfulness, were the outward
signs of inward disturbance. Children seemed on the whole to be remarkably little
disturbed."

Another, writing from an area in the North-West, testifies to the wonderful way
in which the " bombed out " seem to recover, and from the West Country comes the
statement: " Generally speaking, strain does not show during the first ten days."
Even in a Midland town where one night's intensive bombing had subjected the
population to a terrifying experience, the worker sent by the Mental Health Emergency
Committee found that the chief " Mental Health problems " were those of long
standing, intensified and thrown into prominence by the " Blitz " but not produced
by it. It is true that 40 per cent, of the population had been evacuated before her
arrival and that this number may have included those who suffered most acutely,
and that there was an absence of continuous raids after the severe one, but nevertheless
the absence of widespread loss of nerve is a striking testimony to the stability of the
people.

The experience of Mental Treatment Clinics, Child Guidance Clinics and
individual psychiatrists is in line with that of other workers, and contributions to
The Lancet and the British Medical Journal* have commented on the fact that the
advent of air attack has not resulted in any appreciable number of psychiatric cases
directly attributable to it. Even in the Psychiatric Departments of large London
Hospitals serving heavily and continuously bombed areas, only the merest handful of
such cases have presented themselves for treatment, and the majority of these have
a previous history of mental instability.

This initial immunity from " shock " may be due to a variety of factors?a
feeling of gratitude for preservation from danger, the excitement of being suddenly
thrust into prominence as a " victim ", and the fact that neighbours are sharing the
misfortune. In a Rest Centre, the care and " mothering " that is given to those who
seek shelter there has the effect of temporarily dulling anxiety, allaying fear, and
producing a sense of security which, although illusory, is of real help to those con-
cerned. Moreover, the many opportunities which occur for helping others and
giving useful service in the Centre, are also no doubt of therapeutic value as is, too,
the provision of regular hot meals and other facilities, some of which were, at first,
unfortunately absent in many of the Centres.

To organize in the Centres a regime which, whilst helping to prevent the develop-
ment of psychological disturbance does not, at the same time, by providing complex
security, encourage those it shelters to sink into an apathetic state of dependence
(e.g. into the attitude that now they had lost everything, it was for the Government
to see to all their needs) is obviously a task demanding considerable experience,
* e.g. " Psychiatric Casualties in September 1940 by George Pegge, M.A., M.R.C.S.,
L.R.C.P. October 26th, 1940.

wisdom and ingenuity. This particular problem was not envisaged at the outset
and it is hardly surprising that the first emergency staffs without any special training
and faced with gross material difficulties, failed to cope with it adequately. Too often
they wavered between a too strict enforcement of discipline and too great leniency
leading to the toleration of slack and casual behaviour, and often quite unwittingly, as
?ne worker writes, " they ministered to the general sense of insecurity, while failure
to issue clear, direct orders led to anxiety and confusion ". When the need was
discovered steps were taken to meet it, and recently the Ministry of Health and Local
Authorities have appointed a considerable number of Welfare Officers and Inspectors
for Rest Centres. The special knowledge and training of the Mental Health worker
has been found to be of great value in this connection, but it is obviously impossible
even if it were necessary to have a Mental Health worker for every Centre and Shelter,
ft is, however, essential that Medical Officers and workers in charge should know
what local facilities exist for dealing with cases needing psychological or mental
treatment or for securing provision for mental defectives, epileptics, etc.*
The importance of transferring people from the Centres to billets without delay
is a matter which has a definite bearing on Mental Health. As time goes on, workers
find that signs of strain begin to manifest themselves; irritability increases and the
desire to be helpful dies away. The neurotic, after a week or so, often begin to
lapse into a state of depression. Personal antagonism and resentments flare up and
increase, and some of the men take to drinking. Moreover, in every Centre appears,
sooner or later, the type of neurotic who so completely and happily adapts himself
t0 an environment in which he receives food, shelter and protection without the
need for personal effort, that he manifests no desire ever to leave it, and considerable
difficulty is found in persuading him to do so. An appreciable number of these
cases have been referred to the C.A.M.W. and the Mental Health Emergency Coin-
mittee. An adequate system of registration of people arriving at Centres is essential
if this problem of " drift " is to be dealt with. At first, very naturally, in London,
n? records were kept and people drifted in and out, without any enquiry being
niade as to whether or not they were legitimately entitled to the facilities offered,
0r what was the nature of their particular needs. In this way, the hospitality of
the Centres was abused by the unscrupulous, and others who desperately needed
Personal advice and help followed by special billeting, were lost in the crowd and left
ln a quite unnecessary state of anxiety.

Here again the trained helper is of inestimable value. Into a Shelter, after an
^tensive bombing, pours a cross-section of the local population in which there must
'nevitably be individuals presenting special problems under normal conditions e.g.
the neurotic and unstable, the epileptic, the mentally defective, the senile who should
he sorted out and referred to the appropriate authorities and organizations. If this
's done expeditiously and wisely, many difficulties and delays in connection witn
billeting will be avoided, but only workers familiar with the machinery of the various
s?cial services are in a position to call in their help where needed. The disposal of
^ The National Council for Mental Hygiene has recently compiled for the Ministry of Health
?M.S. a Directory of Out-Patient Clinics (see page 19). the mentally defective has been in some areas a particularly urgent problem and one
requiring the type of handling which can only be given by the trained worker. The
following case also illustrates this need:

" B.M. is a single woman of 40. She was referred to the Mental Health Emergency
Committee by a worker who discovered her in a Rest Centre which she was using
simply because she was drifting about London and had no money to pay for lodgings,
although she produced a completely fictitious story of having been bombed out. She
had been in and out of numerous Convents but, when first seen, stubbornly refused
to enter another one and asserted her suitability for domestic work, criticizing everyone
for her repeated failures in life. An appointment was procured for her at a Mental
Treatment Clinic where she was diagnosed as a chronic hysteric, probably unemploy-
able. She was, with great difficulty, persuaded to accept a vacancy in a Convent
which was found for her, and was accompanied there by a worker. After a few
days, however, a report was received saying she refused to settle, and was determined
to leave. Nothing has been heard of her since."

Even under the best conditions, however, the help that can be given in the Rest
Centre to individuals needing psychiatric treatment or the specialized services of a
Mental Health worker, can only be in the nature of " First Aid moreover, it is
only the most obvious and acute cases which will probably be discovered. It is in the
Reception Areas to which these homeless people are drafted, that the real extent
of the need is clearly seen and where the greatest opportunities for constructive
Mental Health work are to be found, and the Mental Health Emergency Committee
has paid special attention to the devising of machinery for linking up workers dealing
with cases in the Rest Centres with those in Receiving Areas where special billets
are being sought.

An experimental scheme, on a small scale but yielding results so satisfactory
that it is proposed to extend it if possible to other areas, was started in the autumn of
1940 and some account of the experience gained during these three months is given
here in the hope that it may be interesting and suggestive.

One worker?whom we will designate as Worker A?was sent to a district of
Greater London which received 1,700 evacuees from two badly bombed East End
districts. To her 115 families (about 7 per cent, of the total number) were referred as
being in need of special help by reason of some Mental Health problem produced or
intensified by air raid experience. In a large proportion of these cases it was found
that the emotional disturbance was not of a serious type and that the tension was
quickly relieved by encouragement and reassurance and by the administration of
some simple remedy such as glucose (reinforced by suggestion) for helping to induce
sleep. In many cases much of the psychological suffering was due to the loneliness
of unfamiliar surroundings and to lack of interest and occupation, and to remedy
this state of affairs the worker co-operated actively with the Women's Voluntary
Services and other volunteers in the promotion of entertainments and friendly visiting?
the provision of library facilities and the organizing of Play Groups for the children,
in which latter activity the help of an educational psychologist was enlisted.
There remained, however, a small group of individuals needing definite psychiatric
treatment and advice, and for thirteen patients attendance at a Mental Treatment
Clinic was arranged. In the majority of these cases, one interview with the psychia-
trist was sufficient to bring about the necessary assurance, but there was a residuum
|n which removal to an area outside the gun barrage was considered to be necessary
the development of further trouble was to be prevented.

It was in these cases that the help of a second worker?Worker B?was called in.
She was placed in a rural district of Warwickshire, to act as a Special Billeting Officer
working in close co-operation with the ordinary billeting authorities. During two
Months in the late autumn of 1940, sixteen cases (comprising forty-six individuals)
were referred to her, the great majority coming from Worker A, and consisting of
families in which one or more members were urgently in need of security and peace.
To illustrate the type of problem presented by these cases, the following examples
may be quoted:

The M's. This family consisted of a grandfather of 79, a middle-aged father and
mother, and a young daughter of 13?all of whom had been through particularly
distressing experiences. The father (a stevedore at the Docks) had been injured in
the street by a bomb and three days later the hospital to which he had been taken was
hit. The other members of the family were in a shelter where four neighbours were
killed, and they themselves received injuries. Moreover, the girl (" G.") had on her
knees a baby who was killed and (according to her story) when she put out her hand
to stroke its head in the dark she found, to her horror, that the head had been blown off.
When visited in the area to which they were first evacuated, all of them were in a very
distressed condition. Mrs. M. " fears she is going mad?is excessively irritable and
worries lest she may hit G. Cannot sleep. Is anxious about wounds not yet healed."
Mr. M. " cries very easily?very anxious about himself?gets very excited ". G.
" panics when she hears a gun?frightened if separated a minute from her parents ".
Arrangements were made for them to be seen by a psychiatrist who urged evacuation
to a country areai out of the range of gun fire, and considered that if this could be
effected, no further treatment would be necessary. A small cottage was found for
the whole family in which they have settled down happily, although on more than
one occasion the help of the Mental Health worker has been needed to steer them
through crises. The father later obtained unskilled labouring work and the latest
report is that they are all making an unexpectedly good adjustment to village life.
The K's. Mrs. K., a young woman with three small children, was referred as
being badly upset by bombing experiences. Before the birth of the baby she " thought
she was going mad " and the eldest child (3 years) was found to be in a miserable
condition of nerves and to be quite unmanageable. A psychiatrist to whom the case
was referred considered that the family's evacuation to a safe rural area was essential.
A billet in the cottage of a friendly farm labourer's wife was found, and after some
preliminary difficulties the eldest child gradually became happier, and a cordial
relationship was established with the household.

The A's. Mrs. A. is a coloured woman with a negro husband (an ex-seaman) and
three small " piccaninnies ". She had had two previous mental breakdowns, was
obviously very nervous and unhappy. The problem here was to find a billet where the
" colour bar " would not create difficulty, and a village was obviously unsuitable.
A search was therefore made in a neighbouring town and eventually a billet was
secured with a woman whose first husband had been coloured and whose three children
were of negroid type. The experiment has worked extraordinarily well and the two
families soon became real friends. In view of Mrs. A.'s history of mental instability,
however, close touch will be kept with her.

Out of the forty-six individuals dealt with under the scheme, only six returned
Precipitately to London. This result has, however, only been obtained by dint of full
complete co-operation between the two Mental Health workers concerned.

Thus Worker A, in the first reception area, before notifying a case for billeting to
Worker B?in the rural area?collected all the information about it that was procur-
able, and where necessary obtained a psychiatrist's report on any member of the
family who appeared to be in need of special treatment. In possession of this
information, Worker B was then in a position to assess the type of billet required,
and when a suitable offer v/as obtained, she would describe it in detail to Worker A,
who would then discuss the proposal with the family concerned and help them to
make the necessary arrangements for travelling, billeting allowances, etc. On
arrival in the village, the evacuees were met by Worker B, who ensured that they
received a welcome and that any initial difficulties with the householder were
smoothed over at the outset. Having settled them down, the worker then kept a
watchful eye over them, and was at hand to cope with any domestic or psychological
crisis that might arise involving perhaps the need for a visit to a neighbouring Mental
Treatment Clinic and/or a jaunt to the nearest town with a cup of tea at a restaurant
(a procedure found to possess definite therapeutic value !). She was also frequently
concerned with the task of helping the father or other employable members of
the family to find work or deal with intricacies connected with the payment of
allowances, or pensions, to say nothing of coming to the rescue in the various
difficulties which arise when town-bred people are called upon to adapt themselves
to village life.

In the achievement of this work, the greatest help has been received from local
billeting officers, the Manager of the local Labour Exchange, the Women's Voluntary
Services and the Psychiatric Clinic, as well as from the villagers themselves who have
shown unfailing kindness to the evacuees and included them in all their social
activities. In fact, so far as this particular village is concerned, there has been?the
worker writes?" no evacuation problem

The experiment has been admittedly on a small scale, but in assessing its value
it should be remembered that the families concerned were selected not because of
their special suitability for country life but because one or more members were
showing signs of temporary emotional disturbance due to bombing. Haphazard
billeting would have been unlikely to meet their special needs, and might have ended
in disaster, but because of good team work carried through by trained workers, not
only were all the employable evacuees absorbed into employment so that they were
no longer a charge on public funds, but?still more important?frayed nerves have
been healed, peace of mind has been restored and new hope has been given to those
who were in the grip of fear, distress and anxiety. From this practical experiment,
the Mental Health Emergency Committee concludes that a scheme worked on these
lines is both practical and economical and brings the maximum amount of help to
those suffering from the effects of air raids.

The Mental Health Emergency Committee is anxious to be of use to Authorities
who are faced with the task of dealing with people rendered homeless through enemy
action and hopes that it may be possible to give help wherever needed. The Ministry
of Health has recently agreed to recognize, for purposes of grant, the employment by
Local Authorities of a Mental Health worker for work amongst evacuated mothers
and children (as well as amongst unaccompanied children), where it can be shown
that the need exists, and the way is therefore open for an increased use of their
services. As a further help, the Committee is seeking to appoint in each Civil
Defence area a Regional Representative who will act as a link between the various
Authorities and organizations whose work brings them into touch with Mental
Health problems, and who will thus be in a position to give advice and ensure that
workers throughout the area are fully cognizant of the facilities available. The
Committee is also glad to arrange talks to groups of Inspectors, Welfare Officers or
other workers employed in Rest Centres or Shelters, based on practical experience
and giving information as to the sources from which help can be obtained for special
cases.

The present situation offers a new opportunity for Mental Health work of a type
that is urgently needed, and, if full advantage is taken of it, much suffering may be
Prevented and in the midst of disaster and destruction a lasting and constructive
c?ntribution may be made which can be carried over into the post-war world.
Applications for the Committee's help should be sent to the Hon. Secretary at 24 Buckingham
Pal applications tor the C
ace Road, London, S.W.I
