Some Wartime Problems of Mental Health
========================================

MENTAL HEALTH
The Editorial Board does not hold itself responsible for the opinions of contributors
Vol. II. No. 2 APRIL 1941 Price lOd. (1/- Post Free)

:Author: DORIS M. ODLUM, M.A., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.M.

Hon. Secretary, The National Council for Mental Hygiene
It was to be expected that people who have been subjected to air raids and
Specially those who have actually been bombed out or injured would show evidence
?f a certain amount of nervous strain. It is a matter of universal surprise that the
^rge majority appear hardly to feel any nervous strain at all in these circumstances,
?r, if they do, it is only of a transient nature and they soon regain their emotional
equilibrium.

There are, however, a certain number of persons, both adults and children,
who do develop considerable nervous and emotional reactions, and these cases are
met with in shelters, rest centres for those who have been bombed out, and at first aid
Posts. Such cases present considerable difficulties to those who are in charge and,
the uninstructed, appear very frightening. Moreover, unless they are rightly
handled the condition becomes worse and is catching. Thus one unstable emotional
Person may infect a crowd with hysteria or even panic. The symptoms are dramatic
and often alarming, but the condition if properly treated at the outset is seldom as
Serious as it appears. First aid treatment is comparatively simple and is usually
effective.

Although conditions vary considerably as between shelters, rest centres and
first aid posts the types of nervous and emotional instability encountered will be
similar.

The Normal and Abnormal Personality
-------------------------------------

The majority of persons as has already been stated are essentially well balanced
and emotionally stable, and even if they have been bombed will quickly regain their
emotional balance after the first shock is over. There are, however, people of the
0ver-sensitive type who tend to be more severely upset and are slower at regaining
their balance, also the so-called hysterical type prone to excitability and loss of
emotional control, and the chronic-anxiety type who are over-anxious and take
themselves and life too seriously and may in addition suffer from physical sensations
induced by nervous instability, such as headaches, palpitations, attacks of trembling,
breathlessness, etc. A comparatively small number of persons are more profoundly
unbalanced and are liable to develop '' nervous breakdown '' so called as the result
of emotional shock. Persons of sub-normal intelligence may also be encountered,
and epileptics and persons who may be suffering from emotional shock caused by
sudden and extreme fear or grief. Emotional shock is not the same as ordinary
shock although it may have some resemblance to it and in severe cases may develop
into it. The condition develops swiftly, it reaches its maximum almost instantane-
ously and gradually decreases as the intense emotion fades and reason begins to
regain control. It is impossible to remain in a state of intense emotion for more than
a few minutes at a time.

The aged are apt to become mentally confused and forgetful if they are subjected
to sudden shock. Cases of head injury without evidence of any external damage
may occur, and for these it is important to remember that after concussion or any
kind of head injury persons may show symptoms which occur in the other types of
cases mentioned, especially mental confusion, loss of memory or stupor. Sometimes
they appear fairly normal although in fact they are acting automatically without
any real consciousness of what they are doing or saying.

In the case of fear, which may be for one's own safety or that of another, the
first sensations are of complete terror and panic with the desire to escape or, less
commonly, to fight. The commonest symptoms resulting from fear and emotional
shock include: trembling, shaking, chattering teeth, rapid heart beat, weakness of
the legs, suffocating feelings, sweating, chilliness, " stomach turning over " heart
in the mouth ", sickness, dizziness, pressure on the head, the need to pass water
or faeces, weeping, and a desire to cling on to someone strong and protective. In this
state the adult loses all sense of responsibility, dignity and self-control, and becomes
like a frightened child.

These are the sensations of the average person if subjected to a very severe and
sudden emotional stress. In the normal person, however, these soon pass off even
with little or no help from others and control and emotional balance are quickly
regained.

More serious manifestations include, hysteria, loss of consciousness, stupor,
mental confusion, loss of memory, temporary loss of voice or sight or of the use of
one or more limbs.

First Aid Treatment
--------------------

The first aid treatment for all these conditions is of a somewhat similar character
and fairly simple. The first thing is to avoid the spread of panic by adopting an air
of calm assurance. Excitable people should always be spoken to in a calm level
tone of voice and with an air of absolute authority. They should never be ridiculed
but dealt with firmly and kindly and treated exactly like a frightened child. To lose
one's temper or shout at them or to appear fussy or anxious not only increases the
patients' symptoms but will spread the infection. It is wiser to explain to them that
everyone is as frightened as they are and that no one thinks the worse of them for
their loss of control, but that they will be helping themselves and everyone else by
trying to keep calm.

Adults feel annoyed when bullied or patronized, and both of these attitudes
should be avoided. A patient who is excitable is always better lying or sitting down
and should not on any account be allowed to walk about. It is often of great comfort
to them to be allowed to tell their experiences to a sympathetic listener, and it is well
worth while trying to spare a few minutes to listen to their story. Constant repetitions
should, however, be discouraged, and patients should be persuaded to keep completely
quiet. Physical restraint should be avoided unless absolutely necessary and then it
must be adequate. A useful method of restraining an excited patient is to cover
him with a blanket and have two people sitting on either side of it to keep it in
position.

In extreme cases of fear a state of true " shock " may arise. The patient becomes
cold, pale, the pulse is weak, the breathing shallow, and there is a danger of collapse
and heart failure. Warmth, quiet, and reassurance are essential and, if the patient
is conscious, sal volatile, or a hot drink with sugar should be given, and a hot bag
applied to the heart, feet, and stomach. The patient should be lying down well
Wrapped up, the head fairly low and the feet raised a little above the level of the head.
Gentle massage to the feet and hands helps to restore the circulation. If the patient
is not fully conscious he should not be given anything to drink as he will choke,
and if hot water bags are used they must not touch the flesh or they may make a
bad burn.

A cup of hot tea with plenty of sugar, or, failing that, sal volatile and hot water
followed by a lump of sugar to suck have an extraordinarily beneficial effect. In
every shelter and rest centre there should be available a supply of sugar or boiled sweets,
sal volatile, smelling salts, rugs or blankets, drinking water and, if possible, hot coffee
with milk well sweetened. Spirits are not necessary and are better avoided. They
should never be given to anyone who is in a state of hysteria as this will only increase
the excitement.

Some of the milder cases will respond very well if they are given some small job
to do. It should, however, not be anything that involves responsibility or that
Matters if they fail to accomplish it, but the mere fact of being occupied has a stabiliz-
1Jig effect on many people.

Those subject to epileptic fits present a problem because they need much super-
vision and are very distressing to others. The fit is not, however, dangerous provided
the patient does not hurt himself in falling and is not allowed to bite his tongue.
This can be prevented by putting between the teeth a large rubber ring or a spoon
Wrapped up in a handkerchief, or any object which will keep the teeth from clenching.
There is no cause for alarm as patients very soon recover. They are better left to
steep the fit off if they seem drowsy afterwards. They should not be given anything
to eat or drink unless they ask for it.

Even for those showing less marked symptoms proper treatment by a doctor
specially qualified to deal with these types of cases is an urgent necessity and should be
Mailable as soon as possible. Facilities for treatment are available at many centres
in London and the larger provincial towns, and it would be of great value if a service
could be provided at each Rest Centre and First Aid Post for patients to be
accompanied to a clinic, since many will be too apathetic to go unless someone
actually takes them.

At a Rest Centre occupation and various amusements, games and other interests
should be provided as a means of taking people's thoughts off their own troubles.
There should be a supply of toys, books, a gramophone if possible, and games,
dances, competitions, etc., should be organized. Helpers should also be available
to assist harassed mothers by playing with the children or setting them simple lessons.
If people who have been through great strain are left to themselves they tend to become
apathetic and dispirited, a prey to self-pity, and to spread an atmosphere of discourage-
ment, criticism, and grievance around them.

First Aid Posts
-----------------

Practically all that has been stated above applies to cases brought in to first aid
posts, so far as first aid treatment is concerned, and it must be emphasized that no
patientwho has shown symptoms of nervous or emotional instability should be allowed
to go home alone. If no one in authority is available, a more stable minor casualty
should be asked to accompany the nervous patient home and advise the relatives that
the patient's own doctor should be consulted. The name of the nearest clinic for
functional nervous disorders and the address and time of sessions should also be
given in writing to the patient.

Air Raid Shelters
------------------

The conditions in a shelter during a severe raid in some ways resemble those
on a passenger liner during a dangerous storm at sea. The people who go into
the shelter are of all sorts and all sizes, of both sexes, and of all ages. They
are extremely anxious about the safety of their house and household, and distressed
by their inability to protect them. In certain parts there may be a large number
of foreigners in the shelter and it is well recognized that they are much more
emotional than our own race and much more prone to panic.

One of the most trying factors in an air raid is undoubtedly the noise. All
so-called " highly-strung " people are hyper-sensitive to noise and feel an unreasoning
fear of it, quite apart from the fact that it may have no hostile significance and indeed
may represent the protection provided by our own anti-aircraft guns.

In order to avoid panic and loss of control it is desirable that there should be
a male air raid warden in charge of each shelter with experience of handling people
in difficult circumstances, and also that he should have a trained woman as his
second in command. Many women are much better dealt with by a woman than
by a man, and there may be personal intimate services needed that only a woman
can perform. It is, moreover, more difficult for a man to assess the nature and
importance of symptoms in a woman than it would be for another woman to do so.
The presence of a calm, trained woman will also help to steady the men in the shelter.
The provision now made for medical inspection in air raid shelters enables the
visiting doctors to give helpful advice in many cases to the nervous and over-anxious
and to put more serious cases in touch with hospital clinics or arrange for their special
care and disposal.

All those in positions of responsibility will have a most valuable opportunity of
helping these unfortunate people, and if they avail themselves of the facilities at their
disposal many of them will not only be helped temporarily but enabled to develop
permanently a more stable and better balanced personality. This is obviously a
matter of the first importance not only to the individual but to the community.
Detailed notes for the guidance of those in charge of First Aid Posts, Air Raid
Shelters and Rest Centres have been published by the National Council for Mental
Hygiene from whom copies may be obtained on application to the Secretary,
76-77 Chandos House, Palmer Street, London, S.W.I.
