The Cambridge Evacuation Survey
================================

120 MENTAL HEALTH
Book Reviews

Edited by
Susan Isaacs, with the co-operation of
Sybil Clement Brown and R. H. Thouless.
London: Methuen & Co., 1941. Pp. x.
+ 235.
The study of evacuated children, edited by
Dr. Isaacs and her colleagues, is in many ways
unique. The numbers are smaller than those
covered by other inquiries ; but the results are
discussed with far greater detail than has been
possible in wartime articles published in psycho-
logical journals. The readable style, the vivid
anecdotes, and the relegation of technical
statistics to an appendix, will give the book a
wide and popular appeal. Moreover, whereas
most of the previous surveys have been based
on material collected and analysed by voluntary
co-operators, the inquiry at Cambridge has
received generous financial help from the Mental
Health Emergency Committee, who loaned the
services of three psychiatric social workers ;
and the whole study has been planned and
supervised by an able and experienced research
committee. It is, therefore, extremely en-
couraging to find that, on the main points,
the report appears to confirm the conclusions
reached independently by other investigators,
who have studied the same problem in other
areas by extensive or intensive methods.
At Cambridge, records were first obtained
for 373 boys and girls evacuated from Totten-
ham, mainly older and brighter children coming
from fairly comfortable homes. Later, similar
records were secured for 352 children from
poorer districts in Islington. Special visits to
the billets were in general deemed inadvisable.
Hence the material gathered consists primarily,
we are told, of " such information about the
child and the foster-home as was already in
the minds of those who had supervised the
children for the first two monthsThis,
however, was freely supplemented by informa-
tion secured from other sources, particularly
from teachers and from essays written by the
children themselves.
The investigations showed that only about
8 per cent of the children were unsatisfactorily
adjusted to their new environment. Some
may be surprised at the low figure ; yet it
tallies with those obtained in other surveys.
The statistical appendix?a masterpiece of
lucid exposition?gives a detailed analysis of
the amount of correlation discernible between
maladjustment and such conditions as sex and
age of child, age of foster-mother, changes of
billet, presence of other children in billet,
visits of parents, and the economic status
of the two homes. Here, too, the main con-
clusions agree with those of other investigators,
namely, that non-psychological factors have
comparatively little influence.
To study the influence of psychological
factors, an intensive investigation was attempted
with a small group of 40 maladjusted children,
and a control group of 40 well-adjusted children.
These were tested for intelligence by a psycho-
logist ; and the character of each child was
estimated by a scrutiny of school and home
records, by interview, or by observations made
during the intelligence tests. The statistical
analysis is here perhaps a little less convincing.
Of the children whose relations in their foster-
homes were rated as unsatisfactory, " only 7
we are told, " were assessed as being perfectly
normal ". The amount of subnormality which
this implies would seem to be exceptionally
high. It should, however, be noted that the
scheme adopted for classifying the tempera-
mental peculiarities of the children was sug-
gested ad hoc by one of the physicians assisting
in the work; and consequently comparison
with the results of other surveys, either before
the war or during the war, may not be altogether
justifiable.
Lack of space has presumably prevented the
writers from comparing the results of their own
investigations with those of others, and thus
confirming their results where findings are
similar, or explaining the differences where
findings are different; and this has led more
than one commentator to regret that there have
been no other investigations. No doubt, as
the writer of the introduction complains, more
prevision might have been shown after the
warning given in September, 1938. But it is
only fair to record that, well before the out-
break of war, attention had already been given
to the problem by educational psychologists,
tentative schemes for investigation drawn up,
and communications opened with officials
of some of the larger education authorities ;
and as soon as war broke out, the editor of the
British Psychological Society's Journal (Educa-
tion Section) inserted a note suggesting a
co-operative inquiry by agreed methods ; and
both he and the Society have been active in
stimulating and publishing inquiries on the
whole subject. The Cambridge investigators
rightly emphasize that, with so complex and
widespread a problem, collaboration is essential.
Moreover, conditions are constantly changing,
and fresh problems arising. Similar inquiries,
MENTAL HEALTH 121
for instance, are urgently needed on the evacua-
tion of pre-school children, on the effects of air
raids, food-restrictions, and the like; and not
the least interesting part of the book is the
attention incidentally drawn to numerous
specific problems still awaiting scientific research.
As the writers point out, conclusions drawn
from a survey confined to a single area may not
hold good in other localities ; and comparisons
would be easier if psychologists engaged on
such researches in various parts of the country
could, in spite of the obvious difficulties,
consult together, and agree upon the adoption
of one or other of the existing schemes for
assessing children's personalities, and gather
their data upon some more or less uniform
plan. Let us hope that the publication of this
suggestive survey will stimulate many other
inquiries along similar lines.
Meanwhile, in regard to children of school
age, the summary of provisional recommenda-
tions with which the volume concludes should
be of the greatest practical value. The dis-
cussion of the reasons for the return of so many
children to their homes, the description of
child guidance in the reception area, the account
of the teachers' personal impressions, and (in
some ways the most fascinating contribution
of all) the numerous extracts from the children's
own essays, still further enhance the merits
of the whole book. The committee is to be
heartily congratulated on having planned,
executed and published so suggestive a piece
of work.
C.B.
