The Hygiene of the School Child
================================

:Type: Reviews and Abstracts.
:hAuthor: Lewis M. Terman. 
Published by George
G. Harrap and Co. Price 10s. Gd. net.

This book is stated to be published for the
use of teachers and those training for this profession, but a careful perusal of it demonstrates quite clearly that school medical
officers, health visitors and others will find in
it a real storehouse of knowledge. The author
has spared no pains in delving deeply into a
perfect mass of literature in order to unearth
facts and opinions as may be seen by the
voluminous bibliography appended to each
chapter. From each of these well-chosen
sources he has extracted the kernel of the
matter in question with a logical and accurate
appreciation amounting almost to uncanny
insight and in this small volume of about 400
pages he has condensed and marshalled his
findings in extremely well-reasoned sequence.
The book is a veritable thesaurus of wellgleaned material.

Some few sentences will indicate the aptness of the author's conclusions. ' 'Thinking,
biologically speaking, is never its own end but
a means towards adaptation, which is essentially motor."

"Whatever else play may mean, Aristotle's
conception of it as a catharsis is essentially
correct.''

"Nervousness, as some one has said, is not
one disorder but a whole cohort.''
' 'Sanity is a relative term,?Mental balance
is the exception, not the rule."

The several chapters on mental hygiene
besides being essentially sound and wellbalanced shew a deep and sympathetic appreciation of child psychology and the suggestions for observation of abnormal children as
tabulated 011 pp. 297-8 might well be memorised by those responsible for the care of children whether normal or abnormal.

The book is well illustrated with plates,
charts and diagrams, is carefully indexed and
contains a glossary of technical terms. The
only criticism we have to offer is a small one,
viz., that we cannot quite appreciate the
insertion of a plate shewing the "primary
incision for separating the hypertrophies
tonsil from its attachments": if this be intended to give a view of the fauces, one without
three surgical instruments in situ to compl1"
cate it would have been preferable.

Everything considered, however, this book
is one for the desk and not the library shelf
and is one which the reviewer intends to keep
elose at band. G.A.A.
"A Comparison of Three Methods for
Making the Initial Selection of Presumptive Mental Defectives."
' 'Of What Use is a Psychological Clinic ?''
By J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D., Director of the Psycho-Educational Clinic, St.
Louis, Missouri, U.S.A.
"Suggested Rules for Special Classes.'
"Progress in the Field of Mental
Hygiene in Missouri."
"The Concept of the Feeble-Mind ed ,
Especially the Moron."

The first two of these pamphlets are concerned primarily with the value of Group
Tests of Intelligence which?originally devised to allow of the systematic testing of
recruits for the American Army?are now being
extensively used in schools and institutions
throughout the States. Wholesale testing of
this kind obviously cannot yield results so
reliable or accurate as those obtained from
individual tests, but for conducting preliminary surveys and for the purpose of ascertaining e.g. what children in a school should be
referred for examination by a mental expert,
they have in them elements of value which
must not be overlooked.

At the St. Louis Psycho-Educational
Clinic?opened in 1914 with the primary
object of sifting out from the ordinary schools
children who are too mentally defective to
derive any benefit from them?this question of
"selection" has from the outset received Dr.
Wall in's close attention, and he recently
instituted a special enquiry to ascertain
whether Group Testing would be of material
assistance for the purpose.

His conclusions, which will be of special
interest to teachers, may be summed up as
Allows:?

(1) That the Group Test, as an aid in
selection, is not superior to the judgment of
the trained and experienced teacher, and
the prevalent view as to the incompetence
?f such a teacher to determine without resorting to tests which children are most
defective, cannot be generally upheld.

(2) That the Group Test gives occasionally
unreliable and misleading results, the possibility of which must always be borne in
mind, and that it cannot therefore take the
Place of psycho-clinical examinations.

But (3) that it is of value if used as one
amongst many aids to classification.
In another pamphlet Dr. Wallin gives th e
rules and regulations for Special Classes as
drawn up by him and adopted by the State
Superintendent of Schools in Missouri.

The section of these Regulations concerned
ith schools for feeble-minded children
(Special Schools for Individual Instruction or
Opportunity Classes, as they are termed)
contains, amongst others, the following provisions in which teachers in similar schools in
this country will be interested:?

Admission to the Classes is limited to
children who have been properly examined
by means of standardised individual mental
tests, and it is generally understood that the
children for whom they are intended are
those having an Intelligence Quotient between 30 and 70.

The importance of an investigation beforehand into the condition of each child,
together with his history and home environment is urged.

No class must contain less than 10 children and a teacher should be able successfully to manage from 15 to 18.
As a general guide it is suggested that
35% of the time in school should be devoted
to brain work, 35% to manual work and the
rest to physical and sensory training, and a
list of suitable occupations, etc., is given
in full.

It is assumed that special training will be
taken by all teachers who undertake the
work, such training to include psychology
and pedagogy, the application of mental
tests, practical experience in teaching the
feeble-minded, and industrial and manual
work.

It is interesting to note in this connection
(see Progress in the Field of Mental Hygiene
in Missouri) that although the State has had
since 1919 a law making the establishment of
such Special Classes compulsory, it has for the
most part, as in this country, remained a dead
letter. Another failure regretfully recorded
is the creation of a ' 'Bureau for Mental Defectives" for the purpose of providing recognised
and widespread facilties for the examination
and classification of alleged defectives?a
provision which Dr. Wallin regards as perhaps
the most essential item in any programme of
work for the feeble-minded. In St. Louis
itself the Psycho-Educational Clinic does what
it can to fill this need, but, owing to the lack
of financial support, it cannot do so adequately. ?

In The Concept of the Feeble-minded
Especially the Moron, Dr. Wallin sums up
the views he has arrived at after his long and
intensive experience in this field of work, and
the result makes must suggestive reading.
The diagnosis of mental deficiency, he urges,
should not be undertaken by anyone without
scientific training and prolonged experience.
He severely condemns the prevalent practice
of labelling persons as feeble-minded on the
ground that they are not able to pass beyond
the 12 year old Binet Tests.

His opinion that this standard is far too high
has, he points out, received striking confirmation during the War in view of the fact that
the Army Intelligence Survey revealed an
average mental age in the white American
soldier of 13.1, and in 47% of less than this.
If, therefore, the 12 year old standard is
adhered to it follows that probably some 50
million citizens of the United States are
' 'high -grade morons,'' and moreover that the
age of the average citizen is only one-fifth
of a year above the level of feeble-minded?
a result which he can only describe as
''inane."

A revision of this conception has therefore
been rendered necessary and he suggests that
the borderline of feeble-mindedness should be
drawn between the upper limit of 7 and the
upper limit of 9, or at most 10?or in terms of
I.Q. between 60 and 80. With an adult or
adolescent it will vary from 4 to 6 years of
intelligence deficiency based on the adult level
of 13 in the Army. But, if this standard is
accepted, there follows the somewhat disquieting conclusion that the vast majority
of delinquents and criminals classed in the
last decade as defective are not defective at
all?or at any rate not more so than millions
of their fellows countrymen who are regarded
as normal citizens,?unless the conception of
feeble-mindedness is widened to include what
he terms "conative and emotional feeblemindedness"?and this extension Dr. Wallin
does not advocate. He admits its convenience but considers that it flies in the face of
the historically fixed connotation of the term
as being essentially an intellectual defect.

This is, he points out, recognised in our own
Mental Deficiency Act which has a special
definition for "moral imbeciles." Moreover
he considers that no objective test can possibly
measure emotional temperamental and moral
instability or deficiency, and as its diagnosis
must largely depend on the subjective opinion
of the examiner based on his own or other's
people's observation, the standards adopted
will inevitably be widely divergent. His own
experience forcibly illustrates this for out of at
least 60 alleged moral imbeciles sent to him
for examination he has only felt justified in
corroborating the diagnosis in one case.
This type of individual does, of course, need
special treatment and care, but in his opinion
it should emphatically not be given in the
same institution or school as that to which
ordinary defectives are sent, but in a special
home set apart for "defective delinquents."
Word Blindness.

Miss Lucy G. Fildes, Holder of the Board of
Control Research Studentship at Cambridge
has recently published* the results of "A
Psychological Inquiry into the Nature of the
Condition Known as Congenital Word-Blind*
ness'' to which we draw the attention of those
who are interested in the subject.

The object of the enquiry was to ascertain as
far as possible whether inability to learn to
read or the loss of the power of reading is due
to specific or to general defect, and if the
former, whether the defect shows itself only m
reading or whether there is any general lowering of visual power.

Twenty-six children were experimented
upon, aged between nine and sixteen, of whoni
twenty-two were attending a Special School
and four an ordinary Elementary School. AH
were selected on the grounds of finding special
difficulty in reading, though the extent of the
difficulty in each case varied. As the result
of a preliminary test with the Stanford revision
of the Binet Scale it was found that their
Intelligence Quotients ranged from fifty to a
hundred and eleven, and thus the fact was revealed that no relationship existed between
their Intelligence Quotients and their power
in reading. The suggestion was therefore
established at the outset that "inability to
learn to read depends on a specific rather than
a general defect although in school life such a
defect may, because of its nature, simulate
one more wide-spreading in character. This
assumption was afterwards confirmed.

A series of experiments was then undertaken
with a view to investigating each child's ability to carry out the various forms of mental
activity known to be involved in the act of
reading in so far as it is limited to the recognition of words, letters and figures previously
taught.

The experiments fall into three groups
according to the special power they aimed at
testing:?
(1) Experiments to test the Powers of
Visual Discrimination and Retention.
(2) Experiments to test Auditory Discrimination and Retention.
(3) Experiments to test the power of making
Audito-Visual Associations.
The experiments established
the fact that non-reading children have powers
? ?'Brain," Vol. XLIV., Part III. Macmillan &
Co., Ltd. 6/-.
ec]Ual to the normal in discrimination between
totally unlike forms whatever the length of
exposure time, and in learning from visual
Material when the method of learning is free
and the forms easy to distinguish: but that
they are inferior to the normal in distinguishjng between forms only slightly different and
*n learning from visual material when the
Method employed must be chiefly visual, and
when the forms are easily confused, such as
digits. These special difficulties are probably
attributable to slow discrimination of similar
visual presentations, and faulty association
between a visual impression and its appropriate name. Probably both causes operate
in every case.

In the second series of experiments such
Jnferiority as was shown by the non-readers
Was not so great as was the case when dealing
with visual material, and there seemed to be
n? c?rrelation between them. Defect in either
opacity seemed to be specific rather than
general. Thus there were certain children
specially bad in reading whose auditory difficulties also were abnormally great, but whose
general mental capacity was comparatively
high.

From the "Associations" Experiments it
Was found that the non-readers made associations between meaningful material as easily
as did the readers: but that they dropped behind when the similarity between the forms
and sounds presented was increased.
Miss Fildes' main conclusions are as follows :?

(1) That, as non-readers are found to be of all
degrees of intelligence and the degree of
failure in reading shows little correlation
with the degree of general defect, it may
be inferred that the defect underlying
inability to read is to a certain degree
specific in nature.

(2) There is nothing in the results of the
experiments to indicate the existence of
any such region as a "visual-word" centre, the absence of or injury to which will
make the visual recognition of words impossible. The defects found are not so
strictly localised as such a hypothesis
would demand, for the word -blind individuals reveal special difficulties in
dealing with material other than words.
Further the implication of this theory
that ability to read depends on the power
to store up images of words has no psychological support; the recall of images is
not in question.

(8) The theory that the experiments do support is that "word-blindness" is but one
aspect of a more general, yet still in itself
specific, defect in either the visual or
auditory regions or in both.

It is interesting to note that side by side
with her purely experimental work Miss
Fildes took in hand the teaching of reading
to the word-blind children concerned, and at
the end of nine months she was able to report
that she ' 'had not found one of them entirely
incapable of learning any words or figures."
It may be of interest to readers to compare
the above conclusions of Miss Fildes with
those of Dr. Wallace Wallin, which are recorded in a pamphlet '' Congenital Word
Blindness. Some Analyses of Cases," giving
an account of a special examination of a
group of 95 Word-Blind children carried out
in 1920, and may be summed up as follows:?

(1) Word-Blindness appears to be due to
defective visual word imagery and its interpretation, not to defective apprehension or
retention of ideas; but how far the seat of the
trouble may be in the connection between the
centres for images for spoken words and those
for printed words has he considers yet to be
investigated.

(2) The Word-Blind children in the group
examined were found to be superior to the
others of the same Intelligent Quotient in
powers of general auditory and visual imagery
and no lowering of general intelligence is
necessarily involved in children suffering from
this condition.

(3) The incidence of word-blindness, if the
milder form is included, is greater than is
commonly supposed and is apparently to some
extent a sex limited disability. Thus in the
group of cases examined it was four times as
prevalent among the boys as among the girls.

It was also found that the milder form (dyslexia) was about five times as prevalent, as the
more serious form (visual aphasia).

Dr. Wallin concludes his pamphlet by
urging the organisation of "special reading
disability" classes where various methods and
devices of teaching reading may be tried, and
not until it has been demonstrated that a
child has failed to respond to such intensive
treatment should it be assumed that to attempt
to teach him reading is an impossible task.
Backward Children.

There has recently been published by the
Birmingham Education Committee the report
of an investigation carried out by Mr. Cyril
Burt and Dr. B. R. Lloyd into the incidence
and origin of educational backwardness in
the schools of that city which no one interested
in this particular branch of "Mental Inefficiency" should fail to study.

During the investigation Mr. Burt psychologically examined a limited sample of between 500 and 600 "Backward" children.
These had all been also examined physically
by Dr. Lloyd who continued his investigation
until over 1,000 cases had been through his
hands.

The results of the two enquiries are embodied in the pamphlet under consideration.
Regarding as backward all children whose
mental ratio is on an average below 85% and
over 70%, or in terms of standards all children
who at 11 years of age or more are three stand dards behind or at 10 or under, two standards
behind, the investigators calculate that
Birmingham has 800 such children. This is
roughly 10%, the same proportion that Mr.
Burt found in London.

The question as to the causes of backwardness is considered under three heads:?(a)
Physical Defects; (b) Psychological Defects;
(c) Administrative and Social Factors. The
data collected under (a) revealed an unexpectedly small difference in health between the
normal and the backward groups dealt with,
and the most that Mr. Burt can say on this
point is that while the average child has three
physical defects the backward child has four.
Ill health cannot therefore be regarded as a
fundamental factor, though it is of course ft
contributory one and one that must be attended to. The prevalence of catarrh amongst
the backward children examined is specially
commented upon. Many of them, Mr. Burt
reports, "were said to be scarcely ever without
the symptoms of a cold," a condition which not
only must, increase inattention, but is frequently the forerunner of an unhealthy general
diathesis resembling those termed rheumatic
or tubercular. In only 5% of these cases,
however, was physical defect the sole discernible factor.

Psychological defects on the other han'-l
were found to be of great importance. From
the investigations made it is estimated that
60% of backward children suffer from marked
defect in general intelligence or educational
capacity, apparently permanent and probably
congenital. In nearly 20% of these cases this
inborn capacity seemed the sole and sufficient
cause, although in most instances there was
associated with it some other extraneous
factor such as ill-health or poverty.

With regard to administrative and social
factors such as poor attendance, poor teaching, poor organisation in schools, poor home
conditions, they appear in only 10% of the
cases to be of more importance than intrinsic
defect and the most frequent of such factors
was bad attendance at school which was noted
in nearly one-third of the backward children
examined.

Dealing with the general question of causation Mr. Burt sums up his conclusions in the
statement that backwardness is far more ft
psychological problem than a medical problem , being due primarily to inherent incapacity and only secondarily to ill-health or
bodily disease.

But this inherent incapacity,?though the
root cause?cannot, in the present state ol
our knowledge, be dealt with directly; the
physical disabilities accompanying it can,
and the need here is an investigation of their
nature followed by an effort to remove or
alleviate them.

To compensate for the mental disability,
the most urgent need is the establishment ol
Backward Classes where each individual child
ca.il be "studied, treated, and taught,"
a^d the report has sections containing suggestions as to the organisation of such classes and
the educational methods suitable for use in
them.

. Mr. Burt, concludes his report by emphasising the great need for further investigations
into the whole problem in order that through
the co-operation of the Medical Officer, the
teacher, the social worker and the Psychologist the best solution may be found.

The last half of the Report is written by
r ? Lloyd on his Physical Examination ot
backward Children. His conclusions were
Arrived at quite independently of Mr. Burt
ut the two found themselves to be in strikUl8ly close agreement.

The Report is published by the Birmingham
Education Committee. Copies may be obtained from the Education Officer, Council
House, Margaret Street, Birmingham.
Mentally Deficient Children : Their Treatment and Training. By G. E. Shuttleworth , B.A., M .D., etc., and W. A.
Potts, B.A., M.D. etc. 5th edition.
H. R. Lewis and Co., Ltd. 10s. 6d.
This invaluable book has for some time been
?ut of print and we cordially welcome its reaPpearanee in a 5th edition.

The bulk of its material is unchanged and
the book is too widely known to need a review,
but there are useful amendments and additions
to which we should like to draw attention as
they niay be taken as an indication of the
ej?tent and nature of recent developments in
Cental Deficiency work in both its administrative and scientific aspects.

The "Historical Retrospect" has been reused and brought up to date, perhaps the
'Host notable addition being an account of the
New York Mental Deficiency Law of 1919.
The increasing stress which is now being
|aid on the significance of the endocrine glands
ln regard to development is specially referred
to both in the chapter on "Etiology, Diagnosis and Prognosis" and in that on "Treatment,."* Attention is drawn to the importance
these glands in connection with toxemic infeetions during pregnancy and to the possibility of averting the mental defect in the
child which may result therefrom by glandular
treatment of the mother at an ante-natal
clinic?a suggestion of great interest.f
A further new feature of Chapter V which
will be found very useful is a section on Mental
Tests in which the various systems of tests
now in use are recorded and discussed.
In the Chapter on the "Psychopathies of
Puberty" an additional paragraph is introduced on the necessity of bearing in mind in
diagnosing certain nervous affections the
possibility of "Encephalitis Lethargica."
A brief discussion as to the value and limitations of the use of psychotherapy in cases of
"Psychic" Epilepsy has been added to
Chapter 8,j and at the end of the chapter on
"Moral Training" the possibility of such
treatment for moral delinquency is alluded to.
This Chapter also contains a new section dealing with the work of Dr. Potts and Dr.
Ilamblin Smith in connection with the psychological examination of delinquents brought
before the Birmingham Courts.

Lastly we would note in the Chapter on
"Results and Conclusions" a summary of Dr.
Fernald's Report on "After-Care Study of
the Patients discharged from Waverley for a
period of Twenty-Five Years."
A few changes have also been made in the
illustrations.

If there are any workers amongst Mentally
Defective children who have not yet read this
book, we would strongly urge them to repair
their omission without delay.

We would refer those of our readers who
were specially interested in Dr. Robert
Hughes' article on "The Mentally Unstable
Child and its Needs" in our last number* to
his recently published Annual Report where
in the section entitled "Mentally Abnormal
Children not included in the Mental Deficiency
Act 1913," his views on the psychology of this
type are re-stated a 1 ittle more fully.

Applications for copies of the Report should
be made to Dr. Hughes at the Education
Offices, Stoke-on-Trent.

Page 102-3.
?j" Page 207. 1 Page 204. *Vol.3. No.l.
