Mental and Scholastic Tests
============================

:Author: Mr. Cyril Burt, M.A

Book Reviews. Report by the Education Officer, 
submitting three
Memoranda by Mr. Cyril Burt, M.A.,
Psychologist, on Mental and Scholastic
Tests, published by the London County
Council. pp. xv X 432. 21 / - net.

To the teacher of the defective child, the
J*Se of mental and intelligence tests as an aid
hoth in the diagnosis of mental deficiency,
and in the practical classification of children
or teaching purposes, has become a common-
Ptace. So widely indeed is the value of cer-
tain well-known scales for measuring intelli-
gence accepted, that we are in considerable
danger of forgetting their limitations and of
attributing to them powers which they do not
Possess. Particularly is it too often forgotten
*hat until the recent publication of Mr.
urt's Mental and Scholastic Tests we have
had no translation or emendation of the Binet-
Sin*on Scale,?still the foundation of practi-
Ca% all scales for use with individuals?
Properly standardised for English children.

while admitting the essential importance of
a standardised procedure in order to get com-
Parable results we yet have used tests in which
the very translation of the instructions given
has made of the test itself a quite different
thing. Jn standardising the Binet-Simon
Scale, therefore, for English children, Mr.
?urt has achieved a result of great service
t? all who have used this scale in the past or
ttiay use it or any of its revisions in the future.

Mr. Burt's book is in the form of three
Memoranda. The first of these deals with
the actual revision of the Binet-Simon Scale,
including a discussion of the practical use of
the method. Memorandum II. gives results
?f work done with the amended scale and dis-
cusses their theoretical validity. Memoran-
dum III. gives certain standardised tests for
educational attainment, including many tests
specially designed for use with defective chil-
dren together with a discussion on the need for
such tests and their uses.

In his consideration of the practical use oi
Scales for measuring intelligence, in Memor-
andum I. Mr. Burt emphasizes the need for
early recognition of ability or of disability,
especially in cases where the variation of the
individual from the norm is comparatively
slight. The danger of classification on an age
basis only or mainly has never been more
clearly demonstrated. We recognise indeed
more and more that we should "promote by
attainment rather than by age and by ability
rather than by attainment," yet in practice
age is still the main basis of classification
except with the very bright or very dull. The
practical issue of such a situation is that
teachers must themselves learn to test their
children and to make use of the results so
gained.

The actual scale of tests given in this mem-
orandum includes all those from Binet's 1908
and 1911 scales, with seme few additions;
05 tests in all. The individual tests are modi-
fied as little as possible, only such changes as
are essential for translation being made. Thus
comparison with earlier results obtained by
using the unrevised Binet-Simon scale is made
possible.

The tests are arranged in order of increasing
difficulty, on the basis of results given by
some 3,000 London children, normals, defec-
tives, and delinquents. The standardised
methods of procedure for giving and for mark-
ing the tests are exactly given, together with
suggested methods of entering and keeping
the records, and the computation of the mental
age from the results. All the materials needed
are also included, or exactly described.

Memorandum II, as has been indicated,
consists of a consideration of the theoretical
validity of the results of the work carried out.
A study of it is essenital for a true grasp of the
contents of the preceding memorandum, while
everyone interested in the problem of mental
deficiency will find here a wealth of material
both in its facts and in its suggestions very
worthy of consideration, especially when such
problems as the education and the after-care
of defective children is a point at issue.

The aim of the revision, to provide an im-
proved scale for English children, the results
of which can be compared with earlier results
obtained from the Binet-Simon scale, together
with the method pursued to attain this aim,
are exactly described. Especially interesting
here is the number of assignments of the orig-
inal Binet tests to ages different from those
originally indicated. No less than 34 out of
the 65 tests of the original scale have been
found to need re-setting, a fact which must
involve making large alterations in mental
ages already found if they are to be as exact
as possible; and which is also of the utmost
importance in using Binet-Simon scales for
the diagnosis of defect.

The findings with regard to the constancy
of the intelligence quotient confirm the trend
of opinion that it varies little in spite of
favourable environment and therefore is
especially significant in prognosis, while
further light is thrown on the mentally defec-
tive condition when we are told that in general
intelligence more than half the mentally
defectives are equal to children in the ordinary
schools.?a fact from which Mr. Burt assumes
that mental defect is a pathological and not a
normal deviation from the average.

The suggestions made as to a line of de-
marcation for defect on the intelligence side,
a matter badly iti need of definition, are use-
ful, although many may not agree with the
idea of estimating the number of defectives as
a percentage based on existing accommoda-
tion. It is probably, however, sufficiently
satisfactory in London, where special school
accommodation is provided for some 1.5% of
the school population; that is, for all children
with an intelligence quotient below 70.
Further points of interest are, the relations
shown between the results of the tests and
educational attainments, and the influence
of educational attainments and opportunity on
the tests themselves. The correlation be-
tween the results of the tests and educational
attainment is high, but it shows nevertheless
that the general tendency in school life is for
the brighter children to be kept back to the
level of the average. On the other hand, the
tests themselves are shown to be considerably
influenced by school knowledge. Readers
interested in young delinquents will find sug-
gestive hints for the prevention of delin-
quency in the section dealing with the relation
between backwardness and misbehaviour.

Finally, the consideration of the diagnostic
value of the scale is of great importance to all-
Even with the emendations, the Binet-Sim?n
scale is only moderately successful with nor-
mals as a test of general intelligence.
fulfilling its original purpose, however,?-that
is in helping in the diagnosis of defect, and
also in helping in the selection of the duller
normals,?it is far more successful. As Mr*
Burt admits, a new scale is needed, but until
we have this there is no doubt that a revision 01
the old scale, standardised for English children
can be of immense service,
An appendix to Memorandum II gives
certain supplementary tests of intelligence,
more suitable for the selection of super-normal
children.

In Memorandum III Mr. Burt records the
result of certain attempts made to standardise
tests for the measurements of educational
attainments as distinct from that of intelh"
gence. That the two are not the same thing
is clearly shown in his earlier discussion, and
the importance of the distinction to the teacher
of the mentally defective is obvious when ^ve
realise how often defect is shown in school
work mainly, or even in it alone. The need
for keeping a permanent record of the educa-
tional progress of each child is justly empha-
sised, and there can be no question that such
a record would be of greater value if kept m
terms of standardised tests than if it merely
expressed the opinion of different individual
teachers. A knowledge, in particular, of the
special educational difficulties of each child
such as these tests could give, would prevent
much loss of time in school.

Tests are supplied for reading, arithmetic
and spelling, while case-histories are given,
showing clearly the possibilities of danger to
the child of an unrecognised specific disability?
which may well influence adversely and often
unnecessarily its whole school career. Tables
of norms for these tests are supplied, together
with medium specimens by which such sub-
jects as drawing, composition and writing may
be judged.
Mr. Burt's book would form a valuable addi-
tion to the Staff library of any school. In
the school for the mentally defective it- is
practically essential, for in its carefully estab-
lished and recorded facts, and in its many
valuable suggestions, it throws much light
0ri some of the most vital problems faced by
the teacher. L .G .F.
Education of Defectives in the Public
Schools." By Meta L. Anderson.
Harrap & Co., Ltd. Price 5s.
School Training of Defective Children .
By Henry H. Goddard. Harrap & Co.,
Ltd. Price 7s. 6d.
?ne of the difficulties met by teachers taking
Special School work is the dearth of text-
??ks by means of which the experience of
ethers would be placed at their disposal. As
yet we have produced in this country only one
two such manuals, so we welcome especially
this edition of Miss Anderson's concise yet
c?mprehensive monograph issued some three
iears ago in America and now made more
eas^y obtainable in England. While not
attempting to give such details ot method as
sWld be already in the possession of the
efficient teacher of normal children and none
^hers should take up Special School work
t^e book will be of great value in helping such
teachers to take up the right attitude in deal-
!n8 with feeble-minded children and in show-
ing where to leave the beaten paths oi elemen-
ry school methods.

It may be noted that Miss Anderson advo-
cates that, beyond the kindergarten stage, the
Pecial School should, where possible, be
^rganised on the departmental plan, having
subject' rooms each in charge of a specially
Qualified teacher, every child spending one
Period in each room per day. The 'subjects
are (l) housework of all kinds (2) wood-work,
manual work including basketry, brush-
^aking, weaving and sewing; (4) physical
raining and music and (5) academic work
along with nature study and speech-training.
There is much to be said in favour of this
arrangement though it might lead to the
'subject' becoming more important than the
all-round development of the individual
pupil, a condition of things sometimes to be
met with in our Secondary Schools.

A simplified form of the educational
record chart given on page 7 (similar to those
in Burt's Memorandum on Educational
Abilities) might well be incorporated in the
records of progress kept in our Special Schools,
the graphs for successive years being entered in
different colours. We need everything that
will help us, as this does, to have a clear
understanding of the individual pupil, his
attainments and possibilities.

It is encouraging to find that while speech
training is emphasised, academic work is
relegated to its right place. The survey of
occupations suitable for defectives (Chapter
6) and the selections from after-school records
(Chapter 7) should be of interest to social
workers as well as to teachers. Again and
again throughout the volume we meet the
injunction "Begin where the child is,"?
simple but so often forgotten. When the
parent, the teacher and the State each do this
then will the outlook be more hopeful than at
present, for only then can we tackle success-
fully the problems of home, school and after-
care.

School Training of Defective Children is
a re-issue by Harrap and Co., of the Report on
the Ungraded Classes for Defective Children in
New York, drawn up by Dr. Goddard about
ten years ago. Many of the criticisms put
forward could be directed at our present-day
half-hearted methods of dealing with the
feeble-minded in our midst. We would
recommend this volume to any educational
administrators, social workers and teachers to
whom it may not be already known, dealing
as it does with all aspects of the problem.
E.L.S.R.
