Extra-Institutional Care of Mental Defectives in New York State, U.S.A
=======================================================================

:Author: Susan W. Hoagland.
Member, Board of Managers, Rome State School, N.Y. Field Agent, New York

State Commission for Mental Defectives.
-----------------------------------------

No State should consider itself either humane, or efficient from a business
point of view, which continues to support in idleness any of its dependents (not ex-
cluding those physically or mentally handicapped), who might, under proper train-
ing and supervision, become at least partially self-supporting. But as a rule it is
not until an intolerable weight of taxes drives a state into new methods of conser-
vation, or when some big-hearted genius undertakes to relieve conditions which he
or she vicariously feels to be intolerable, that the partial powers of handicapped
dependents are ever fully developed.

Fortunately for the feebleminded all over the world, both these conditions
have prevailed during the last decade in N.Y. State, U.S.A. The demands of
educational authorities who, finally roused to the importance of dealing ade-
quately with mental defectives in the public schools, set up a standard of a'' speical
ungraded class" for every ten children three years retarded in school work; of
social workers who, appalled by the many social evils resulting from the full
liberty allowed feebleminded persons in the community after school age, were
pressing both parents and judges toward the committment of all mental defectives
to proper State institutions; and the irritation of the State Institutions, which,
already full to overflowing, were rebelling at the apparently never ending pro-
cession of new patients pressed upon them,?forced the State legislature into
creating a permanent Commission of three persons to consider New York State's
mental deficiency problem as a whole and return recommendations.

The first and most pressing demand confronting this commission was for the
provision of at least "20,000 more beds for the feebleminded!" and it was in their
search for means of doing this stupendous task in post war time that their attention
became focussed upon the original experiments in extra-institutional care for
mental defectives then being carried on by the Rome State School, Rome, N.Y.
This school is the State's largest institution for mental defectives, of which Dr.
Charles Bernstein has been the devoted and very active superintendent for over
twenty years.

Close personal observation and sympathetic interest in the 6,000 "children"
coming under his care during that time, had brought Dr. Bernstein to the con-
clusion that a certain proportion of them were failing to fulfil even their partial
possibilities of usefulness in the world, mainly because they lacked relatives, or
friends able and willing to supplement their pathetic inability to compete in the
open market with normal human beings at the job of earning a living. Years
before the State commission began its work, Dr. Bernstein had decided that every
patient in his school had an inalienable human right to as much normal life in the
community as he was capable of using with safety to himself and the public, and
had dedicated himself not only to the securing of this right for them, but also to
protecting them in their enjoyment of it, or in any suffering brought upon them in
the process of securing it. ' 'How many of us," he demanded of his apprehensive
assistants, "even those above average intelligence, would have made good in life
without parents, relatives, or friends to stand back of our repeated failures and
start us up, over and over again ? even seventy times seven ?''

COLONIES FOR BOYS*
--------------------

Renting a hundred acre farm near the school, Dr. Bernstein began his experi-
ments by placing there twenty boys who had been already trained and found
trusty in the main school, under the supervision of a capable, trained farmer and
his wife to live in the farmhouse and carry on the work of the farm.
At the end of the first year, including the sums earned by the boys in spare
hours at helping the surrounding farmers, this first experiment surprised even its
founder by paying for itself. In other words these twenty boys had become not
only self-supporting, but had led vastly happier, more human lives in simple
natural surroundings than in the vastly more expensive crowded institution with
its highly polished floors and necessarily formal routine. They had also im-
proved in self-respect, in their physical carriage, and in some instances one to two
grades in intelligence. They had also been of immense help to the farmers of the
region, who were at the time desperate for helpers.

The success of this colony led to repeated duplications of it, until to-day
the Rome State School is running 16 such farm colonies for boys, and three other
colonies of different types. One of the latter is placed under a suitable man and
wife, in an ordinary town house in a good neighbourhood, in Rome, from which
the boys go out to day's work as lawn tenders, furnace tenders, elevator boys,
bundle boys, etc. During the late war these boys handled all the freight at Rome's
main railroad station. This group also supports itself.

Another group of low-grade boys, including several imbeciles, was placed
near the lately acquired Rome Country Club grounds and did excellent service at
clearing the ground of stones and brush, work for which at that time it was im-
possible to get ordinary labour.

A third group of boys among whom were some of the most serious disciplinary
problems of the school, was taken to the heart of the Adirondack mountains far
from any possibility of harming themselves or others. Here they planted trees
for the State forestry conservation commission, and happily secured for themselves
a better record for living trees at the end of the season than the State's hired
labourers of the year before. Their pride and delight in the open life of the
mountain camp, was good to witness, and healthy fatigue following each day's
strenuous labour reduced disciplinary problems to a minimum.

These colonies for boys proved so successful that no opposition to them now
remains, and there seems therefore no reason for not increasing their number
indefinitely, provided they are carried on under competent supervision. 360
"Rome boys" are now supporting themselves in this normal happy way, thus
freeing as many beds in the main school for more socially dangerous cases.

COLONIES FOR GIRLS.
--------------------

To initiate this policy for feebleminded girls was quite a different matter, and
demanded a far more daring courage, the popular belief being that feebleminded
girls are a greater danger to the community, as well as in far greater danger from
the community than are feebleminded boys. For even one feebleminded girl to
become pregnant, whether married or unmarried, as a result of any experiment on
the part of the State, would be enough, said the extreme eugenists and the over-
anxious social workers, to condemn the whole scheme.

But in spite of the thousand and one objections successively placed in his
way. Dr. Bernstein proceeded with his experiment of "Working Girls' Colonies"
for feebleminded girls. Renting an ordinary house in a good neighbourhood in
Rome, a small city lying about two miles from the main school, he placed there 20
trained, trusty girls under a capable matron, well known for her work at the school
and imbued with the high purpose of the experiment. A social worker was also
attached to this colony, who not only carefully selected places for the girls to work
at domestic service, but also collected their wages and adjusted difficulties arising
from this new venture.

The charge made for the girls' services was small at first in order to em-
phasise the educational feature of the experiment rather than its financial value,
and also because some inducement had to be made to encourage employers to
undertake what was then regarded as more or less missionary work. Some slight
neighbourhood opposition to the colony showed itself during the first month or
two, but as domestic servants were scarce in Rome, practically all the neighbours
soon availed themselves of this new source of help and the opposition quickly
faded, especially as the State School was known to be both able and desirous of
keeping up exceptionally well any property under its care.

Life at the colony house was a delight to the girls in comparison with life in a
big formal institution. Many privileges of individual dress, amusement, and
possessions could be allowed them that were impossible in the larger group,
especially after all the girls were steadily earning. They were allowed to start
savings accounts, and to help choose and purchase not only their own clothing, but
also attractive furnishings for the colony house, which was now their home. Games,
dolls, and a victrola were soon added, as well as several pet animals, to which the
76 studies in mental inefficiency.

girls were endlessly devoted. Taffy pulls, sewing bees, dances in front of a big
open fire were frequent occurrences, and once a week the matron took a group to
the ' 'movies,'' as girls were never allowed out after dark alone. But for the most
part all of them were healthily tired at the end of each day's work, which seemep
to include sufficient varied experiences to amuse and satisfy the majority of them.
The Domestic Service Colony soon made its own way, the preference of both
employers and matrons being for the girls of lower grades of intelligence. High
grade imbeciles did very well, as they were never placed in positions of respon-
sibility, but only where they could be hands and feet for some kindly housewife,
who did her own work. But there remained a group of the quicker, brighter,
more restless girls to be provided for and since their type is often so emotionally
unstable as to make it seem unwise to trust them on the street alone (as the domes-
tic service girls were safely allowed to do), a new type of colony was established
for them in a small factory town about twenty miles from the school. Twenty-
four such girls were placed in a big attractive house with a good yard, under the
care of two matrons, one of whom ran the home, while the other went with the
girls to the factory, taking a job as forewoman there in order to adjust the girls'
difficulties on the spot, immediately, to keep them steady, and see them home
again.

This scheme provided just the stimulus needed to satisfy this set of girls,
especially as they were soon earning all the way from $8 to $15 a week at piece
work. This was much more than the duller more plodding domestic workers
could earn, so that this group could afford more attractive home furnishings and
personal wearing apparel. They even bought a second hand automobile in which
the matron took them long rides on Sundays and evenings, through the beautiful
surrounding country. They also rented a large attractive cottage at the nearby
lake for the two weeks of their summer "lay-off" from the factory. They asked
for and were granted a feeble-minded baby from the main institution, for a pet,
and took excellent care of him with the matron's help. They lavished pretty
clothes and too many toys upon him out of the part of their earnings allowed them
for spending money, and were very careful to be absolutely quiet when he was
asleep which was a blessing to the often overstrained nerves of the matrons.

To-day Rome State School is supervising twelve of these working girls'
colonies, one of them daringly situated in the heart of the third largest city in the
State; and another, of coloured girls, in a small town of which the centre is a boys'
college, and over which the president of the college keeps a close supervision, as it
represents the only source of domestic service for the college professors' wives.
These colonies are now caring for about 321 girls, the population changing
more or less constantly in response to the needs of the colonies and also of the
girls, some being returned to the main school temporarily for hospital or discip-
linary care and training, or permanently as unsuitable for colony life.
In time some of the girls proved so trustworthy and so suited to the homes into
which they gradually settled down, that they were allowed to sleep at their places
of employment, but they were still required to use the colony house as an amuse-
ment centre for their days off, and as their home when employers were away
for any reason ? Last year these colony girls (domestic and mill colonies together)
earned about ?62,000.

Many mentally defective girls wear out their environment more quickly than
normal persons, so that the possibility of transferring them repeatedly to different
types of colonies, in different places, under different types of matrons, is a valuable
asset in their care. One girl, though a good worker, flatly refused to go two days
in succession to the same place for work, but is to-day working quite steadily and
happily by being sent to a different place of work each day in the week, the Mon-
day place being considered quite satisfacory a week from the Monday before.

RESULTS.
----------

After fourteen years of experience with the colonies for boys, and eight years
with those for girls, Rome State School has to-day over 1,000 of its patients outside
the walls of its main institution (over one-third of its population). It has put
this colony method of care for certain types of the feeble-minded far beyond the
experimental stage. From its results Dr. Bernstein judges that fully 40% of the
feeble-minded may be handled in this comparatively simple and much less expen-
sive way, earning at least two-thirds of their own keep as a group.

These experiments have not only demonstrated the humaneness of the scheme
by brightening and delighting hundreds of handicapped human beings, but has
also shown itself a valuable aid to discipline in the main school, because of the new
hope and desire to improve that it instills into the children remaining there. It
has also raised the grade of intelligence, the appearance and behaviour of mauy
individuals sharing its life.

More than this, it has led many parents and also many judges to be willing to
allow borderline cases of mental defect to remain for life under competent super-
vision who must otherwise have fallen into misery and disgrace, because the
public would not be willing to commit such cases to an institution for life, to sit
around the walls of their wards doing nothing. It has educated many communi-
ties into a more sympathetic understanding of these handicapped human lives
and consequently into a more willing payment of taxes sufficient to give such
children proper care. It has also shed welcome light on the problems of many
socially insufficient individuals. The Superintendent of one factory employing
our girls reports that they compare very favourably with the so-called normal
girls in his factory, many of whom would in his opinion be safer and happier under
our colony system of care. It is the writer's belief that many domestic servants
are of this very class and in pathetic need of the same type of friendly human super-
vision of their leisure hours.

During Rome's eight years of experience with "Working Girls Colonies"
860 girls have passed through this test for partial freedom and to-day 360 of that
number still remain in the colonies.

There have been nine pregnancies incidental to attempted escapes during
the initiation of the system; but it should be noted that, although the chances for
escape are naturally greater than in the main school, there have been propor-
tionately fewer runaways from our colonies than from our main school. It should
also be considered that these casualties took place among a group of girls whom we
should probably not have been able to hold at all under any other system. For
parents and judges are very unwilling, and justly so, to "put away" for life, in
a state institution either boys or girls who appear able to enjoy life and earn at
least a part of their own support.

Had the financial success of this experiment proved less astonishing, Dr.
Bernstein would still claim that the human benefits it confers upon the individuals
thus partially liberated would fully justify the state in continuing and extending
it, even though it necessitated greater expense than intra institutional care. For
the State as foster parent or guardian must meet the whole of its human responsi-
bility, which surely includes far more than simply food, clothing and shelter.

During the Great War many opportunities of earning wages were open to the
feebleminded which would not be theirs in normal times. But even though they
have been obliged to relinquish certain of their jobs to more efficient labourers,
the demonstration has been made, once for all, of what they can do under training
and supervision; so that never again can the world shut its eyes to the shame and
cruelty of allowing even these partially efficient persons to remain idle from lack
of public interest.

OBJECTIONS.
-------------

Such a bold proposal as even a partial liberation of any group or type of
mental defectives was sure to meet opposition. The first note of protest came from
the extreme eugenists who insisted that the public mind would by this system be
unduly diverted from the great necessity of making impossible, by the absolute
segregation of all feebleminded persons, the reproduction of mental defects.
In vain Dr. Bernstein reminded these persons that the absolute segregation
of all feebleminded persons, rich and poor, was an impossible Utopia; first because
of lack of public sympathy with the proposal, and again on account of the over
whelming expense of carrying it out. He also stated it as his belief that half the
working population of the world would fall below the extreme eugenist's standard
of normal mentality and suggested that since we could not to-day secure total
segregation of all mental defectives, we had better train and supervise as carefully
as possible those who could with some degree of safety be given a partial liberty,
thus saving the beds already available in public institutions for the more socially
dangerous cases.

Certain types of social workers who had become almost rabid over the need
of banishing from society every kind and grade of mental defect, violently opposed
the possibility of even limited liberty for any individual that he or she had laboured
so hard to "put away" for life, and declared that the state had no right to coun-
tenance any system which opened the way to possible escape and marriage of even
one feebleminded inmate solemnly committed to its care.

To these Dr. Bernstein emphasized the already overcrowded condition of
the state institutions; the fact that these institutions were schools and not prisons;
the ignorance and apathy of the general public toward building sufficient institu-
tions to care for even the most socially dangerous types of feebleminded persons;
and also the unwillingness of parents and judges to "put away" for life in state
institutions any child who seemed able to earn at least part of its support.
Both of these groups then demanded sterilization as a prelude to a system of
testing for freedom of feebleminded persons. Dr. Bernstein reminded them that
this doubtful procedure was again unlikely to be agreed to by the general public,
and that proper supervision should be able largely to eliminate the danger feared;
also that without this drastic practice we should be able to secure and hold a far
greater number of feebleminded persons under strict supervision than we could
hope to do were sterilization known to be a part of the state's policy.

The Labour Unions fearing that the feebleminded would be used to replace
normal labour, made certain demands that were recognised as just, and a promise
was given them that our ' 'children'' would never be allowed to work for lower
wages than others were paid on the same job, also that in case of strike we would
at once remove them until the dispute at issue was settled, since we recognised
that they would not be able to take part in the affair intelligently and the State
as such could never take part in any industrial struggle.

Other interested onlookers objected that the colony system would draw public
attention to, and therefore label unfavourably the girls living in the colony houses;
that every loafer within miles of the houses would be drawn to annoy its inmates,
while girls placed directly in private homes at service and supervised there would
naturally sink out of sight and thus avoid unfavourable publicity.

This unpleasant thing has happened several times to our colony houses, but
has been promptly met by the matrons, and the offenders sent to jail for the
offence, which cleared the atmosphere of this particular trouble for a long time
thereafter. The same thing happens in the case of the girls placed directly in
private homes at service, and there it is much more difficult to discover and
punish, because the employer desires no such publicity, and often hides the
facts, fearing that the girl will be removed from their home because of them.
Another objection is that the state is exploiting these helpless "children"
by taking their earnings from them for their own support. This seems hardly a
tenable position, since experience has shown that in almost every case the child
has not been able to direct his or her life alone, and without our supervision,
which the state is paying for, they would soon drift into the courts and prisons,
or maternity wards of city hospitals.

The State Commission for Mental Defectives soon understood, and has for the
last three years intelligently backed up this hard won success of Dr. Bernstein's
organising genius. Due to its recommendations the state legislature last year
voted to support and extend the colony system as widely and rapidly as feasible.
The Commission also instituted the employing of Field Agents to supervise
mental defectives in the community, since they realise that only a small propor-
tion of the total number to be cared for ever reach a state institution. They now
consider their first and strongest drive must be toward securing proper mental
examinations of, and adequate schooling for all mentally defective children;
second, the supervision of all feebleminded persons in the community throughout
life, leaving state institutions as the last resort when other types of supervision
have failed. Five Field Agents have already been appointed whose duties are
to assist in the parole work of the state institutions, and to arrange for the admis-
sion to state institutions of suitable cases; to supervise mental defectives in
their own homes, and in industrial placement as far as possible; but especially
to do the mental testing and social work connected with the free mental clinics
which the commission is placing within easy reach of towns or rural communities
where such opportunities are not readily available. Twenty-six of these clinics
have already been established, held bi-weekly, tri-weekly, or monthly as needed.

Calls for new clinics are constantly coming in, as they become better understood
and appreciated by public schools, courts, medical men and social workers.

We recognise that England is far ahead of us in the community supervision of
the feebleminded in their homes, and also in industry, but our state-wide clinics
and our colony system providing as it docs for gradual steps toward further liberty,
as earned, we believe to be New York's contribution to the solution of this sub-
ject. Already congratulations and inquiries as to details of the colony system
are pouring in from all over the world.

PRIVATE EFFORT.
---------------

One of New York's largest private reform schools, for girls from 16 to 21,
has sold its enormous congregate building and is trying out a new plan of boarding
homes for different types of offenders, from which the girls go out to work by the
day, iising'the!home:'as'?their'centre^forrsupervision8and7guardianship, thus reflec-
ting the influence of our colony^systemTorrthevfeebleminded girls. The writer
believes that a comparison of the two groups'of girls would show less difference
than is suspected in the types of mentality.

The Jewish Big Sisters of New York City, finding that their problem girls
were almost always girls of subnormal intelligence, and that no trade school for
girls would bother with such problems, have pushed intelligently for the estab-
lishment of a special trade school for such girls, and to their credit be it said that
such a school for 100 of these girls is to be opened in New York City this
Fall by the Board of Education. They also found that the ordinary employment
agency would not bother with these problem cases, and they have opened a "Voca-
tional Adjustment Bureau for Girls" which deals only with girls having an intelli-
gence quotient below average intelilgence, and already they have over 100
employers working with them intelligently to place their girls at jobs suited to
their mental abilities.

May I take this occasion to thank all of the English workers in this field
from whom I received so many courtesies during my stay in London earlier in
this year. I shall endeavour to help their ideas and experience bear fruit for the
feebleminded of our country. If any of these workers should visit America, I
hope they will surely get in touch with the New York State Commission for Mental
Defectives at 105, East 22nd Street, N.Y. City, and with Dr. Charles Bernstein
at Home State School, Rome, N.Y.
