Notes and News
===============

Board of Control.

Sir Marriott Cooke, K.B.E., M.B., and Dr. Sidney Coup land, F.R.C.P.
(Consulting Physician to the Middlesex Hospital) have retired from their position
as Commissioners of the Board of Control. Both of them were appointed Commissioners in Lunacy in 1898 and the former, who was previously Medical Superintendent of the Worcester County and City and the Wiltshire Asylums, acted
during 1916-18 as Chairman of the Board.

The London Gazette of the 18th November announced that the King has
appointed Sir Edward Marriott Cooke, K.B.E., M.B., who had recently retired
from the Board of Control, to be an unpaid Commissioner of the Board of Control
for Lunacy and Mental Deficiency.

Annual Report of the C.A.M.D., 1920-21.
--------------------------------------For the benefit of those readers who have not seen a copy of the recently
issued report of the C .A .M .D. we append a short summary of its chief contents.
Six new Local Associations for the Care of the Mentally Defective were
formed during the year 1920, viz., South East Lancashire, North Lancashire and
Central Lancashire (all at the request of the Lancashire Asylums Board), Portsmouth, Staffordshire, and Suffolk, a trained organiser being sent in each case to
start the work. Arrangements were also made to start an Association in Worcester
City, the prospective local Secretary coming up to the Central Office for a period
of training. The Exeter Association unfortunately found itself unable to continue its work, and has now ceased to exist.

The training of workers has been actively carried on, and during the year
eleven social workers came to the office for the purpose, ten of whom are now employed as Secretaries or Assistant Secretaries of Local Associations. In addition
the Superintendent Health Visitor for the Durham County Council came up for a
short time to gain an insight into the work, as did also an American student from
the London School of Economics.

Four other students took Part I. of the C.A.M.D.'s Training Course which
consists of three weeks in a Certified Institution.

Two Short Courses for Teachers of Mentally Defective Children were held on
behalf of the Board of Education during the year, one at Colchester attended by
forty students, and one at Manchester attended by forty-four students.
The holding of two Post-Graduate Courses for Medical Practitioners in conjunction with the University of London constituted a new development of the
work. These were attended altogether by 142 students and proved a great success.
At the time of the Joint Conference of the C .A .M .D. and the National Special
Schools Union held at the Church House, Westminster, in November, a series of
three meetings were arranged for the Secretaries of Local Voluntary Associations,
forty-one of whom were able to be present.

A course of nine public lectures was also given during the year.
A new Standing Medical Committee has been appointed to act as an advisory
body to the Council on matters needing expert medical opinion.
A Special Statistics Committee was also appointed during the year to revise
the form of Annual Return in use by Local Associations.

From 1st January 1920, to 31st December, 603 cases of defectives were
referred direct to the C.A.M.D., and those coming from areas where there is no
Local Association were dealt with in various ways.
The total number of cases recorded on the central register amounted at the end
of the year under review to 22,856, this being an increase of 4,408 on the previous
year.

The circulation of ''Studies in Mental Inefficiency" rose during the year to
890, in addition to the sale of single copies.

The reports of 32 Local Associations are appended to the Report: these
received notice in our last issue.

Change of Name of G .A .M. ,D.
As reported in our last issue the Council of the C.A.M.D. held, on July 18th
1921, had before it a Resolution to change the name of the Association to the
"Central Association for Mental Welfare," based on a Memorandum on the subject drawn up by the Chairman, Mr. Leslie Scott, which had previously been
circulated. Considerations of space precludes its reproduction in full, but it may
be summarised as follows:?

It is in the direction of the care of the defective in the community?one
of the three main functions of the C.A.M.D.,?that its work needs development , for experience has shown:?

(a) that advice and assistance for high grade and for borderland cases cannot
be sought too early, and
(b) that the number of such cases where parents and relations do not know
where to apply for help and advice is infinitely larger than was ever
thought possible.

It has been found that the present name of the Association tends to limit
its usefulness in dealing with these cases, for the popular belief is that
"mental deficiency" necessarily implies a condition of imbecility or idiocy
and parents of high grade cases or of those who may be on the borderline
shrink from seeking the help of the Association except as a last resource,
when irreparable harm may have been done. For the same reason the
following important branches of work may be instanced as being handicapped by the present name:?

(a) Training Homes, Schools and Institutions for children and young persons.
Many children and youn gpersons pass through Homes and Schools and are
known to the authorities as rather sub-normal, possibly high grade feebleminded, unbalanced, and likely to fail in competition with others. Such
children on leaving the Homes would benefit by the advice of those trained
and experienced in dealing with such cases, and yet the authorities of the
Homes hesitate naturally to refer for help to an Association for "defectives."
(b) Special Schools, After Care and Employment.

Many children leave the Special Schools without being notified to the
Local Authority and the larger proportion of these are for a time at least,
capable of employment, and often of good work. But help is needed to
enlist the interest of employers and secure the right work under proper
conditions. Employers often hesitate to take children coming from an
Association with a name they completely misunderstand.

(c) Criminals and Persons brought before the Courts.
Criminals and persons tried before the Courts, or in prison, who are, if
not actually defective, often subnormal, are in need of special advice and
treatment. Magistrates, prison doctors and others connected with the
administration of the law, often hesitate to refer cases to the Association for
help and advice, as unless the persons charged are absolutely certified as
defectives it may hinder rather than help. In view of the general ignorance
regarding mental deficiency it is clear that many persons who specially need
caring for are thus lost sight of.

Amongst other considerations too which bear on the subject is the
possibility that the Association may later be able to assist workers who are
claiming exemption from the Minimum Wage clause of the Trade Boards
Act on the grounds of "mental infirmity." It can be easily understood that its present name might be looked upon as likely to prejudice
the Board and both employer and employee.

A further weighty factor in the question is the future position of the
Association with regard to the home visiting of cases attending Psychiatric
Clinics for the early treatment of mental disease, which are now being started in
connection with an increasing number of general hospitals. Experience has
already shown that a not inconsiderable proportion of pat ients brought to such
Clinics are mentally defective or on the borderline of mental defect. If
separate workers are to be employed to visit these cases a certain amount of
overlapping will be inevitable. It would therefore seem desirable that
visitors of the mentally defective should be so trained as to be qualified to
undertake this special visiting if asked to do so. Here again the name stands
in the way.

The development of the work as set out above does not mean a new
departure for the Central Association. It means a constructive and organised
carrying out of the work for which the Association was originally formed, in a
manner which will be recognised by the public and which will make it more
efficient and more complete. No alteration will be needed in the Memorandum and Articles of Association owing to the wide lines on which they were
originally drawn up.

In conclusion it is pointed out that it is not suggested that the Local
Voluntary Associations affiliated to the C.A.M.D. should feel compelled to
follow its lead by changing their names also: the matter will be left entirely
to their own discretion.*

During the course of his remarks upon this Memorandum Mr. Scott referred
to the possibility that those members of the Council who represented Institutions
formerly registered under the Idiots Act might?after their long and splendid
fight in support of their contention that Mental Deficiency and insanity were two
different conditions which needed different legislation and treatment?look upon
the proposed change as a retrograde step. He felt, however, that such would not
be the case as the Association would always continue to recognise that vital
distinction. As regards the new name he did not pretend that it was perfect,
but after long and earnest thought it was the best they could arrive at.

An Amendment proposing that the words "and nervous" should be added
after "mental" having been lost, the original Resolution was carried with one
dissentient. The Resolution was accordingly submitted to the Annual Meeting
on October 20th, and the decision of the Council was endorsed by a large majority.
An application to the Board of Trade for permission to carry out the change of
name has now been forwarded and as soon as it is received the necessary steps will
be taken.

Conference of Educational Associations.
--------------------------------------As we go to press, the C.A.M.D. is taking part in the Tenth Annual Conference of Educational Associations held at University College during the first
week in January.

Lectures are being given by G. A. Auden, Esq., M.A., M.D., D.P.H.,
F.R.C.P., School Medical Officer, Birmingham, on "The possibility
of co-operation between the School Medical Officer and the Teacher
in the Training of Subnormal and Mentally Defective Children";
Miss Lucy G. Fildes, B.A., Holder of Board of Control Research
Studentship, Psychological Laboratory, Cambridge, on "The Training
of Teachers for Mentally Defective and Backward Children and Special
Methods of Teaching"; and Miss K. L. Marsden, Inspectress of Infant Schools,
City of Nottingham Education Committee, on "The Organisation and Scope of
Backward Classes."

An Exhibition of didactic apparatus, etc., used in teaching mentally defec?Three Local Associations have already made the change, viz.: Cambridge, Suffolk and
Ipswich.


tive children, specimen schemes of work, time-tables and photographs is also on
view.

It is thus hoped to bring before the public the educational needs of the
mentally defective and the backward child and thereby to stimulate interest in
his welfare.

By the time this journal is issued the Conference will be over, but a report of
it must be deferred to our next issue.

New Occupation Centres.
----------------------Four more Occupation Centres have been opened by Local Associations during the last few months?at Willesden, York, Worcester and Barrow.

The Worcester Centre which was opened at the end of June, first on two days a
week, then on four, has an average attendance of seven: a room was lent temporarily by the Education Committee, but upon its being required a few weeks
ago, other quarters had to be found. The centre is now installed in a room at the
Congregational Chapel for which it only has to pay firing and caretaker.

The expenses are met by voluntary subscriptions and the Centre is run by
voluntary helpers with the assistance of the Secretary of the Association.

The Willesden Centre, opened at the beginning of October, is attended by
seven children. It is held three half days a week in a room in the School Clinic
lent by the Education Committee, and is in charge of an experienced worker with
the assistance of volunteers. The Board of Control have allowed part of the grant
which they give to the Association to be used to meet the expenses of the Centre,
but this has to be supplemented by subscriptions and donations.

The York Centre opened at the end of October, and has at present an attendance of only three children; it is hoped, however, shortly to find occupations for
some of the older boys and girls who are at home unoccupied and deteriorating.
A loom has been purchased with that end in view and mat and rug making will
also be taught if possible. A part-time teacher, trained in Nursery School work
has been appointed. The expenses of the Centre are at present paid from the
interest of a capital sum originally subscribed for starting a Home, but not used
for that purpose. Later it is hoped to obtain voluntary subscriptions to supplement this income.

The North Lancashire Association have made a beginning in Occupation Centre
work by holding a small class for ineducable children at Barrow one afternoon a
week, a room for the purpose having been placed at their disposal by the local
Board of Guardians. A similar weekly class is also being held in Lancaster in
one of the rooms of the School Clinic lent by the Education Committee.
Intelligence Tests.

In the current Annual Report of the School Medical Officer to the Manchester
Education Committee an interesting section?contributed by Dr. Herd, Chief
Assistant School Medical Officer?is devoted to a criticism of the use of Intelligence
Tests.

Dr. Herd has given special attention to tests allotted to different ages in
different scales and publishes a table of his results in Manchester as compared with
those of the Stanford Revision and of Mr. Cyril Burt's revised Binet Scale. He
considers, however, that there is a tendency to attach undue importance to the
scoring system and to the calculation of "mental ages" and "intelligence quotients," his criticism being specially directed to the following points:?
(a) The fallacy of evaluating each test as of equal importance.
(b) The need of more differentiation in the scoring of different types of
answers.

(c) The doubtful value of the principle of a time limit to certain tests.
(d) The impossibility of expressing adequately in terms of scoring, the
method of response to tests?a factor of considerable significance.
But even assuming that an approximately correct mental age can be arrived
at by means of tests, of what practical value, Dr. Herd pertinently asks, is it?
It is of necessity a pure abstraction, particularly in the case of retarded children,
owing to the lack of homogeneity amongst them, and their irregularity of development, and the expression, he prophecies, will probably be discarded altogether by
psychologists before many years have passed: at any rate, at the present time with
tests that are admittedly imperfect, its use is both premature and fallacious.

Dr. Herd, however, does not deny that, meantime, certifying officers and
teachers may find the Stanford Tests of considerable service, as if they are supplemented by other lines of enquiry they do provide some sort of indication as to
whether or not a child is "educable." Amongst the "crucial" ones he would
place first and foremost, the "vocabulary" test, and after that the "differences
and similarities," the repetition of numbers backwards, the "pictures," the
"detection of absurdities," the "dissected sentences" and the "comprehensive
questions," all of which involve certain of the higher mental processes and are
therefore useful for diagnostic purposes.

In the recently issued Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the
Board of Education, to which we again refer below, the subject of mental tests is
also dealt with at some length and a table (furnished by Dr. Shrubsall,of the
L.C.C.) is given showing how intelligence quotients can be used by Certifying
Officers as a guide in deciding the type of education for which a child is suited.

The use of three types of tests is advocated:?"Education Tests," "Intelligence
Tests" and "Environmental Tests," these latter being defined as "general
questions intended to elucidate the mental relationship of child to home, out of
school occupations, teachers, friends, and the world in which it moves, with a
view of correlating these findings with the results of education and intelligence
tests, and of determining to what extent the child is likely to be able to manage for
itself after the expiry of school age."

Sir George Newman, however,?while not sharing to the full the scepticism
of Dr. Herd?is careful to point out that the discovery of "mental age" can in no
sense be considered to be all that is needed, and he lays particular stress on the
necessity of obtaining also a "clinical picture of the mental condition," a factor
which, at the present time, tends to get too much thrust into the background.
Report of Chief Medical Officer to Board of Education.

In Sir George Newman's recently issued report (to be obtained from H.M.
Stationery Office, 6s. net.) two sections are devoted to the subject of "Abnormal
Children" and Special Schools, and much that is of value to Mental Deficiency
workers is contained therein.

To take first, the statistical information:?we learn that it is estimated that
there are in England and Wales 37,000 mentally defective children of whom
31,000 are feebleminded, 5,000 imbeciles, and 1,000 idiots;* in addition probably
half a million children at least are ' 'dull and backward.'' The number of Special
M.D. Schools is now 201 (compared with 199 last year) with accommodation for
16,123 (last year 15,825), an increase upon which we can hardly pride ourselves.
A numerical return of all "ascertained exceptional children in 1920" gives
* It is interesting to compare this estimate with that given ia 1914, viz.: feebleminded
24,000; imbeciles and idiots, 12,000.
some interesting results. Of 28,344 feeble-minded children reported, 9,389 were
attending public elementary schools, 14.656 were attending certified schools for
mentally defective children, 1,196 were notified to the local control authority
during the year, and 3,103 were not at school. Of 4,500 imbeciles, 467 were
attending public elementary schools, 652 were notified to the local control
authority during the year and 3,381 were not at school. Of 870 idiots, 107 were
notified to the local control authority during the year, 763 not being notified.
In this report for the first time official recognition is given to the existence of
the "Neuropathic Child" for whom, as such, no special treatment is, as yet,
available, although he may be regarded as suffering from a definite defect. His
leading characteristics are summed up as follows:?"His behaviour may be
marked by certain psychological characteristics, a tendency to quarrel, to make
violent friendships, to engender bitter dislikes, to attend unduly to his bodily
functions, to night terrors, to unreasonable fears, grief, abnormal introspection
and self examination, and to separation from family and friends. The physical
accompaniment of these psychical symptoms may include loss of sleep, constipation, diarrhoea, sickness, stammering, fainting, resentment of change of diet and
scene, for no assignable reason." The proper treatment of this type of child is
emphasised as being of first-class importance, as permanent mental injury may
result from the use of repressive or unsympathetic disciplinary methods. On
the other hand by skilful management mental stability may be restored.
Special attention has been given to the incidence of this condition at a school
in a slum area in Notting Hill, and the figures show a percentage of 12 in 1912-13,
rising to 31.6 in 1917-18, and falling to 18.1 in 1919-20. With regard to age
incidence it might be supposed that with the approach of adolescence the numbers
would rise, but on the contrary there is a material fall in the ages groups of 11,12
and 13, the incidence being greatest at those of 9 and 10. This is attributed by
Sir George Newman to the cumulative steadying effect of school-life.

Another subsection of the Report is devoted to the Dull and Backward Child
who is described as a "serious factor in national life." Sir George Newman considers that the problem should be dealt with on the following lines:?
(i) Ascertainment of the nature and extent of the problem by special
methods of inspection which shall include medico-psychological
examination.

(ii) Treatment of physical defects associated with backwardness.
(iii) Assisting in framing educational proposals for the suitable training of
backward children.
(iv) Co-operation with the health authorities in advancing domestic ideals
in regard to a proper and hygienic mode of life,
and he gives a lucid account of the nature of backwardness and the factors
associated with it.

We allude above to the references to Mental Tests which are also to be found
in the report.

Mentally Defective Prisoners.
----------------------------The recently issued report of the Prison Commissioners for the year ended 31st
March, 1921, contains some interesting information bearing on the problem of
Mentally Defective delinquents.

83 male prisoners and 21 female prisoners were certified under
?fin this connection, see also article on "The Elementary School and the Individual
Child" in the October number of the American journal ''Mental Hygiene."

Section 1 of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913. Orders were made by the Secretary
of State under Section 9 of the Act for the removal of 54 males and 8 females to
Certified or State Institutions; and 66 males and 29 females were handed over to
the care of Local Authorities on discharge or from the Courts. During the year,
67 reports were received of the reception of feeble-minded prisoners not coming
within the scope of the Lunacy or Mental Deficiency Acts. In addition to the
above, 1,348 males and 390 females were remanded to prison for mental observation
and report.

During the year 22 males and 6 females were certified under Section 1 of the
Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, and orders were made by the Secretary of State,
under Section 9 of the Act, in the case of 6 males and 3 females for removal to
Institutions for mental defectives.

The Report refers to the difficulty of securing the transference of Mentally
Defective inmates of Borstal Institutions, with the result that some have to be
retained for many months after they have been certified. To mitigate the inconvenience occasioned by this state of things it has been decided to collect such
certified cases in one Borstal Institution where they can be segregated from the
normal inmates and given a special regime. This however is recognised as being
an expedient only and its enforced adoption is regarded as indicating "a grave
departure from the spirit actuating the advocates of legislative control of defectives and indeed from that of the Mental Deficiency Act itself."

The Commissioners moreover, it is interesting to note, take the view that
' 'even the provision of adequate accommodation would not remove the problem,
for as long as the important operative sections of the Act remain permissive, and
not obligatory, so long will these cases remain for considerable periods in prison."
Copies of the Report (C.M. 1523) may be obtained from H.M. Stationery
Office, Imperial House, Kingsway, W.C.,Price 9d. net .

A Mental Deficiency Act for Tasmania.
-----------------------------------The Tasmanian Legislature has recently passed a Mental Deficiency Act in
connection with the administration of which a Psychological Clinic is being set up
in Hobart.

The Act is based upon our own Act, though its procedure is, of course, greatly
simplified. It is interesting to note too that it accords legal recognition to the
Psychologist who may give one of the two certificates necessary for certification
provided that the other is given by a medical man.

Another point of divergence from the English Act is the provision by which
defective children leaving ordinary schools at fourteen may be notified to the
"Mental Deficiency Board" as well as those leaving Special Schools at sixteen;
head teachers of private schools, too, are empowered to report direct to the Board
defective children who appear to be "ineducable."

A Tasmanian correspondent, writing to us about the Act, states that the first
task to be undertaken in connection with it is the making of a "survey of the
schools for the purpose of combing out the defectives and setting up Special Schools
and Classes." It is intended too, he says "to make a special feature of 'supervision,' and the Board is charged with the responsibility of providing supervision
for all defectives who leave the schools at sixteen years, and who are not committed to an institution for the feeble-minded.

It will be interesting to hear at a later date how the administration of the
Act is progressing.

London Special Schools Sports Association.

We have pleasure in drawing attention to the following report of an interesting
development of London Special School work, kindly sent to us by the Hon. Secretary
of the Association:?

The possibility of holding sports meetings and swimming galas for Special
School boys has often been discussed. Everybody has felt that the boys would
benefit by taking part in such competitions and in May last a meeting was held at
which all the London Elder Boys (M .D .)Schools were represented, and an Association with Sir Harry Stephen (L.C.C.) as President, Mr. A. H. Hill (L.C.C.
Inspector of Special Schools) as Chairman, and Mr. L. C. Beber (of Edward
Street E.B. School, Deptford) as Hon. Secretary, was formed forthwith.

The intention was to hold only a swimming gala during 1921, but, owing
to the kindness of Miss K. Gallwey, the ground of the Barnsbury Girls' Club
was placed at the disposal of the Committee for a sports meeting.

This was held on Friday, July 8th, the ground arrangements being in the
able care of Mr. W. H. Fletcher (Cloudesley E.B. School) and his enthusiastic
staff. The weather left nothing to be desired and over four hundred and fifty
entrants keenly contested the events, some fine performances being given.
Our visitors were impressed by the splendid sportsmanship displayed; this was
also shown admirably when at the conclusion of the events the President presented
the challenge cup to St. Hubert's School and the prizes to the winners, for the
recipients were most heartily cheered by their less fortunate fellows, and the
officials are to be congratulated upon a most successful meeting.

The swimming gala was held at St. Bride's Swimming Baths on Wednesday,
September 28th, and again a good programme was presented and carried out
most successfully. The swimming was of a very high order, all the events being
closely contested, the same sportsmanlike spirit that animated the previous
contests again being shown. The challenge cup (presented by Mr. A. H. Hill)
was won by Harmood Street School, whose captain received it from the Hon.
Neville S. Lytton, who had kindly attended to present the medals to the winners.
Miss Stone, a visitor and friend of Special Schools, was so impressed by the good
feeling of the boys that she immediately offered a further trophy for competition
in future years.

The Association, thus well started, is now seeking to enlarge its sphere of
usefulness and a sub-committee is at work drawing up a scheme to enable the
Junior (M.D.) Schools to participate in the sports in 1922.
It will be of general interest to learn that Henry Stockton, a pupil at Edward
Street E.B. School, has been awarded the Vellum Certificate of the Royal Humane
Society for gallantly saving the life of a boy from drowning in the River Thames
in June last.

Society of the Crown of our Lord.
-------------------------------We have been asked to state that the Society of the Crown of our Lord?
which has tried to help mental invalids of all classes since 1895?has recently
decided to sever its connection with the little religious community (previously a
part of it) whose scheme for a sanatorium for mentally defective girls we reported
in our last issue. The community in question is changing its name in order to
avoid confusion with the parent society.
