Notes and News
===============

Conference on Mental Deficiency.
---------------------------------

The Conference of the C .A .M .W. of which provisional notice was given in our
last issue, will be held at the Caxtcn Hall, Westminster, on Wednesday and Thurs-
day, July 26th and 27th. The first day will be devoted to the discussion of
"Mental Deficiency in Relation to Crime" when?with Sir Leslie Scott, the
Solicitor General, in the Chair?Sir Bryan Donkin, Member of Prisons Board
and late H.M. Commissioner of Prisons, Dr. Norwood East, Medical Officer
of H.M. Prison, Brixton, Stuart Deaeon, Esq., Stipendiary Magistrate of
Liverpool, and Mrs. Patrick Green, J.P., Colchester, will giye papers, the pro-
ceedings being closed by an address from the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Atkin.
The second day?when the President of the Board of Education has consented
to give an opening address?Dr. Brackenbury, Chairman ot the Education Com-
mittee of the C.A.M.W., will submit a paper on "Economic Difficulties which
Prohibit the Development of Special Schools?some Alternative Methods of
Education for certain grades of Mentally Defective Children" to be followed
by discussion opened by Spurley Hey, Esq., Director of Education,Manchester.

Lt-Col. Alderman W. E. Raley, President of the Association of Education
Committees will be in the chair. In the afternoon Mrs. Anderson, Case Secre-
tary, C.A.M.W., will speak on "Occupation Centres" and there will be short
addresses on the work of their own Centres by Miss Elfrida Rathbone (London),
Miss I. M. Brayn (Portsmouth), and Mrs. J. Cooke-Hurle (Somerset). The
second part of the afternoon will be devoted to a discussion on "Working
Hostels and other Non-Institutional Methods of Dealing with Defectives" to be
opened with a paper by Miss Ruth Darwin, Commissioner of the Board of
Control.

Tickets, price 2/6 each, can be obtained from the offices of the C.A.M.W., 24,
Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.

The Question of Sterilisation.
------------------------------

A series of articles has recently appeared in The Morning Post under the
title "The Purity of our Race" emphasising the need of drastic action,?notably
the adoption of a policy of sterilisation,?in connection with the mentally defec-
tive, and suggesting that the Government should be urged to pass the necessary
legislation for putting such policy into effect.

Opinions from leading experts which have been solicited reveal a marked
divergence of opinion the balance of which is by no means on the pro-sterilisation
side. In fact, unqualified support only comes from one medical man, Sir Archdall
Reed, and one layman, Mr. Harold Cox, both of whom consider a policy cf steri-
lisation to be the alternative to progressive racial degeneration, though the latter
would not have it performed in any case without the consent of the patient, or of
his parent or guardian! Dr. Tredgold approves of it only to a strictly
limited extent by taking the view that whilst "sterilisation would be a perfectly
justifiable and advisable procedure in particular cases of defect, it cannot dc away
with the necessity for segregation and institutional care in a large proportion of
cases, and there are reasons why its compulsory application to all defectives is
not advisable"; and Sir Bryan Donkin states that he considers that ''on the whole
the present knowledge regarding the procreation of mental defectives by mentally
defective parents (one or both of them) is sufficient to justify the sanction of the
proposed operation under precautionary regulations."

Sir Courtauld Thomson, Chairman of the recently formed Mental Hygiene
Committee is opposed to sterilisation in any shape or form, and Sir Leslie Scott,
the Solicitor General and Chairman of the C.A.M.W., writes as follows:?"My
own view is a strong one, that the subject needs much more investigation before
the surgical remedy can properly be brought forward as a political proposal in
this country. A11 sorts of issues are indirectly involved. We do not know enough
about mental deficiency either in its medical or its social aspects to justify a
reasoned crusade in favour of artificial sterilisation. The taint is infinitely varied
in degree. Where draw the line? The truth is that if those interested in the
question of the mental health cf our population were to take upon their shoulders
the burden of advocating compulsory sterilisation they would find themselves
plunged in a bitter controversy, with their power for good greatly curtailed, and
throw away a large part of the progress they have achieved in the education of
public opinion up to date."

The Council of the C.A.M.W., whilst fully aware of the racial dangers in-
herent in any increase in the number of defectives, shares Sir Leslie Scott's view
as to the necessity for further investigation, and it has accordingly referred the
matter to the Medical Committee to report fully to the Association.

Formation of a Scottish Association of Care Committees.
--------------------------------------------------------

The following account of this important development of Mental Deficiency work
in Scotland has been sent to us by Mr. W. W. McKechnie, Chief Inspector of Schools,
Scottish Education Department, to whose untiring efforts, together with those of the
Paisley After-Care Committee, it is largely indebted for its inception:

On Saturday, June 17th, a meeting was held in the Technical College,
Glasgow, to consider the desirability of forming a Scottish Association for the
Care of the Mentally Defective. Sir H. Arthur Rose, Chairman of the Scottish
Board of Control presided and the meeting was largely attended by Representa -
tives of Local Authorities and by others interested in the problem ol mental
defect. The Chairman read very cordial letters commending the object of the
Meeting from Mr. Munro, the Secretary of State for Scotland and Sir Leslie Scott,
the Solicitor General for England, and President of the C.A.M.W. Sir Leslie
had very kindly undertaken to deliver an Address but was unfortunately detained
in London by important Government Business. His address, which was read in
his absence bv Mr. McKechnie, H.M.I.S., made a deep impression. Then Mrs.

Fern, the Chairman of the Paisley After-Care Committee which originated the
movement showed briefly how clamant is the need in Scotland for better provision
for the mentally defective.

In the discussion which followed, some of the Representatives of Parish
Councils advocated delay in order that the Councils might have time to con-
sider Sir Leslie Scott's paper and the important problem it raised, but it was
decided by a very large majority that a National Association should be
formed at once. An influential Committee was appointed to launch the Associa-
tion which it is reasonable to hope will soon be in active operation. The need
for it is great; it will have difficulties to overcome, but it has made an auspicious
start and promises to fill a most important role in the national life of Scotland.
We extend hearty greetings to our sister Association and wish it a long career
of usef ulness.

Training of Teachers for the Mentally Defective. New Scottish Scheme.
For some years Scottish students have taken advantage of the Short Courses
of training provided in England by the C.A.M.W. and in Edinburgh by the
National Committee for the Training of Teachers, but, as a result of the efforts of
this latter body, they will in future be able to secure a training lor the work that
is really "adequate and scientific." The new Course which is being planned
by the Committee will extend over a year and will be held in Glasgow with the
co-operation of the Local Education Authority, who will not only supply the
necessary facilities for school practice, but has agreed to utilise the services of
the expert psychologist who is to be appointed in connection with the Schcme.
The Course is mainly intended for teachers actually in the employ of Local
Education Authorities who have completed two years' probationary service in a
Primary School, and who show special aptitude for work with defectives. The
Committee will be prepared to remit the fees of such students if nominated by
their Authorities, where good cause is shown, and also to consider applications
for limited maintenance grants during the Course. They express the hope, how-
ever, that Authorities will consider the possibility of allowing their nominated
students half-pay during the period of training and in this way pension rights will
not be lost.

A period of three months at the end of the Course is to be devoted to continu-
ous work in a Special School or Class, and as far as possible it will be arranged for
students to carry this out in a school belonging to their nominating Authority
so that the period of absence from duty will be lessened.

The detailed prospectus of the Course is not yet published but Education
Authorities throughout Scotland have been circularised and applications from
intending students have been invited.

We feel that the institution of such a scheme is a matter of congratulation for
all interested in the education of defectives and as we shall continue to welcome to
our own Short Courses Scottish teachers who are unable to take the longer and
more adequate training, we venture to hope that conversely English teachers who
can afford a year's course will be allowed to go to Glasgow.

Enquiries about, the new Course should be addressed to:?James Malloch,
Esq., National Committee for the Training of Teachers, 8, Charlotte Square,
Edinburgh.

New Local Associations.
------------------------

At the initiative of the Canterbury Women's Diocesan Council, and with the
help of an Organiser from the C.A.M.W., a Voluntary Association is now in pro-
cess of being formed in Kent.

The area of its activities will be at first confined to the Canterbury Diocese,
but it is hoped that later on it may be extended to cover the whole of the adminis-
trative county.

Correspondence should be addressed at present to Mrs. Gardner, 14, The
Precincts, Canterbury.

We are glad also to record the formation at Birkenhead of a Voluntary Asso-
ciation which has been formed with the primary object of undertaking the After-
Care of children leaving the Special School other than those notified to the Local
Authority under Section 2 (2) (b).

Correspondence should be addressed to Miss Barker, Special School, Grange
Road, Birkenhead.

New Occupation Centres.
-------------------------

The number of Occupation Centres and Handicraft Classes continues to
increase?Sheffield, Kingston-on-Thames, Woking, Croydon and Manchester
being the latest additions to the list. The first four have succeeded in carrying on
with the help of voluntary workers alone, but Manchester has a paid teacher,
this being made possible by the untiring efforts of the Secretary of the South -
East Lancashire Association who, through the organisation of entertainments,
etc., has raised a fund sufficient to meet the expenses of the Centre for, at any rate,
the immediate future.

The Centres at Sheffield, Woking and Kingston are chiefly for high-grade or
ex-Special School cases: those at Croydon and Manchester are intended primarily
for excluded imbecile children.

Essex Voluntary Association: Meeting at Royal Eastern Counties Institu-
tion.

On May 25th, the Essex Voluntary Association held a very successful meeting
at the Royal Eastern Counties Institution, Colchester, when addresses were given
by Dame Catharine Hunt, Miss Chisenhale Marsh (Chairman of Association), Dr.
Douglas Turner (Medical Superintendent of the Institution) and Mr. Tabor, the
Chairman of the County Medical Deficiency Committee.

Miss Chisenhale Marsh, dealing with the work of the Association, referred
to the importance of occupation for defectives,?as ' 'the best way to make them
safe and happy was to make them useful;" Dr. Turner emphasised the wide
scope of the Institution in which they met, successfully catering as it did for
defectives of all grades and of all ages, and stated that in his opinion a large
Institution was not only more economical than a small one, but able to provide a
brighter life for its patients. Thus dances and wliist-drives were at Colchester
common events, and last year they had fifty football matches.

After the meeting?through the kindness of Dr. Turner?the visitors made a
tour of the workshops, and a number of children under the direction of Mr. Harris,
the Head Master, gave an admirable performance of singing, dancing, etc.
while the band of the Institution played selections.

Reformatory School for Abnormal Girls.
---------------------------------------

A new departure in Girls' Reformatory Schools is just being inaugurated at
Inval, Haslemere. Here twenty girls who have proved physically or mentally
unfit for the ordinary curriculum of the Reformatory School are to be received for
individual care and specialised training. Cases of adolescent instability and
Cental retardation are specially contemplated. The training scheme is to be
very varied, including gardening, spinning and weaving, besides other handi-
crafts, and every effort will be made to ascertain each girl's best line ot approach.
The Warden is Miss Pierce, who will gladly answer any enquiries.

We hope to give a further report of this interesting venture in a later issue.
Holiday Camps for Special School Children.

In spite of the inroads of the "economy campaign" Special School children
in at least two favoured districts are going to the country this year, as they did
last and we should like to record these ventures, one initiated by voluntary the
other by official effort:?

The Lilian Greg Centre (London) has been able to arrange very successful
camps (each lasting a fortnight) for three batches of Special School children,
?Senior Boys, Junior Boys, and Girls, respectively, a total of 89 in all.
The first batch went to the Shaftesbury Society's Camp at Whitstable in
charge of teachers in the L.C.C.'s service who were lent for the occasion:
the other two fortnights were spent in the Epping Forest Shaftesbury Camp,
and for the staffing of these the Lilian Greg Centre was responsible although
in each case the Council lent one teacher to assist. The cost of the holidays
was borne by voluntary funds raised for the purpose and augmented by con-
tributions from the Children's Country Holiday Fund: in as many cases as
possible contributions were also obtained from the parents.

How much work experiments of this sort entail, only those who have
taken part in them can fully realise, but the effort is small compared with the
great joy that they are the means of giving?a joy which it is no sentimental
banality in the case of these children, the limitations of whose environment are
so great, to call ' 'new life.''

The official venture referred to above is that of the Birmingham Education
Committee who have again rented a house at Barmouth to serve as a Summer
School" for the Special School children of the city during the summer months:
Groups of 24 children are being sent fortnightly,?from the Schools for
the Deaf, the Physically Defective, and the Mentally Defective at an
estimated total expenditure of ?510, ?75 of which is expected to be recovered
from the parents.

The staff of the School consists of a House Mother and a Cook, and two
teachers accompany each batch of children, or when Physically Defective
Children are present, a Teacher and a Nurse.

The Time Table is elastic, and though certain fixed time are prescribed
for mental work, handwork, and physical exercises, the school routine is
varied by singing and organised games on the beach, bathing, and excursions
to places of interest.

We feel that this venture is such an important and interesting one that for the
benefit of those of our readers who have influence with Education Authorities, we
quote in full the opinion of the Birmingham Special Schools Sub-Committee as
to the value of the Summer School held last year?an opinion which is not likely
to be reversed when the time comes to report on this year's school:?

"The School greatly improved the children in many ways. They
became more alert, happier, more anxious to help and to do their day's work;
their health improved: new standards of personal cleanliness have been set
up: and in some cases both conduct and regularity of attendance have also
noticeably improved since tie visit to the School. The Sub-Committee are
more than ever impressed by the incalculable benefits to the children, and feel
that the establishment of the Summer School has had a most valuable and
far-reaching effect not only on the children who attended there, but on their
parents, and indirectly on the children who are attending the Special Schools
generally."

London Special School Boys' Gallantry.
---------------------------------------

Some of our readers may remember that in our January issue we printed a
report of the London Special Schools Sports Association at the end of which was
recorded the awarding of the Vellum Certificate of the Royal Humane Society to a
pupil of the Edward Street Special School, Deptford, who saved a boy from
drowning in the Thames.

The Head Master of the school now informs us that this same boy, who is now
sixteen, has recently saved another life under similar circumstances, and that this
makes the fifth rescue from drowning which he has effected. The Thames Police
Patrol have sent his name to the Humane Society for their further recognition of
his bravery.

The name of another pupil of Edward Street School has also been sent up who,
though only "a slim little chap of twelve" and unable to swim, waded into the
river up to his neck on Empire Day at Greenwich and so saved a child from
drowning.

We feel sure that our readers will want to join with us in sending their con-
gratulations both to the young heroes themselves and to the school which shares in
their prowess.

Such incidents should make those who condemn the education of feeble-
minded children as a useless extravagance, think again.
