A New Graded Scheme of Needlecraft for M.D. Institutions
=========================================================

The Course of Lessons in Needlecraft for M.D. children, given to Special School
Teachers who attended the C .A .M .W. Short Course held recently in London, forms
the basis of a very interesting and practical sewing scheme iust issued by the EduCraft Association, and E .N .A. Schoo 1 of Needlecraft of London.

The Scheme is worthy the study of all Special School Teachers. It aims in
its earliest stages at developing in the M.D. child the ability to sew correctly.
The lessons start at the very bottom of the scale and proceed, by easy and attractive stages aided by some very simple apparatus, to develop not only the facility
in clumsy fingers to make the right kind of stitches, but also to impart that degree
of love and understanding of the task which must precede any permanent educational results.

The lessons are primarily concerned however in bringing the M.D. child to the
point where the normal seven year old child starts, that is to say to the point where
the making ot simple, attractive household articles with ordinary needles, threads,
and fabrics is possible. The lessons then proceed along ordinary lines to the
making of more advanced articles, garments, etc., always of course by carefully
graded steps.

The "Universal Line Alphabet.
-------------------------------
The authors of the lessons show that all instruction in writing, drawing,
geometry, or sewing proceed from the basis of simple straight or curved lines.
The sewing lesson is cor-related with the first three subjects, as well as with simple
cutting out. The straight lines, circles, half-circles, loops, etc.. are formed into
simple familiar objects, Capitals and Borders. These are shown on a series of
very suggestive illustrated sheets.

New Needlecraft Stitchery.
--------------------------
No minute stitches sewn in self-colour are used in the Scheme. This method
of sewing is held to have been largely responsible in the past for the eye and nerve
strain so prevalent among school children. Tiny stitches are moreover deadening
to the imagination. The new stitches are called "pattern stitches" (the straight
lines, in their various combinations, form the basis of these stitches). The
larger stitches are sewn in colours that blend with the background material. The
method provides a channel of self-expression to the little sewer, in a way not
possible with the older method. The sewing lesson becomes a lesson in Art, in
the blending of beautiful shades in threads and cloth, and the invention of ever
new forms of stitches. The handling of the colours opens the door to beauty, and
sets free the imagination. For this reason Schools and Colleges everywhere are
adopting New Needlecraft methods of sewing, especially in the younger classes.
First Sewing Apparatus.

A simple mat, made of firm but pliable material, with edges turned over to
ensure it lying flat in working, is used for first sewing exercises.
Simple upright, horizontal and sloping lines are worked upon this with a
large wooden needle and thick, bright coloured threads. The Mat is bored with
large holes and the nature of the material allows of the needle passing in and out
from the front.

From this Mat the child passes to a series of interesting sewing exercises upon
Canvas, which approximates more to ordinary sewing fabric, but which still provides the necessary degree of guidance and measurement for fingers lacking skill
and control. Needle and threads become smaller in these lessons. The simple
but beautiful designs in the coloured thread, which are sewn upon the Canvas
Plaques, are first drawn before being worked on the fabric. A series of Canvas
Mats are the next specimens made. These embody lessons in elementary construction : tacking, hemming, and cross stitches are employed. These simple and
easily made specimens make quite charming and decorative little table or sideboard mats. Indeed throughout the whole course, with the exception of the very
first exercises, the authors have steadfastly kept in mind that every article made
shall have a definite purpose and use in the child mind, that it should be something which the child can not only experience the joy of making, but which can
find some place, however simple, in its own home.

Picture Building and Applique Work.
------------------------------------
One section of the lessons deals with the reproduction upon cloth of designs
shown on the Illustrated Sheets, and other simple floral, geometric, animal, and
bird designs. The method is made simple enough for undeveloped fingers to
manipulate. Afterwards the designs are cut out and applied to cushion and chair
covers, table-centres, tea cosies, etc. These exercises are preceded by tracing,
colouring, and cutting out simple designs of cats, dogs, sheep, chickens, houses,
etc., in stiff paper,and sewing or pasteing them upon sheets of paper or cloth, in
the form of pictures.

When the power to make correctly the first little specimens, mats, runners,
needlecase, bookmark, etc. from ordinary sewing fabrics, has been won, the child
passes naturally to more advanced articles of dress and of household use.
Both the needlework processes and the blending of the various shades in thread
and material advance in accordance with developing brain and hands, but in every
lesson there is present the same irresistible appeal of beauty and usefulness that
cannot fail to win the interest of any sewer, whatever the age or mental capacity.
The more advanced specimens include such articles as Baby Feeder, French
Pinafore, Girl's Overall Frock, decorated Nightdress Case, Table Centre, Handkerchief Cases, etc.

Teachers May Inspect the Scheme.
--------------------------------
The Edu-Craft Association have arranged to send the entire set of lesson
specimens, with a full explanatory pamphlet (which need not be returned) to any
School or Teacher desiring to study the scheme, for a fee of os., plus Is. postage.
The specimens are sewn in beautiful colours, and each of the various exercises can
be copied, and so introduced into School, without further charge.
Inspection of the lesson specimens is a delightful educational experience, and
the offer made by the Association is a generous and practical one. lo have the
whole scheme of lessons placed before one, with each process worked out in exact
detail, is the next best thing to taking a personal course of instruction, and lacks
some of the disadvantages attaching to the latter course. I hope the greatest
possible advantage will be taken of the opportunity offered. The Secretary s
address is 807, Evelyn Street, Deptford, S.E.

F. Glasier Foster.
------------------We commend the above scheme to the notice of all who are concerned with the
occupation and training of defectives, as they will find, we think, that it supplies a
need which has been long felt. Ed .
