Suggestion and Mental Analysis
================================

 :Type: Reviews.
:Author: William Brown, M.A., M.D., Oxon.,
D.Sc., M.R.C.P., Lond. Pp.165. University of London Press, Ltd., 1922.
3s. 6d. net.

The author of this little book states in his
preface that its central object is "to give an
elementary and non-technical account of the
relation between two distinct and, in the main,
mutually exclusive forms of theory and practice in the field of psychotherapy, viz.: suggestion and auto-suggestion on the one hand and
mental analysis (including the special Freudian system of psycho-analysis) on the other"
with a view to harmonizing these two modes
of thought. This is perhaps an unfortunate
introduction for, apart from two pages towards
the end of the book which purport to deal with
this question, no attempt is made to discuss
this side of the problem.

The author gives a good, but a little too
brief, exposition of Freud's theory, which in
the main he accepts; he cannot accept the
doctrine of the Oedipus complex, nor the
general theory of infantile sexuality as being
of universal validity; he advances an alternative theory of dreams for "neither repression
in the Freudian sense nor the action of unconscious wishes is essential to the production of
the dream." He dogmatically asserts that
sleep is an instinct ' 'which has survival value
and has been developed in the course of evolution," and he suggests that the dream is a
sort of intermediary form of consciousness
which intervenes and makes the impulses
innocuous so that sleep persists?a theory
which is difficult to distinguish from Freud's
without a more precise definition of the terminology.

The most interesting part of the book is
that which deals with hypnosis, though parts
of this discussion appear to be too advanced
for the general reader. Most psychologists
would agree with the author when he holds
that hypnosis is not a good thing for the individual , and that the general effect of repeated
hypnosis is definitely bad, but that treatment
by hypnosis is justifiable as a means of recovering memories: but it is questionable whether
such a method is justifiable as a means ot
giving an outlet to "bottled up emotion," aS
advocated by the author, even if it be allowed
that emotion can be "bottled up," for many
psychotherapists maintain that this is unnecessary .

When we come to the subject of suggestion it
is almost impossible to understand what the
author means by the term, and moreover we
have to wait until we have read two thirds of
the book before we come to a definition. The
definition accepted is that given by Baudouin
as "the subconscious realization of an idea,
a definition which leaves us in a quandary as
to the meaning of "subconscious." The
author states in the first sentence of the book
' 'one of the most fundamental problems calling
for solution by psychology at the present day
is the nature of the so-called subconscious
and he adds that he is not going to attempt
such a solution. Yet he confidently explains
everything throughout the book in terms of
subconscious and 'dissociation'?another word
which is not explained ?and tells us that the
"subconscious" is that part of the mind which
presides over bodily functions, even over the
cerebral cortex which is supposed to be in the
most intimate relation to conscious mental
activity! Again it is not clear what is meant
by "in normal sleep the subconscious in its
entirety is more easily approachable," and
if the statement referring to treatment?"it iS
also explained to him that should he actually
fall asleep during the hour, it will be normal
sleep, not hypnotic sleep, and that the suggestions will be received all the same" ?is correct, then it would appear that all that is
necessary for the psychotherapist to do is to
give a formula to the relatives and instruct
them to repeat this whilst the patient is
asleep! Further it is stated "whereas Freud
explains suggestion in terms of transference, I
would explain transference (partly at least)
in terms of suggestion"; we are quite unable
to follow the argument on this point, for if
carried to its logical conclusion the love of a
child for the mother would be due to suggestion! The same difficulty as to the meaning
arises on the subject of auto-suggestion, as
evidenced by "it is however much better in
using auto-suggestion to get the state of mind
for a very short time, for a minute or less, and
Uot to attempt to keep this frame of mind for
a longer time," for this "suffices to establish
contact with the sub-conscious and to implant
the idea of the desired end. The subconscious
then goes on to realise the idea at its own leisure .... If you try to prolong the state
for several minutes you run the risk of your
?wn subconscious throwing up an opposite
Suggestion." There is a good criticism of
9?ue's method, on the practical side, in that
*t involves an encouragement and training of
the patient's automatism, which is similar
*u kind to the dissociation of hypnosis and
hysteria, and on the theoretical side in regard
t? the use of the word 'imagination' and the
law of reversed effort; but the ' 'cannot help
foeling some doubt about this law of reversed
e^ort" is a mild criticism for a law which is so
0pp0sed to matters of fact and of psychological
knowledge, that few psychologists would think
*t needed very much demonstration as to its
absurdity.

To write an elementary book on such
?bstruse questions is admittedly a very difficult task, and it is no doubt easier for a critic
t? expose the weaknesses of a book of this kind
than to appraise its worth at its true value,
hut there are two attributes which are essential to the success of such an undertaking, first
that the book shall be easily understood, and
secondly that in it fact shall be clearly differentiated from theory. As judged by these
two tests it would appear that the author has
foiled to accomplish the object, which he set
?ut to achieve.

E. Prideaux.
Juvenile Delinquency. By Henry Herbert
Goddard. Director, Ohio Bureau of
Juvenile Research. London: Kegan,
Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd. Pp.
120. 3s. 6d.

-This book is intended to be of service to
sociologists, psychologists and all who are
interested in one of the most pressing problems
modern society. We cannot, however,
recommend it, because it contains few facts
that will help, and some suggestions which
U^ay mislead. After three years work the
Writer lias recognised the psychopathic child
as distinct from the feeble-minded child. To
diagnose the psychopathic child he relies on
the word-association test, a crude means of
approach to the unconscious mind. He does
not seem to know that the psychopathic child
is a recognised clinical entity, and that some
medical psychologists can pick out such
children in the course of a more ordinary
examination. Perhaps it is the mechanical
methods he employs which have prevented the
writer understanding the problem, and giving
the helpful individual accounts of cases we
have had from Dr Healy and other writers on
delinquency in America and this country.

A feature of the book is elaborate tables,
which must have required much time and
care, but which are little use, because they are
merely facts of a superficial kind. A more
complete and deeper investigation into one or
two would have been work of value. But the
writer is not scientific: he records data from
which he extracts little and then makes the
suggestion that congenital syphilis is the
most important cause of delinquency. He
gives no definite evidence of this, and overlooks the fact that syphilis is not unknown
among non-delinquent juveniles, and is, after
all, only one of the racial poisons, the rest of
which, including alcohol, he ignores.

We do not think the psychopathic child
should be described as having a diseased
mind: but here again there is confusion,
because we are also told that the psychopathic
child has a diseased mind that does not function normally, a different state of affairs. The
writer suggests as a form of psychological
treatment that the delinquent should be
repeatedly told that he has a mind which does
not function properly, and therefore he must
be careful to avoid awkward situations,
because only the normal are equal to them.
Our experience is that the awkward situation
is inevitable, and the way to help is to train
him and teach him how to deal with it.

"English Prisons To-Day": Being the
Report of the Prison System Enquiry
Committee. Edited by Stephen Hobhouse M.A., and A. Fenner Brockway.
Longmans, Green & Co., London, New
York & Bombay, 1922. Pp. 728.
We learn from the Foreword that the Prison
System Enquiry Committee was established in
92 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
January 1919, by the Executive of the Labour
Research Department, but from January,
1921, it has been unconnected with the Labour
Research Department, and has had its own
establishment.

The Report is a description of the English
Prison System as it is to-day, accompanied
by a study of its effects on those subjected
to it. In addition, at the end of the chapters
dealing with the System are tabled the principal defects revealed, while in the last chapter
the broad principles of reform are briefly
indicated. There are also four Appendices,
one of which describes some American experiments, while another deals with the Report
and Recommendations of the Indian Jails
Committee, which was published last year.

The Report is what it purports to be, dealing
in an interesting manner with every aspect of
Prison Life; it is written in a calm and reasonable tone. Certainly some of it is not pleasant
reading, for instance the sections dealing
with the sanitary arrangements, punishment
in Prisons, and the health of prisoners. There
is reason to think, however, that the descriptions are accurate, and the call for reform
urgent. The chief conclusion to which we
are led is that the present system fails as a
rule in one of its chief objects, the reform of
the individual. Its effects are demoralising;
it develops neither character nor capacity,
and often sends the offender out more incompetent and a greater danger to the community
than he was before. It is satisfactory that the
Committee see signs of some reforming zeal
and an attitude receptive to new ideas among
the Prison Commissioners. The publication
of this Report however, makes it incumbent
on them either to show that its observations
and criticisms are inconsistent with facts, or
else to introduce whole-hearted measures of
reform on psychological lines.

It is unfortunate, considering the number
of experts who were consulted on various
matters, that some one, conversant with
mental defect, was not asked to revise Chapter
XVIII, dealing with the mentally deficient.
As it is the chapter is misleading and inaccurate. It begins with statistics which are not
accepted to-day by most workers in mental
defect, because some of them were collected
before the Mental Deficiency Act of 1913 estab'
lished the mentally defective person as ?
definite clinical entity, for diagnosing whicn
there is a fairly definite standard. Further*
the great diminution in the numbers in prison
in recent years, especially of those guilty 0
minor offences, has resulted in there being
fewer mental defectives in prison, while the
fact that many such defectives are now taken
care of in special institutions under the
Mental Deficiency Act, has still further reduced
the number in Prison. Surely no censor with
any knowledge of mental defect would have
passed the statement printed in italics on
page 285 that "approximately two-thirds ox
the mental defectives who are sent to prison
are still legally condemned to remain there.
The truth is a mental defective is not legall)
condemned to remain in prison, but is transferred to an institution for defectives as soon
as he is recognised and the necessary arrangements can be made. The statement must
refer to the mentally unstable, a very different
group not yet graded as a clinical entity, and
who cannot be dealt with in a satisfactory way
till there is a change in the law and special
institutions have been established. The
terms "mental defective" and "weakminded" are used in this chapter without
appreciation of their meaning by a writer
who does not understand insanity either, f?r
the gruesome account on page 286 is clearly a
description of a lunatic and not of a ' 'mentally
deficient person.'' The writer ought to have
enquired whether insanity does not sometimes
suddenly develop in prison without any previous warning, before he denounced in such
scathing terms a magistrate, who it is certain
never saw the prisoner behaving in the dock
as he subsequently behaved in prison. The
same loose use of terms results in a statement
which may be misleading in regard to the
Birmingham Scheme for the Special Examination of persons suspected to be mentally defective, insane, or mentally unstable, and the
treatment of the last group. On page 286
it is said that "at Birmingham the feebleminded are accommodated in a separate
building." The fact is that only the mentally unstable are detained in this building;
the feebleminded as defined by the Mental
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 93
eficier.cy Act, are transferred to an Institul0n for Mental Defectives as soon as the
necessary arrangements can be made.
Respite these inaccuracies the book as a
^hole is sound and reliable; it should be read
y every social "worker, and especially by those
^ho are interested in delinquents.

W. A. Potts, M.D.
Group Tests of Intelligence." By
Philip Boswood Ballard, M.A., D.Litt.
Hodder & Stoughton, Ltd. 6s. net.
252 PPMethods & Experiments in Mental
Tests." By C. A. Richardson, M.A.
(Cantab.) George G. Harrap & Co., Ltd.
3s. 6d. net. 92 pp.
1HE Achievement of Subnormal Children
In Standardized Educational Tests .''
By J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D. Miami
University Bulletin. 97 pp.
These three books, although written with
tfferent aims, touch each other at many
Points, suggesting material for further thought
a*id investigation.

. Within the last few years, the ingenuity of
lritelligence testers has shown itself in the
Publication of series after series of group tests
"~~Otis, Terman, Haggertv, Simplex, Northumberland, National Intelligence and others?
lsplaying marked family resemblances, but
each with special "variations" of greater or
?Ss yalue, which a process of "natural selecj^?n ' will doubtless either foster or eliminate.
r* Ballard in this new book, a worthy successor of his previous book on individual tests,
1Scusses the mental significance of the various
ypes of group test in use, and has himself
urted no less than four sets of tests adapted to
?Ur different ranges of mentality?the lowest
a picture test suited for illiterates and subnormals, and the highest so difficult that even
ie very "superior adult" may be grateful for
he absence of a time limit. Dr Ballard, we
"ink rightly, attaches most importance to
r<~asoning anc^ absurdity tests in the selection
0 super-normals. For the diagnosis of the
subnormal, which is the main interest for
Feaders of this journal, the individual scale
j^ust hold the field: the group test except in
orms devised for illiterates, is in greater part
eyond the capacity of the feeble-minded.
The question naturally arises:?What do all
such tests test ? And if we answer intelligence,
there follows the further question? what is
intelligence? Both Mr. Richardson and Dr.
Ballard attack this problem. Mr. Richardson
appears to hold that intelligence tests are
really-?and not ideally?tests of native intelligence independent of environment and
teaching. Dr Ballard considers that such a
statement can only be maintained "in a broad
and general sense," but that the acquired
knowledge involved in a test is such as a person
of ordinary intelligence cannot avoid acquiring. Both agree that one fundamental evidence of intelligence is the "power to use
knowledge,'' and Mr. Richardson appears also
to find, with Dr Maxwell Garnett, in voluntary attention the very essence of intelligence.
Students of the feebleminded will readily
acquiesce in this finding, though they may
doubt if it completely expresses all that there
is in intelligence. Dr Ballard's discussion
is illuminating, but we are still some way
from what L. P. Jacks calls an "intelligent
definition of intelligence."

Mr. Richardson's book is in larger part the
record of an experiment to determine the value
of both group and individual tests as measures
of educability, this last being judged by test
papers in arithmetic (Dr Ballard's) and an
English composition. He established a sufficiently high correlation in both cases to convince doubters, although it might reasonably
be held that the number of children tested was
too small and the school subjects chosen too
obviously "intelligential" to justify too wide
a conclusion. And. in fact, Dr Wallin whose
pamphlet is a detailed summary of the results
of the application of a series of standardised
tests in reading, spelling and arithmetic to the
children in the Special Schools of St. Louis,
comes to the conclusion that in respect of the
first two subjects the correlations with intelligence, though of fair degree, are not sufficiently high to justify any inference from intelligence status to educational progress in these
subjects. Owing, however, to their differences of method, their results are not strictly
comparable.

Those who delight in the expression of mentality in terms of "mental age" will be interested in the formula worked out by Mr.
Richardson for derivation of mental ages from
group test scores. The formula would require
alteration according to the particular group
tests employed, but the idea is valuable as
giving a means of comparing results of group
and individual tests.

Dr Wallin's results are tabulated in three
ways, by school grades, by Binet Simon ages,
and by diagnosis (Moron, Imbecile, etc.). In
the second case the tabulation is rendered
faulty by the fact that the Binet-Simon age
was in many cases determined two or three
years before the educational tests were given,
yet the results of the latter are credited to the
Binet-Simon age obtained so long before. Dr.
Wallin admits other sources of error e.g. certain low-grade pupils were omitted altogether
from some tests, or only partially tested: some
of the Binet-Simon ages are really Stanford
ages, and not infrequently the numbers tested
were too small. From a strictly statistical
point of view, these errors detract somewhat
from the value of the results.

Not the least interesting feature of his pamphlet is the clinical cases he describes in full,
chiefly of "visual aphasia" or its lesser degree
' 'dyslexia'' and other specific defects. There
is one curious record of a girl who, although a
Mongol and below the intelligence standard
for entry to a Special School, was admitted
and at thirteen years made the best record of
all the pupils in reading.

On the question of school organisation, Dr.
Wallin comes somewhat into conflict with Dr.
Ballard. The latter holds that the "intelligence of the pupils is the primary, but not the
only basis on which schools should be organised" and suggests that there should be three
distinct "streams of promotion" in every
school corresponding to the different levels of
intelligence. Dr Wallin criticizes this position and maintains that a child's stage in
school subjects cannot be neglected and that
allowance must be made for specific abilities
and disabilities, as also for character and
physical factors. Probably Dr Ballard would
admit much of this, but he evinces a faith in
the I.Q. which all may not share. "No
other factor" he declares "tells us so much
about a child as the I.Q." The I.Q. by
itself, in the opinion of many, tells us relatively little about a child, but all can agree that a
school classification based on intelligence
would be superior to the present official classification by chronological age.

Dr Ballard's chapters on the mathematics
of correlations and probable errors will be
valuable to those who lack time or the necessary native capacity to read the longer treatises on the subject.

All three books repay careful study and are
full of suggestion.
H. Herd.
"Condensed Guide for the Stanford Hevision OF THE BlNET-SlMON INTELLIGENCE
Tests .'' By Lewis M. Terman. Harrap
& Co. 3s. 6d.

There has just been issued in England by
Messrs. George G. Harrap a Convenient "con
densed Guide for the Stanford Revision of the
Binet Simon Intelligence Tests" which will
prove very useful to examiners who use this
system. It is well printed and handy in
arrangement and will be found to be a more
rapid guide at the examination than the manual which however it is especially stated by
Professor Terman in the preface it must not
supersede. It is intended as a guide and not
a learner's manual. It seems a pity that it
was not adjusted, as the ordinary record book
has been, for English use and various Americanisms foreign to our children not altered to
suit our language.

Whether it is justifiable to use bad grammar
before a defective?i.e. the superlative when
comparing two things?is a matter perhaps for
the pedant, although the practical examiner
may accept the apologetic explanation given
in the manual (Year IIII (1) and Year V (1) )?
If the necessary test material could have
been inserted in a pocket at the end there would
then have been provided a true vademecum to
this popular revision. Personally the writer
finds the ordinary Binet-Simon tests suffice
for his needs, as he is not yet convinced that
a spurious accuracy, at any rate, in examining
defective children, is not brought about by
the Stanford Revision. The great objection
to all the mental tests at present in vogue is
the implication that the defective does under
stand the words used in putting them forward.
implies the scholastic side more than some
enthisiasts will admit, so that in regard to
prognosis as to manual progress which is primarilY important from the Institutional point
view, performance tests are more likely to
prove useful and is the line on which the
Cental testing of defectives ought to be
advanced. It must be emphasized that the
determination of the mental age by whatever
system arrived at should be only one part of
evidence, and as matters are at present
li?t made the main basis on which certification
?f niental defect stands. We are yet a long
Way from determining the essence of that
Cental will-o'-wisp called "general intelligence," and in the training of the defective
e Psychology of behaviour and its practical
relationship to conduct are the factors that
0r*e desires to be sure about.

W. H. COUPLAND.
The Annual Report of the School Medical
fficer of the Manchester Education Committee recently issued contains a section by
r- H. Herd, Chief Assistant School Medical
. fficer, on "The Diagnosis of Moral Imbecil' to which we should like to draw the
Mention of our readers.*

. Recapitulating the views which he outlined
a previous publication he criticises the text
j??k definition of Moral Imbeciilty as "the
ack of a moral sense "t on the ground both of
* s ambiguity and of the artificial distinction
t etween ' 'mental'' and ' 'moral'' that it tends
0 set up. The only reason for a separate
fk ^0n at a^> he considered, is to emphasise
. e difference in treatment which is called for
111 ^s class of defective, and he goes on to
^ggest therefore that ' 'Morally Defective
ersons" should be defined as "persons who,
early age, display irremediable in. J^ty of character, or inability to control
lr*stinctive impulses to such an extent as to
?0nstitute by their vicious and criminal
ehaviour a danger to others so great that care,
supervision, and control are necessary.''
hi >? introduction of the word "irremedie ' emphasises a point upon which Dr.
Herd lays great stress and of which those who
are practically concerned with the problem
cannot be too often reminded, viz.: that the
diagnosis of Moral Imbecility should never be
made or even considered without exhaustive
proof that the condition is "irremediable."
Modern psychology, he points out, has
revealed the profound influence of repressed
mental conflict in producing abnormalities of
conduct, and the possibility of such an influence being ultimately responsible for apparent
' 'Moral Imbecility'' should never be forgotten.
The more exhaustive the investigations made,
Dr Herd emphatically declares, the greater
will be the hesitation of the certifying officer
in his diagnosis, specially in the case of children. With this increase of psychological
knowledge the question of treatment becomes
of even greater importance, and even if a case
appears to be "irremediable" and is certified
for institution care, such care must be definitely curative on modern lines for the sake
of the individual himself and not merely
segregative for the sake of the community, its
underlying principle being, of course, "the
sublimation of the offending instincts so that
they find an outlet for their energy in useful
and harmless activities."

This pleas for treatment as opposed to mere
detention is one which will find a ready response from all those who think of the problem
of "mental inefficiency" in terms of human
happiness, though how far we are at present
from its practical realisation it is not encouraging to contemplate.

A very useful summary of the various
schools of Psycho Analytic thought, their
points of divergence and their chief exponents,
appeared in "The Lancet" of August 12th and
August 19th, 1922, contributed by Dr J.
Ernest Nicole, Assistant Medical Officer of the
Prestwich Asylum, Lancashire, under the
title "Psycho Analytical Schools, Old and
New."

Those of our readers who have no time for
prolonged study of this immensely important
subject and who are bewildered by the conflicting theories labelled with its name, will
we think find such a concise exposition as is
given in these two articles of considerable
help.

*See also '< The Lancet," 30.9.22.
l922eep"23U^^eS ^enta* Inefficiency," January.
96 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
In the "Journal of Mental Science" for
July, 1922, is an interesting article by Dr.
Hamblin Smith, Medical Officer to H.M.
Prison, Birmingham, on ilThe Medical Examination of Delinquents' in which he describes
the scheme in force in Birmingham and urges'
its extension.

Since the article was written there has
been published by the writer an important
book on the subject under the title "TAe
Psychology of the Criminal," of which a full
review will appear in our next issue.
