The Psychology of Medicine
===========================

:Author: T. W. Mitchel 

1, M .D. Methuen & Co. Ltd.,
London, 6s. net.

Book Reviews. 

This is a pleasantly written book, free from
he objectionable features which have marred
sorrie recent publications on psychology. It
^ay therefore be put without misgiving in
he hands of those "who have had no pro-
essional training in either medicine or psy-
chology5 but who are anxious to keep them-
selves abreast of modern thought in these de-
partments of knowledge." They are the
readers whom the writer primarily had in
view. Those readers however should be told,
hat although the book contains much inter-
fcting and useful information, it is an incom-
plete and somewhat biased guide.

The author makes the mistake of stressing
he therapeutic rather than the psychic side,
and does not seem to have thoroughly assimi-
lated the doctrines of Freud, which form the
chief theme of the book. The theory of
^eterniinism is insufficiently elaborated.
therefore, when he comes to Jung, the funda-
mental difference implied by the Free Will
theory of the Zurich school is not emphasised.
*he other differences between the two chief
Modern schools are dealt with, but some
degree of Freudian fixation leads to a failure,
obviously unintentional, to do full justice to
^Ung. Some Freudian theories are stated as
Iacts; Jung's are never so presented nor do we
think it satisfactory to put Adler and Jung
lr* the same class, and label them "post-
Freudians." Such a term is misleading in
Regard to both, for both are dissociated from
*reud, and being no longer on the same line,
should not be described as "post" any more
than "ante." Besides Jung is more dis-
sociated from Freud than Adler, and his
school seems to have attracted more followers
than that of Adler. What we have said about
the incomplete assimilation of Freudian doc-
trines applies with greater force to Jung's
w?rk; possibly this may be due to the author
n?t knowing where to go for help, because in
the extremely short list of "post-Freudian"
^ritings recommended for further reading we
?? not see the names of either Dr. Constance
?Long or Dr. Maurice Nicoll. Having indi-
cted these short-comings we would again say
that in many ways the book is an attractive
one.

The New Psychology and the Teacher.
By H. Crichton Miller, M.A., M.D.
(Jarrolds, 6s. net.)

Although Dr. Crichton Miller expressly
states that this 'book is intended for one par-
ticular group of readers, and that two similar
volumes for 4'The Parent" and "The
Preacher'' are shortly forthcoming .it is obvious
that the work will be interesting and useful to
a wide field of readers. In so far as his
reach is so much wider than his aim, it has
been difficult to help the teacher to the analy-
tical point of view to any considerable extent.
His views on the importance and aim of
psychology in education are vital and inter-
esting, and will be of considerable value to
the teacher.

The New Psychology offers many points of
difference from the old. Formerly one studied
definite principles, and utilized these in the
preparation of lessons; and noted certain
responses from children and deduced laws of
normal reaction. Psychology was a tool for
the teacher to use in the performance of his
duties. The new psychology appears to be
rather a tool for the teacher's use in strength-
ening his own hand. Dr. Miller depreciates
the idea of the teacher analysing the children
he teaches, or assuming the functions of
psycho-analyst.

To the student, the parent or the thinker in
any sphere of profession this is a book dealing
in a clear and erudite manner with what is
far from being a simple subject. It is illus-
trated by concrete examples from the vast
experiences of the writer and seems to em-
brace not only child life, but life in many
other stages and complexities.

The chapters on the emotional development
of the Boy and of the Girl are strikingly
illuminating, and should be carefully and
thoughtfully read by all parents, particularly
those who have been mystified and disappoin-
ted by the apparently failing affection of their
children.

"Unconscious Motive" is always a fas-
cinating theme, and should be particularly
useful to teachers who will doubtless be able
to supply many examples for themselves even
in the healthy normal children around them.

One notices it frequently as a normal response
to instinct quite apart from any morbid
situation. This work suggests a happy via
media to the teacher who looks with some
dismay on the tenets of those who would
develope the ego in the child without dis-
crimination and without deference to the
claims of the society.

Most teachers will regret that only one
chapter, the last, is devoted to educational
methods and will wish that Dr. Miller had
further explained his ideas on the attainments
of Huxley's purpose of education with regard
to thought and action in the light of the new
psychology.

"An Introduction to Psychology." By
Susan S. Brier ley. Methuen & Co., Ltd.5s.
Mrs. Brier ley's book is to be commended as
an introduction which really is an introduc-
tion, giving the would-be student a bowing
acquaintance with many of the problems
which he will meet in embarking upon the
study of psychology at the present time, and
she wisely warns him at the outset against the
too common confusion between the study of
human nature as it is and as it ought to be,
i.e. between psychology and ethics. The
style is clear and purposely simple and her
brief description of the various schools and
branches of the subject is particularly useful
to the beginner, apt to be bewildered by the
apparently sharp disagreements between
psychologists of the present day. Perhaps
the least satisfactory of these descriptions is
that of social psychology, always a difficult
branch to define, for the simple reason that it
is almost impossible to draw a distinction
between "individual" and "social" psycho-
logy?indeed I am not sure that we shall not
some day adopt a different classification and
study the individual in relation to his environ-
ment according to the degree of consciousness
possessed by that environment.

Her distinction between analysis proper
and the broader conception of human nature
which is the result of analytic work is both
clear and timely. The former is a specialised
method of psychotherapy, the latter a broad
conception of the basis of human behaviour,
a distinction frequently missed by those whose
knowledge of the subject is gathered from
superficial discussions in the press.

The book covers so much ground so well and
clearly that it is perhaps to be regretted that
room was not found for a reference to imita-
tion, suggestion (other than hypnotic) and
sympathy, especially as habit is well and
fully treated. The author seems to make a
definite distinction between instinct and emo-
tion, going so far as to say that it is difficult
to know where one ends and the other begins,
but if emotion is, as it appears to be, inherent
in the instinctive process itself, such a boun-
dary seems hardly allowable. Another point
which seems debatable is her conception of
the relation of the self regarding sentiment to
the ideal. Is it not the minimum or average
rather than the maximum standard of conduct
with which the sentiment is concerned? We
may grieve over an unattained ideal but it is
the sense of inferiority to what we actually
believe ourselves to be, which is so detrimental
to our mental well-being and so productive of
mental abnormalities.

The last part of the book is a sympathetic
account of modern developments in the study
of the unconscious and their bearing on psycho-
therapy. In pointing out the value of
sublimation it might have been noticed that
the substituted activity should bear a definite
relation to the instinct stimulated, a mere
change of object is not sufficient, a point
worthy of notice both in education and in
psychotherapy.

There is no doubt that such a comprehen-
sive and well balanced little book will fill
a very real need and should prove of much
value both to those who contemplate a further
study of the subject and also to those who seek
some slight knowledge of the many questions
involved.

Moral Imbecility.
------------------

We commend the attention of our readers
to two recent contributions to the literature
on this subject.

In a pamphlet entitled "The Element of
Character in Mental Deficiency," reprinted
from "School Hygiene" November, 1921
(Adlard & Son & West Newman, Ltd.), Dr.
Herd. Senior Assistant School Medical Officer
to Manchester Education Committee, dis-
cusses the nature of Moral Imbecility, pro-
testing against the view that it consists in the
lack of a "moral sense." He maintain
father that its essence lies in ' 'the uncontrolled
action of strongly developed or perverted
|nstincts" together with a defective "social
instinct," rather than in an inability to dis-
tinguish right from wrong. He would in fact
So so far as to abolish the term "Moral Im-
becile" altogether, on the ground that it does
not correspond to reality, for the possession
abnormal instincts is only one form of
Cental defect. If, however, a separate defini-
t*on has to be used, Dr. Herd considers that
^?r practical purposes the one given in the
1913 Act would be satisfactory provided that
the words "characterised by" were substi-
tuted for "coupled with," Moral Imbeciles
thus being described as "persons who display
some permanent mental defect characterised
by strong, vicious and criminal propensities,
?n which punishment has had little or no
deterent effect."

Dr. W. Norwood East, Senior Medical
Officer, H.M. Prison, Brixton, has recently
contributed to the "Lancet" a graphic and
detailed account of the career of a typical
floral Imbecile who was at one time under his
Prolonged observation. ("A Case of Moral
Imbecility" "The Lancet", 1921, II., 1052.)
It merits, we think, close attention, not only
for its intrinsic interest, but because it affords
a touchstone by which to test the theories on
the subjcct such as those expounded by Dr.
Herd. The article has been reprinted, but
Unfortunately we understand that the limited
number of copies published is now exhausted.
We should also like to take this opportunity
?f noting that Dr. Tredgold has recapitulated
his views on the nature of Moral Imbecility in
an article contributed to the "Clinical
Journal" of Sept. 28th, 1921.

Mental and Scholastic Tests. Report by
the Education Officer of the L.C.C. sub-
mitting three memoranda by Mr. Cyril
Burt, Psychologist. P. S. King, 21s.
A review of this important book will appear
ln our April number. We regret the postpone-
ment, but considerations of time have ren-
dered it unavoidable.
