The Physical Education of the Mentally Defective Child
=======================================================

:Author: G. Mary Harrison
Late Assistant Lecturer in Physical Training, University-
Co liege, Reading.

J have purposely used the word education in the title of this article rather than
training, as I wish to get away from the prevalent idea that physical education
means nothing but a training of the muscles of the body; the sole aim being
increase of function of the muscular system and all-round physical development.
These two results are wanted but they do not stand alone; and in the case of a
mentally defective child, the mental effects of a thorough system of training can
plainly be seen. As to whether these effects are permanent or merely transitory I
submit no proof, for my own work has not been continuous or even carried on for
any length of time with the same children; but I think that teachers who have
followed certain definite lines and aimed at a tangible improvement in the response
?f the children under their care, will bear witness to the permanence of this im-
provement.

For the purpose of this article I shall deal only with the average mentally
defective child found in a special school or institution; and the methods referred to
a^e those used only with a class or group of children. Individual cases, of special
physical or mental deformity will not be included, as they need individual
attention and cannot come within the limits of this article. Broadly speaking,
the methods can be applied to all types of girls and boys, big or little, weak or
strong, provided that each class or group contains children of more or less the same
level of physique and intelligence; in fact as much uniformity as would be found in
an ordinary elementary school standard.

As in other subjects, one of the most important factors in the success or
failure of the physical education of the mentally defective child is the attitude of
the teacher. If his mind is obsessed by the abnormality of the children he will
fail. He should face the class filled with the conviction that they are just children
who require more than ordinary care; and their subnormality should only be
remembered when preparing the lesson. If he then carefully adjusts his lesson to
the child's needs, remembering the particular difficulties and stumbling blocks of
his own class, and introduces movements to assist or correct these, he can put
their abnormality out of his mind entirely during the actual lesson, and as far as
is possible for a self-conscious grown up, enter into the spirit of play and exhil-
aration with his class. It is impossible to obtain good results with even the
Normal intelligent child if the teacher remains outside the lesson in spirit, and
merely directs affairs from a pinnacle of high authority , and this is doubly so
with the children under discussion. Simplicity should be the keynote. The needs
of the child should first be thought of, and then the means to satisfy those needs.

The question whether a good or indifferent standard of work will be obtained
must be ignored for the time being. That will come later. The more simply and
easily these needs can be satisfied, the more successful the lesson, and the more
appreciable the result.

What are these needs? They will be found to differ very little from the needs
of the normal child in some respects, though generally speaking they are greater
and more pressing. The normal child can usually be trusted to find his own means
of employment especially if left alone, whereas the mentally defective child
requires an external stimulus or suggestion; there is no fund within himself. This
''rousing of the child" can, however, be supplied in some small degree.
Briefly the aims are:?

1. To improve in power, speed and accuracy, the child's response to external
stimuli, and to encourage concentration on the matter in hand.
2. To help the child to express his emotions, and to provide an outlet for
exuberant high spirits and physical energy.
3. To teach the child obedience, and the necessity at times for it to sub-
ordinate its will to that of another.
4. To give strength to the muscles and joints, and to increase the working
capacity and endurance of the body.
5. To give the child the joy and exhilaration experienced when working
vigorously with others.

G. To endeavour to obtain a certain amount of control over the body and the
muscular system, and thus lead on to control of emotions and passions.
Given normal conditions and an enthusiastic teacher, these aims are within
sight. By normal conditions I mean a sufficient floor-space, sufficient time?at
least one lesson of twenty minutes a day, and a moderate amount of apparatus:
bean-bags, balls and ropes. With a sympathetic authority, green fields, un-
limited fresh air, and suitable clothing, better results can be obtained in a shorter
period. No lesson should last more than thirty minutes, and if a certain amount
of time out of each week is allotted to physical work, short periods occurring fre-
quently are the best. The method advocated in the Board of Education syllabus
for "Children under Seven Years" can well be applied here. Two lessons each
day are given, the morning one containing the sterner elements of the work, with
plenty of free activity and games, lasting from fifteen to twenty minutes, and the
afternoon one devoted to singing games, nursery ryhmes, musical games, and the
more recreative side of the work.

It sometimes happens that any response, however slight on the part of the
child, is hailed by the teacher with a glee totally out of proportion to the value of
the response obtained. Appreciation of response should always be tempered in
the mind of the teacher by remembrance of a high standard and the possibilities
of improvement. Otherwise, it may happen that the fullest demand is not made
upon the child's resources, and the latter, realising this even though perhaps un-
consciously , does not put forth his maximum effort. It should always be remem-
bered, that the highest ideal is not too high for anyone, and the striving after
perfection must continue, however far from perfection the result of the effort may
be. It is the amount of effort put forth that matters, far more than the result
achieved. Progression should take the form of increased facility and improved
movements, aesthetically as well as muscularly, rather than the substitution of
more difficult movements. The children should be encouraged to do the things
they know how to do well, better every day, rather than attempt more advanced
exercises and games.

Although it is not first in the list of aims, it is generally acknowledged that
the teacher's first effort should be directed towards increasing the physical powers
?f the body, and materially aiding its efficiency. First the body is warmed; the
blood flows more rapidly; more nourishment is carried to the tissues and waste
Matter more speedilv excreted. There is a general sense of well-being and happi-
ness, a feeling of fitness and a readiness to meet anything; all of which must be
encouraged. If this occurs as often as once a day, the permanent effect of a
general increase in health and well-being will be marked. Ihe child s carriage
will improve, and the movements of the limbs in walking and running will be
freer and easier. A beginning is made to rid the child of the feeling oi clumsiness
and awkwardness which is so hampering and so depressing. The clumsy and
awkward bearing of the mentally defective child often marks him clearly from his
fellows, and any improvement in this is a decided step forward.

The mental results are not so easily seen; also the possibilities suggested open
UP a large field of conjecture and doubt. It is impossible to ascribe any definite
improvement to physical education alone, and it would be decidedly unfair to the
other work, as in a properly regulated scheme all patrs work together as a complete
whole, and none can claim priority. I do not think however, that I claim too
much when I say that the feeling of well-being and joyousness produced by a
successful lesson seems to liberate emotions and impulses which are otherwise
blocked. Few things excite the child as much as a jolly, brisk and well directed
Physical activity lesson. Self-expression in its usual form seems unknown to these
children; they do not go out to seek means of putting forth the motive power
within them, at any rate in the recognised channels, and they require to be shown
aud taught these methods. On the other hand, the smallest increase in the feeling
of happiness is easily noted, as they are as a rule free from self-consciousness and
do not fear to show their emotions; and largely because they do not discover for
themselves physical channels through which to dissipate them, these same
emotions appear more uncontrollable when aroused. This can be utilised in
Physical work, by helping the child to feel, to realise his feelings, and to desire
to express them in a way which gives pleasure to himself, lo take an example:

the exhilaration felt after a succession of jumps in the air is politely restrained by
the child who has been repressed or wrongly trained; it is freely expressed by the
normal natural child; and is almost exaggerated by the mentally defective child.

A new avenue is discovered for the physical energy, and here the teacher can step
in to direct it. The direction of any impulse, however small, marks a step for-
ward. It is something which recalls pleasurable feelings whenever it is remem-
bered , so the desire to return to it is sharpened; a definite impulse is controlled and
directed and so much is gained.

To come to practical details; what is the best kind of physical work? I have
already said it must be simple, and I cannot emphasise this too strongly. Its
appeal must be direct, and all work which demands a complex mental effort with
only a slight obvious result must be avoided. Get the maximum movement for
the minimum mental effort at first; later improve the same movement, beautify
it, show the class how well it can be done and leave it to copy it. Until the move-
ment itself shows definite improvement do not add any extra frills. Let us take
the movement of jumping. (I choose this again for its suitability as an example
as it gives exhilaration, shows at once the amount of effort being put forth by each
child, and requires strong muscular work. A jump successfully tackled gives a
feeling of accomplishment to the child, something to show for his labour). After
the first clumsy efforts, when the whole attention is concentrated on lifting the
body weight off the ground at all, the height can be increased, and gradually the
whole jump improved, until it is light, free, effortless, and finally controlled, as
far as the class can understand these qualities. The important thing to remember
is that the maximum effort must be demanded and the highest jump possible made
before the controlling and restraining factors are set in motion to produce a beauti-
ful jump. It is useless to attempt to control a movement if there is no movement
present worth controlling. Encourage the child to jump high, and forget to
speculate whether he will land on the earth the right way up. If he is warned
beforehand that he may land on his head or his hands, he will be obsessed by that
fear to the exclusion of any big effort.

I have already said that the teacher should remember that his class is sub-
normal only when preparing the lesson, and should let this remembrance influence
the choice of type of movement. Big massive movements, movements of throw-
ing and catching where the class is older, movements increasing suppleness of
joints and elasticity of muscle, such as quick bendings and twistings; to pick an
object off the floor; to turn round in a hurry, to catch another; all these should
predominate. After the lesson is prepared and learnt by heart the teacher should
entirely forget their subnormality and identify himself as far as possible with them.
Except in individual cases of weakness or disability, which should be taken
separately, there is little fear of overtiring the class: the fund of energy is almost
inexhaustible. The lesson must flow quickly, easily, with little pause except
literally to take breath when necessary. The maximum effort must be demanded
throughout the whole period. The crisis or highest point should be reached about
three-quarters of the way through, the last quarter being used to soothe and quiet
the class and restore it to its normal state. It should not be left highly exicted,
but should certainly feel better and more alert. The teacher can easily read the
signs. Games of all kinds are invaluable, and the beneficial effects, both physical
and mental, are obvious. Difficult games involving co-ordination of limb and
eye to any great extent should only be introduced gradually after the way has been
carefully prepared. The same holds good here as in movements: it is better to
teach the class to play a simple game well, than to attempt a difficult one and do it
badly. There is little fear of monotony, especially if every time the game is
taken one point is elaborated and improved. Where possible, and this is easily
so with older boys, ball games can be used: first the simple throwing and catching
over a small space, with perhaps one team pitted against another in speed to add
interest, and later over a bigger distance, even throwing at a particular target.
Examples of this are "dodge-ball" where the player must be hit below the knee,
and "ball-touch" in which one player endeavours to hit the others who are run-
ning anywhere in the room.

I should like to say a little on the use of music in physical education. The
methods of use are so diverse that it is difficult to single out any particular one
for criticism. My own experience has been that mentally defective children, espec-
ially boys, were extraordinarily susceptible to the rousing influence of a jolly
skipping or running tune. Generally speaking their sense of rhythm was excel-
lent and their enthusiasm a pleasure to behold. Such music, used for running,
hopping, skipping, and any vigorous movement, has an excellent effect, and is of
great value. So also have the airs of nursery rhymes and simple singing games,
as long as the movements are kept simple and have a direct bearing on the words
and meaning of the rhyme. It is also quite possible and indeed most helpful, to
take a simple tune, say in common time, and made up in the usual phrases of
eight, sixteen, or thirty-two bars, and make a simple combination of running or
skipping steps to fit the rhythm. In its simplest form this can consist of running
m a circle, with hands joined, keeping time to the music. Next a definite number
of steps, say sixteen, can be taken to the right, then turn, and sixteen to the left.
Or a square can be made and a definite number of steps taken to progress from one
corner to the next. These can be done in circles or loose lines, one child leading,
and the others following with hands joined, or in couples. The simpler the tune
the more direct its appeal, hence the greater value in its perfomrance. This use of
music must not be confounded with Eurhythmies, which is a scientific method of
teaching music by movement, and one demanding skilled teachers and apt
pupils. It is intended merely as a relief from or alternative to the ordinary game.
Its usefulness depends chiefly upon the selection of suitable tunes, with no attempt
at interpretation of the composer's possible meaning, and no attempt to build up
new rhythms, or means of expressing them. It has one point only of similarity
with Eurhythmies, namely that the child endeavours to keep time to the music
and to modify or increase his movements to fit it. Its value lies in the necessary
adaptation of muscular effort, and also in the attempt to express the spirited or
restrained nature of the melody, by large and vigorous or small and quiet move-
ments. This is done more or less unconsciously by the child, who responds
directly to the stimulus.

The question of suitable clothing must not be overlooked, and its effect upon
the lesson is obvious. No child, however intelligent, can be expected to move
freely and beautifully if hampered by heavy boots or clogs, and thoroughly un-
hygienic and unsuitable clothing. It is not of course possible to lay down any
definite rules upon this vexed question. Much depends upon the teacher, who
will find that tact, patience, and above all a never-failing good example, will
work wonders. Where circumstances permit and the floor-space is suitable, the
class should work bare-footed. Boys should always remove the collar and coat.
The ideal costume for girls is not yet designed, but a simple one consisting of a
sweater or a jersey in soft material, dark woolly knickers, and a tunic, is practic-
able and always looks well. This should be worn throughout the day, and the
tunic removed for physical work.*

There is a large field open for investigation and pioneer work in physical
education for the mentally defective child, and there is plenty of room for fresh
ideas and experiment. If a fully-trained gymnastic teacher who has also had a
course in psychology and the methods of dealing with these children, were to
devote herself entirely to a definite number of them, and keep a record of the work
done, the result would probably be astounding. Perhaps before very long the
right, one will come along.

This of course can only be a counsel of perfection for ordinary Special School children.
-Ed,
