Managers and their Wives
===========================

:Author: J. M. and R. E. Pahl
Allen Lane, The Penguin Press,
?3.25

Although they take up a cautious
position, as befits detached observers, the authors contrive to make
readers ask themselves why anybody ever stays married to a
manager. They organized a longitudinal study of about 100 men who
attended a business course at
Madingley Hall, Cambridge, but
unlike many sociologists, who have
concentrated on managers in terms
of their careers or their life styles,
the Pahls decided to examine their
wives too. What they found is
somewhat disturbing.

A fair proportion of well-educated,
middle class women declared that
their own plans and preferences
were as nothing beside the demands of their husband's career.
He might be a spiralist - starting off
as a trainee manager in Slough,
transferring to Newcastle for
broader experience, then settling
down behind a director's desk in
Erith. All in the space of a few
years.

Meanwhile, his wife loses friends,
pride in developing her home,
educational opportunities for her
children, and any reasonable
chance of making her own career.
But what does it matter if she
sprouts cabbage leaves, provided
her husband spirals successfully?
Only a few wives are prepared to
jib at the rat race. Most are willing
spectators. It might seem less unfair
if she played a more active part in
helping his business life. But that
is the American way which does
not seem to have crossed the
Atlantic - yet.

Everything is rather drab in the
Pahls' world. This must be partly
due to their approach. They rarely
hint at any particular enjoyment, or
particular hate in their informants'
lives. Their data gathering techniques seem adequate, but their
interpretation, particularly the extended personal interviews, does
not seem to do the material justice.
The Pahls are happier with
straightforward, factual answers,
such as how many wives had young
children at home. They shrink from
interpreting feelings, from determining how many gain pleasure from
being surrounded by children, as
opposed to accepting responsibility
for them. Informants' comments are
presented at face value-sometimes with a suggestion that other
thoughts might underlie them, but
no more.

Some of their intimidating, frontal
attack questions would make most
market researchers cringe, and feel
unadventurous - 'What sort of a
person do you see yourself as?'
But market researchers are more
adventurous at exploring hypotheses about what the data really
means.

The book raises questions about
people and life which deserve to
be looked at more carefully. A
manager's wife has emotions, as
well as shopping lists.

:Author: Mark Lovell
