Whisper
========

:Author: Brian Barritt 
and David Ball

Whisper Promotions, ?1.90
Notes, jottings and writings smuggled out of a British prison have
been fused into this book, or as it is
better described by Timothy Leary;
this 'whispered manuscript'. One of
the authors, Brian Barritt, was
sentenced to 'four years' meditation' for attempting to bring four
pounds of hashish through H.M.
Customs in 1966, and on his release
from prison, with the help of David
Ball, he put the smuggled material
together to form this personal
journal.

It is difficult to attach a label to
this work. It is probably closest to
the writings of Jean Genet, William
Burroughs or Allen Ginsberg but
the similarity is in style not impact.

Events in the book are not limited
to prison but flow backwards in time
to the arrest and an earlier journey
to the East. The time flow cuts
across the past and present in a
stream-of-consciousness manner.
The journey appears to the author
as a pilgrimage, it becomes all that
is free and liberated-a religious
experience of life aided by hashish,
'the black stone of Mecca, enlightened chemical, purified earth'. To
bring back hash is to spread the
Gospel. By contrast, in prison the
author is 'interned in a steel and
concrete womb waiting to be
reborn'. Time there is filled with
carrying aluminium trays up and
down endless stairways. Freedom
was ended by a judge reacting to
his own images of hash -'criminalinsanity-orgy-sex-vomit-doom' - not
the author's reality of its potential
for expanding the mind.

The book is hard driving, uncompromising - the world is seen
completely in black and white. It is
difficult reading, even in small
doses, because it expresses a very
personal reality. This reality will be
incomprehensible to many; it
certainly is not my world view. However, a few of the passages are
moving and show great insight.

Timothy Leary's postscript says this
book is for fellow 'Time Travellers' those who explore inner space. It
certainly is.

Jim Zacune
Available from: Studio D, Floral
Hall Yard, Covent Garden, London,
W.C.2.
