By Dymphna
=========== 

A personal view of the social work scene
The local authority Social Services Departments are
going to get a bad press during the next year or two
This seems quite certain, because of the attitudes and
activities of certain Members of Parliament. There
appears to be quite a vogue nowadays for Members
to open debates, ask questions and make speeches not
so much for their impact on the floor of the House as
for the amount of press coverage they will earn - and
the press always seems ready to oblige. Overready to
oblige,#one feels sometimes; the newspapers seem to
reflect only what goes on in Parliament instead of
disagreeing or tackling the same subjects in different
ways or ever really developing any particular attitude
of their own.

Anyway, there are a large number of MPs who are
already baying away like sonorous bloodhounds about
shortcomings in the social services, and if these bayings have so far been publicised mainly in the social
work journals, nevertheless, a good many have found
their way into the popular dailies. We may be pretty
sure that the press are slowly being brought around
t0 the idea that it is fashionable and profitable to
Publicise gaps, shortfalls, errors of commission and
m?re particularly errors of omission in the Social
Services Departments.

Two questions seem to arise from this. Will the
bad press be deserved? And even if deserved, ought
there to be any publicity at all?

It may be helpful first of all to list the statutory
duties which have poured like a torrent upon the
Apartments; for I cannot remember quite such a
sPate boiling and foaming upon one Department,
unless it happened to the Education Departments in
tlle first decade of this century (and the mass-media
Were not well developed then).

There are: Firstly, the Local Authority (Social
Services) Act, 1970. This was the amalgamating Act,
^ud it is only slowly coming into effect. It was said
*n Parliament that this Act would not cost anything,
ut the costs are already terrific, partly financial the diseconomies of size are already self-evident - and
partly emotional - the pains of disorientation are
acute. Vast amounts of time, money, energy and
emotion are being dissipated in such tasks as devising
common case-histories, common card-indices and
common filing-systems. From the client's point of
view, nothing is performed better now than ir was
before amalgamation.

Secondly, there is the Chronically Sick and
Disabled Persons Act, 1971. This is the one the
parliamentarians really got worked up about. 'What
are the local authorities doing?' they wailed. 'They
need imagination. They need drive. They need publicity. The handicapped must be served!' The local
authorities had no social workers to spare. With the
best will in the world to do something, they had
nothing to do it with.

Thirdly, there is the Children and Young Persons
Act, 1969. Quite apart from its philosophical basis to encourage a radical re-appraisal of the treatment
of delinquent and deviant young persons - it automatically transferred to social workers a large number
of chores previously performed by the police, the
probation officers and the managers of Approved
Schools. A medium-sized authority can reckon this
year to spend an extra ?10,000 in travelling expenses
and lose 2,000 social-worker hours to such jobs as
escorting offenders up and down the country.

Fourthly, there is Section 45 of the Health Services
and Public Health Act, 1968. This empowers local
authorities to develop a fully comprehensive service
for old people - something which has come not a
moment too soon when one considers the vast number
of very frail, very elderly people who now survive in
the community by the barest margin, and the speed
with which that number increases annually. The care
and welfare of the aged is the Himalaya of the social
services.

Fifthly, there is the Nurseries and Child Minders
Regulation Act, 1948 as amended by Section 60 of
the Health Services and Public Health Act, 1968.
This is not a new Act, but the duties the local
authority is obliged to carry out are to be carried out
by social workers rather than Health Department
personnel. What is clear is that the nursery playgroup
movement is expanding phenomenally: registration
of new groups alone, let alone their surveillance and
the encouragement of higher standards, will need
more workers than ever will be transferred from the
Health Department.

Finally, as if all this was not enough, the Government have decided virtually to rescuscitate the Mental
Health Act of 1959; and the red-covered pamphlet,
Better Services for the Mentally Handicapped, with
its Alp-like statistics showing thousands and
thousands of mentally handicapped persons being
transferred from hospital to local authority care, tells
its own story without any lily-gilding by me.

Here are six major pieces of legislation, any one of
which could easily absorb the total resources of a
Department - in money, in time and in manpower;
yet in addition the Departments have many other
services still to develop - for the gipsies, the homeless,
deprived children, families at risk, the deaf, the blind,
the poorly-housed, the emotionally impoverished.
And the social casualties for whom these services
are designed all have their own support groups and
pressure groups. Those who are keen on the welfare
of the blind are already worried about a dilution of
the service. Those who want more help for gipsies
are unlikely to be satisfied by the answer that more
help is going to the chronically sick; and those who
make impassioned pleas for the severely sub-normal
will only become more impassioned when they hear
the vigorous cries of those who want greater provision
for the homeless.

So, in effect, the Social Services Departments are
being pressed to be masters of all trades when in fact
they are jacks of none. Try as they may, they cannot
possibly meet the demands nor satisfy the pressure
groups. Indeed, the more they try the more errors
they will commit: they are already being badgered
into building and opening more homes and centres
before anybody has sat down to work out where the
staff are to come from. Short-staffed, panicky establishments inevitably drift into scandalous situations
where patients are ill-treated and regimes become
ossified.

So a bad press is assured; and I do not think it will
be deserved. In fact, 'deserved' and^ 'undeserved'
seem to be irrelevant words: the Departments have
been given a superhuman task when they are not
manned by superhumans but by earnest, worried,
devoted little officials.

It seems all wrong to me that at this juncture
Members of Parliament should continue to whoop
it up as they are doing. 'The local authorities must
wake up!' they shout. 'We must publish league tables
showing which are the "good" authorities and which
the "bad"! We must prod, we must chivvy, we must
expostulate, we must at all times prevent anybody
from ever settling down!'

This sort of approach is not only extremely unfair
to the local authorities but does positively more harm
than good; because the publicity inevitably creates a
widespread opinion that provided everybody shouts
loud enough, the social services will expand so that
everybody's problem will be taken care of by somebody else. Even people who never thought they had
a problem will look around for one; worse still, those
people who were coping with problems competently
enough will suddenly realise that they ought not to be,
because their local authority is a "bad" one. Instead
of concentrating on caring, they will concentrate on
chivvying. So that really, all these loud shouts about
caring are inevitably creating an uncaring society.

I cannot expect parliamentarians and publicists to
lay off the social services; but I think I have the right
to expect that they will be altogether more sober,
statesmanlike and sympathetic than they have been
so far.
