Power to the Manager
=====================

CliveLoveluck
Hospitals are managed jointly by nurses, doctors and administrators - a
state of affairs which has 'all the hallmarks of compromise that is a dis-
service to all parties involved'. The case for a 'chief executive' for each
hospital - although it would be fiercely opposed - is a strong one.
'A clear assignment of authority and responsibility to
a chief executive officer with requisite training and
skills is not incompatible with sound patient care?
m fact, it can be argued that it is essential to it'.
This is one of the arguments put forward in a
very stimulating contribution by Walter J.
McNerney, president of the Blue Cross Association,
t0 the book 'Problems and progress in medical care'.*
Certainly, his 6 weeks visit to Britain last year has
resulted in some illuminating observations and
highly pertinent questions about the National Health
Service.
I think two of his ideas in particular are important
for everyone concerned about the future of the NHS.
First, the idea of the creation of a 'hospital manager'
and second, the inter-relation of the 'private' to the
Public sectors of the health service'.
The concept of a chief executive for hospitals is
^ost attractive. Though not an original idea, it has
been neglected in the NHS because it challenges the
listing power structure in hospitals. Power cur-
rently rests with the medical profession and is based
uPon knowledge. Unfortunately, the knowledge pos-
sessed by doctors, whilst crucial to the doctor-patient
relationship, is by no means central to the major
Problem of resource allocation. The nursing profes-
Slon is flexing the muscles given it by the Salmon
Report, but is still emotionally crippled by tradi-
t!onal obeisance to the consultant. The third part of
the triad?the administrator?is the least competent.
Administrators, with few exceptions, are turned into
eunuch managers. The profession is emasculated by
a shortage of talent which can be blamed on the
dreadful disparity between salary and potential
responsibility and is reinforced by a closed-shop
Pattern of experience and training typical of a defen-
Slve profession.
* Problems and progress in medical care?essays on cur-
rent research Ed. by Gordon McLachlan.
Published for the Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust
by Oxford University Press, ?1.75.
These remarks may seem intemperate but there
are solid reasons for them based on both experience
and theory and it is rewarding to find these feelings
expressed in American words:
'The triad, in fact, may be symbolic of a decision
not to act with a reasonable dispatch. It has all the
hallmarks of a compromise that is a disservice to all
parties involved'.
Mr. McNerney has put his finger on a crucial
problem in our health service: how do we improve
efficiency at the operational, i.e. hospital level? To
train our senior staff at universities, where the
emphasis rests upon the philosophy of the health
service, will not help very much. To segregate by
sending junior staff to polytechnics and colleges
(where the vast bulk of management training is done)
will oply aggravate the problem. To create some kind
of new administrative superstructure may help in
the long run, but only if it avoids the present arrange-
ments and allows us to 'consider giving the adminis-
trator of a hospital a budget, reasonable guidelines
and then letting him administer'.
The arguments against the hospital manager?in
the sense of a single chief executive?are normally
that hospitals are different, that they are not profit-
oriented, that 'business methods' would destroy the
doctor-patient relationships. There is truth in these
arguments but they are out-weighed by two
opposite questions:
'It is a considered principle in management theory
that change in a large system must be energetically
sought and evaluated . . . different ideas must be
honoured'. McNerney
' . . . seen as a form evolving in relation to its
changing environment, the business firm has been
unsurpassed over the last 50 years in its ability to
effect rapid inventive transformations of itself
without flying apart at the seams . . .'
Donald Schon 'Beyond the stable state'
47
It is by developing the power of 'hospital mana-
gers' that transformations can be achieved. But one
precondition is to 'upgrade the quality of managers
(by) establishing the simple rule that the position
would be paid on a basis equivalent to consultants'.
(McNerney).
The second suggestion that I would select from the
many offered by Mr. McNerney is this:
'The private sector can help fight the forces of
institutionalization through pioneering with new
programmes . . . (and) . . . can provide useful
benchmarks of performance, in terms of quality
and quantity, in terms of modes of diagnosis or
treatment, and in terms of unit lists'.
The idea of developing a new policy toward a
private 'health sector' of the economy as a means of
stimulating the public sector?including innovation
and change?and of providing comparative measures
of performance is particularly interesting. When
taken with the concept of the 'chief executive'?it
gives the possibility of at least using the private sec-
tor as a means of introducing the 'business manager'
to the hospital world. It is, perhaps, no coincidence
that it is in the private sector of the educational
world that businessmen have started to move in as
headmasters.
The advantages of this proposal as an innovating
force must be weighed against the principles on which
the NHS was based: 'free care for all'. It is possible
to argue that the complete withdrawal of all private
health services would force the middle class to
depend upon the NHS to such an extent that the
state system would be forced into making massive
improvements. This is surely a discussion which
should be pursued.
Mr. McNerney's essay is certainly stimulating?it
alone is worth the price of the book. I would recom-
mend everyone connected with the health service to
read the essay and?if they are at all concerned for
the future of the service?to discuss and argue its
points.
For myself, the central point not only for the
essay, but also for the NHS is:
' . . . the interesting question of whether the NHS
could use more money in several places con-
structively without change in the system, in the
light of the shortage of professional and particu-
larly management skills'.
This is the question we should all now consider:
and can, when consultants stop communing with
God, nurses stop talking with the angels, and hospital
secretaries stop talking to themselves.
48
