With the Eyes of a Child
==========================

:Author: A.T Ravenette

Children's art is often fascinating because of its originality, its naivety and
its perception. Psychologists use it to check on a child's development and,
sometimes, to try to find reasons for disturbed behaviour which may
become apparent in drawings but never come out in conversation.
Children's drawings tend to be viewed in either of
two ways. On the one hand, as idle products of
natural artistic ability; on the other, as objects invested with deep psychological significance. This
polarization of views is not restricted to the layman
- often it is also the case among professional workers.

These two books* may do something to justify the
best hopes and the worst fears of people who hold
either point of view. But anyone reading them with a
relatively open mind will be well rewarded by their
presentation of the different ways of interpreting
children's drawings.

Although both books are about children's drawings,
they are different in aims and intentions. Di Leo's
book is concerned with the developmental changes
which become apparent both as children grow older
and under certain conditions of handicap. The second
book deals with the ways in which children depict
their families in drawings. The emphasis in this case
rests on the assumption that children are sensitive to
problems and difficulties within their families and are
able to communicate them (albeit unconsciously)
through their drawings.

Young children and their drawings is in two
Parts: normal development in the first part and
deviance in the second. Di Leo traces the development of children's drawings from the earliest scribblings to the representation of the complete human
figure.

He also shows how the different forms which the
drawings take at different stages of development can
be matched by different styles of depiction produced
in different countries and at different times by adult
agists. For example, the typical stance in Egyptian
friezes is found in the drawings of children who arc
Moving from a 'frontal' to a 'profile' view of the
human figure. He is careful, however, not to argue
that children's development recaptures the historical
development of art.

He makes another interesting contribution to the
study of children's drawings by reproducing pictures
drawn by children during the last century in Italy;
these show that developmental stages which can be
recognized today could also be recognized then. In
other words, there is apparently some universality in
children's representation of the human figure.

Part 2 of the book illustrates some of the ways in
which children's drawings can be used to diagnose
what is wrong with them. The primary emphasis is
on groups which are diagnosed in basically medical
terms, e.g. mental subnormality, cerebral palsy,
cerebral dysfunction and various communication disorders. Disorders of personality are also described
in categories which owe their derivation to a medical
frame of reference.

However, there is always a serious problem when
drawings are used in this way. Although a child with
a recognised disturbance may produce an abnormal
drawing, the same abnormality might be produced
by a child who was not disturbed, either as a phase
of normal development or as a quirk of his representational style.

In this sense, the material in this part of the book
is less convincing, partly because the simple way in
which Di Leo presents his case invests it with more
authority than it perhaps deserves and partly also
because it is not always easy to accept some of the
drawings as more than chance aberrations of a child's
drawing skills.

Kinetic family drawings is more limited in its aims,
but more dramatic in its content. The authors devised
the idea of inviting children to draw their family,
including themselves, with everyone doing something.
The inspiration for this beautifully simple task is
taken from Anaxagoras, the philosopher of Classical
Greece, who defined 'understanding' or 'nous' as
'giving movement, unity and system to what had
previously been a jumble of inert elements'.
Over a number of years the authors have used this
technique with children referred for 'psychological'
or 'family' problems, and the book contains 59 (one
picture, by editorial oversight, is reproduced twice)
examples of children's family drawings.

A very instructive sequence of drawings by one
child appears at the beginning of the book. These
drawings were made in response to different drawing
instructions - draw a person; draw a house, tree and
person; draw a family and draw your family in
action. They show how, with an increasingly limited
'briefing', the child presents more and more information in her drawings which can be used as a basis
for understanding her.


House-tree-person.
------------------
The first drawing tells us a limited amount about
the child - does the pants-type skirt suggest that she
is worried about sex? Is the off-centre blouse pattern
significant? The drawing of the house tells us a little
more but leaves unanswered questions: is the question-mark doorhandle important? Is the balance of
the drawing significant? And the third drawing-the
family - is the criss-crossing on her own portrait
significant? Are the father's eyes important?
It is really in the kinetic (action) drawing that
the girl reveals her feelings most clearly: the isolation
she feels within the family setting, the apparent
reversal of parental roles, the maze of staircases presenting different patterns of communication - or
non-communication. This final example certainly
makes the point very clearly that the drawing of a
family in action has considerable advantages over
drawings made in response to less precise instructions.

Draw a family.
-------------
The text is subdivided according tcVarious themes
which include identification by both boys and girls
with their parents, emotional deprivation, problems
of power within the family and problems in connection with school.

Two rather surprising features have been isolated
by the authors and they appear in pictures representing different sorts of problems. One feature is labelled
the 'ironing board' or 'X' syndrome which appears in
drawings where problems of control of feelings are
important. The other is the 'A' syndrome, which is
associated with problems of achievement in school.
When these symbols are pointed out they are obvious,
but apparently the authors modestly admit that they
were slow in recognizing them at all.

The interpretation of the pictures leans heavily on
a rather broad psychoanalytic theory and, although
the authors quite rightly stress the tentative nature of
their interpretations, there must always be the problem of deciding what is evidence and what is inference
and, in this book, there is too little text to allow the
reader to decide which is which. Perhaps this is an
unfair criticism of a book which sets out to be
illustrative rather than scientific.

The two books, taken together, are very valuable
additions to the literature on children's drawings.
They are interesting in themselves as examples of
child drawing and they suggest ways of understanding children through their art. They will not convince
'tough-minded' scientific psychologists, but they will
enhance the clinical understanding of people who
work with children who have problems. The time has
not yet come for a theoretical framework which fully
does justice to children's expressive acts, but these
books provide another step in that direction.

Young children and their drawings
Joseph H. Di Leo
CONSTABLE, ?6.00
Kinetic family drawings (KFD)
Robert C. Burns and S. Harvard Kaufman
CONSTABLE, ?4.00
W S/STEft sunlit

'Shaded areas below the waist of mother and sister indicate adolescent preoccupation with this area. Alan is
terrified of being left with his rather seductive 11 -year-old sister - he is 1 6. Great attempts at control are seen in
the "X phenomenon" ironing board used by mother with the "X" draw through the shaded area of her skirt - a
constant theme with children attempting to control sexual impulses.'
