First-Class Citizenship
========================

LEN BARTHOLOMEW
A flexible system of care for the mentally handicapped, based on the com-
munity to which they belong, is an essential step towards their true inte-
gration into the mainstream of life. A scheme, devised on this principle, is
in the early stages of implementation in Sheffield.
Over the past few years, the existing patterns of care
for the mentally handicapped have been subjected to
a great deal of criticism. The accommodation pro-
vided has come under close scrutiny and arguments
about demand and resources are open-ended. The
approach for the Sheffield Feasibility Study was to
fully assess the problem, starting from first principles.
serving the Sheffield C B and
Divisions 22 & 25 of W R C.C
1968 population 531.000
1981 projection 560 900
Specialist Hospitals
District General Hospital
In 1969 a multi-disciplinary team of administra-
tors, doctors (psychiatrist and paediatrician), nurses,
social workers and architects from the Department
undertook an analysis of the problems of early identi-
fication, comprehensive assessment and re-assessment,
the provision of training, medical and social services,
and accommodatipn.
It was agreed that the team should consider
simultaneous co-ordinated and comprehensive plan-
ning in both the hospital and community sectors of
services and explore the problems of introducing a
pattern of service based on district general hospitals
instead of specialist hospitals for the mentally handi-
capped. The object would be to design a service
incorporating up to date ideas which could be
evaluated in practice, rather than to design a model
service to be copied generally.
The implications of these findings were studied in
relation to a specific urban area - the County
Borough of Sheffield, where the existing services were
evaluated in detail-to determine whether a new
pattern of care was feasible. 1
The team's report recommended a dispersed
pattern of service and smaller units of accommodation
to preserve personal contact using appropriate local
services where possible.
The dispersal pattern acknowledges that mental
handicap is a social/educational as well as a medical/
nursing problem and that mentally handicapped
COMPONENT
Assessment Centre
Schematic location of ti
Northern half of Sheffield
250.000 population
1. Officers of the Regional Hospital Board, the teaching
hospital Board of Governors and representatives of the
Sheffield County Borough co-operated in this exercise.
people could benefit if they lived in smaller groups
in a stable domestic setting integrated with the
community.
Dispersal has been organised by defining the com-
ponent parts of the new service and the interaction
between them. In short, this led the team to the
conclusion that early identification, assessment and
re-assessment should be considered as the nucleus of
the service and the centre, from which referral would
be made to other component parts - to be provided
by the Regional Hospital Board, the teaching hospital
and the local authority.
The hospital and local authority services will there-
fore provide a hierarchy of accommodation which
should ensure progression from one type of accom-
modation to another by the mentally handicapped if
and when appropriate and as recommended by the
assessment service.
The assessment service should allow for multi-
disciplinary assessment of each handicapped person.
Re-assessment should consider growth, development
and the effect of treatment, training, education and
environment. Specialists from both the hospital and
local authority services concerned with medical, social
and educational assessment are expected to partici-
pate in order to provide an integrated service for
all age groups with any handicap.
The hierarchy of accommodation proposed for the
northern half of Sheffield for a population of (say)
250,000 can be summarised as follows: ?
Local authority
Provision. To supple-
ment existing facilities
hospital provision.
f?cKceexis,in9
Accommodation
B
A
Children
Adults
Children
Adults
Children
Adults
Functional unit
(,Building type)
10-12 place day
nursery unit
20 place residential
unit (for a start)
68 residential places
1 or 2 6-place
group homes
150 place adult
training centre
60 places for
advanced indust.
training
24 bed residential
unit
2 x 24 bed
residential units
24 bed residential
unit
25 place day care
unit
4 x 24 bed
residential units
115 place day care
unit
Comments
The number of
school places
required is to be
established by the
local education
authority
In a variety of
functional units
The advanced
industrial training
unit will provide
120 places
LOCATION:
Off the District
General Hospital
site i.e. community
based
LOCATION:
On the periphery
of the District
General Hospital
site, but functioning
as a hospital
department
Movement Variables
e.g. of Children's Network
District General Hospital
41
In considering the design of residential accom-
modation it was recognized that the degree of
medical and nursing dependency of those who would
use the accommodation would be a very important
factor. Designs were therefore based on three broad
classifications, as follows: ?
GROUP a: For those requiring substantial medical
and nursing care.
GROUP b : For those requiring some continuing
medical and nursing care.
group C: For those requiring no continuing medical
and nursing care.
The provision proposed for the local authority follows
the principles and patterns which have been estab-
lished since 1957, with the important difference that
the study emphasises the social and educational
needs of pre-school age children living either with
parents or in a substitute home.
Accommodation provided by hospital services
prior to the study had to be reviewed and it seemed
appropriate that the team, formed to consider a new
pattern of service, should also consider the kind of
buildings required.2
The team's investigations defined room activities,
sizes and relationships, relative to agreed group sizes
and care procedures for hospital accommodation
based on a dispersal pattern. It was envisaged that the
work undertaken and the documentation compiled
could form the basis for further work to produce
detailed designs, costs, etc. for buildings to be erected
as part of the Sheffield Development Project.3
The assessment centre, serving the whole Sheffield
County Borough catchment area, was considered as
an extension to an existing centre fo^the assessment
of handicapped children. A schedule of areas was
arrived at to ease the work that would be carried out
by the assessment team to be made up of:
1) Medical and para-medical staff (paediatrician,
psychiatrist, physio-, speech and occupational thera-
pists and other specialists as required).
2) Local authority specialist and supporting services
William Apps, Kenneth Bayes and Maurice Green of
Design Research Unit joined the Department's team
and their expertise helped to ensure that the design
solutions met the team's ideas on requirements.
. The study has now received approval in principle from
the Secretary of State and from the Hospital and Local
Authorities. The Department has agreed to provide
central finance for the hospital and capital developments
envisaged and to support from its research and develop-
ment funds local authority developments forming part
of the project which would be additional to, or need to
be carried out in advance of, the programme of services
which might reasonably be expected of a progressive
local authority.
staff (doctor, educational psychologist, teacher, social
worker and health visitor).
3) Case register data collection staff.
4) Administration and clerical support.
Six other hospital building types were considered.
Although a dispersal programme of the scale en-
visaged for Sheffield implies a major transfer of care
from hospital to community services (working,
ideally, to support and advise families wishing to care
for their own relatives), established populations of
the existing specialist hospitals were also to be
planned for as well as the relatively small number of
children and adults who, for a variety of reasons,
need some form of hospital day or residential care. In
this context, hospital provision refers to: -
a) accommodation on the fringe of a district hospital
site, where the building should, if possible, be
domestic in scale and should relate to (and be visually
integrated with) near-by housing rather than the
hospital departments, and
b) accommodation located elsewhere in the com-
munity, away from the hospital complex in estab-
lished residential areas.
Group A children hospital unit
24 beds (3 x 8)
Staff &
Stores
To day care unit
8 bed unit no. 2.
8 bed unit no. 1
8 bed unit no. 3.
Group A residential accommodation for children
is to cater for those who (because of additional heavy
handicaps or severe behaviour problems) require the
support of a full hospital service fairly close at hand.
Each functional unit of 24 places should provide for
three 'family' groups of 8 children, each group
clearly identifiable as occupying a separate home,
although some common services and spaces will be
shared by the whole unit.
A proportion of the first admissions to this type of
Care will be drawn from an existing specialist hospital
^0r the mentally handicapped and a few will have
lived at home where they may have attended a special
carc unit run by the local authority.
Each group or 'family' will cater for boys and girls
?f varying ages and handicaps, and it was agreed that
lvvo single rooms, one double room and one four-
^edded room should be provided with provision for
conversion if necessary to cater for the changing
nccds of older children who may benefit from greater
Privacy. Activities within each 'home' are essentially
small family group activities, providing a stable
domestc situation. It is hoped that some of the child-
ren will transfer to Group B accommodation. Some,
however, on becoming adult, will move to Group A
residential accommodation for adults.
A day care unit for 25 children will be associated
with a 24 bed Group A children's residential unit.
The function of the day care unit will be to provide
the children from the residential unit (and, in one or
two cases children living at home) with a structured
day, with therapy, training, play and education in its
widest sense, and a complete change of environment.4
The day care unit will also provide recreational
facilities during evenings, holidays and weekends for
all the children, including some who live with their
parents. The unit will have child care staff and local
education authority teaching staff in addition to
nursing staff drawn from the associated residential
unit. Speech and physiotherapists from the assess-
ment service will be available to advise and work
with unit staff for specific activities.
It was agreed that a large social space will be
required as the whole group of 25 children will need
to meet together at times. During a typical day the
children and staff will feed into and move through
this social space into adjacent areas which should
clearly relate to it.
4. A special care unit, having a similar function to the day
care unit, is provided by the local authority in Sheffield
for severely handicapped children cared for at home.
Group A children's hospital day care unit-25 places
Teaching 1
Teaching 2
Teaching 3
3
To children's
residential
unit
Therapy
43
A possible breakdown of the total group of 25
children during a typical day when large group social
activities are not taking place could be: -
6 children in the 'locomotion' (physiotherapy) area,
for any one session, with 2 members of staff exclud-
ing the physiotherapist who may not be in attendance
continually.
6 children in the adventure area - again 2 staff should
be available to be on hand during adventure play,
constructional play and possibly sand and water play.
6 children in teaching room 1 with 2 members of
staff.
2 children in teaching rooms 2 & 3 each with 1
member of staff.
The remaining three children could be in the large
social space, the therapy room, the kitchen or the
bathroom/wc areas for habit training, or even off-site
shopping or visiting.
This grouping arrangement will be flexible depend-
ing on each child's individual requirements but these
grouping sizes should be taken as the maximum for
small group activities.
Group A residential accommodation for adults is
to cater for those requiring full medical and nursing
facilities. Four 24 bed functional units are to be
located on a district general hospital site, allowing
each unit to be visually identifiable as an autonomous
group.
It is envisaged that, within a 24 bed unit, the sexes
will be mixed for most activities, although opinion
varies about separation of bed areas. The agreed
design solution provides that each unit has living?
dining and sleeping areas to accommodate two groups
of 12 and varying sizes of bedroom, thus allowing
for local decision on the mixing of sexes within this
smaller group. The units need to provide a domestic
environment with adequate space and facilities for all
activities associated with 'home'.
A day care unit for 115 will be associated with the
four 24 bed Group A residential units for adults. The
function of the day care unit will be similar to that of
the unit for children, but it will also provide sufficient
Group A adult hospital unit
96 beds (4 x 24)
To day care unit
24 bed unit no. 2.
24 bed unit no. 4.
W
24 bed unit no. 1.
LT
24 bed unit no. 3.
/
Group A adult hospital unit
96 beds (4 x 24)
44
day care facilities for some heavily handicapped
adults living at home to spend at least part of the
day in a different care situation.
It was agreed that two teaching and training
activity areas, each containing several spaces of
different sizes and each incorporating two bathrooms
and toilets for self-care training, should be provided.
These teaching areas will each serve two 24 bed
residential units and a number of adults living at
home.
Suggested maximum groupings were: -
Locomotion' (physiotherapy) - 6 adults & 2 staff.
Adventure - 10 adults & 2 staff.
Caching rooms 1-12 adults & 2 staff in each of two
rooms.
Cachings rooms 2-8 adults & 1 or 2 staff in each of
two rooms.
Teaching rooms 3-8 adults & 1 or 2 staff in each of
two rooms.
Teaching rooms 4-8 adults & 2 staff in each of two
rooms.
This would leave 4 staff to look after 27 adults likely
to be in other parts of the building - and it was
agreed that a free area 'social space' should be
incorporated in the central area to cater for this
group.
A large social area will be required as the whole
group of 115 adults will need to meet together at
times. The space to be allocated for the free area
(social space for 27 adults) 'locomotion' and adven-
ture should be utilised for this purpose.
Group B residential accommodation for children is
to cater for those who need limited medical and
nursing supervision but can generally attend local
authority special schools. As with Group A residen-
Group A adult hospital
day care unit
115 places
Therapy
& Office
Group B children hospital service 'hostel' 24 beds (3 x 8)
y&g? Service
Entrance m>
Service
Private
play
8 bed unit no. 1.
Entrance !?*??
Service W
Private
play
8 bed unit no. 2.
D . i Communal
Private
? i p|ay
play
8 bed unit no. 3.
Entrance ?l>
Rumpus
Entrance
Staff house
i
I Car ports Boiler
j
I
?? 1
I
Staff house
j
tial units for children, a functional unit of 24 should
provide 3 autonomous 'family' groups of eight.
Before coming into this type of residential care the
majority of children will have lived at home, but
some may have been with foster parents, in a
residential nursery or children's home. A proportion
of the first admissions will have been drawn from
existing institutions. In future most of the children
will have attended nurseries or be drawn from Group
A residential accommodation for children.
Between the ages of 5-16, full-time residential
care may "be required for most, but for some a 5 day
per week basis with a return home at weekends will
be possible. The need for temporary care of children
living at home during parents' holidays will be met.
Medical attention will be given by a visiting
paediatrician or local GP in the hostel. They will use
local recreational facilities, shops and other com-
munity facilities.
Each 'family' group will contain boys and girls
of varying ages and handicaps. The housemothers for
each group will be two single people who will pro-
vide stable and consistent relationships for the child-
ren. It is not considered essential that the house-
mothers should be nurses, but they must have training
or experience in child care. Housemothers will iden-
tify with smaller groups of children and have bed/
study space with their 'family'.
Some of the children will transfer to Group C
accommodation or return to their parents, whilst
others, when adults, will move to Group B residential
accommodation for adults. Group B residential
accommodation for adults will be similar in concept
to the Group B residential units for children. How-
ever, the adults will be cared for by non-resident
hospital staff and will have staff on duty at night,
and ground floor bedrooms for the physically handi-
capped will be provided. The adults will attend local
authority adult training centres.
Apart from the new facilities proposed the team
made a number of recommendations about the run-
ning of the service. Amongst these were: -
(i) the existing services provided by family doctors,
health visitors and social workers should continue but
with the social work service reorganised so as to pro-
vide an expanded joint hospital and local authority
service, giving substantial support to the mentally
handicapped and their families;
(ii) important recommendations about the training of
staff for the new service. Amongst the proposals were
that a new experimental nurse training scheme, not
based on a single hospital, should be discussed with
the General Nursing Council; that all nurses working
in the service should have special 'house-parent'
^training or experience, and that staff with special
training in residential care should work both in the
community homes and in the hospital units in the
community;
(iii) that the hospital and local authorities should
jointly appoint a whole-time organiser of voluntary
services whose task would be to stimulate and recruit
individuals and organise voluntary participation in
supportive services in hospitals and in the community
and generally to co-ordinate the available voluntary
effort so that it is used most effectively.
Group B children hospital service 'hostel' 24 beds (3 x 8)
2 beds
1 bed
1 bed
2 beds
Hobbies
Living
2 beds
House mother
?
Shower
XT-
Stair
^=StorageE
W.C.
Bath
=? c
Shower
House
mother
Dining
I 1
Kitchen
'home" for a family group of 8 children Service
46
