Confusion Reign
================



:Reference Type:  Journal Article
:Record Number: 17082
:Author: Trevelyan, J.
:Year: 1971
:Title: Confusion Reigns
:Journal: Mind Ment Health Mag
:Volume: 1971
:Issue: Winter
:Pages: 6-9
:Epub Date: 1971/01/01
:Date: Winter
:Short Title: Confusion Reigns
:ISSN: 0300-8266 (Print), 0300-8266
:PMCID: PMC4997116
:Accession Number: 27670979
:Abstract: The ex-film censor looks at the way ideas about what is Pornographic alter and suggests that although times change only some people change with them.
:Notes: Trevelyan, J Journal Article Mind Ment Health Mag. 1971 Winter;1971(Winter):6-9.
:Database Provider: NLM
:Language: eng


John Trevelyan

There is no general agreement about
what is and is not 'pornographic'.
Attitudes change and what was
thought daring on the film screen
ten years ago would not raise an
eyebrow now. The argument about
pornography must be set against
this background of constantly shifting standards.

I have no qualifications or experience in psychology,
and certainly not in psychiatry or psycho-analysis. I
am writing as a layman who, until recently, has had
the responsibility of deciding, with the help of others,
whether a film is, or is not, suitable for exhibition at
public cinemas. In doing this job I was inevitably
compelled to see some films which many people
would describe as obscene or pornographic, and this
is the (only) justification that I have for contributing
to the argument on this subject.

At the present time obscenity and pornography
are subjects for public debate, and I get the impression from what I read and hear that the discussion is
often emotional rather than objective, and that
difficulties are caused by the lack of specific definition
of these words, not only in legal but also in general
terms.

The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines obscenity
as something that is 'repulsive, filthy, loathsome,
indecent, lewd' and pornography as 'description of
manners etc. of harlots, treatment of obscene subjects
in literature', a definition which I think would now
generally be thought to be inadequate!

Do these words mean the same or different things?
Can either or both words be applied to something
other than sex - in particular to violence?
My own inclination is to apply the word 'pornography' to written or visual material concerned
solely with sex, and the word 'obscenity' as a more
general term covering pornography and also other
things especially violence. This view was held by
D. H. Lawrence who suggested that obscenity was a
matter of personal opinion, whereas pornography was
something specific; he defined it as making sex dirty
for money, and added, 'Even I would censor pornography most rigidly', probably because he regarded sex
as a radiant and heart-warming part of human life which it certainly can be and should be.

I suppose that most people would use the word
'pornography' to describe the books, magazines and
films that describe or display sexual relations of one
kind or another between human beings of either sex
with either sex, or between human beings and animals,
the descriptions or displays being both explicit in
detail or crude. Although such material is not new The story of a tent at Wimbledon - unexpected apparition
behind the canvas walls. An illustration from an 1870
edition of Days Doings contains the element of voyeurism
common to most pornography but also shows what 100
years can do to our ideas on the subject.

there was much of it around in the Victorian Age* it has increased in quantity and availability in recent
years, to the point where it has caused public protest
and demands for legal control.

There are, of course, different interpretations of
these words in different parts of the world. The
Swedes, for example, do not regard their sex films or
sex education films as pornographic, since sex in
Sweden is accepted as a normal part of human life
and not a taboo subject, whereas many people in this
country and some others would have no hesitation in
describing them as pornographic.

Extremes of sex and violence in films are apparently
acceptable to audiences in Japan, but would not be
acceptable in many parts of the world. In India even
lhe mildest representations of sex have not been
allowed, although there are indications that this
attitude is changing, so presumably what would be
See "The Worm in the Bud" by Ronald Pearsall, pub'shed by Penguin Books.

acceptable in Britain would be regarded there as
pornography. There are obviously no absolutes in
this any more than there are absolutes in moralities.
There appears to be no evidence that pornography
has a harmful influence on people who read such
books or see such films. This does not mean, of course,
that anyone can claim with certainty that it does not
have a harmful influence; only that there is no proof
one way or the other.

Such evidence as has been produced - notably in
Denmark and the United States - suggests that it is
not harmful and, as a result, the Danish Parliament
in 1968 repealed all legislation relating to obscenity
and pornography, and similar action was recommended by the 'Johnson' Commission on Obscenity
and Pornography in the United States, and by a
Working Party set up at about the same time by the
Arts Council of Great Britain. However, in neither
country has this recommendation yet been adopted.
The lack of evidence only encourages the emotional
approach on both sides. After the 'Moors' murder
case Pamela Hansford Johnson published a book, 'On
Iniquity in which she implied that it was books
which caused Ian Brady to become the kind of
person that he was, but it could equally be claimed
that he bought the books because he was the kind of
person to whom they were specially attractive. The
recent lOz trial produced some emotional and nonobjective arguments on the other side.
'The Little Red School Book' was described in Indian films the mildest representations of sex are not
allowed - even this is a bit naughty.
Court as obscene, yet it fits none of the definitions
that I have given, or, as it seems to me, the present
legal definition, taken from a legal judgement of
1868, as 'something which, if taken as a whole, would
tend to deprave or corrupt. 

A further complication arises from the anomalies
and inconsistencies of present legislation. The
Obscene Publications Act of 1959, for example,
specifically excludes films that are exhibited in public
cinemas or even in club cinemas, but does not exclude
films shown in private dwelling-houses to which the
public are not admitted; so if any one of us shows a
pornographic film privately in our own home the
police have a legal right to take punitive action! So
far, attempts to propose amendments to existing
legislation have all failed, and there is something in
favour of the argument that it is both illogical and
unjust to have a law that prohibits an activity that the
law cannot define.

One thing can be established. The recent publicity
given to this question by Lord Longford and others
has increased the attraction of pornography and consequently its sales. This has been confirmed to me by
people who distribute and sell this kind of material.
Repression by law or censorship tends to have this
effect too, and the law, however well devised, cannot
impose standards of personal morality.

Quite recently I saw a motto carved on a building
in 1894 which read 'Times change and we change
with them', I think perhaps I would modify this to
'. . . and some of us change with them'.

At the same time the basic premise is true, and the
censorship of films in Britain has reflected this. In
1958 the film Room at the Top was regarded as
sensational and daring; now it would not raise an
eyebrow. Nudity of both sexes, which was unacceptable ten years ago, is now commonplace on stage and
screen. Homosexuality of both sexes and explicit sex
education appear in films and books. Four-letter
words are to be found in many modern novels, and in
plays and films-the pity is that another four-letter
word 'love' seems to have less prominence than it
used to have, being largely replaced by the threeletter word 'sex'.

Occasionally there is criticism of something that is
considered to go too far-for example, there has
been this kind of comment about the film The Devils,
based on the Aldous Huxley book, but such criticism,
if given wide publicity, simply guarantees increased
box-office returns.

To be subjective, I much dislike pornography. I
find it distasteful and degrading but, in the absence
of any clear indication (let alone proof) that it does
individual harm, I find it difficult to say that it should
be repressed by law or censorship so that adults who
want it should be prevented from getting it legally.
They will get it anyway 'under the counter', and at
inflated prices, so it seems to me that probably the
most sensible solution would be to let them buy it
legally at shops which specialise in this kind of
merchandise and to make it illegal to sell such
material to minors or to have displays in public
streets which could reasonably offend people who
pass by. This would reduce its attraction and substantially reduce the profits of those who sell it.
What seems tragic to me is that there can be little
attraction to people who have happy sex lives, and
the interest in pornography emphasises what we
already know - that many people are sexually unfulfilled. Since this is a vitally important factor in
human life, I think we should have sympathy and
compassion for people who need the compensation
of pornography. So many people are afraid of sex,
and afraid that they may be sexually inadequate
The clinch on a rain-swept beach from Room at the Top
which shook cinema audiences rigid in 1958.
/'*>?

Surely if there is any way in which they can be
helped we should not condemn it, especially if we
have been lucky enough to experience sexual
fulfilment ourselves.
One thing is encouraging. The young do not seem
to want or need pornography. In the so-called
'permissive' age, they are less inhibited sexually than
earlier generations were at their age, and they seem to
be better informed and more honest about sex.
This honesty is certainly to their credit. The question which we cannot answer is what the young people
of 20 today will be like when they are 40. Will they
be like their parents whose generation buy pornography, or will they retain a more healthy and
natural attitude to sex? Will the sexual frustrations
come at a later age?

Another encouragement is the philosophy of the
young which does not accept violence; 'Make love not
war' has much to commend it. We may well see this
as a hopeful sign in that violence is often a compensation for sexual inadequacy; indeed, many sexcrimes suggest this. I believe that a philosophy of
peace, which does not always appeal to older people,
especially those who have not experienced love and
who have enjoyed war, should be regarded as a sign
of hope and not of despair.

To me violence is the worst obscenity. This extends both to fantasy violence - the use of violence
for entertainment - and also to violence in reality. If
one has respect for human beings it is surely impossible to regard violence as acceptable even if the
cause is just. To use it in entertainment, except for
the legitimate purpose of condemning it, seems to me
wrong.

As with pornography, there is no evidence that
exposure to violence is harmful but, even if it is not,
surely it can contribute to a blind acceptance of
violence as normal in human relations, both on a
personal level and an international level. After the
assassination of Robert Kennedy an American journalist said to me, 'If you live in a violent society you
come to expect this kind of thing'. It is this acceptance that I find intolerable.


We cannot eradicate violence, however much we
may want to, but at least we can recognise it for the
evil and obscenity that it is. We cannot get rid of
pornography, but we can look at the problems that it
produces with common-sense, and recognise that
however much we may personally find it distasteful
and degrading it cannot do as much harm to mankind as violence. I believe that society has more
serious problems to solve.
