No Title
=========

Can the tensions and stresses of unhappy family life lead to one member bein?
avoid, and perhaps resolve, the family's conflicts? An important new film explj1
Considering what an enormously important job they
have to do parents don't get much training - if any
at all. By the time we are old enough to question the
way in which our parents brought us up we are too
old to do anything about it anyway. We can develop
a different set of values and 'unlearn' inherited
prejudices but the basic mould which fashions us
remains substantially intact.

Throughout Christian history, the family unit has
been looked upon as a force for good, the basis of
all social order, in fact too much has always been
expected of it. Depending upon its members - and
particularly upon the parents - the family can be
a force for evil and disintegration just as easily as it
can be a power for harmony and progress.

Kestrel Films' new production, Family life* is a
blistering examination of the family as an agent of
destruction yet the family on which it focuses is by
no means exceptional. One like it, with the parents'
marriage in a propped-up state of bored, resigned
decay, is probably known to all of us.

The screenplay by David Mercer is an expansion
of the theme of his 1967 television play hi two minds.
David Mercer agrees with R. D. Laing's concept of
what we call 'schizophrenia' being the 'fragmentation
of the personality' occurring when a member of a
family takes on the burdens of the unacknowledged
conflicts of the family and becomes the scapegoat
and withdraws, or is driven, into a 'schizophrenic
state'.

The events in the plot would be mundane except
that the trivia and skirmishes of the unhappy family's
*Academy 1 from January 13th and selected ABC cinemas
throughout the country.

life combine to plunge the daughter, Janice, into a
state of mind which is 'abnormal' an eventual diag-
nosis of 'schizophrenia' and a wide range of treatment
in mental hospital.

Janice does get pregnant and has an abortion at
her mother's insistence but these two events, which
might be expected to be points of high drama in the
film, are almost inconsequential. On screen they only
serve to add fuel to bitter family rows, they are
ammunition with which the parents can reload for
the continuing onslaught on their daughter.

Each incident, each eruption of tension intensifies
the level of unexpressed emotion within the family,
simmering and bubbling just below the surface
'normality'. It is a family controlled and manipulated
by a prim, overbearing, claustrophobic and impos-
sible mother. Well-meaning in her own terms, she
has emasculated her husband over the years and,
with her blinkered belief in 'what's best', allows her
daughter no scope for development or independence.
It is a family which sets a premium on emotion being
kept under control.

Ken Loach, the director, allows the film to evolve at
its own halting pace. Here is a family forced by a
crisis to talk, to try to express long-buried feelings
and it is not easy. David Mercer's dialogue vividly
shows that what passes for conversation in many
families is usually either banter or abuse and when
they really have to communicate, to listen to each
other, the words are awkward and hesitant. Even
then there is no common ground, no compromise, no
sense of 'getting through.

The film runs for 107 minutes, the producer, Tony
Garnett, still thinks it should be shorter but everyone
is at a loss to know where to cut it. The development
gled out for 'mental illness' or even unconsciously 'electing' to become ill to
lis theory on man's most baffling disorder.

In a bored daze, Janice - the central character in Family life - drifts from one dead-end job to the next wanting something
better out of life but too perplexed and indecisive to know what to do about it.

is slow but right, it captures the reality of a family
reduced to a series of hopeless, inarticulate gestures
- knowing that something fundamental has gone
wrong but unable to admit it or come to grips with it
because what is wrong is the family as a whole.
'Of course, it's always the parents they blame first
these days, isn't it' says the mother settling into an
armchair at her first interview with the young
psychiatrist in charge of the 'therapeutic community'
ward which Janice first enters.

For the day of her daughter's admission to hos-
pital she has had a hair-do and taken her fur piece
out of moth-balls. She is confused about young
people's values and admits to the doctor that she
doesn't know 'where it will all end'. She is shocked
that the secretary who brings in the tea calls the
doctor 'Dave' - 'I mean, they treat you as an equal
- it's not right'.

In the ward Janice is free to express herself and
be listened to for almost the first time. 'I don't feel
there's a "me" to choose for when it comes to making
a big decision', she says when the doctor asks her
about her future.

Taking part in a group discussion, another girl
expresses what is probably true of all the young
people in the ward, driven towards 'mental illness'
by family conflicts, 'They think I'm being bad, I
think I'm being myself. They think I'm destructive
of myself but the thing that I am destroying is myself
in them - I really don't want them in me'.

Just when Janice seems to have a chance for pro-
gress in her 'therapeutic community' ward, the young
psychiatrist's appointment is not renewed by the
hospital management committee acting on the advice
of a 'drug 'em and shock 'em' consultant who has a
low opinion of 'experimental' methods of treatment.
The scene is a caricature of a hospital management
committee speaking, in hardly more than a minute
of screen time, volumes about the attitudes, com-
position and background knowledge of some such
groups.

Janice becomes the patient of the consultant who
relies on 'physical' methods of treatment and this
switch gives David Mercer scope to examine what he
has called 'the major conflict in psychiatric ideology'.
The contrast in methods is immediate and drama-
tic. Janice has the first of a series of electro-convulsive
therapies (ECTs)-she protests weakly and des-
perately saying she doesn't want the relaxing injec-
tion, not even knowing what is to follow it. A deeply
disturbing sequence this, hinting at wide and indis-
criminate use of 'shock treatment'.
Inevitably, since film is such a 'concrete' medium,
the two types of psychiatric approach appear very
black and white. The patient, gentle, young psycho-
therapy-based doctor is made to appear infinitely
preferable to the consultant who relies on drugs and
electricity and who has a God-like belief in himself
and his treatment.

But what both Laing and David Mercer are
questioning is the basic idea that there are mad
people and sane people and mad people must be
cured i.e. the philosophy of psychiatry. Is Janice
'mentally ill' at all or is she in fact preserving her
sanity by adopting a form of defensive, protective
behaviour? That behaviour might well appear
'abnormal' from 'normal' society's point of view but
is it necessarily insane?

Are the psychiatrists who are bent on administer-
ing drugs and ECTs in the interests of getting
patients out of hospital and back into the community
asking why their treatment appears to work or what
it is they are curing? Are they returning people to a
concept of 'normality' which is insane in another
sense? Is the normal life from which they came and
to which they are returned really normal?

'We'll eliminate the symptoms and soon have her
back home' the consultant tells Janice's bewildered
parents after the closure of the therapeutic community
ward. And so he does, Janice is soon back home -
in a vague, subdued state, spending large parts of the
day in bed, taking the tablets. But it is the home she
has been returned to that is questionable - does it
really represent 'normality'?

She brightens whenever she comes into contact
with her art-student boy friend and they spend one
jolly afternoon spraying her father's garden blue with
cans of aerosol paint. Her parents see the prank as
just another example of their daughter's insanity -
'Have you seen the state my gnomes are in?' says
her father in a blustering rage.

In a devastating and harrowing sequence of
mother's birthday party the whole family are seen
together for the only time and with disastrous results.
Janice's elder sister, Barbara, who long ago had the
strength to escape from the family's clutches, brings
her children to tea. Whereas Janice is the one who
gives in to her mother, buckles and has become the
'scapegoat', Barbara is the one who fights back and,
seeing the state of her sister, she lets her parents
have it with both barrels.

An enormous row filled with fury and loathing
ensues which mother, in her usual infuriating way,
chooses to ignore. Rebuke and recrimination fly
across the tea-table like missiles until Janice, who
has been completely silent, smashes her fists down on
the table and screams out in distraught, pent-up
anguish. The row has been about her and her future
yet, again, she has taken no part in it - it has been
as if she were not there, not a real person - but, by
her dramatic outburst, she has put a stop to it. She
has absorbed the conflict and ended it, she has
adopted the role of scapegoat once again.

The same night Janice comes downstairs when the
house is silent, absent-mindedly gouges chunks out of
the dining table with a knife sharpener, and suddenly
lashes out in all directions in frustrated rage smash-
ing, among other things, father's 25-year-long-
service-presentation-clock. This is too much. They
take her back to hospital.

And so, the pattern of Janice's life and her 'illness'
is established - unless, somehow, she can find the
strength and support not to have to return yet again
to the family environment which has made her what
she is, she appears to be doomed to shuttle between
mental hospital with its treatment methods which
are almost entirely irrelevant to her needs and a
desperately unhappy home which offers only sterile,
negative relationships which will sooner or later
bounce her back to hospital again.

The hospital has nothing to offer her - graphically
illustrated by a totally incomprehensible 'chat' with
a ward sister who wants to put an end to Janice's
'dangerous' walks in the hospital grounds with a
young male patient but never actually mentions 'sex'
or 'men' - all is starch and euphemism. The only
'real' person in Janice's life in hospital is a superb
Spanish nurse who soothes her after her outbursts of
fury or when she is overwhelmed by her fears and
hallucinations.

On a visiting day, her boy friend is so staggered
by Janice's fears of never getting out of hospital that
he whisks her back to his flat then and there. But the
hospital authorities come and retrieve her - 'Don't
you think she'd be better off in hospital?' says the
general practitioner who has come with a psychiatrist
and the ambulance to take her back. 'No!' retorts
the boy with a desperate ferocity.

The final haunting scene is of Janice being used
Janice explains to her art student boy friend that, although she loves the painting he has done for her, he will have to keep
it for her because she knows per parents would refuse to have it in the house.
In the final scene Janice - now mute, passive and
apparently completely unaware of her surroundings - acts
as a 'classic case' to illustrate the lecture given by the
consultant on schizophrenia.

to illustrate a lecture on 'the schizophrenic' being
given by the consultant. She appears even more
withdrawn, passive and immobile - apparently com-
pletely unaware of her surroundings and what is
being said about her 'case'. 'Any questions?', says the
consultant to the rows of yawning, doodling, bored
medical students.

Family life makes its point with shattering force.
It is a film which leaves you angry and sad - the
sensation of impotence is almost total. But the active
response to the film is to question assumptions, to
resist generalisations and handy classifications of
people into diagnostic groups. It asks psychiatry
quite simply not to be sure of itself, not to be con-
tent with methods and results which it cannot really
explain. The pressure is on psychiatry to increase
its 'productivity', a rapid turn-ovei of patients can
appear to be a measure of success and - to some
extent - it is but, Family life is saying, it can be
success at the expense of the individual patient.
Psychiatrists are no ogres, they have the health and
happiness of their patients in mind as their goal like
all doctors but for them the goal is nothing like so
easy to achieve and the routes to it may vary every
time.

This is an important, intensely moving and
thought-provoking film as relevant to a wide public
because we are all members of families as it is to the
professionals working in psychiatry because it pin-
points a dilemma they all have to resolve - or, at
least, bear in mind. It is the most important film on
a mental health subject to appear for many years,
perhaps the most important, full stop.

The acting - all by virtually unknown screen
actors - is flawless, totally convincing and a remark-
able achievement especially that of Sandy Ratcliff as
Janice. The direction has the sensitivity which is
becoming Kestrel's hall-mark and the film is packed
with subtlties and nuances that would make seeing it
over and over again a rewarding exercise.

It should attract big audiences but it will un-
doubtedly be disturbing, even to the best-adjusted
cinema-goer, its potential impact on someone who
has been ill or who identifies strongly with the girl
or the mother is a bit worrying - to sound one note of
warning.

The film distributors experience with Kes, made
by the same film company, should increase the
chances of Family life reaching the wide audience it
so thoroughly deserves.
