Insight
=======

Art therapy is much more than just i
no other form of communication seeming how best to treat a patient's distur
Pictoral art constantly provides us with insights into
the mind of the artist, and this highly subjective
aspect of painting is the 'starting point' of art
therapy. At the end of the last century, creative work
began to play its part in psychiatric developments
and both Jung and Freud drew on their patients'
work when developing their schools of thought.
The importance of art as a portrayal of the way in
which society works and the way individuals within
society act and interact developed considerably during
the early part of this century. Many educational
pioneers emphasised the importance of the visual
arts so that the therapeutic potential of creative work
developed in two spheres.

It was not until the 1940s, however, that doctors,
psychotherapists, teachers and artists came together
to crystallise ideas and the first art therapists began
work - mainly in hospitals. The following years saw
tremendous developments in art therapy - mainly
channelled through the inspiration and ideas of indi-
viduals, working in hospitals and many kinds of
schools. There was a great deal of discussion and
much writing about the relationship between visual
arts and mental illness.

But how does art therapy actually work} What
does it try to do? Art therapy is not easy to categorise
but it falls somewhere between psychotherapy and
art teaching.

Certainly the teaching role of the therapist is
played down and the patient is encouraged to express
himself freely whilst, at the same time, being given ~
every encouragement to do so. So the main purpose
is not the conventional educational one - acquisition
of information or a skill. The purpose is the acquiring
of knowledge, but knowledge about the person/
patient himself, his innermost feelings, his fears, his
32

5 THROUGH ART
' Alison Wertheimer
activity' to keep patients occupied. It can be a bridge to progress wh
J'e or it can provide a psychiatrist with a valuable clue when it comes to dec
3te of mind.         J
Doodling can lead on to writing for many patients - a skill they may not have used for several years.
Adding features to three 'balloons' provoked a peal of laughter from a previously silent woman in her 30s.
aSliilS
m 9 "
Self-portrait of a lonely woman in a park.
conflicts . . . This kind of 'knowledge' is often some-
thing which can only be expressed on canvas or
paper - it sometimes involves thoughts and feelings
of which the patient himself is not conscious. Even
if he is aware of them he may be unable to express
them verbally, but through art therapy - the expres-
sion of these feelings in pictorial terms - he can share
them with the therapist and perhaps start to come to
terms with them. The therapist, in sharing this know-
ledge, is able to attempt an assessment of the
person's particular difficulties and, in some cases
(where the patient agrees) the work can be shown to
the psychiatrist involved, to help him reach a
diagnosis.

In 1964 the British Association of Art Therapists*
was formed. One of its aims is to act as a clearing
?Secretary: Miss Diane Waller, 13c Northwood Road,
London, N.6.
-
house for information and ideas about the role of the
afts in therapy and education. The Association
recently staged an exhibition, 'Art in hospitals', at
the new St. Pancras Library as a joint venture with
the Camden Association for Mental Health. Over
50 drawings and paintings, as well as some ceramics,
were on show from 8 different centres - these in-
cluded day centres, child guidance clinics, occupa-
tional therapy units and psychiatric hospitals.

At its most basic level art therapy may be just a
series of doodles - done by someone with their eyes
open or closed. One of the exhibits showed how one
Patient's doodling (with closed eyes) led him on to
writing - something which he had not attempted for
years; so the doodling became a channel through
which communication could be re-established.

Another, more sophisticated, example of this
breaking through non-communication was provided
by a vivid painting of three faces done by a severely
retarded woman in her mid-30s. This woman did not
sPeak at all. But, in an art session, having originally
drawn three balloons and been encouraged to ex-
periment further, she then drew these three faces; her
response to what she had done was her first attempt
at verbal expression - a burst of laughter: a reward-
lng and worthwhile experience for both patient and
therapist - and a starting point for improvement.
Art therapy is often a means of expressing sub-
conscious feelings in visual images - feelings or
emotions of which the patient is aware but is un-
willing to express in words.

A 17-year-old Jamaican boy, separated from his
Mother and younger brother and living with a strict,
demanding father, is outwardly quiet and compliant
although he occasionally exhibits irrational outbursts
anger. These feelings of suppressed anger were
clearly expressed in one of his paintings by his
depiction of pent-up lava erupting in a violent purple
and yellow stream from a volcano.

Another 'violent' painting was a self-portrait of a
Patient suffering from a breakdown brought about
by family problems. Outwardly a very mild character,
he never reacted violently, even in the face of un-
deserved provocation from other patients. But, just
before his release, he painted an aggressive self-
Portrait in violent reds and yellows which, to his
surprise, revealed feelings of anger that he had always
kept subconsciously suppressed.

A less obvious 'self-portrait' on show was a painting
by a rather isolated woman, fond of painting children
and animals ... In the park, children are happily
Playing on the swings while one figure stands watch-
lng - alone except for the 'company' of a cat. Quite
^terally, she is not 'in the swing of things'.
At the end of the exhibition was a series of paint-
ings by one man, done over a number of years. The
nude sketches were done while he was an art student
and show considerable talent.

X V
is

Two sketches of nudes drawn by a man when he was
a promising art student before he became ill . . .
. . . two more sketches with a Bosch-like quality done just before his admission to hospital when he was ex-
pressing very strong feelings about his body. The figure in the mire is a self-portrait depicting a fear of
'letting go'.

The next two sketches arose almost unconsciously
from doodles and have a Bosch-like quality - these
were done just before his admission to hospital. At
the time he was expressing very strong feelings about
his body which are reflected in these drawings. The
figure in the mire is a self-portrait expressing his own
fear of letting go (of drowning in his own madness?).
His final drawing, done some three years later, is
an abrupt shift away from his previous work. He has
apparently lost all feeling and no longer preoccupied
with his emotions, he has turned away completely
from depictions of the human body.

So art therapy has a double function. On the one
hand, both patient and therapist are acquiring new
insight and understanding of inner thoughts and feel-
ings, while, on the other, the very act of painting,
drawing or doodling can act as a therapeutic process
in itself.

and a final drawing done three years later when
the style has changed completely and become
unemotional.

The next two sketches arose almost unconsciously
from doodles and have a Bosch-like quality - these
were done just before his admission to hospital. At
the time he was expressing very strong feelings about
his body which are reflected in these drawings. The
ligure in the mire is a self-portrait expressing his own
fear of letting go (of drowning in his own madness?).
His final drawing, done some three years later, is
an abrupt shift away from his previous work. He has
apparently lost all feeling and no longer preoccupied
with his emotions, he has turned away completely
from depictions of the human body.

So art therapy has a double function. On the one
hand, both patient and therapist are acquiring new
insight and understanding of inner thoughts and feel-
ings, while, on the other, the very act of painting,
drawing or doodling can act as a therapeutic process
in itself.
