Caught in the Cross-Fire
========================

Pornography is a subject of never-ending interest
because sexuality involves all of us in one of life's
central and most powerful experiences. Sexual
activity involves intense satisfaction and is at the root
of the formation and maintenance of human relationships and reproduction, so it performs a complex
variety of functions which contribute vitally to the
maintenance and stability of society.

In addition, and unlike other essential physiological
functions (eating, breathing, sleeping, etc.), sex is at
the centre of value systems which change and evolve.
It is the conflict and tension involved in the evaluation of this evolution of the meaning, significance
and function of sexuality - which forms the background of the present renewed interest in the subject.

Pornography is one of several current features
which identifies the 'Permissive Society', along with
promiscuity, abortion, pre- and extra-marital sexual
relations, the Pill and the impermanence of marriage
which some people feel are collectively eroding the
moral fabric and the very foundation of society. They
are opposed by an equally vociferous and determined
group who attack the reticence and hypocrisy of the
past, welcome the sexual liberation, extol personal
freedom (according to the philosophy of John Stuart
Mill) and are determined to defend with word and
action the gains of the recent past.

For the sake of simplicity, these factions may be
called 'conservative' and 'liberal', although what they
call each other privately - and sometimes publicly is another matter. The pithy language is highly
emotive as are the feelings of those caught in the
cross-fire.

But what about the rest, the vast majority of people
not immediately involved in the debate? Most of
them, particularly if they are parents, are conscious
of the powerful influence of advertising and of the
Public media which vividly portray the changing
standards of sexuality. They go through the full
range of puzzlement, confusion, uncertainty and not
a little anxiety over the likely effect on their children
and the consequences for society.

Meanwhile the committed protagonists of the extreme positions want action. Those who oppose
current trends would like to see tighter censorship
and a change of the law to provide greater control,
necessary backed by penal sanctions. Those in
favour seek a greater extension of freedom and the
abolition of as many restrictions as possible. Assesses the validity of these opposing points of view is
difficult, particularly when it comes to considering
| the contribution of the psychological sciences.
In any scientific approach the first job is to sort
?ut a definition. What constitutes pornography and
what, if any, are its dangers? This is the core of the
problem because there is no really satisfactory definition of pornography.

As far as the law is concerned it is essentially a
matter of the impact of material upon the individual
in terms of the extent to which it may corrupt or
deprave. Proving a capacity to corrupt or deprave is
usually difficult if not impossible simply because both
the terms are subjective and lack explicit, objective
criteria for assessment.

The starting point is obscenity and this word,
which in turn is capable of three broad meanings, is
more helpful. First something which is obscene is
capable of offending modesty or decency; second it
has the capacity to be prurient or to arouse sexual
excitement and third, to be disgusting or repulsive.

Psychological knowledge and experience can be
weighed in a consideration of these three connotations
of obscenity.

Obscenity as offensive to modesty or decency
Broadly speaking, society regulates its sexuality by
means of language, pictorial representation, fashion
and behaviour. It is clear that, in today's world, there
are marked differences between the generations as
well as between (and within) social classes when it
f?

No Mr Smith, I'm afraid pornography isn't
available on the National Health, yet...
comes to a concensus of opinion about these channels
through which human sexuality is communicated.
But there are limits which are recognized and set
by the law. The exhibitionist, voyeur, obscene telephone caller and people who solicit publicly are all
clearly beyond the limit of what is acceptable to
society. The psychiatrist quite often sees people who
behave in these kinds of ways and they usually show
marked psychological features of a failure to develop
sexually. While there may be some argument about
the wisdom of driving the prostitute off the street,
most would agree on the need for protective measures
to cope with people who, though psychologically disturbed, can cause distress (and perhaps harm) to
others.

There will be much less general agreement when it
comes to the proliferation of shops selling pornography, strip-tease clubs, cinemas showing 'blue' films,
and the appraisal of a spate of plays which feature
nudity or include highly controversial behaviour or
language. There are those who defend all, pleading
the case for the freedom of the individual to choose
to participate in whatever he pleases, and those who
attack all, either on the commercial grounds of
'exploitation' or because of the fear of corrupting the
young. Those who favour unchecked expansion insist
that no one is compelled to attend performances
which they might find distasteful to which the 'limitations lobby' reply that the very availability of facilities constitutes a danger. No studies are available to
assess the professed advantages or dangers of proliferation of 'points of sale' for 'pornographic' material.

Probably the most controversial area in the whole
pornography/obscenity debate is broadcasting - particularly television. The listening or viewing audience
can be 'exposed' to obscenity without warning and
without exercising any choice in the matter especially so in the case of 'live' programmes. Obviously, what adds up to an 'offence to modesty or
decency' will vary depending upon the background of
each listener and the viewer. But, over and above
social factors like upbringing and religion, there are
people for whom sexuality is particularly threatening
while other people have reached such personal
maturity and social security that no broadcast or
programme seems offensive.

The impact on children of exposure to all kinds of
radio and TV broadcasting has not been assessed and
it would not be any easy thing to do. Age, the sex of
the child, its personality and the corrective forces in
its environment would all be powerful determinants
of the outcome. Until such studies are carried out
the subject will remain in the explosive arena of
powerful subjective emotional forces.

Obscenity's capacity to arouse sexual excitement

Pornography is intended to be a source of prurience
and sexual excitation. But what is the significance of
sexual excitation and pleasure in human activity?
This is a central and complex issue to which psychological theory has an important contribution to make.
Until this century sexual pleasure and procreation
were closely linked despite the age-long attempts at
contraception which can be traced back to ancient
Egypt. In addition to this link between sex and conception there has also been hostility to sexual
'pleasure' as such which is closely connected with
Christian doctrine.

The twentieth century has seen the effective separation of the sex act from pregnancy by efficient contraception, the impact of Freudian theory and the
reversal - both from within and outside Christianity of the devaluation of sexual gratification.

So sexual pleasure has emerged as something
positive in its own right and there are many people
who would not hesitate to advocate unlimited sexual
gratification as desirable, natural and healthy for men
and women.

If this was the whole answer then clearly anything
and everything which stimulated sexual excitement
and ultimately produced an orgasm would be desirable in its own right. The most corrupted and illunderstood interpretation of Freud would support
this. But Freud wrote not only about libido but also
examined the meaning of love and love implies a
relationship with another person. The elements of
one-to-one relationships have been examined by
Freud and those who have followed him in the
psychodynamic tradition.

The libido theory of Freud (which suggests a selfenclosed sexual instinctual system characterized by an
infantile pattern of oral, anal and phallic phases and
adult genital union) has been further elaborated by
other research workers who have stressed the need
for security, self-esteem and mature dependence as
other essential characteristics in the formation and
maintenance of one-to-one relationships.

Dr John Bowlby is the latest theorist to outline
an 'instinctual attachment' pattern between child and
mother in the first few years of life which acts as a
basis of all other intimate one-to-one relationships
later in life. In these early years the child learns to
feel recognized, wanted, appreciated; in short,
acquires the components of affection and love which
form the essential ingredients in all significant, subsequent relationships.

So if an adult relationship is to reach maturity it
must achieve a balance between the instinctual and
affectionate, this is essential if the full potential of
the individual and the couple is to be realized.
Pornography concentrates on an isolated experience
and separates the instinctual from the affectionate
and so detracts from the full realization of a relationship. It is probably in this respect that it is most
significant in psychological terms.

Psychologically, a case could be made for saying
that pornography serves the needs of people who,
either temporarily or permanently, find it difficult to
form satisfactory sexual relationships. Many who
turn regularly to pornography or prostitutes are some
of the most impoverished personalities in our society
who are incapable of sustaining personal relationships
which could give them a much richer experience.

This category of 'regulars' would have to be conbasted with people who have casual and only temporary contact with pornography - like adolescents
0r men temporarily separated from sexual partners,
soldiers, prisoners, travelling salesmen, etc.
n?ther definable category is that of people who
tUrn to pornography as a source of stimulation to
Sustain or enrich an existing but impoverished sexual
relationship.

each of these cases pornography may offer
CriJrnbs of comfort to people (usually men) who are
unable to find within themselves sufficient sexual
1Ve to start or sustain a sexual relationship.
Inevitably mere visual stimulation, leading to solitary
sexual activity, is a poor substitute for the wealth of
interpersonal exchange involved in a mature relationship although for some people it is considered much
safer or is the only thing possible.

Pornography as disgusting or repulsive

Because 'beauty is in the eye of the beholder', one
constant problem is to distinguish between the erotic
and the pornographic. 'The erotic' tries to capture
and portray the beauty and richness of human
sexuality in contrast to 'the pornographic' which
trivializes, titillates, restricts, distorts, exaggerates
and fragments.

Value judgements of this kind are extremely hard
to sustain in individual cases but a comparison of
different works in literature, painting, sculpture and
photography on sexual subjects can leave little doubt
that a distinction does exist and can be made - if for
no other reason than the obvious commercial one.

Pornography is a money spinner and its qualities of
imagination, artistry and presentation are secondary
to its purely commercial goal.

More specifically, a fair amount of pornography is
concerned with the portrayal of sexual deviations sadism, masochism, fetishism, transvestism and
homosexuality are all served in and through pornography. This material, together with oral and anal
features of infant sexuality, are understandably
capable of provoking disgust or proving repulsive.
Furthermore, some people fear that deviations, in
particular sado-masochism, can be spread by pornography. The evidence for this is non-existent despite
the storm which raged over the Moors murder trial.

All we know about sexual deviants suggests that
their 'incubation period' spans the whole of childhood
and that numerous factors are responsible. Nevertheless, anxiety is widespread. But the abolition of
pornography, even if this were possible, would not
eliminate the richest reservoir of all - the human
psyche whose world of fantasy extends beyond anything that pornography can offer.

Society is in the process of experiencing a major
sexual revolution the reasons for which are complex
and partially obscure. Pornography, whilst not a new
phenomenon, has recently attracted undue attention.
The job of the behavioural sciences is to continually
evaluate the available evidence and to help society to
discriminate between genuine dangers and the overanxiety prompted by too much imagination and
fantasy.

A lonely potential customer scans the hoardings.
