The Hostel Method for Feeble-Minded Young Men and Women
=========================================================

WINIFRED GIBSON
The Surrey Voluntary Association for Mental and Physical Welfare
opened Eagle House as a Hostel for feeble-minded girls in May, 1924. At that
time, although many large Certified Institutions sent some of their higher-
grade patients out to work on leave of absence, and one or two Institutions had
even set apart special buildings for the accommodation of such patients, there
was, I believe, no other Institution run solely as a Hostel, quite independently
of any parent Institution. Eagle House was started as an experiment. It draws
its inmates from Certified Institutions all over the country, but once any girl
has arrived, there is nothing to tell the outside world, and more especially her
immediate neighbours, that she has any connection with an Institution for
mental defectives. Mistresses engaging girls are informed of their mental dis-
ability, and are warned of the special care and precautions necessary, but the
general public of Mitcham, after 6 years, still looks upon Eagle House as an
ordinary Girls' Home. We have found that the higher-grade feeble-minded
girl resents, far more than the boy, the fact that she is a certified patient under
the Mental Deficiency Acts. Herein lies the value of the independent Hostel.
She lives with other girls, all of whom are eidier out at work under normal
conditions, or are in definite training for such work, and there is nothing in
her environment to remind her that she is connected with an institution for
defectives. The inferiority complex is strong in many of our temperamental
feeble-minded girls, and anything which tends to remove it is of value.

On the other hand, the fact that our Hostels are not connected with any
parent Institution gives rise to certain difficulties. We have no previous know-
ledge of our inmates, and have to depend on written reports from Institutions
of very varying size, character and efficiency.

In the first two or three years many girls were sent to us who were utterly
unsuited to Hostel life. Some were temperamental cases, thoroughly discon-
tented with anything and everything that was done for them; others were
physically unfitted for sustained work; some were too low-grade mentally to
stand any chance of obtaining work in the everyday world, and were only fitted
for the sheltered life of an Institution.

Gradually the unsuitable cases have been weeded out, and now the Local
Authorities sending cases have a far better understanding of the type of defec-
tive likely to do well under Hostel treatment. Such cases should be of stable
temperament, without serious physical disabilities, and sufficiently intelligent
to be able to perform ordinary household duties without a very great amount
of supervision.

The kind of work in which most of the girls are placed must, of course,
depend very largely on the neighbourhood in which the Hostel is situated.
When Eagle House was first opened a few of the girls secured employment in
a neighbouring sweet factory, where the welfare conditions reached a very
high standard. They had, however, to compete with young girls of 14-15, and
as the chief qualities required of them were extreme quickness and dexterity,
very few of our girls were really suited to the work. Also the standard of
physical fitness required was too high for most of our girls. One or two were
employed on simple, monotonous processes for some time, and then asked to
be transferred to work in domestic service. This branch of work which high-
grade feeble-minded girls can be trained to perform really well, and in which
there is a constant demand for workers, now absorbs all the girls we send out.
They receive a thorough training in all branches of domestic work in the
Hostel for six months after admission, and are then placed as cooks, parlour-
maids, house-maids and general servants. Several have kept the same situation
for several years, and six have been placed under the guardianship of their
mistresses.

In other parts of the country, especially for instance, in Lancashire, I can
well believe that factory work of certain kinds might be found to be a suitable
field of employment, but in Mitcham domestic service certainly provides the
best outlet.

As soon as she is earning money each girl starts a savings bank account.
She is allowed to keep a small amount weekly for pocket-money, her travelling
and insurance expenses are paid out of her wages, and a fixed amount is
banked, partly in a Post Office Savings account, and partly in the Hostel bank.
She can draw on her Hostel bank account for any small expenses, and only
touches her Post Office Account in cases of any serious outlay being required,
such as purchase of Guides' uniform, or help being urgently needed by
relatives.

All Post Office accounts are held in the name of the Matron as trustee,
and money can only be withdrawn with her approval.
Royal Hostel for boys and young men was opened in January, 1929. Its
organization is entirely similar to that of Eagle House. It has been a happy
undertaking from the outset. Possibly feeble-minded young men are less
temperamental than young women of the same age and mental capacity; at
all events they appear to resent less the fact of their certification under the
Mental Deficiency Acts, and once they are provided with congenial work and
have a bank balance of their own, they settle down very happily. Our lads
have six months training in house and garden work, carpentry and shoe-
mending. They are then placed in daily posts in the neighbourhood. The
openings found for them have been rather more varied than in the case of the
girls. Two are working as farm labourers, one has the care of pigs and poultry,
one is a cook in a country inn, several are working as house and garden boys,
and one, perhaps the most happily placed of all, is working as a carrier's assist-
ant. One lad is a fairly skilled carpenter. It was not found to be possible to
place him in continuous employment of this nature in the neighbourhood, so
he is employed partly as the Hostel carpenter, partly in carrying out orders
obtained from private individuals or firms. He is paid in exactly the same
way as the other lads who are working outside, and is entirely satisfied with
this arrangement.

In the case of the boys, we use the Home Safes of one of the large banks
for their savings. The boys take great pride in banking their money themselves
each week. Each has his own pass-book, and can draw on his savings with
the approval of the Superintendent. In addition to saving money themselves,
the feeble-minded young men and women in our Hostels are contributing
materially to their own support, as a part of their earnings is returned to the
Local Authorities who are maintaining them. Those in residential posts are,
of course, entirely self-supporting.

The Hostel system, therefore, while making for happiness and self-respect,
should also prove an economical method of dealing with the highest-grade of
mental defectives in the community.
