News mid Notes
================

C.A.M.W. Conference, December 11th, 12th and 13th, 1930
The next Conference of the C.A.M.W. will be held on Thursday., Friday and Saturday, December nth, 12th and 13th. It is hoped that a short
session can be arranged for the morning of Saturday, December 13th, in order
that the special facilities offered by the Railway Companies may be available
over the week-end. The subjects for discussion and further details will be
announced in the next issue of Mental Welfare.

Mental Health Course
-----------------------

The attention of readers is called to the enclosed slip giving particulars
of a Mental Health Course of the London School of Economics and Social
Science. The Child Guidance Council offers six scholarships of X181 I0S- ?deach to students desiring to take the Course.
In the selection of candidates for the Scholarships, consideration will be
given to their previous experience of social case work and to the type of work
which they wish to pursue after training. It is not intended to give Scholarships to young students who have just recently taken a social science certificate
and have had little social work experience, but rather to give further specialised
training to those who have realised in their work the need for a wider knowledge of mental health problems.
The scholarships are open to those wishing to undertake social work for
children or adults at child guidance and hospital clinics at mental hospitals
and in associations for the care of the mentally defective. They are also open
to hospital almoners, children's workers, probation officers, etc. Further particulars and application forms can be obtained from The Secretary, Child
Guidance Council, 7, Buckingham Palace Gardens, S.W.i. Applications
should be received not later than June nth, 1930.

Mental Treatment Bill
----------------------

The Mental Treatment Bill passed its Third Reading in the House of
Commons on May 14th. Attention of readers is called to the special article
which appears in this issue with reference to mental health work in general.
First International Congress on Mental Hygiene
This Congress, which has just been concluded at Washington, formed a
representative gathering which included over 200 official delegates from fiftythree foreign countries and six continents. Over 2,500 people attended the
Congress, which has been one of the most successful ever held at Washington
O 7 O
and a permanent international Committee for Mental Hygiene has now been
formed. Miss Fox attended the Congress as a member of the British Delegation and read a paper on the " Social Aspects of Mental Deficiency." It is
hoped that she may be able to write a short account of the proceedings for the
next issue of Mental Welfare.

British Social Hygiene Council Summer School
----------------------------------------------

This Summer School which will be held at Digswell Park, Welwyn,
Herts, from August 22nd to 29th next, is the fifth School organised by the
British Social Hygiene Council. The School will include instructional courses
on Biology and Psychology and their social applications. Full particulars may
be obtained from the Secretary, British Social Hygiene Council, Carteret
House, Carteret Street, S.W.i. The Programme and a form of application
for the School are enclosed with this issue.

Public Lectures
-----------------

(1) An interesting series of six lecture-discussions on " The Difficult
Child as a Medical, Social and Psychological Problem," has been arranged by
the Child Guidance Clinic of the Jewish Health Organisation. The Lectures
are being held on Mondays and Thursdays at 5.15 p.m., commencing on May
19th at Toynbee Hall, Commercial Street, E.i. The lecturers are Dr.
Emmanuel Miller, Dr Noel H. M. Burke, Miss Beatrice H. Robinson and
Mr. M. Fortes. Tickets for the whole course are 1/6 and may be obtained
from The Secretary, Jewish Health Organisation, 19, Dorset Square, N.W.i
(Ambassador 1477), or at the Child Guidance Clinic, Jews' Free School, Bell
Lane, Spitalfields, E.

(2) A Lecture will be given by Professor Jean Piaget on Friday, June
6th at 5.30 p.m., at University College, Gower Street, W.C.i. The subject of
his lecture (in French) is " La Logique Chez L'Enfant." Dr C. Spearman
will take the Chair. The lecture is open to the public without fee or ticket.

Public Social Services Handbook
--------------------------------

A fifth edition of this useful handbook has just been issued by the
National Council of Social Service. It gives a clear and concise account of
all Public Social Services and their administration and should be in the offices
of all social organisations. The fifth edition has been prepared with the intention of incorporating the new developments and administrative changes
which have been brought about by the Local Government Act. The handbook can be obtained, price 2/-, from The National Council of Social Service,
26, Bedford Square, W.C.i.

Obituary
--------

It was with very great regret that we heard of the death of Miss Margaret
Macdowall whose life was devoted to the education and training of mentally
defective children and whose splendid work must be well known to all readers
of this magazine. Miss Bertha James, who was closely associated with her, has
kindly promised to write us an appreciation of Miss Macdowall's life and work
to appear in the next issue of Mental Welfare.
As we go to press we have also heard with regret of the death of the Rev.
H. N. Burden, the Warden of the Incorporation of National Institutions for
Persons requiring Care and Control, who was, for many years, a member of
the Executive Council of the C.A.M.W.
