The Visiting Teacher at Work
=============================

MENTAL WELFARE 83
Book Reviews CS2 Abstracts
-. By Jane
F. Culbert. Commonwealth Fund Division
of Publications. New York.
The Visiting Teacher at Work " presents
to us an instructive and interesting account of
the professional standards, procedure and ad-
ministrative relationships of the Visiting
Teacher in America. The book makes a very
material contribution to the increased under-
standing of the problems that lie in the prov-
mce of this comparatively newcomer in the
Professional field.
In the first part of the book we are intro-
duced to the visiting teacher's problems?
those children, who, through undesirable per-
sonal traits, or because of unfavourable con-
ditions in their environment, are failing to reap
hill benefit from their school life. We meet
John with his poor school record and repeated
Misbehaviour; Dorothy, who is a " show off "
^d loud talker; and Frank, who is a disturb-
element in his class and never sits still.
f e watch the visiting teacher approach the
? Wo groups of adults who have most influence
m the child's life, viz., parents and teachers,
jjj ^at?h her study of the child himself. How
^mminating the child's own point of view can
"? ^e see the gradual marshalling of facts
inch go to form that interesting record, The
((ase History, with its " Diagnosis," and
tentative Plan for Treatment." We see the
^siting teacher helping the child to adjust
^mself, helping the school to adjust the child,
& with disturbing elements in the home,
o aiding in the development of group and
^unity activities.
v-, second part of the book deals with super-
cu?ry and administrative problems, and dis-
ingSeS SUch interesting points as the follow-
ab^an .t^le visiting teacher work more profit-
in th high school children or with those
j he elementary school ?
pr wise to assign to her the more difficult
sho 111115 which arise in a widespread area, or
ali0v , her service he so limited as to
tj,,,. ' her to do a more intensive and preven-
V^type of work?
^haTf the service be initially organised ?
are facilities and general working conditions
C(iuisite for conducting the work ?
There are ten appendices which detail such
things as Case Records, Annual Reports, Time
Schedules, Book Lists, Open Letters and An-
nouncements and Posters and Bulletins, which
have been issued.
Parents will find the book very illuminating,
setting out as it does, so many of the problems
that call for a readjustment of home circum-
stances. Teachers who have not the privilege
of Visiting Teacher Service in their schools, will
find here much that will assist them to solve
their own particular problems. For those taking
up the work of visiting teacher, there are prac-
tical and helpful suggestions as to the pro-
fessional preparation required, and of the per-
sonal qualifications which go so far towards
making the work a success. The book should
be read by all those whose work brings them
into close contact with young children.
B. Craig.
Essays and Addresses. Sociological, Biolog-
ical and Psychological. By A Surgeon. H.
K. Lewis & Co. 1930. 10/6 net.
This book consists of thirteen chapters, the
contents of most of which have appeared or
been delivered elsewhere. Chap. VII, the
Galton Memorial Lecture for 1928, on " Some
Causes of Racial Decay," and Chap. XII, on
" The Prevention of Mental Deficiency," are
the most arresting. If these and other essays
dealing with urgent problems leave the reader
a little disappointed, it is because the author is
not afraid to tackle what is at present insol-
uble. Chap. XI, on " The Human Factor in
Industrial Life," may be summarized thus :
many men work badly; they work badly be-
cause their work is dull and they do not enjoy
it; if it were interesting they would enjoy it
and work better. The remedy proposed is
vocational guidance and selection; excellent as
far as it goes, but seeing how unworthy and
repellent to an intelligent man much of the
labour in our industrialized civilization must
be, it does not go very far. Unless we leave
unskilled labour to the unintelligent. There
are enough and to spare.
Chap. VII is rather dismal reading. It re-
views the causes and signs of decay of cultures.
84 MENTAL WELFARE
We seem to exhibit them all, though perhaps
we have not fallen quite so far as to justify the
author's implication when he says that with
our modern knowledge we might in a few gen-
erations reach the Victorian level of intelli-
gence. But the situation is bad enough and
the chief symptom, whether cause or accom-
paniment, of our declines, is the familar one
that we are breeding more from our worst
stocks than from our best. Our increasing-
care of the unfit by helping them to multiply,
hastens the tendency. The worst danger comes
from the rising tide of mental deficiency and
no remedy at present can be more than a
palliative. The author suggests that relief of
taxation or endowment for the first four or five
children would encourage the good stocks to
breed and the limiting of the bounty to four or
five would discourage the undesirables, but
since these will breed to their full capacity in
any case, the bounty would encourage them,
and its limitation would not check them. Mak-
ing the marriage of defectives illegal, though
of little direct use?defectives often dispense
with the rite?would be propaganda. Segrega-
tion would do more but would not prevent
normal "carriers" from passing on the defect.
The remedy which might do very much is
drastic sterilization, not only of defectives but
of carriers. The author implies that about 10%
of the population would have to be sterilized.
But this is not to be thought of. What then ?
First, a national survey to know where we
stand; next, education and propaganda. At
present the national consciousness is hardly
aware of the existence of the feeble-minded :
idiots it knows and lunatics?probably sane
and shut up by wicked doctors. When the
feeble-minded person has become familiar as
an idea and when to marry into a family hav-
ing the taint of deficiency shall carry the kind
of stigma that bastardy now bears, or coloured
blood in the United States, a step forward will
have been made. For the present " our im-
mediate object must be to bring home to the
minds of statesmen, Government departments,
local authorities, and the public, the fact that
our present sociological methods are not based
on sound biological principles." And the
remedy may come in ways which at present
we can hardly imagine. The foreshadowings
in Chap. XIII are dim, but they allow hope.
A.M.
A Study of Masturbation. By J. F. W.
Meagher. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox. 1930.
To anyone who has to deal with problems
arising in the lives of children and adolescents,
this book can be recommended with complete
sincerity. Masturbation is one of the problems
of the growing individual which is least com-
monly understood and most commonly treated
wrongly. In practice, one finds that a definite-
ly large proportion of adult neuroses are based
on wrong information secured during the time
that the patient was struggling in his mastur-
batory phase. It is one of the conditions which
appears to rouse more prejudice amongst
those who have to deal with the moral life of
children than perhaps any other subject on
which these individuals write. A subject of
this intimate nature which is dealt with from a
prejudiced point of view can only do harm to
those to whom it is directed. Dr Meagher's
book deserves, and I hope I shall be able to
give it, a more detailed review when I have
time to prepare one.
From the general point of view, he writes in
a balanced way from practical experience of
the problem that he is dealing with. His views
are broad-minded and delivered in a not too
scientific way; and he does give, what is so
often missing in books, practical means of not
only approaching the problem but also of deal-
ing with it.
There are certain points which commend the
book to myself and which I should have liked
to have seen elaborated to a greater extent-
One is the paragraph on " Attitude." I11
psychological teaching, as it is now, the ques-
tion of the individual's attitude to the facts of
life is too often ignored. Attitude is the funda-
mental means in the correction of immoral and
delinquent conduct and must be almost invari-
ably the primary point of attack in treatment.
The author, I feel, would have given greater
weight to his book had he stressed more this
question of attitude.
The other good point is the amount of stress
he lays on the results of the exaggeration o
the harmfulness of the habit of masturbation-
In a condition which is a phase of develop'
ment which has been passed through by the
majority of adults, to over exaggerate conse-
quences is to create crippling effects, yet over-
exaggeration is one of the common methods a
MENTAL WELFARE 85
present in use for the treatment of the con-
dition. This particular chapter could quite
beneficially be issued as a leaflet for the guid-
ance for those who have to train the young and
adolescent.
Dr. Meagher's views on the treatment of the
condition are sound. He does not adhere to
any one particular school of psychological
thought, but gives due weight to physical
factors which might be underlying. To my
mind, he does not sufficiently emphasise the
need for giving psychological equivalent to the
pleasure derived from the active participation
the habit during the time that the individual
ls trying to break it; but without the possibility
?f creating such a pleasure, equivalent treat-
ment is not likely to be efficacious. This book
should have wide circulation amongst those
^7ho have to deal with the moral side of the
growing child.
E.H.P.
