A Note on the Sterilization' of Mental Defectives
==================================================

By A. F. TREDGOLD, M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.S.E.
The recently published Report of the Joint Mental Deficiency Committee
of the Board of Education and the Board of Control has shown that the num-
ber of defectives in the country is almost double that ascertained by the Royal
Commission twenty years previously, and is at least 8 per 1,000 of the total
population of the country. While it would be a mistake to assume that mental
deficiency has increased to this extent in a single generation, for there is little
doubt that the ascertainment by the former enquiry was incomplete^ it is,
nevertheless, impossible to avoid the conclusion that an increase has occurred
during this time, and that the problem has now assumed such a magnitude
as to demand the most serious consideration by the community. The most
important aspect of the problem is unquestionably that of prevention, and in
regard to this it is very natural that the subject of sterilization should have
attracted a large measure of public attention.
This subject was considered very carefully by the Central Association for
Mental Welfare several years ago and in 1926 I wrote an article which was
afterwards published as a separate pamphlet. This pamphlet is now out of
print and I have been asked to write another note on the subject.
10 MENTAL WELFARE
There has been no material change in the arguments for and against the
sterilization of defectives. Its advocates make three main claims; first, that it
would greatly diminish, if not entirely eliminate, mental defect; secondly, that
even if it did not do this it would at all events greatly lessen the cost of these
persons to the community; and thirdly, that, by allowing many defectives who
are now in institutions to be at large, it would greatly add to their happiness.
The first of these arguments is clearly based upon a complete misunder-
standing as to the causation of mental defect. It is now generally recognised
that the majority of cases are a result of " inheritance." It has consequently,
not unnaturally, been assumed by those who have no great experience of
defectives and who are unacquainted with the subject of heredity, that the
mentally defective child must necessarily be the offspring of mentally defective
parents. It is of the utmost importance to realise that this is not so, and that
the defect of a child may be due to inheritance without its parents being
similarly defective. The explanation of this paradox lies in the nature of the
inheritance of these cases. Although some writers, chiefly in America, have
attempted to prove that Mental Deficiency is due to the absence in the ancestral
germ cells of certain definite constituents, and that transmission is in accordance
with the laws formulated by Mendel, these attempts have been entirely un-
successful. On the contrary, there is every reason to conclude that mental
defect is not due to the absence from the germ of a definite factor, or even of
a series of factors; but that it is the expression of an impairment of develop-
mental potentiality. In other words, it is due to a qualitative rather than to a
quantitative change; this change being of the nature of a germinal vitiation.
There is reason to think, however, that the amount of this vitiation varies not
only in the germ cells of different individuals of the same stock but also in the
germ cells of the same individual. Moreover, it is highly probable that even
with vitiated germ cells the condition of the offspring resulting therefrom
will be to some extent influenced by the nature of the ante-natal environment.
The result is that, although the majority of mental defectives come of families
whose germ cells have undergone vitiation, this change shows itself in many
other ways than mental defect. In some individuals it may be manifest as
Dementia Precox or other forms of Dementia. In others, as certain forms of
insanity or mental instability. In yet others, it may be so slight and the envir-
onment of the individual so favourable that it is not manifested at all, and he
passes through life apparently normal. Nevertheless, it is probable that all
these classes of persons are " carriers " of mental defect, and that a chance
combination of adverse circumstances may at any time so embarrass the develop-
ment of the impaired germ cells as to result in a mentally deficient offspring.
It is thus seen that mental defect may be due to inheritance, as it un-
doubtedly is in the majority of cases, without the parent or parents of the
affected child being defective. As a matter of fact, my own observations show
that, in relation to the total number of defectives, the proportion of those who
are the offspring of a certifiably defective parent or parents is extremely small.
MENTAL WELFARE n
And I have no doubt that this is the general experience of all those who have
investigated any considerable number of these cases. This, however, is a very
important fact in relation to the preventive effect of the sterilization of defec-
tives. For it follows that if every defective in existence a generation ago had
been sterilized, the number of defectives to-day would not have been appreci-
ably diminished. It also follows that if every defective now existing were to
be sterilized, the result a generation hence would be insignificant. In short,
in order to produce any marked decrease in the total number of mental defec-
tives a generation hence, it would be necessary to sterilize, or otherwise prevent
the propagation of, not merely those who are themselves defectives, but all those
who are " carriers," that is to say, every person suffering from germ vitiation.
Obviously, this is so utterly impracticable as to be impossible. It may be added
that even could this result be achieved, it is yet practically certain that the
factors which initiate that impairment of the germ cells, whose culminating
manifestation is mental defect, are still in operation, and that consequently if
every individual carrier were eliminated to-day, a fresh crop would soon come
into being. We are compelled to conclude, therefore, that from the point of
view of prevention, sterilization would not do what is claimed for it and that
its results would be relatively slight. As a matter of fact, it has been applied
for some years past in several of the United States, where some thousands of
defectives have been sterilized; but there is no evidence that it has resulted in
any diminution in the incidence of mental deficiency.
The second claim of the advocates of wholesale sterilization is that, by
permitting the discharge of defectives from institutions it would greatly de-
crease their cost to the community. This is a statistical question, but unfortun-
ately, we are without the statistics necessary to make a comparison. For while
we know the cost of defectives in institutions, we have no sufficiently extensive
figures showing their cost outside. It is to be remembered, however, that steril-
ization will merely prevent propagation. It will not make defectives more stable
or more efficient; it will not in any way lessen their social incapacity. Even the
mildest grade are defined by statute as " persons in need of care, supervision
and control for their own protection or for the protection of others," and this
need would still exist even were they to be sterilized and discharged from in-
stitutions. What would happen in this case would be that large numbers of
defective men and women, youths and girls, who are now living by no means
unhappy lives in well managed institutions, where they have companionship
?f their kind, and are engaged in useful and to some extent remunerative work,
would again be thrown upon the world to shift for themselves. They would
have to compete for a living against their more fortunate fellows, in a market
already flooded with a superfluity of labour. They would again be the butts
and tools of the ignorant, designing and unscrupulous. They would have no
real companions, and they would inevitably drift into destitution, vice and
crime. In other words, the liberation of defectives to an extent which would
make an appreciable difference to the nation in the cost of their maintenance
12 MENTAL WELFARE
in institutions, would simply result in a return to the evil days which existed
before the passing of the Mental Deficiency Act, and those who are familiar
with those days know only too well how evil they were, and how wretched
were the conditions under which thousands of mental defectives existed in this
country before 1913. Large numbers of the feeble-minded then lived a harried
existence between the workhouse, the refuge, the prison and the streets. Their
cost to the community was spread in so many different ways and borne by so
many different authorities that it is impossible to say what it amounted to, but
there is not the slightest doubt that it was very considerable. And it was a cost
accompanied by decided menace to the general well-being of the community,
quite apart from any question of propagation, and for which the community
received no return. The presence of mental defectives in a nation must always
be an uneconomic proposition, but I am of opinion that, on the whole, institu-
tional care is certainly more economical than were the conditions which
formerly prevailed and which would again prevail were any considerable
number of these persons to be discharged from such care.
There is, moreover, another important point which has to be considered
in regard to this. It is well known that under the conditions which formerly
prevailed a considerable amount of promiscuous sexual intercourse took place
between defective young women and normal males, and to a less extent,
between high-grade defective males and normal girls. It cannot be doubted
that this would have been even much more prevalent had there been no fear
of pregnancy and no risk of being mulcted of a weekly charge for the mainten-
ance of offspring. Does any experienced social worker question for a moment
that if this fear were removed, owing to these persons having been sterilized,
such promiscuous sexual intercourse would be greatly increased? But it is
intercourse of this kind which is the chief means of spreading venereal disease,
and I do not think there can be the slightest doubt that the presence in the
community of defectives who were known to be incapable of producing child-
ren would be followed by a considerable increase in these diseases. Not only
is the feeble-minded girl more amenable to sexual solicitation, but it is well
known that her very defect makes her unaware of the danger of venereal
disease to her health, oblivious of the need for treatment and undeterred by the
state she is in from responding to further solicitation. The advocates of steril-
ization may, and do, pooh-pooh this aspect of the question and affect to regard
it as a thing which is not at all likely to happen, but I venture to believe that
what I have stated will be endorsed by everyone having practical experience
of defectives.
The third claim is that sterilization, by permitting the discharge of defec-
tives from institutions, would conduce to their greater happiness. It is true
that a small proportion of defectives do resent being detained in institutions.
They object to the routine and the discipline. They dislike having to do any
work. They would much rather be released from all oversight and control
and be where they could do exactly what they pleased, how they pleased and
MENTAL WELFARE 13
when they pleased. Almost invariably, however, these are the very persons
who have proved their utter incapacity for social adaptation, who are so fickle
and unstable that no one will employ them, and for whom the supervision,
against which they fret, is absolutely necessary in their own interests. It is
exceedingly doubtful whether such persons would be any happier outside than
inside an institution. But cases of this kind are in the minority. It mav safely
be said that the majority of defectives are by no means unhappy in institutions.
On the contrary, institutional life affords far greater opportunities for compan-
ionship, recreation and amusement than they would obtain outside, besides
shielding them from that constant reminder of inferiority which results from
their incapacity to succeed in competition against their normal fellows.
So far I have been considering the question of sterilization as a general
policy and a wholesale measure to be applied to all defectives. I think it is
clear that it would fail to accomplish any of the things which have been claimed
for it. It would have very little effect in preventing mental deficiency; it
would not reduce the cost of mental defectives to the nation; and it would
not really add to their happiness. In other words, on preventive, economic and
humanitarian grounds, segregation, as a general policy, is far preferable to
sterilization and is without its disadvantages. Segregation not only does all
that sterilization would do in preventing propagation, but it does other things
as well. It removes the many dangers to the well-being of society which
would arise from the presence in its midst of a large number of unstable, un-
trained and inefficient defectives. It is more conducive to their happiness. It
ls> in the long run, almost certainly less costly; and, if carried out in suitably
staffed and up-to-date institutions, it is attended with some degree of remun-
erative return.
It is now necessary to consider another aspect of the question. It is recog-
nised that there are many defectives who are stable and well conducted and for
whom, after training in institutions, suitable employment could probably be
found outside. In such cases the chief objection to their discharge from institu-
tional care is the danger of procreation. The question therefore arises whether
sterilization might not be made a condition of such discharge, and whether it
might not be possible by its application in suitable cases, to reduce to some ex-
tent, the number of persons in institutions. It is obvious that this is a totally
different proposition to that of the wholesale and indiscriminate sterilization we
nave hitherto been considering. It is also one which has received a considerable
measure of support from persons having practical knowledge of defectives. It
is therefore worthy of careful and serious consideration.
My personal opinion is that there are certain cases of this kind in which
sterilization might well be an appropriate and desirable procedure. Its sanction
w?uld, however, necessitate an alteration in the Law and the practical diffi-
culty, to my mind, consists in drafting such legal definitions and regulations
as would ensure its restriction to suitable cases. It must be remembered that
emands for the discharge of patients who are quite unsuitable for discharge
i4 MENTAL WELFARE
are very frequent and insistent. They come from parents, friends, lay com-
mittees and authorities responsible for payment. If sterilization were legalized
these demands would certainly be increased and there would be a very real
danger of the operation being extended to those defectives who were quite un-
suited to be outside institutions. In the minds of those who had not carefully
considered the matter the discharge of these persons would appear so safe and
it would unquestionably be used as a lever in favour of such discharge.
Now it cannot be too strongly emphasised that, whether sterilized or un-
sterilized, institutional treatment has been shown by years of experience to be
the most satisfactory means of dealing with the bulk of defectives. It cannot
be too strongly insisted upon that, even if every defective now in existence
were to be sterilized, the number of those unfitted to be at large (on totally
other grounds than the danger of propagation), is so great that more institu-
tional accommodation than now exists would have to be provided. There is
a very real danger that the legalization of sterilization, even to a particular type
of patients, would delay still further the provision by local authorities of in-
stitutional accommodation, which is so urgently needed. Indeed, by giving
rise to a false sense of security, it would not only do this; it would almost
certainly also prevent the development of adequate methods of guardianship
and supervision for those who might with safety remain in the communitv, did
these methods exist. It would therefore react to the disadvantage alike of the
community and the defectives. I do not say that these objections are insuper-
able; but they are certainly serious and require careful consideration before
sterilization, even if intended to be restricted to a particular class, were made
legal.
I have not considered it within my province to deal with any objections
to sterilization which might be made on religious or ethical grounds, although
doubtless such would be advanced. Nor have I considered the question from
the point of view of public opinion, although doubtless this is at present so
unripe that much propaganda would be needed before there would be any
chance of a Bill to legalize sterilization being passed by Parliament. In this
short survey I have confined myself entirely to the biological, economic and
social aspects of the question and I have done so without any personal bias
either for or against the procedure. I have tried to show that, from these aspects
alone, the matter is far from being so simple as is often assumed, especially by
those who have little practical experience of mental deficiency. Indeed, it is
not too much to say that it is one which simply bristles with difficulties and
which certainly requires the most careful consideration before any alteration
in the law is made. It is a matter in which panic legislation cannot be too
strongly deprecated. At the same time, the problem of mental deficiencv has
unquestionably now attained grave proportions. It is one which is intimately
connected with many other important social problems, and the total number
of defectives and their ratio to die general population are increasing. It is
high time that a thorough investigation were made by some authoritative and
impartial body into its causation, its relationship to other social problems and
into any means, including sterilization, by which it might be prevented.
