Accommodation Coleshill Hall, Birmingham
==========================================

98 MENTAL WELFARE


The Birmingham City Council in 1925 sanctioned the purchase of the
Coleshill Hall Estate and at the same time approved recommendations for the
adaptation of the Hall for the accommodation of eighty patients and staff and
the erection of three villa annexes to accommodate 210 patients. The building
scheme was subsequently revised to allow for further expansion to provide
accommodation for 1,000 patients.

The Institution, which stands in an estate of 180 acres, is designed on the
villa system, which permits of properly graded schemes of segregation. The
villas are designed in a simple domestic style, the aim being to make them as
uninstitutional as possible. Extensive stable buildings have been altered and
an up-to-date steam laundry installed. The cost of the scheme works out
approximately at ^89,000.

The Hall was officially opened by Mr. Brock, Chairman of the Board of
Control, on the 16th September.

Stallington Hall, Stoke-on-Trent
---------------------------------

This Institution for the mental defectives of the City of Stoke-on-Trent
was opened on September 18th. The home supersedes the smaller home,
The Cloughs, at Newcastle, which had accommodiation for only 45 patients.
Stallington will accommodate 81 patients and is so situated that it can be
extended in the future along colony lines.

The accommodation, which includes all the necessary bedrooms, dorm-
itories, rest rooms, etc., has also a fully equipped surgery capable of serving
as an operating theatre and a special dental department. Adult males are to
be accommodated in a new block built some distance from the Hall.

Exhall Institution, Coventry
-----------------------------

This Institution was formally opened on October 1st. The Institution
was formerly the Exhall Isolation Hospital and was purchased by the Coventry
Board of Guardians in 1929. The Corporation has since made an additional
purchase of 33 acres of adjacent land. Thirty male patients from the London
Road Institution were to be admitted early this month. Apart from the central
administrative block, there arc three pavilions which will be utilised as dorm-
itories, dining and recreation rooms, etc., and two other buildings, one to be
used as the general stores of the Institution and the other as workshops for
patients engaged in indoor occupations.

Eaton Grange, Norwich
----------------------

A new Institution for 37 female mental deficients was opened in Septem-
ber, at Eaton Grange, Unthank Road, Norwich. Eaton Grange was formerly
a boarding-school and has easily been converted into an ideal small institution.
With the exception of a few items, practically the whole of the equipment was
supplied by local firms.

Staffordshire " Study Week "
----------------------------

An experimental Study Week for the Staff of the Staffordshire Associa-
tion was held from August 25th to 29th. In 1930 the Association became
responsible for the organisation of 8 full-time Occupation Centres in the county
and as its staff was increased accordingly, it was felt that it would be desirable
for all members of the staff to meet and through discussion and practical work,
to endeavour to bring the highest attainable standard into the work of each
Centre.

The average attendance during the week was 14. The mornings were
taken up with Lectures and the afternoons with practical work in the form of
Handicrafts, Rhythmics and Singing Games. A member of the staff of the
Arts and Crafts Company, Stafford, gave practical instruction in the various
crafts. One day was devoted to a visit to Monyhull Colony. The week was
most successful, not only from the educational aspect but also as a means of
breaking down the feeling that Supervisors are of necessity isolated in their
own particular Centres.

Appointments
Board of Control
------------------

On the passing of the Mental Treatment Act, the Board of Control, with
the approval of the Minister of Health, have appointed Mr. P. Barter, of the
Ministry of Health, to be Joint Secretary of the Board. (Mr. Barter was Sec-
retary to the Committee on Asylum Administration, 1921-22; the Royal Com-
mission on Lunacy and Mental Disorder, 1924-26; and the Royal Commission
on Local Government, 1928-29.)

General Nursing Council
------------------------

Lt.-Colonel J. R. Lord, C.B.E., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., Medical Superintend-
ent of Horton Mental Hospital, Epsom, and Lecturer in Clinical Psychiatry,
London (Royal Free Hospital) School of Medicine for Women, has been
appointed by the Minister of Health a member of the General Nursing Council
for England and Wales.
too MENTAL WELFARE
Forthcoming Lectures
Royal Institute of Public Health

A Course of Lectures on " The Prevention of Accidents, Disorders and
Disease," has been arranged by the Royal Institute of Public Health to be held
on Wednesdays, at 4 p.m., commencing on Wednesday, October 15th. The
lecture most likely to be of interest to our readers is arranged for Wednesday,
December 10th. Sir Hubert Bond, Commissioner of the Board of Control,
is to lecture on " The Prevention of Mental Illness." Mr. Brock, Chairman of
the Board of Control, will take the Chair.

All lectures will be held at the Lecture Hall of the Institute, 37, Russell
Square, London, W.C.i.

Tavistock Square Clinic
------------------------

A Course of Eight Lectures on " The Principles of Mental Health," will
be given at the Friends House, Euston Road, N.W.i, at 6 p.m., on Mondays,
beginning October 13th, 1930, by Dr. J. A. Hadfield. The Fee for the Course
is jfi is. od. Single tickets at 5/- will be issued as far as accommodation admits.
Full particulars and tickets can be obtained from The Honorary Lecture Sec-
retary, 51, Tavistock Square, W.C.i.

National Council for Mental Hygiene
-------------------------------------

A series of lecture discussions will be delivered at the Lecture Room of
the Medical Society of London, 11, Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, W.i,
on Thursdays, at 5.15 p.m., commencing Thursday, October 16th and (with
the exception of November 7th) continuing up to November 27th. Amongst
the subjects for discussion are: Preventive Treatment in Childhood (Dr. Alice
Hutchison), Mental Conflict and the Development of Character (Prof. W.
Brown), The Psychology of Adolescence (Dr. Doris Odium), and The Import-
ance of Mental Deficiency (Dr. R. G. Gordon). Tickets, price 1/6 each or 7/6
for the Course, can be obtained from The Secretary, National Council for
Mental Hygiene, 78, Chandos House, Palmer Street, S.W.i, or at the doors.
Conference on Mental Welfare, December 11th, 12th and 13th
A Conference on Mental Welfare, organised by the C.A.M.W., will be
held, by courtesy of the British Medical Association, in the Great Hall of
British Medical Association House, Tavistock Square, W.C., on Thursday,
Friday and Saturday (morning), December nth, 12th and 13th, 1930.
The Rt. Hon. Arthur Greenwood, M.P., Minister of Health, has kindly
promised to attend the Conference and to give the Opening Address at the
Morning Session of the nth December; an address will also be given by Mr.
L. G. Brock, C.B., Chairman of the Board of Control.

The first two days will be devoted to discussion of matters arising out of
the Mental Treatment Act, and the Mental Deficiency Acts, including one
session dealing with the Need for an Enquiry into the Causation and Preven-
tion of Mental Deficiency. At the Saturday morning session, when it is hoped
that teachers will find it possible to attend, School Re-organisation as it affects
the Education of the Mentally Defective and Retarded Child, will be the sub-
ject of consideration.

On Thursday, December nth, a luncheon for delegates will be held at
the Hotel Russell, W.C.

Further information may be obtained from the offices of the C.A.M.W.,
24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.i.

Social Investigator. Research into Mental Deficiency
------------------------------------------------------

Applications are invited for the post of Social Investigator to undertake
field work in connection with Research into Mental Deficiency and its causes.
The appointment is made jointly by the Medical Research Council, The Darwin
Trust, and the Royal Institution, Colchester.
The person appointed will be a member of the Staff of the Royal Institu-
tion, and must reside in Colchester. The first piece of research will take the
form of a thorough investigation into the mental capacity and home conditions
of the families of known defectives, and will be under the direction of a
Research Medical Officer. It is hoped and expected that Research Work will
continue for years.

Candidates must have experience of social conditions, home visiting and
mental deficiency.

Commencing salary at rate of ^275 to ^300 a year, according to experi-
ence, non-resident. Travelling expenses will be paid.
A Form of Application may be obtained from the Medical Superin-
tendent, Royal Institution, Colchester, and must be returned to him before the
1st November, 1930.

Departmental Committee on Relief of the Casual Poor
This Departmental Committee, which was set up in September, 1929,
published their Report in July last. The whole of the Report makes interesting
reading, particularly in view of the new administration of the Poor Law under
the Local Government Act, 1929. It will be remembered that Section 3 of
that Act gave the Minister of Health power to make orders combining the
areas of two or more councils for any purpose connected with the administra-
tion of Poor Law functions. At the date of publishing this Report, the Depart-
mental Committee stated that 16 such Joint Vagrancy Committees had been
established, covering 36 administrative counties and 63 County Boroughs. The
Committee give a summary of their recommendations which they consider
necessary.

(1) Proper arrangements for bathing, sleeping, cleansing, feeding and
work.
(2) Properly qualified staff to give casuals the personal attention they
need.
(3) Regular medical inspection.
(4) Co-operation by means of vagrancy committees of neighbouring
councils.
(5) Co-operation by means of advisory committees representing the
vagrancy committee, the standing joint committee or watch com-
mittee, the Ministry of Health, the employment exchange, and the
voluntary bodies in the area specially interested in the assistance of
destitute wayfarers and their restoration to the ranks of industry.
Dr. E. O. Lewis carried out an investigation into the number of casuals
suffering from mental disability. He visited a number of casual wards in
different parts of the country and out of the 592 casuals he examined, 93 or
1:5.7% were feeble-minded; 32 or 5.4% were insane and 34 or 5.7% were in
a psychoneurotic condition. The results of his investigation are given in an
Appendix to the Report, which can be purchased from H.M. Stationery Office,
price 1/6 net.

Mental Treatment Act
---------------------

The Mental Treatment Bill received the Royal Assent on July 10th, 1930,
just after our last issue had gone to press. Copies of the Act can be obtained
from H.M. Stationery Office, price 6d. net.
A Session of the C.A.M.W. Conference in December will be devoted to
discussion on possibilities of future developments in mental health work under
this Act.

Memorial to Margaret Macdowall
-------------------------------

It has been suggested by some of those who knew and admired Margaret
Macdowall and her work for children of limited intelligence, that many might
care to subscribe to a memorial, to take the form of a new edition of her book,
" Simple Beginnings in the Training of Mentally Defective Children." This
book, which was first published in 1929 and is still in constant demand, has
been out of print for some time.

If, as it is hoped, the response to this appeal brings in a substantial sum,
it is proposed to use the balance, and any proceeds from the sale of the book,
to create a Fund from which grants or loans could be made to help educated
girls to train for work among defective children.

Donations large or small will be very welcome and should be sent to
Mr. Harold Morland, Cherrycroft, Gerrards Cross, Bucks. The Fund will
close on October 31st, 1930.

Establishment of Special Classes, Southern Rhodesia
The C.A.M.W. has been asked to assist in finding two Trained Certifi-
cated Teachers with experience and special training in teaching feeble-minded
children, to take charge of two Special Classes that are to be established by the
Education Department of Southern Rhodesia at Salisbury and Buluwayo.
The initial salary will be ^270 to ^33? Per annum, according to experi-
ence, rising by incremental scales of ^15 per annum to ^420 per annum.
Teachers will be required to sign a three years' agreement; passage will be
paid, and they will be required to sail immediately after Christmas, to start
work as early in 1931 as possible.

We are informed that the cost of board residence in Southern Rhodesia
ranges from ^8 to ^12 per month; there are a limited number of vacancies for
teachers in the school hostels, where certain supervisory duties have to be under-
taken out of school hours, in which cost of living is only jC2 per month.
Teachers who would like to apply for these two posts are asked to get
into touch as soon as possible with the Secretary, Society for the Oversea Settle-
ment of British Women, Caxton House West, Tothill Street, Westminster,
S.W.i.

Public Health Reports
----------------------

As we go to Press we have received two important Reports, the Eleventh
Annual Report of the Ministry of Health for the year 1929-30 and the Annual
Report of the London County Council on Public Health for the year. Both
these Reports will be reviewed in the January issue of Mental Welfare.
