Visiting in Mental Hospitals
============================

The systematic visiting of mental hospitals is of comparatively recent
origin and as a means to the formation of a link between patients in hospital
and the outside world presents valuable possibilities in the field of mental health
work for the future. In the hospital visitor, the patient absorbed in his own
problems and imaginings, from which his immediate surroundings afford him
no escape, finds someone who, coming to him from the outside world, speaks to
him naturally of events and happenings there. A patient who is capable, at
least for the moment, of dissociating himself from his own too intense inner
life, will welcome the opportunity of talking to "someone sane." To the
extent that he is able to interest himself in outside events or in matters concerning the visitor's own life, a better balance will have been effected between
"inner" and "outer" in his mind.

Mental hospital visiting is not easy at the beginning. The visitor is given
keys and told that she may go anywhere in the hospital, but the establishment
?f actual contact with the patients is slow and gradual work. At first she may
even get the impression that she is not wanted. Only after she has become a
^miliar figure to the patients will she see faces brighten at her approach and
"ear expressions of gratitude for her visit. The visitor has to learn by ex-
perience how to " take " the patients. She must never be disconcerted at an
extraordinary remark or unexpected behaviour, but must take everything good
naturedly and if possible put a little humour into the situation. A mild joke
WlH often relax tension and win a cheerful response from a patient. On one
occasion I suggested to a rather gloomy patient that she should look at the
world through " rose-coloured spectacles." This idea pleased her and I heard
er afterwards explaining to the other patients how they might wear rose-
coloured spectacles. I cannot help thinking that this idea and the mental
curiosity aroused by it may have been one of the factors which conduced to an
improvement in her condition (she was soon afterwards discharged and when
saw her last was making good in her own home).

38 MENTAL WELFARE
In order to effect successful contacts the visitor must also cultivate the
power to talk on any subject that may interest a patient. With one patient I
usually discuss with animation the different makes of typewriters, he holding
a brief for the " Yost." With another patient I was once trying to establish a
contact under difficult conditions, as I could not talk to him about his wife,
from whom he was separated, nor about his children, to whom his
behaviour had not been impeccable, nor about his work, since he had
been unemployed for several years; finally, we found a topic of
friendly conversation in the Derby. The visitor must never be dis-
couraged by an unfriendly look, for sometimes a quite morose looking
patient will, when addressed, make an amiable remark about the weather.

A handshake will perhaps establish friendly relations when no conversation
is possible. I have often offered to shake hands with a patient and thought
that no response was forthcoming; then slowly the arm would begin to move
and after the exercise of some considerable patience on my part the hand would
finally be put into mine. Even when a patient refuses to shake hands it is
possible that a good impression may have been made on his (or her) mind by
the offer of a handshake; I had evidence in one case that the refusal was due
to an inhibition of which the patient was herself aware and which she re-
gretted; her very regret, perhaps, helping to remove the inhibition, since later
she took trouble to come and speak to me and explain the former situation.

With experience, also, the visitor learns to use tact in her relations with
patients. By speaking too frankly it is possible to alienate a patient and so
lose all power to help her. It is best to take a patient on her own ground,
listen to her with patience and then try to lead her away from the subject of
her delusions. Any hint that she was in the wrong might be fatal to friendly
relations; I have even established a more or less friendly contact with one
patient on the understanding that I am everything that is wicked and bad.
The visiting of the patients' homes is an important part of the work of
the mental hospital visitor, not only because of the actual results obtained in
persuading the relatives of patients to visit them, but because of the additional
link formed beween the hospital visitor and the patients through this work
undertaken by her on their behalf. With most patients the chief interest in their
lives is provided by the visits of their relatives. In the case of patients whom I
know well, I can often tell from their appearance whether they have recently
been visited by their friends or not. The gratitude which they feel to the hospital
visitor when she can give them news of their friends or has procured a visit
from a relative, gives her an additional power of suggestion over their minds,
which she can use to good effect. In the visiting of the relatives, also, much
educational work can be done; often the relatives will adopt the hospital visitor
as their special friend, of whom, perhaps, they stand almost as much in need
as the patient. The daughter of one patient (whom I have never seen) writes
to me " with fondest love," and considers me quite as much a friend as her
mother does.

Visits paid to the homes for the medical staff in order to gain information
with regard to a patient's previous history are also of great interest. In the
case of a patient newly certified the relatives will often express relief in being
able to speak to someone who understands the nature of the illness and who
will reassure them as to the treatment received by the patient at the hospital.
If such investigation were made more regularly much valuable material for
research and data for the compilation of statistics might be obtained.

Perhaps the most hopeful element in the hospital visitor's work arises
from the fact, often noticeable, that the insane patient tends to identify him
self with the visitor as " sane," dissociating himself from the other "insane"
patients (the projection of his own " insane " self). Sometimes the patient
will give the suggestion tiiat he is working with the hospital visitor, or at
least sympathising with and understanding her work, for the benefit of the
" insane." One would infer from this that every insane person has a sane
self and that this sane self tends to come to light in the presence of someone
who, coming from the " sane " world, can yet by understanding and intuition
act as a friend to the " insane."

Alice Raven.
