Margaret Macdowall
===================

Margaret Macdowall, a well known and leading figure among pioneer
teachers of the mentally defective, was born on July 20th, 1862, at Thornton
Dale (her father was Vicar of Rillington in 1864). She had a very delicate
girlhood which seriously interfered with her education, but in spite of that
she lived to be nearly 68. When special opportunities came, her doctor
(attending her for a very severe attack of pneumonia) forbade the examination
which would have given her the certificates she so ardently desired. But she
did very well without! Before this disaster she had realised her vocation.
She had been living in a family where an imbecile child called out her affec-
tionate interest. She became conscious that she could help him and Dr.
Shuttleworth who was consulted, saw that her gifts for doing so were excep-
tional. When it became necessary for the boy to be placed as a private patient
in the Royal Albert Institution at Lancaster, Margaret accompanied him for
a time. Here was laid the foundation of her knowledge of the mentally
afflicted, based on practical experience under a sympathetic doctor and daily
contact with every variety of type. Just at this period (1895) Dr. Shuttleworth
introduced her to Bertha James who was looking about for girls suitable for
training in the private school she was hoping to start for the mentally defective.
To make a long story short, the " Little School " was opened at Ealing
(after a period of preparation at West Kensington) and Margaret was installed
as Head Mistress, with others to help her. Till old age forbade travelling, Dr.
Shuttleworth was ever the kindest and best of advisers. After a time the
School was placed entirely in her hands, and when she left Ealing, it
opened out into a larger and wider life at Avonhurst, Burgess Hill, in Sussex.
It was to Avonhurst that public authorities often sent ambitious teachers or
students to study Miss Macdowall's methods. Nothing was withheld from
them. All points were discussed and her original apparatus was freely lent.
Old students can recall her emphatic and infectious zeal as she held forth?
sometimes with indignation if the girls were careless or if " The Cause " was
in any way slighted or deserted?but in most cases with success.

Often asked to lecture publicly she invariably declined but at last was
persuaded to write the book " Simple Beginnings," which quickly ran through
two editions and which is about to be republished as a Memorial with portraits
and prefaces. It is so vividly characteristic that it gives a true impression of
herself which her friends at once will recognise and value.

She lived through a period of great changes. When the School began
there were hardly half a dozen English Medical specialists who were also
educationalists and the world in general, if it thought at all, believed that
nothing could be done for low types of defective except ensure comfort and
kindness " out of the way." And it was Margaret's genius and almost magic
understanding of the mentally defective child that did much to stir up public
indifference into intelligent action on their behalf.

She was one with many others who have worked indefatigably from the
end of last century for the welfare of defectives.

After several severe illnesses from which, though only partially recovered,
she valiantly " began again," the end came rather unexpectedly. She died at
her post on March 9th, 1930, and was buried in St. Andrew's Churchyard,
Burgess Hill. Her " Children " dropped flowers on the coffin already hidden
by beautiful wreaths: no painful memories will mar recollection of their
farewell to the friend they loved so much and who loved them. May she rest
in peace.
B.J.
