Mental Hygiene and Social Work
===============================

54 MENTAL WELFARE
Book Reviews *82 Abstracts
By
Porter R. Lee and Marion E. Kenworthy,
M.D. New York. The Commonwealth
Fund Division of Publications, 1929. $1.50.
In Mental Hygiene and Social Work, Mr.
Porter Lee and Dr. Kenworthy have issued a
report on a vitally important experiment in
the fields of psychology and sociology. The
Commonwealth Fund of New York has set up
as one of its aims the prevention of delin-
quency, and as part of its programme the
Bureau of Children's Guidance was established
in 1921 within the New York School of Social
Work. The Bureau served the triple purpose
of providing a clinic for the treatment of ner-
vous or difficult children, a research unit for
investigation into problems of normal and ab-
normal psychology, and a field for the practical
training of social workers, psychologists and
psychiatrists. The Bureau was maintained in
its virginal form for five and one half years,
and during that time five hundred and ninety
one children were treated. The staff therefore
gained a body of experience of the highest
value both for child guidance and for the train-
ing of social workers, and this experience is
set out in Mental Hygiene and Social Work
with admirable clarity and open-mindedness.
The book, however, is much more than an
ordinary report of an experiment. In two
chapters, Parent and Child, and Child and
Parent, the psychological theory on which
mental hygiene work must be based is put
before us, largely through the description of
illustrative cases. By now we have all heard
so many pathetic little stories of pathetic little
children in the large literature of propaganda
and appeal, that we may have become slightly
impatient with this mehod of presentation.
There are no grounds for impatience here. Or
there are grounds for impatience of another
kind?impatience to go and act on a newly dis-
covered truth. Those of us who have known
psychology as a rather dull and academic
"subject," sociology as concerned mainly with
the strange doings of savages in remote parts
of the world, or statisics on birth rates and
divorce rates and rates of all kinds, philosophy
as incomprehensible jargon about topics of in-
finitesimal importance, may find in this book
an illumination of human motives, a theory of
social values, a plan for human education
which will fire those of us whose work forces
us to interfere in the lives of others with a
desire to revise our evaluations of people and
institutions, and build anew 011 better founda-
tions.
We are shown in these chapters how close
is the organic unity of family life, so that an
emotional disturbance in one member spreads
like a wave, or like a fire, or like a fog, accord-
ing to its nature, to the other members. Trees
are bent by the prevailing winds, and we can-
not understand their shape without knowing
about the winds. The prevailing psychological
wind which shapes a child's behaviour may be
the anxiety of a widowed mother, the discord
between quarrelling parents, the jealousy of
an older brother. We cannot hope to help the
child without doing something to allay or de-
flect the wind.
But we are not only helped in this book
to deal with established evils, we are given
practical advice for preventing their occur-
rence. The path which the child follows in
his journey to maturity can, given goodwill
and intelligence in those around him, be so
planned for him that many of his difficulties
will appear only as easily climbed steps, each
leading to a new satisfaction in achievement.
The second half of the report deals with the
subject of training for social work in the field
of mental health. Here again the interest of
the exposition lies not so much in the content
of the training scheme outlined, though that in
itself is excellent, as in the revelation of a
pedagogical method based on a new insight
into the difficulties of adults learning at the
same time an involved science and a difficult
art.
An appendix gives the formal outlines used
in the examination of patients at the Bureau
of Children's Guidance. Social workers may
at first feel somewhat amazed at the amount of
personal and family history considered necess-
ary for an adequate social examination. It
must be understood, however, that this is
material which will emerge gradually during
what usually becomes a long and friendly re-
lationship with the family, and not evidence to
be wrung from unwilling witnesses in a single
painful interview.
Some statistical analyses of the Bureau's case
records are also offered, unfortunately with-
MENTAL WELFARE 55
out comment. The figures in themselves are
highly interesting and one is anxious to hear
the opinion of the workers themselves of these
results. For instance, the fact that more than
twice as many boys as girls were referred to
the Bureau for treatment is noteworthy. The
comparative representation of the various
racial groups is also striking. Thirty-nine per
cent, of the children were of Jewish origin.
It is impossible, however, to judge how much,
if anything, this fact means, without knowing
the numerical proportion of Jews in the pop-
ulation of New York City as a whole, and
other possible factors which may control the
size of this group.
The Bureau frankly admits its failures,
which it estimates at one fifth of the total case
load. Some people may think this a large pro-
Portion. But when one considers the com-
plexity of the task in child guidance, the new-
ness of the work, and the fact that many of
these failures occurred in the early days, when
the Bureau was at its newest and most ex-
perimental, one may wonder rather at the high
Percentage of partial and complete successes.
I have not seen the book on sale in England.
Readers may therefore be glad to know where
*t can be obtained. It can be got direct from
the Commonwealth Fund Division of Publica-
tions, Fuller Buildings, 57th Street and Mad-
!j?011 Avenue, New York City, at a price of
?H .50.
E.L.
Cattell Group Intelligence Scale. Pre-
pared by R. B. Cattell, B.Sc., Ph.D. Pub-
lished by George G. Harrap & Co. Specimen
Set and Booklet, 3/6.
the booklet supplied with these tests the
author states that his aim has been "to produce
Vtf* *nteHigence scales capable of testing the
A o e range of intelligence development from
at of the normal child of eight to that of the
oderately gifted adult and constructed on
in!! r-m Principles." Three scales of increas-
ing difficulty have been prepared: Scale 1
ended for normal children aged 8 to 11,
^ for children of mental ages 11 to 15,
;Va j ^ ^or mental ages of 15 years and up-
th ' *s' ^or adults of average and more
an average ability. The author thinks that
by using three separate scales, each designed
for an age span of only a few years, a more
accurate measurement of ability can be ob-
tained than by using scales of less limited com-
pass. Alternative scales, exactly parallel in
construction, are also provided for use in re-
testing.
In constructing the tests, the author claims
to have been guided by certain principles: ?
(a) To include only those types of tests al-
ready proved to be most highly saturated with
" g " (Spearman's " general ability ").
(b) To expect only a bare minimum of gen-
eral knowledge on the part of the subject as a
working basis for the mental operations dealt
with by the tests.
(c) To assume a much more limited vocabu-
lary than has hitherto been demanded in most
intelligence tests.
(d) To arrange the successive items in each
test in increasing order of difficulty.
(e) To facilitate the use of the scales for
large numbers by rendering the scoring as
simple and rapid as possible.
The total amount of time taken in the actual
working of the tests amounts to 58 minutes in
the case of Scale 1, and 70 minutes in the case
of the other two Scales. The individual tests
are timed and two rest pauses of five minutes
and one of ten minutes are introduced in
Scale 1. At the time the rest pauses occur,
the succeeding test is exposed on the opposite
page of the book. This seems an unfortunate
arangement, since the pupils are to be en-
couraged to talk during these intervals and,
if possible, to play out of doors. The usual
plan of having the printing upside down on
the opposite page would have been a simple
way of avoiding any possibility of discussion
of the succeeding test.
The majority of the tests are of a type now
familiar to those who have followed the dev-
elopment of group tests in recent years. The
scales include several forms of information or
relations tests, such as Essentials, Parallels,
Opposites, Classifications, and Sentence Com-
pletions; and the usual forms of reasoning tests
such as Absurdities, Analogies, Inferences,
Best Reason, Riddles and Picture Completion
Tests. The last named follow the principle of
the Healy Completion Test, but instead of
blocks to be selected and fitted into the spaces,
56 MENTAL WELFARE
we have a row of picture insets. The two
correct insets have to be chosen and joined up
by an arrow line with the two appropriate
blank squares in the picture, a somewhat diffi-
cult method of solution for children of 8 to 11.
Certain details in two or three of the tests
are open to criticism. In Scale 1, for example,
the sample sentences to be completed show
only one omitted word, the position being in-
dicated by a mark of interrogation. Several
of the test sentences, however, contain a sec-
ond omission not to be filled and indicated by
dots. To younger children this is bound to be
confusing, especially in such an example as :
Wheels are the .... of Motor Cars.
(Trains
Aeroplanes
Animals
Fish
In Test 8 of the same scale it is evidently
assumed that " lane " can have only one
grandfather, since the other might be no rela-
tion at all to the cousin indicated ! Several of
the pictures in Test 2 of the same scale are
badly drawn. A blank in one of the pictures
cuts off half of a house, but none of the insets
supplies the other half, and all the insets are
devoid of the rain which is falling heavily on
the whole scene.
It should be noted that in Scale 1 nine out
of the eleven tests are linguistic in nature. It
is doubtful if tests demanding such a degree
of facility in reading and of ability to inter-
pret linguistic terms, should be used to this
extent for children below the mental age of
10 years. Are psychologists agreed that in
the majority of young children " g " shows
itself to the best advantage through problems
presented in linguistic form ?
It is suggested in the instructions that for
children " aged 7 and 8 " the tests should be
read out from beginning to end by the exam-
iner. This means that the children must do the
tests, if at all, at the rate they are read out; it
at once alters the conditions of testing. The
slow children, if left to themselves, might be
able to puzzle out at least some of the solu-
tions, but urged on by the reading of the ex-
aminer, might accomplish nothing at all.
The booklet supplied does not indicate in
any way how the tests were standardised,
though perhaps Dr. Cattell has published this
separately. It is hinted that Scale 1 is "some-
what tentative, including tests that have not
been widely tried out." Surely the accurate
standardisation of a scale is what brings it,
if at all, into the realm of real usefulness. It
is therefore unfortunate that these scales have
been put on the market before that stage has
been reached.
No norms are given in the booklet but it is
stated that these may be obtained separately.
E.L.S.R.
Sterilization for Human Betterment. By
E. S. Gosney and Paul Popenhoe. The Mac-
millan Co., New York. 1929. 8/6.
In the institutions of the State of California,
6,255 sterilizations, for one reason or another,
had been performed prior to the year 1929.
This is three times as many official steriliza-
tions as had been perfonned in all the rest of
the United States. It was a praiseworthy task
to trace the records and results of these steril-
izations as far as possible. This has been done
under the general supervision of Dr. Paul Pop-
enhoe, but presumably Mr. Gosney took his
share of the responsibility.
In the first part of their book, the authors
give a summary of their findings and in the
second part some conclusions to which these
findings, and a general consideration of steril-
izations elsewhere, have led them. It should
be noted that of the 6,255 sterilizations under
consideration, only 1,488 in all are described
as having been done on account of feeble-
mindedness : even so, the results of a really
scientific enquiry into this relatively small
number would have been interesting and of
some value. Unfortunately, the impression
that the book leaves is that the research was
not very thorough, and that it certainly was
not unbiased. Both in the way certain facts
are stated, and even more conspicuously in the
arguments about the facts and the conclusions
drawn from them, the desire to prove a thesis
is more evident than a desire to discuss the
truth. Over and over again in cases where
sterilization had been effected, good results are
attributed to such sterilizations almost entirely,
whereas it appears at least equally possible
that they were the consequence of institutional
care, training, or supervision. The authors
may claim to have shown, what has never been
MENTAL WELFARE 57
seriously in dispute, that the operation is in
the great majority of cases effective for its
purpose in the individual, and that it can be
performed without serious risk to life or health.
There is no proof that it has any deleterious
effects upon character or conduct; and although
a mild claim that it has a beneficial effect
seems to be suggested, there is certainly no
proof of this either.
A not uncommon objection to sterilization
has been that the patient would be more likely
than before to indulge in promiscuous sexual
intercourse and thereby to perpetuate certain
evils; the small number of cases investigated
ln this regard do not appear to substantiate
this objection, but truth in this matter must be
very difficult to come by. Nevertheless, in spite
?f these serious deficiencies and limitations, the
authors have evidently desired to state their
conclusions with a certain degree of modera-
tion in contrast to the wild and exaggerated
statements only too often made on this subject.
One of their first statements is this; " By
sterilizing all mentally defective persons, the
Production of mentally defective persons would
not be stopped, for many would still be pro-
duced from apparently sound parents; but at
least the number of mentally defective
Persons in the community could be re-
duced by perhaps as much as half in
hree or four generations." This seems to
. e a pure guess, for no criteria are produced to
Justify it( aild it would probably be regarded
s optimistic by those most qualified to express
,n ^Piuion in this country. Moreover, the
s erilization of all mentally defective persons
as Postulated, is impossible as a practical
r?Position. As an effective eugenic measure,
f c'rilization, as the authors implicitly acknow-
ledge, would require to be performed on
^Proximately one-tenth of the whole popula-
on : " the number of persons in the United
e'Hi W^? are definitely inferior mentally,
tier because of disease or because of defic-
^'ncy, must be nearly 10,000,000." At the
su?St> results ?f the Californian enquiry
tio the desirability of further investiga-
va]11 as to whether sterilizaion might be of real
safe*2 aS a measure which would result in the
^ return to the community from institutions
th a somewhat larger number of defectives
^ould otherwise be possible.
H. B. Brackenbury.
Lip-Reading. By Irene R. Ewing. Man-
chester University Press. 3/6 net.
This small book of less than 100 pages con-
tains a vast amount of information on the diffi-
cult Art of Lip-reading, or, as the author more
accurately calls it, Speech-reading.
Mrs. Ewing writes not only with the author-
ity of an experienced teacher of the deaf but
with the deep sympathy of one who has her-
self passed through the various stages of ever-
increasing deafness and who thus understands
the feeling of isolation and despair which deaf-
ness brings and of the return of hope, renewed
interest in life which results from the ability
to speech-read. Moderation is the key-note of
this little volume; the author makes no extrav-
agant claims and does not underestimate the
patience and determination required by both
teacher and pupil.
Part II contains carefully constructed
schemes to enable friends of the deaf to co-
operate with the teacher, by giving suitable
practice material; there are also two courses
of 10 lessons each, which include all the phon-
etic theory necessary to enable the student to
analyse speech movements, but I must confess
that I cannot quite agree with the description
of the articulation of I and r.
The author shows, in Part III, her deep
knowledge of the mental processes behind
acquisition of speech by the normal child, and
she seeks to develop the watching attitude
necessary for speech-reading, by observing the
reactions of each child to different situations
and noting his individual interests.
In short, a most excellent handbook on the
art of speech-reading which should certainly be
read by all deaf adults and the parents of deaf
children, as well as by teachers of lip-reading
and by those responsible for the education of
the deaf.
E.C.MacL.
The Education of Handicapped Children.
By J. E. Wallace Wallin. London Edition.
George Harrap. 8/6 net.
This is an English edition of a book which
was published a few years ago in America.
The book contains a comprehensive and con-
cise history of the education of retarded and
mentally defective children, together with the
psychological theories attendant on feeble-
58 MENTAL WELFARE
mindedness and backwardness.
Practical and helpful suggestions as to the
nature of the equipment and natural endow-
ment which teachers of these handicapped
children should possess are detailed in the sec-
ond part of the volume. There is, in addition,
an exhaustive plan for their education.
The third part of the book concerns the
social consequences of the neglect of the prob-
lem of the feeble-minded. It describes the
constructive work that has been done or at-
tempted both to prevent the incidence of
feeble-mindedness and to provide adequate
care and training of the mentally defectives
already in existence. A useful appendix des-
cribes the physical and mental characteristics
of various types of mentally deficient children.
On re-reading the book one is impressed
once again with the fact that the most helpful
form of constructive work with the feeble-
minded lies in the proper education and skil-
ful care of the physical health of the children
so afflicted. The last word as to the nature of
that education which may be described as
suitable for such cases, has not yet been said,
but the author's suggestions on the matter
have been applied with successful results, and
are worth the utmost consideration of those
concerned in the mental welfare of the race.
H.C.D.
