Sterilisation of the Unfit
===========================

26 MENTAL WELFARE
Book Reviews & Abstracts
. Walter M.
Gallichan. Werner Laurie. 7/6 net. 1929.
It is difficult to see for whom this book is
written; it is obviously unscientific; it is too
dull to be popular.
It is so discursive and ranges over such an
immense field that it is necessarily simply a
series of rather disconnected jottings. It con-
sists of 192 pages of good print, of which 44
are entirely blank and in its course it touches
on the following subjects:?the incidence of
defect; the physiology of reproduction; various
types of insanity (apparently picked at ran-
dom); the menace of the feeble minded; crim-
inal insanity; sterilisation, voluntary and com-
pulsory; birth control, and a Chapter entitled
"Terrible Families," giving an account of the
Kallikak and the Jukes family. Very highly
debatable propositions are set down as indis-
putable facts. For instance, it is repeated
frequently throughout the book that heredity
is the main cause of Mental Deficiency. It is
also stated again and again that the effect of
sterilisation is entirely beneficial, bringing
about an " improvement in health, sometimes
amounting to revitalization in the case of
ailing persons who are operated upon
voluntarily." In a chapter dealing with the
objections to sterilisation the only objections
considered are sentimental and not those which
are urged by informed opinion.
No part of the book shows first hand know-
ledge and the author would appear to have
gathered together from various very uneven
sources a collection of facts and opinions which
he has failed to assimilate. There are mistakes
in the text which, though probably due to im-
perfect proof reading, are none the less an-
noying to the reader.
M. T.
The Hygiene of the School Child. By
Lewis M. Terman and John C. Almack.
(Revised Edition, pp. 505). George Iiarrap
& Co., Ltd. 8/6 net.
For many years Professors Terman's and
Almack's " Hygiene of the School Child," has
occupied a foremost place in the literature of
school medicine on both sides of the Atlantic.
The revised edition has been undertaken be-
cause of changes and increased knowledge in
all that relates to the mental and physical
health of the school child.
The authors outline the indisputable need
for health work in the schools. Education is
passing from the narrow definition of " learn-
ing " to the wider and truer meaning of the
art of how to live; and it is in the school that
much can be done to rid humanity of the bur-
den, the torment and the incalculable cost of
disease.
In the preliminary chapters the growth and
development of the child and the many factors
concerned therewith are discussed together
with a comparison of the main differences in
child and adult physiology. Reviewing the
various skeletal and muscular defects so com-
mon in all schools, the writers stress the need
for full attention to the medical and education-
al needs of the crippled child. It is only in
recent years that our educational systems
have attempted to recognise and to deal with
this important obligation, and the establish-
ment of day and residential schools for the
physically defective children is a bounden duty
of education authorities.
The lean years of the post-war decade have
raised the problem of malnutrition in school-
children in almost all of our depressed areas.
Not one but many causes are seen to lie at the
root of this condition, and attention to gen-
eral physical health and to the instruction of
parents in correct methods of feeding are as
important as the provision of school meals.
Although the death-rate in the school popula-
tion has decreased to a considerable extent,
the common infectious diseases still account
for much mortality and morbidity. The fact
that diphtheria is still one of the leading
causes of death amongst children of school-
age, and that it is now to be regarded as a
preventable disease reveals the need for great-
er application of immunisation. Where this
has been carried out on a large scale in certain
American cities gratifying results have been
obtained. The ever increasing " toll of the
road " calls for serious consideration, for
many thousands of deaths are due to motor
and other accidents. " Safety First " is a
slogan which should have a foremost place in
the schools if we are to reduce the number of
fatalities and permanent crippling conditions
which result from street accidents.
MENTAL WELFARE
27
Tuberculosis is much less frequent amongst
children than hitherto. While this may be clue
to improved conditions of living the factor of
improved methods of diagnosis must not be
forgotten. As initial infections occur most
frequently in childhood it is to adequate med-
ical care during this period that preventive
measures against the ravages of this disease
can be best applied.
Dental disease is a widespread condition
common to practically every school. The need
for increased dental staffs is obvious, but the
solution of this problem lies in the early incul-
cation of health habits, frequent dental in-
spections and the immediate treatment of
defects. Closely associated with this question
is the hygiene of the nose, throat and eai.
^ere also very thorough medical supervision
is essential, and the authors point out the use-
fulness and necessity of school clinics which
alone can supply the constant and frequently
Prolonged treatment required by many con-
ditions within this province.
. The human eye has had comparatively little
time to become accustomed to " the tyrrany
?f Print." While it is now held that the school
ls not so responsible for defective vision as
was hitherto supposed, the writers urge edu-
cationists to keep a careful watch on any poss-
lole form of eye strain, and outline the signs
and symptoms whereby the need for immedi-
ate reference to the oculist is indicated. They
show, also, the many and varied causes of
headache?a frequent complaint amongst
schoolchildren.
1 he place of Mental Hygiene in the school
as still to receive much recognition both in
"judical and in educational spheres?especi-
^ y in this country. Several new chapters are
1 evoted to a very comprehensive survey of the
causes, the treatment and the prevention of
le difficult and the nervous child. 1his is
vUl"ely the greatest problem school hygiene has
yet encountered; once it is approached and
ealt with on organised lines we may expect
itSo^ution of the social questions of insan-
^ > delinquency and general maladjustment
d? Hfe~~and not before. It is gratifying, in-
eed> to find that the teacher and the doctor
re beginning to adopt a saner and wiser atti-
i lc e towards the child-mind, which in the past
as been so completely and thoroughly mis-
understood.
book on school hygiene would be com-
plete without reference to the importance of
the hygienic schoolroom, and the authors con-
sider in detail the essentials to be observed in
the lighting, the ventilation and the general
cleanliness of the school. The health of the
individual teacher, too, requires a very definite
place in the general scheme of school hygiene,
and it is suggested that periodical examina-
tions by the school doctor would be of the ut-
most service to the members of this profession.
Health education in the school curriculum
has never been taken very seriously in many
countries. The writers show quite clearly
why and how it should be done.
To teacher and to doctor alike this excellent
and widely comprehensive text-book may be
warmly commended. Its pages show how
education has evolved from the mere teaching
of the " Three R's " to a means of prepara-
tion for the great adventure of life. Efficiency
in this supremely important social service will
depend on a thorough understanding and a
full co-operation between the educationist and
the physician?and not otherwise.
N. R. B.
Oliver Untwisted. By M. A. Payne. Cr.
8vo. vii. 120. Edward Arnold & Co. 3/6.
This book tells of a brave woman's endeav-
our to reorganise a large Poor Law Institu-
tion for destitute children in accordance with
modern ideals of education and discipline. The
author has presented her story in an attrac-
tive form, and the book is full of " human "
illustrations which enlist the sympathy of the
reader for the unfortunate children who under
the old regime were treated as " numbers,"
and not as individuals, and did everything to
the sound of a bugle ! Gradually, in spite of
obstacles from within and from without?from
Managers who were content with what always
had been and were distrustful of innovations,
and from Staff and children who did not
understand and could not make use of the new
freedom that was offered them, the barriers of
tradition were broken down and the Institu-
tion began to be transformed into a real home,
where members of a family loved one another
and were trusted. Unfortunately, with a
change in the personnel of the Managers, the
experiment was abandoned, so that the results
of this pioneer work will probably never be
known.
28 MENTAL WELFARE
The author has a very real sympathy and
understanding of children and their needs; one
is perhaps tempted to feel that the " feverish
haste " of modern educationists, of which she
speaks on p. 116 may perhaps have led her,
in her desire to benefit the greatest number of
children under her care, to be more revolu-
tionary than a conservative but well-meaning
body of Managers and Staff could bear, and
that peaceful penetration, from the nursery
upwards, might have enabled her work to con-
tinue and develop. But the faith and the
vision were there and those in themselves
justify the experiment.
The book will give cause for thought to all
workers interested in the care of children.
The Special Services of Education in Lon-
don. With a foreword by G. H. Gater,
C.M.G., D.S.O., Education Officer, and F.
N. Kay Menzies, M.D., F.R.C.P., D.P.H.,
County Medical Officer of Health and School
Medical Officer. Hodder & Stoughton. 1/6
net. 1929.
In this booklet are described by those who
know them well the whole scope and aim of
the ameliorative work of the London County
Council in respect of elementary school child-
ren. A comparison here and there of present
conditions with those of the past serves to
make the more apparent the enormous pro-
gress that has been made since the passing of
the earliest Education Acts, in the realisation
of public responsibility for social conditions,
and the possibilities of raising the standard of
health and living by means of a kindly and
humane official supervision of certain aspects
of the daily lives of children.
The first part of the book sets forth the
methods by which the special needs of those
children and young people who have not all
the advantages to which youth and depend-
ence give them the right, can be met. And in-
deed, provision is made for the welfare of the
whole child population, for circumstances arise
nowadays in the life of every child in which
the advice and help of a sympathetic public
official is almost a necessity. So complete is
the administrative organisation, that, provided
its work is not hindered, we may reasonably
hope that the growing population of London
will be the healthiest and most energetic we
have yet known.
A full description of the network of admin-
istrative activity, beginning with the functions
of the various committees and sub-com-
mittees, and the powers invested in them, fol-
lowed by the duties of the various officials who
carry into effect the policy of the committees,
shows clearly the extent and value of this
humanitarian work. One of the interesting
side issues achieved is the gradual education
of the parents with whom dealings are held, to
a more intelligent realisation of their respon-
sibilities towards the children. This delicate
and tactful task is undertaken by a band of
social workers, school nurses and attendance
officers, wThose intimate intercourse with the
parents supplements and emphasises the sug-
gestions of doctor, dentist, after-care com-
mittee, or other agency.
The work falls into two departments; the
Education Officer's Department, and the Pub-
lic Health Department. The Education Officer
is represented locally by divisional officers who
act as secretaries for the managers of groups
of council schools, which are responsible for
the work of the attendance officers whose
work carries them into the schools and homes
of the children attending them. The Medical
Officer of Health is similarly represented by
Divisional Medical Officers who organise the
medical inspections, and supervise the work of
the school doctors and nurses, who are in in-
timate touch with the children in the schools.
London is fortunate in having also a large
body of honorary workers who are trained
under the care of the Council for the type of
work they undertake.
This machinery makes it possible to carry
on all branches of ameliorative work, begin-
ning with the feeding of the hungry, the med-
ical treatment of the ailing, the supervision of
the physical health of all. It has led to the
formation of Medical and Dental School Clinics
where slight ailments and teeth may be
treated, to the growth of Special Schools where
children with more serious physical defects
can be closely watched, and receive the skilled
attention they need, to the development also
of Special Schools for the mentally defective,
in which these children are given the type
teaching suitable for them.
There is, in addition, abundant and conclus-
ive evidence in the book of the co-ordination
of the work of the various agencies by whicf1
the life of the young Londoner is influenced*
MENTAL WELFARE 29
so that once a child or young person has been
111 touch with any authority, he can be helped
to grapple with any of the crises incident to
his physical and mental development.
The work of all these organisations, amelior-
ative, advisory, or reformative, is detailed in
t"is book in a manner at once interesting and
Ruminating. The illustrations and explana-
0ry graphs and maps, add incalculably to the
Vcry strong appeal which the book should
"lake to all who have the welfare of children
at heart.
H. C. D.
r*E Health of the School Child. Annual
Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the
Board of Education for the Year 1928. H.M.
Stationery Office. l/-net. 1929.
It is always a difficult task to choose extracts
So?* Sir George Newman's Report. There is
So^ch ?f it that is of interest to teachers and
j?aal workers and which it is a pity to neglect.
ut sPace is limited and it is therefore necess-
ry to deal only with the section of this report
^Particular interest to readers of this Journal,
m m Previous Reports, Sir George New-
an lays great stress on the need for the co-
0fUT?a^on ?f the work of the Medical Officer
" sTlth an<^ ^ie School Medical Officer.
^ ' chool hygiene cannot be divorced from
bo hy giene and this in turn is intimately
c n UP w^th the hygienic conditions of the
th !Tnity- Efficiency and economy require,
(|ajjC ore, an organic relationship between the
aunf WOrk school authority and of the
0r ority responsible for the administration
Th*2 branches of public health."
c . (%re has been a large increase in the work
does6 ?U^ m"lor ailment clinics?which
jn ? ,n?t necessarily indicate an increase in the
tjj .ence of disease, but rather an increase in
and 1!?tG"est *n health taken by the community
a closer co-operation between e
Medical service and those in a posi ion
sponsibility towards school childien.
Eight new Open-air schools have been estab-
lished during the year and plans foi 1 c <? y '
3 residential schools (providing oi -1'
children in all) have been approved. i ncr ^
has been an immense advance too in the
nition of the value of air and sunlign in
ordinary schools. Of the plans submitted to
the Board of Education, 80% include pro-
posals for throwing open to the outside air
whole portions of the classrooms. In almost
every report on the work of the open-air
schools emphasis is laid on the improvement
in general health after a comparatively short
period of attendance.
The total number of educable mentally
defective children remains approximately the
same as last year and the provision for this
type of child has not undergone much change.
" Excellent work continues to be carried out
in many areas by voluntary associations for
mental welfare, which not only conduct occu-
pation centres intended primarily for cases
under the Mental Deficiency Committee, but
also visit the homes of children who are
referred to them by the School Medical Officers
and exercise supervision over these children."
An account is given in this Report of the clinic
which has been opened at Highbury by the
Child Guidance Council for the treatment of
nervous, unstable and difficult children.
A chapter of the Report is devoted to a re-
view of the Report of the Joint Committee on
Mental Deficiency and a short account of the
procedure adopted in the investigation and a
summary of the results and recommendations
are given. Sir George Newman comments on
the increased incidence of mental defect as
contrasted with the findings of the Royal Com-
missions and several reasons are given which
support the view that the investigation of the
recent Committee must of necessity have been
more thorough and complete than that of the
Commission. But he also points out the fact
that " while we accept this study as a sub-
stantial advance in the investigation of this
intricate question, we must not hastily draw
from his (Dr. Lewis') findings, conclusions
which they do not justify or sustain In
modern western civilisation the presence in a
great population of a half per cent, or even
one per cent, of mentally defective persons, is
not in itself alarming or even surprising. Nor
is it, as is sometimes suggested, a grave
national disqualification, a scourge which
threatens the future of civilisation or the sur-
vival of races. Whilst it is none of these things,
it is not less an important index of a condition
of things which calls for serious attention."
Sir George Newman comments on the great
value of the Report in its attitude and spirit
of constructive reform and suggests several
30 MENTAL WELFARE
ways in which much can be done with the
present statutory powers on the lines of the
recommendations made. The Local Education
Authorities should immediately ascertain and
notify all lower grade " ineducable " mentally
defective children in their areas; they can
facilitate the organisation of suitable educa-
tion for the large group of high-grade defec-
tives or the still larger group of the dull and
backward. It is urged also that research
should be advanced into the causation of
mental defect as is suggested in the recom-
mendations of the Joint Committee.
