Socia! Work in Out-Patient Clinics
====================================

Out-Patient Clinics for the treatment of mental disorders offer unique
opportunities for constructive social work?constructive almost in a literal
sense, for the main object of the worker is to establish the patient's social life
?n such firm foundations that he can build upon and develop the more stable
and enduring qualities in his character.
At present, the facilities for all who need such help and treatment are
totally inadequate to meet the demand, but it is hoped that the Mental Treat-
ment Bill will give an impetus to the establishment of new Clinics, and the
further development of those already in existence.
The three types of Out-Patient Clinics to be found in London and other
cities are: ?
(1) Clinics attached to General Hospitals.
(2) Clinics connected with Mental Hospitals or Hospitals for Nervous
Disorders, functional and organic.
(3) Independent Clinics.
The General Hospital Clinic has many advantages over other types, as
^ell as some very obvious limitations. It is a great asset to have all the
acilities offered by a large General Hospital for physical, bacteriological and
other examinations and the genuinely early cases are more likely to be sent to
a Citric of this type. But the large numbers usually attending, and the gener-
40 MENTAL WELFARE
ally depressing atmosphere of a Hospital Out-Patient Department, are adverse
factors in the treatment of nervous patients.
The establishment of more Out-Patient Clinics, attached to, or connected
with Mental Hospitals, would do much to break down the popular fear and
dread of such Institutions and they would form a useful link between the
Hospital and the outside world for those patients who have recovered and been
discharged, but who yet feel the need of help and support in facing up to life's
responsibilities.
The independent Clinic is usually smaller than either of the other types
and it is possible to create an atmosphere removed from all suggestion of ill-
ness, which is tremendously helpful to the patients, but it is a costly method
of providing out-patient treatment, and for many reasons is less likely to be
adopted by Local Authorities or others when establishing new Clinics.
The appointment of specially trained social workers in Out-Patient
Clinics for mental patients, is a comparatively new development, but it is
becoming more and more evident that without their services, much of the
time and effort expended by the psychiatrist on treatment, will be wasted.
They form an indispensable link between the Clinic and the community and
by their practical knowledge of social conditions, are able to help the patient
to carry out the suggestions of the psychiatrist in matters of social re-adjust-
ment.
The duties of a Clinic social worker vary slightly according to the type
of Clinic she serves, but generally speaking, her activities fall under two head-
ings: (i) investigation; (2) social treatment.
The investigation covers a wide field and calls for a high degree of tact
and knowledge. The collection of family history and the early history of the
patient requires knowledge in rejecting the irrelevant, and following up
significant clues, as well as skill and tact in gaining the confidence of the
patient and his relatives. A wide and varied experience of social conditions
is also required if a true understanding of the patient's environment is to be
obtained and a constructive plan formulated for his future.
The first step in social treatment is to secure the sympathy and co-opera-
tion of the patient's relatives and friends. All too often, there is a complete
lack of understanding on their part of his symptoms, and the unconscious
motives for his words and actions, and the social worker can do much to
establish the right atmosphere in his immediate home environment.
Where convalescent or other treatment away from home is advised, or
when new work or additional recreational opportunities are essential, her help
may well prove invaluable. For this more concrete side of her work, a close
and friendly co-operation with other social agencies and public bodies is all-
important, and the measure of success attainable in the social adjustment of
the patient, will largely depend on the degree of understanding of his needs
which the social worker is able to instil in the minds of others.
MENTAL WELFARE 41
The cases which offer the best hope of success in social re-adjustment
may be roughly classified as follows: ?
(a) Adolescent girls or boys, who have shown great intellectual promise at
school, but who do not fulfil that promise owing to erratic, unstable or
irresponsible behaviour.
(b) Adolescent boys or girls of the intellectually dull type, who fail to hold
their jobs and begin to show anti-social tendencies.
(c) Young people between the ages of 20 and 25, of the shy, solitary type,
who, by imperceptible degrees are becoming more and more secluded,
and whose condition suggests a developing dementia praecox.
(d) Adults who, under some prolonged strain, become physically and men-
tally exhausted and apathetic.
(e) Adults suffering from acute depression, or symptoms suggestive of a
manic depressive state.
There can be little doubt that many of the adolescent cases are saved
from a complete breakdown by treatment at this early stage. The environ-
ment must be more sheltered than is necessary for the stable adolescent, and
the patient must be led by slow but steady stages to the full responsibilities of
adulthood. Very often the dull child breaks down through being placed in
work beyond his capacity, and this can generally be rectified by the efforts of
the social worker.
A good example of what can be done for the patient who appears to be in
danger of withdrawing from the world of reality, is seen in the case of A. L.,
a girl of 24 who had been for some years in good domestic service but had left
her situation because she felt she could not concentrate on her work, and only
wished to be left alone. She had a good working class home and a very
devoted mother, who waited on her hand and foot and allowed her to lie in
bed or sit about doing nothing all day. The patient herself showed a desire
to get well and responded to psycho-tiierapeutic treatment, attending the Out-
Patient Clinic regularly week by week. During this time, the social worker
visited the home constantly and gradually changed the mother's outlook and
Method of handling the patient, who was steadily drawn back into the active
fire of the home. As soon as she was fit for it, she was sent to a small Home
ln the country where she mixed with other girls and led an active, happy life.
After a few weeks of this, she returned home and work was found for her.
She had one slight set-back, but except for that, steadily improved and was
finally able to take her place again as a normal member of society.
B- M., a married woman of 35, is a typical example of a patient, who must
mevitably have been certified had it not been for the treatment available at
the Out-Patient Clinic. She was the wife of a steady, good type of working
^Jan, had two young children and a home with a fair standard of comfort,
ne had had a long strain, owing to the illness of one of the children and at
e time of application to the Clinic, was in an exhausted condition, both
42 MENTAL WELFARE
mentally and physically. She was thin and looked ill and so apathetic had
she become that her home and children were neglected and she herself was
dirty and ill-kempt. The patient was ordered to bed and arrangements were
made by the social worker to secure help in the home, and constant visits were
paid to see that the psychiatrist's instructions were faithfully carried out. She
made an excellent recovery and there seemed every reason to expect the cure
to be permanent.
As a picture of a manic-depressive, I would describe G. P., a girl of 23,
who was first brought to the Clinic by a relative on account of depression and
an abortive attempt at suicide. Immediate certification was advised and the
patient sent to a Mental Hospital. Unfortunately, her relatives secured her
discharge as soon as the period of depression was over, and they verv soon
brought her back to the Clinic, complaining that she quarrelled with every-
one and was in serious danger of losing her job as a clerk on account of her
violent temper. It seemed probable that if she could be helped over the next
few months she would make a complete recovery and the social worker inter-
viewed the employers and secured their sympathy and help. Although she
slowly improved, and eventually did recover, the vicissitudes in this case were
many. The relatives lost patience and the worker had to find a Hostel for
her?the employers bore with her for as long as they could, but finally had
to give her notice. For two years the girl attended the Clinic and was helped
through many a difficult time, but in the end her mental balance was restored
and for the last five or six years she has carried on well and is once again on
good terms with all her family.
It has not been possible to do more than indicate the general lines upon
which social work in Out-Patient Clinics is carried out, but I have been at
pains to show how great is the scope it offers for the successful re-adjustment
of mental patients and how much can be done to prevent a total breakdown,
even in those with marked psychotic tendencies. It should surely be an inspir-
ation and an incentive to action, to know that by the establishment of Clinics
of this kind, the burden of suffering which follows in the wake of insanity,
may be lessened.
St. Clair Townsend.
