International Congress on Mental Hygiene
=========================================

The First International Congress on Mental Hygiene, which has already
been mentioned in a past number of this Magazine, will take place in Wash-
ington, U.S.A., from May 5th to 10th, 1930. The objects of this Congress are
to bring together from all countries, workers in mental hygiene for the pur-
pose of discussing social problems arising from all forms of nervous and
mental disease; to consider methods of world co-operation for the promo-
tion of mental hygiene; to attempt to correlate the knowledge and experience
?f psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, etc.

The American Psychiatric Association and the American Association for
the Study of the Feeble-minded will hold their 1930 Annual General Meetings
in conjunction with the Congress.

Amongst the papers to be read are the following: ?Organisation of
community facilities for prevention, care and treatment; psychopathic hos-
pitals and psychopathic wards in general hospitals; special problems of adol-
escence; parent and teacher training. Miss Fox has been asked to attend the
Congress and to read a paper on the " Social Aspects of Mental Deficiency."
All particulars may be obtained from the Administrative Secretary,
International Congress on Mental Hygiene, 370 Seventh Avenue, New York
City, U.S.A.

Institutional Accommodation
In answer to a question in the House, Mr. Greenwood, Minister of
Health, stated on December 12th last, that 28 local authorities in England and
Wales had provided institutions for the residential care of mental defectives;
18 had schemes in progress, but 78 had not then made any institutional
provision.

Organisation of Occupation Centres and Home Teaching in Middlesex
A Scheme, allowing for the extension of the organisation of Occupation
Centres and Home Teaching by the C.A.M.W., in return for an increased
grant, has been approved by the Middlesex County Council and will come into
operation on 1st April, 1930.

The scheme allows for extensions on the following lines by the end of
the year 1933 : ?the establishment of 10 full-time Occupation Centres (Mixed)
and 6 half-time Handicraft Centres (3 for boys and 3 for girls) and the organ-
isation for the home teaching of 160 defectives. From experience, it would
appear that one teacher can deal satisfactorily with 40 cases, so that by the
end of 1933 four home teachers will be required, but it is intended to appoint
these gradually as the need is shown and the organisation is possible.
The cost of running a full-time centre has been estimated at about ?500
per annum and a half-time centre at ^300 per annum. The salary and ex-
penses of a home teacher will amount, approximately, to ^225 per annum.
These expenses, together with general administrative expenses, have been
estimated at ,?21,940 for the grant period 1930-33. As stated above, the Middle-
sex County Council have approved the scheme and have passed the estimates
and the organisation of this work will begin in April next.

Manor House, Aylesbury
-----------------------

The Manor House, Aylesbury, which in April, 1928, was acquired by the
Bucks. County Council as a home for Mentally Defectives, is already being
extended to accommodate a larger number of cases. The cases originally
admitted were crippled children, active girls, who though not crippled, were
unable to do much for themselves, and higher grade girls and women. The
proposed extension is to include two temporary buildings, each to accom-
modate 25 male mental defectives.

With the growth of the Institution the County Medical Officer has found
it impossible to continue to act as Visiting Medical Officer, and Dr. Katherine
Campbell, Medical Officer at the Borstal Institution, Aylesbury, has been
appointed part time Visiting Medical Officer.

Sterilisation Proposals
-----------------------

The Council of the Association of Poor Law Unions received resolutions
from several Boards of Guardians, either advocating the introduction of legis-
lation to authorise the sterilisation of the mentally defective or pressing for an
enquiry into the matter. The Council also received a copy of the Resolution
of the Executive Council of the C.A.M.W. advocating that a Royal Com-
mission be appointed to enquire into the whole question of the causation and
prevention of mental deficiency. The Poor Law Unions Council submitted
the whole subject to its General Purposes and Finance Committee, who
recommended " that in view of the varying opinions prevailing as to the
efficacy, expediency or propriety of the measures advocated in the respective
resolutions of the Lexden, and Winstree, Corwen and Bucklow Boards of
Guardians, the Council expresses the opinion that the time is not opportune for
legislation upon the proposals of such Boards; but that a full enquiry should
be undertaken by the Government as to the best means of dealing with the
unfit." The Council decided to adopt the above recommendation of its
Committee.

Rampton State Institution
--------------------------

Circular No. 728 was issued by the Board of Control last November to
the Medical Superintendents of each County and Borough Mental Hospital,
stating that there is now accommodation at the Rampton State Institution
for juvenile mental defectives of dangerous or violent propensities and also
that the new villas which have been provided are suitable for the admission of
children suffering from mental defect arising from encephalitis lethargica who
have developed dangerous or violent propensities.

The Board anticipates that there will be at first many more applications
than vacancies and it is therefore not the intention of the Board to admit idiots
or low-grade imbeciles.
Similar Circulars have been issued to the Clerk to the Justices, the Superin-
tendents of Certified Institutions and to Local Authorities under the Mental
Deficiency Acts.
Forms of Application for admission can be obtained from the Board of
Control.

Obituary Notice
------------------

We regret to report the death of Dr. Robert Hughes of Stoke-on-Trent,
whose work for defectives is well known throughout the country. In addition
to the valuable work Dr. Hughes carried on in Stoke-on-Trent, where he was
for many years School Medical Officer, he devoted much time to the develop-
ment of Besford Court Mental Welfare Hospital, where he was an Hon.
Medical Officer. His wide knowledge and experience will be greatly missed.
Investigation into After-Careers of the Feeble-minded
Dr. Fox, Assistant School Medical Officer in Kent, has been conducting
an enquiry into the after-careers of the feeble-minded in his area. He has
ascertained the present state of 214 children certified as feeble-minded and
now between the ages of 20 and 25. The enquiry was carried out by the Kent
Voluntary Association for Mental Welfare through local visitors. The Tables
showing the present employment of 116 certified males and 98 females are
given below.

Males. 116
(a) Wholly self-supporting
12 on farms 2 motormen 2 brickfields
5 gardeners 3 in shops 2 casual labourers
2 roadmen 2 Army 16 various or unknown
(b) Partially self-supporting
17 on farms 3 brickfields
4 gardeners 12 casual labourers
2 in shops 4 various
Three of these are married. Nineteen attended special day schools. Of
these, ten are now self-supporting, one was sent to an industrial school.
Females. 98
(a) Wholly self-supporting
10 in service 9 as housewives
(b) Partially self-supporting
10 in service 5 on farms
9 " housework " 1 in shop
10 of these are married, 72 single. The married women have 10 children
and 7 of the unmarried have 11 children.

Further details are given of special training received, places of residence,
delinquencies, etc., and comment is made on the low marriage rate. " In
conclusion, this investigation proves nothing. But within its slender scope,
it can at least be said to give no support to the idea that the feeble-minded (not
all grades of deficiency) are a serious charge on the community, that they
multiply to an extent likely to affect the general average of intelligence, or that
their behaviour has an effect on the number of police constables required. An
inference is, not that they shall be ignored, but that sympathetic effort on their
behalf is not thrown away." The account of this investigation is reported in
the Annual Report for 1928 of the School Medical Officer for the Kent County
Council.

Additions to the List of Certified Institutions, Certified Houses, Approved
Homes, Section 37 (Poor Law Institutions) approved by the Board of
Control from 11th April, 1929

CERTIFIED INSTITUTIONS

Berks. Crauford Home, Maidenhead.
106 defectives, i.e., 92 adult females and 14 juveniles of either sex (cot
and chair cases).
Essex. The Retreat, Maldon Road, Witham, Essex.
33 adult male defectives. (Ancillary Premises to Royal Eastern Coun-
ties Institution.)
Somerset. The Old Rectory, Bathwick Hill, Bath.
21 high-grade feeble-minded females over the age of 16 years who shall
only be received on licence from other Certified Institutions.
Surrey. 6, Morland Road, Croydon (The Hermitage).
20 low-grade juvenile males.

Warwick. The Warwickshire Western Colony, Weston-under-Weatherley,
near Leamington Spa.
40 males and 12 females. Feebleminded within the meaning of the
Mental Deficiency Act, being cases over the age of 16 years.
Yorkshire. Meanwood Towers, Stonegate Road, Meanwood, Leeds.
64 low grade males, of whom not more than 10 shall be cot and chair
cases. (Ancillary premises to Meanwood Park Colony.)

APPROVED HOMES
---------------

Devon. Raleigh House, Ottery St. Mary (substituted for St. Anthony's).
15 patients, of whom not more than 11 shall be juvenile female mental
defectives, and of whom not more than 4 shall be males of tender
years fit to live in association with girls.
Dorset. The Rectory, Hinton Martel, Wimborne.
10 male patients over the age of 14 years and suitable to live in associa-
tion with each other.
Surrey. " Lynton," Coombe Lane, Kingston Hill.
6 females between the ages of 14 and 18 years on admission.

SECTION 37 (POOR LAW INSTITUTION)
-----------------------------------

Yorks. Doncaster Poor Law Institution.
20 males and 20 females. Medium to low grade patients over the age
of 16 years.
24 MENTAL WELFARE
Board of Control Committee
As we go to press we have received the following notice from the Board
of Control.
The Board of Control, with the approval of the Minister of Health, have
appointed a Committee with the following terms of reference: ?
" To consider and report what are the essential structural requirements
of a complete colony for mental defectives of all types and to what extent
the cost could be reduced by the adoption of semi-permanent or tempor-
ary buildings or other new methods of construction, having regard to
the comparative cost of maintenance, as well as the initial capital
expenditure involved."

The Committee is constituted as follows: ?
Walter Hedley, Esq., D.S.O., K.C., Recorder of Newcastle-on-Tyne (Chair-
man); Mrs. F. Rose Davies, J.P., Alderman, Glamorgan County Council;
Miss Clara Martineau, J.P., Member of the Birmingham City Council; Sir
George Oatley, F.R.I.B.A.; Dr. A. Rotherham, Commissioner of the Board
of Control; A. Scott, Esq., M.B.E., A.R.I.B.A., Chief Technical Officer,
Ministry of Health; Sir Lindsey Smith, J.P., Chairman of the Board of Gov-
ernors of Holloway Sanatorium; F. Douglas Turner, Esq., M.B., Medical
Superintendent of the Royal Eastern Counties Institution, Colchester; with
Mr. H. J. Clarke, of the Board of Control, as Secretary.

Mental Treatment (H.L.) Bill. 20 Geo. 5 Bill 107
In an article printed on page 15 of this issue, Dr. R. Langdon-Down
explains the provisions of the above-named Bill. It may be of interest to
readers to know that at a meeting held on January 13th, 1930, the Executive
Council of the C.A.M.W. decided to press for the following amendments to
the Bill when it comes before the House of Commons next session: ?
Words in square brackets constitute the suggested amendments.
1. Clause i (i) to read : ?

Any person who is desirous of voluntarily submitting himself to treatment
for mental disorder, and who makes a written application for the pur-
pose, may without a reception order be received as a voluntary boarder
in an institution within the meaning of this Act, or in any hospital or
nursing home | or training or other establishment] approved for the
purpose of this section by the Board of Control, or, with the consent of
the Board, into single care.

Also consequential amendment in Clause 6 (2).
(This amendment arises out of the evidence given by the Association
before the Royal Commission on Lunacy and Mental Disorders, approved by
the Executive Council on May 26th, 1925, which included a series of Recom-
mendations as to the provision by Local Authorities of Special Training Homes
for " persons under the age of 21 years who are suffering from disorder of
mind, not certifiable under the Mental Deficiency or Lunacy Acts," and the
power " to contract with the Managers of any such recognised home for the
reception and maintenance of such cases.")
2. Clause 6 (3) (c) to read : ?

Subject to the approval of the Board of Control, a local authority shall
have power
(c) to make provision for | social services for] any persons who | are
undergoing or who] have undergone treatment for mental disorder,
including the after care of such persons, and to contribute to the funds
of voluntary associations formed for that purpose.

NOTE?The actual wording of this amendment will have to be carefully con-
sidered by a Parliamentary draughtsman, in view of the very wide
mterpretatio?i that might be placed on the term " social services.")
This Clause affects mental welfare work in so far as the social services
mentioned might be carried out in some areas by the Mental Welfare Associa-
tions, some of which actually undertake work in connection with Mental
Hospitals and Clinics. The Clause as it stands gives power to contribute to
the cost of " after-care " only; this is an important part, but is not the whole,
of the social services which should be connected with Mental Hospitals. If
the Mental Welfare Associations whose work is already covering this wider
field are asked by Local Authorities to undertake its further development, it
is of importance to them that all forms of mental welfare work carried out for
Local Authorities should be eligible for grant.

For example, in Clause 6 (3) (a) of the Mental Treatment Bill, power is
given to the Local Authority to establish Out-Patient Clinics. In connection
with these Clinics there will be a great need for skilled, trained social workers
? ? . . to visit homes, report as to home conditions, and to co-operate with the
staff of the Clinics.

Another form of social service is that of Hospital Visiting. Up to the
present, this has been done voluntarily, and attached to most of the L C.C.
Mental Hospitals are Visitors, working with the consent and co-operation of
the Medical Superintendents, who visit, not only the patients in the Hospitals,
but also the homes of the patients, their relatives, and generally form a link
between the patients and the outside world. They also visit, for the Medical
Superintendent, die homes of patients whose discharge is under consideration.
Voluntary visitors are doing splendid work, but it is impossible for the
ground to be covered adequately by voluntary workers, and the suggested
amendment would make it legally possible for a Medical Superintendent to
employ a trained social worker for the purpose, should he so desire. In any
case, it will be noted that Local Authorities have a " power " only, and not
a " duty " in the matter, so that the insertion of an amendment such as is
suggested would not render compulsory the employment of a social worker.
