News mid Notes
================

New Institutions and Homes

Bethlem Royal Hospital
The new Bethlem Royal Hospital, at Monk's Orchard, Eden Park,
Beckenham, will be opened by Her Majesty the Queen on July 9th.
This new Hospital will be the fourth Bethlem; the first was on the site
now occupied by Liverpool Street Station, the second in London Wall and the
third at St. George's Fields, Lambeth.

The new Hospital will be in very different surroundings and stands in
grounds of about 200 acres. The modern construction of the buildings allows
for suitable classification of the patients in different houses. A scientific treat-
ment unit includes pathological, bacteriological, psychological, dental and
electrical departments.

Meanwood Park Colony, Leeds
During the past year, Meanwood Towers, a large mansion standing in
grounds on the borders of the Meanwood Park Colony, has been opened as
an annexe, to accommodate 64 patients. The accommodation is at present
limited to low grade male cases, leaving only female cases at Meanwood Hall,

There are, however, further schemes in hand for an extension to provide
for 1,000 patients. According to an estimate based on Dr. Lewis' figures in
the Joint Mental Deficiency Report, this will provide sufficient institutional
accommodation for this area. It is hoped that the first instalment of the scheme
giving accommodation for an additional 320 beds will be in operation before
the end of the year.

Denbigh Colony
---------------

Coed Du, Flintshire, was opened early in May by the Denbighshire
County Council as a home for mental defectives. At present there is accom-
modation for about 70 women and girls but the site, in a park of 130 acres,
affords room for development and is admirably adapted for the erection and
the establishment of a Colony.

The Guardianship Society, Brighton
-----------------------------------

An increase of work in all departments of this Society was recorded at
the last Annual Meeting. During the year under review the Society had 943
persons under care, in addition to which 70 were being visited in their own
homes, exclusive of after-care patients. The mental after-care department,
which was established in order to keep in contact with patients discharged from
mental hospitals, has now a total of 304 cases on the register.

The Society has 2 Cottage Homes in Sussex and the work of training boys
at these centres is proving very satisfactory.

Ascertainment in Leeds
----------------------

The Leeds Mental Health Services Committee in the Annual Report for
1928-29, gives the ascertained number of Mental Defectives in the Leeds
County Borough as 1,920, or 4 per thousand of population. Comparing this
with the figures estimated by Dr. Lewis in his investigation, the Report says,
" Accepting Dr. Lewis' Estimates for the Country which were based on in-
vestigations made in typical areas specially selected for the purpose, there are
1,280, or 2.7 per thousand, defectives in Leeds not yet ascertained and of that
number 850, or 1.8 per thousand, are low grade children and adults still to
be ascertained under the Mental Deficiency Acts. If the rate of yearly increase
in the ascertainment is maintained, the number of defectives in Leeds notified
to the Local Authority will have exceeded Dr. Lewis' Estimates within the
next five years."

History of Royal Eastern Counties Institution
-----------------------------------------------

The Report of the Royal Eastern Counties Institution for this year is
particularly interesting, as it contains a brief history by the Medical Superin-
tendent of the growth of the Institution. The early history of the Institution
was closely connected with the Royal Earlswood Institution. Dr. Andrew
Reed, philanthropist and founder of the Royal Orphan Asylum, the Royal
Hospital for Incurables, and others, together with a Committee formed in
1847, opened the first " Asylum for Idiots," at Park House, Highgate. The
disorder and noise of this first collection was such that " some who witnessed
the scene retired from it in disgust and others in despair," but within a year
or two it was found possible to maintain order, secure some classification and
to provide cheerful and useful occupations. From here the home extended
to Essex Hall, Colchester. Dr. Turner calls attention to the fact that even in
these early days the trades of tailoring, carpentering, gardening, farmwork,
and even printing, were taught. From this nucleus, the colony spread to
additional houses. Dr. Turner again calls attention to the fact that the Colony
system is no modern product but was anticipated by these pioneers in 1855.
So also was the system of allowing patients out on licence.

Plans*were then made for a larger Asylum at Earlswood and Dr. Reed's
original idea that there should be established an Asylum for Idiots for the
Eastern Counties, was finally realised. In 1879, the first big extension was deter-
mined on and since that time extension and enlargement have been almost con-
tinuous; a Recreation Hall, Laundry, Nursery, the first Farm, Seaside Homes,
Technical Schools, etc.

The Work of the Metropolitan Asylums Board
--------------------------------------------

To mark the end of the work of the Metropolitan Asylums Board as such,
Sir Allan Powell, Clerk to the Board since 1922, has compiled an attractive,
well illustrated book on the origin and development of the Board. The histor-
ical survey from the foundation in 1867 to the close in 1930 is a tale of con-
tinuous progress and development.

The Board has been the central Poor Law authority in London for pro-
viding and maintaining institutions for Infectious Diseases, for Tuberculosis,
for Mental Defectives and Epileptics and for the homeless poor. Its ambu-
lance service, too, is well known to all Londoners.

An interesting piece of history is that of the years of the Great War when
the Board was called upon to make provision for housing war refugees from
the Continent. In all, some 13,000 beds were provided and equipped. Draw-
ings of the Earls Court Exhibition building with its " Thousand Bed Gallery "
and " Arena Dining Hall," give some idea of the extent of this tremendous
piece of organisation carried out by the Board apart from its ordinary routine
work.

With regard to the transfer of its function to the London County Council,
Sir Allan Powell writes in conclusion to this book: " The steady addition to
the Board's duties both by Act of Parliament and by administrative order of
the Ministry of Health, is sufficient testimony, if testimony is needed, for the
board's efficiency. Though changes in London local government had been
threatened for a generation no one would have thought it likely when the

Local Authorities (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1928, was introduced in March,
1928, imposing new duties for a period of four years on the Board, that within
a few weeks the Government would have decided on a vital change in London
government; but changes in the incidence of rating designed to assist the
recovery of industry (the de-rating of industrial premises) had been under con-
sideration and, at the moment, the Government of the day decided to incor-
porate in the Act making provision for these changes, a measure for the re-
organisation of local government including the abolition of the guardians of
the poor and the transfer of their duties to the County Councils and the County
Borough Councils. The constitution of the Board, which is composed largely
of representatives of the London boards of guardians, called for revision, and
it was decided by the Government that, since the L.C.C. had expressed its
willingness to undertake the Board's work, Parliament could not be asked
to set up a new authority in London. The Board had therefore to be content
with the knowledge that no shortcomings of their own had contributed to
the changes and with the many tributes paid to their good work."
September Courses

Courses (a) for persons engaged in the training of Mental Defectives in Occu-
pation Centres, Institutions or Mental Hospitals,
and (b) for Officers of Local Authorities and Local Mental Welfare
Associations,

will be held this year by the C.A.M.W. at Notcutt House, 35, Dorset Square,
London, N.W.i, from August 30th to September 20th. Lectures will be given
on the medical, psychological and social aspects of Mental Deficiency, on
methods of training; manual and rhythmic classes will be given and practical
work will include visits to Special Schools, Certified Institutions, Occupation
Centres, etc.

The Fee for each Course is ^14 os. od., including a Registration Fee of
5/-. This includes the cost of Board and Residence at Notcutt House during
the whole Course. The fee for non-resident students is ?6 5s. od. It is
desirable that the above Course should be supplemented by a week's practical
work which will be arranged by the C.A.M.W.

Application forms, which can be obtained from the C.A.M.W. Office,
should be sent in, together with the Registration Fee, as soon as possible.
Advertisements

The attention of readers is called to the advertisement rates for this
Journal which are printed on page 86. These columns should be particularly
useful to the Managers of Small Homes, to Homes or Institutions requiring
additional staff or to individuals requiring vacant posts.

Mental Welfare is the only journal of its kind which deals specifically
with this branch of social services and circulates amongst exactly those spec-
ialised workers whom advertisers wish to reach.
