Intelligence? A Definition
===========================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1919, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XIV, Nos. 3-4
May, June, 1922

By Lightner Witmer, Ph.D.
Intelligence is the ability to solve a new problem.
An old problem remains in some sense new, so long as an unsurmounted difficulty confronts an individual or a group, and the way
to solve it is unknown.
When a problem is difficult enough or the solution is sufficiently
novel and important, the intelligence displayed in productive invention will be considered "genius."
Intelligence may appear at any intellectual level, even a low one,
and is divined from what the individual makes of opportunity and
resources. Intelligence is not to be measured by conventional standards but by the successful outcome of performance. The discrimination of intelligence from other abilities is concerned only with the
criteria that distinguish the variable and novel creations of free
initiative from the more constant and familiar effects of established
habits. The originality of a performance is proportional to the
number of novel elements entering into its composition, and to the
amount by which a successful production varies from the prevailing
mode.
Competency is an aggregate of many congenital abilities, some
of them specific abilities, like talking or singing; others more general,
like intelligence, intellect, discernment, will and motivation. By the
time a child is six years old he will ordinarily display all his congenital
competency, from which the discerning observer may estimate how
much ability he has, and judge if he has enough to be considered
normal.
No one has ever devised an intelligence test that tests intelligence
and nothing else. In consequence, the results of so-called intelligence
tests have significance, only when analyzed and interpreted in relation to a particular set of antecedent conditions and attending circumstances. The Binet Intelligence Quotient for example, is not
necessarily a measure of intelligence, and in those making low scores
it may indicate anything in the way of ability, or deficiency, except
intelligence. The Intelligence Quotient is in fact an index of proficiency, and the so-called "Mental Age" is only a performance level
(05)
66 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
determined by roughly averaging the efficiency indices derived from
a relatively small number of arbitrarily selected performances.
In order to test the ability to solve a new problem, an intelligence
test must provide that many members of a homogeneous group will
fail and that all but a very few will make many errors before they
achieve success. If all the members of a group pass a supposed intelligence test, either the test is not an intelligence test because it is too
easy for them, or some of the group knew beforehand how to solve it.
The ratio which the number of those who succeed in solving a new
problem bears to the number of those who fail measures the relative
novelty of the problem. From the number of failures an individual
makes before he succeeds, one may roughly estimate the originality
of the solution as well as of the performer. Intelligence, therefore,
is directly proportional to initiative and inversely proportional to the
number of errors made, provided the errors are not too few. To
measure a performer's intelligence, one must know the time required
to achieve success, but one must not neglect to observe the performer
at work and to take into consideration the number and kind of errors
made and how he corrects them. An intelligence test is adjusted to
the intellectual level of a group of individuals when the number of
individuals who succeed do not more than equal the number who fail.
The eleven-block formboard used at the Psychological Clinic is
a satisfactory intelligence test at or about the four-year-old intellectual level, because not more than fifty per cent of four-year-old
children pass it. No two-year-old child has ever passed it; about
twenty-five per cent of three-year-old children have passed it, and
approximately one hundred per cent of six-year-olds. If I know
nothing about a particular child except that he is four years old, the
odds are even that he will pass the test. If he is three years old, the
odds are three to one that he will fail. Intelligence is displayed in
a performance that succeeds against adverse odds; stupidity is failure despite favoring odds.
The diagnosis of intelligence is a statement of our expectation
that an individual or a group will succeed in a significantly large
number of performances, under circumstances that make failure more
probable than success. The diagnosis of stupidity is the statement of
our expectancy that the individual or the group will fail, even though
the odds favor success. While the differential diagnosis depends
upon the ratio of successes to the total number of attempts at achievement, an expectation of intelligence is also to be derived from the
observation of traits of character most frequently associated with
creative imagination. Amongst these are ambition, audacity, aspiration, the love of adventure and, most significant of all, a disregard
INTELLIGENCE?A DEFINITION. 67
of authority, leading perhaps to a defiance of privilege and public
opinion.
The meeting point of intellect and intelligence is interesting.
Imagination belongs to the category of intellect, and also to the
category of intelligence. A civilization implies an average intellectual level. The farther an individual's intellectual level falls below
the mode, the more intelligence he will need. Creative imagination
produces order out of chaos, and memory is an established order
become habitual.
A civilization is a social order, the developmental level of a
group?it may be large or small. It is to be measured in the number
and diversity of material and intellectual resources, but its chance of
survival depends on intelligence, that is to say, on its ability to
change. The social order of tomorrow is the invention of a few
individuals whose intelligence operates at a high intellectual level.
Change is the predominant characteristic of uterine life; stability, of the adult. Youth combines the plasticity of initiative with
the efficiency of acquired skill and thus produces the successful
inventions from which a new order is evolved. Old age brings wisdom but is handicapped by deficiency of initiative and dislike of
change. The vitality of a civilization is directly proportional to the
creative intelligence of its young men and young women.
Observation of the behaviour of children and adults leads to the
conclusion that intelligence is not to be acquired through education.
It is a congenital endowment, though not inheritable, and its amount
is not increased by training. Efficiency, on the other hand, may be
increased by training, and knowledge is being constantly acquired
through experience and education.
The best single index of the developmental level of an individual's competency is to be found in his "judgment." With age, we
are supposed to increase in wisdom and judgment, what the business
man calls "good common sense." In the last analysis, good judgment is my judgment, or the judgment of some group, large or small.
The only other criterion of good judgment is the successful outcome
of adventured action.
Specialized intelligence is the ability to solve new problems in
one particular field. General intelligence is proportional to the area
over which the ability to solve new problems is spread.
Intelligence is seldom considered "superior" unless it operates
at a high intellectual level. To reach a high intellectual level, the
individual or a group needs discipline, education and industry as well
as intelligence.
