The Analytical Diagnosis
=========================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1922, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XIV, Nos. 5-6
October, November, 1922
By Lightner Witmer, Ph.D.

Psychology is a science of behavior. It is derived from the
observation of one particularized performance after another. Let
"B " represent the behavior of a lifetime, a day, an hour, or a moment,
and P, P', P" the sequence of performances observed; then
B = P+P'+P"+ (1)

A particular performance is defined by a beginning, a number of
discriminated components, and an end. "A child walks upstairs"?
this performance begins with the first step up and ends at the top
of the staircase. If the performance is oriented as nothing but one
step up after another, each step like every other step, the total
performance is composed of the repetition of one and the same
performance, i. e., it is an operation. "To do the eleven-block
formboard,, is an operation of eleven repeated elements, if the
adjustment of each block is considered equal to the adjustment of
any other block. In reality, however, each block differs from every
other block; some are easy to hold and adjust?others difficult;
some are easy to discriminate?others difficult. To adjust one block
is itself a complex performance made up of constants and variables.
To solve a mathematical problem is a complex performance involving
the four elementary operations of arithmetic and many other
operations.

The operation is the analytic element of performance, a constant
which may be repeated, but which, by definition, varies only quantitatively. The goal of scientific analysis is the differentiation of
elementary, i. e., not further analyzable operations; theoretically,
every
P = xO+yO'+zO"+ (2)
in which performance 0, 0', O" are qualitatively discriminated
operations, and x, y and z are differentiated quantities.
Even when performances are known to be complex, they are
often treated as quasi-operations; thus, we speak of the operation of
a machine (an ideally simple operation), and also of the operations
of an army or the human intellect?performances which differ
exceedingly in complexity. Adding up a column of figures approaches
more nearly the ideal operation of analytic discrimination than
writing a composition, but both may be regarded as operations or
as complex performances, depending on our point of view. All the
behavior of a lifetime may be considered as an operation, i. e., a
sequence of adaptations to environment.

The outcome of a performance brings something into existence
that did not exist before. This "something" is a product. A performance is usually defined by its product. The classification of
performances, therefore, will be a classification of products. We
judge a tree by its fruits, and we assume competency from the
products of an operation. We affirm the existence of an ability
whenever we see a particular operation eventuating in the production
of some differentiated pattern of behavior. The performance, viz.,
the operation, is a sequence of observed events?it is an observed
fact, but the ability is an idea?as a cause, it is potential energy
The operation is a form of motion producing an effect; it is a mechanism, a means to an end. The affirmation of the existence of an
ability is only a promise of future performance. The diagnosis of
an ability is a prognosis of future production under given conditions.
Just as performances are analyzed into components called
"operations," so an ability may be analyzed into cooperating
abilities, a different ability for each qualitatively differentiated
product.

Competency is an aggregate of abilities. Thus, reading competency is the aggregate of all the abilities necessary in order to read.
The use of the word "competency" suggests that reading is the
product or effect of many different operations, and that each differentiated operation implies a differentiated ability. Talking and
reading seem to be equally simple productions, but the ability to
read is a more complex competency than the ability to talk. At
one time it may serve our purpose to regard a particular product as
an effect of the operation of a single ability; at another time it may
serve our purpose better to emphasize its complex character. In
general, a competency is the ability to bring into existence some
qualitatively differentiated product. Every competency, no matter
how apparently simple, is theoretically analyzable into cooperating
abilities. Every

C = A+A'+A"+ (3)
or C = No A's (4)

Such statements, as "Man has more ability than any other
species of animal," or, "Shakespeare is a greater poet than LongTHE ANALYTICAL DIAGNOSIS. 131
fellow," are diagnostic estimates based partly on opinion and partly
on observed production* As an opinion, the diagnosis is what I call
(for reasons which I cannot enter into now) a "critical diagnosis."
As an estimation of observed production, it is "an impressionistic
diagnosis." To say that man has more ability than any other
species of animal really means that human operations produce more
of value to human beings than the operations of the lower animals.
To say that "Shakespeare is a greater poet than Longfellow" means
that Shakespeare's products are preferred, by me and other critics,
to those of Longfellow. The critico-impressionistic diagnosis is an
expression of preference. It implies relative value or importance; it
displays appreciation or prejudice. It enters into every statement
of relative competency; it is an integral part of every diagnosis.

Let Cj represent the competency of one man and C2 the competency of another, and let us suppose that
Cx>C2 (5)
then ViAj-f V,1A,1+V',1A"1+ >V2A2+V'2A'2+V',2A',S+ or,
V1XN0. Ax's >V?xNo. A2's or,
ViCx >V2C2 (6)
In other words No. 5, the formula of comparative competency,
is an elliptical form of No. 6.
If the critico-impressionistic diagnosis is disputed, i. e., if it is
denied that ViCi>V2C2, then productions must be measured,
analyzed and valued, and, to do this, a standard unit of time must
be introduced into the formula. This standard unit of time may be
the lifetime of those whose competency is rated or it may be a smaller
unit of time, for example, the time required to pass a test. Competency is only a promise of future performance, but proficiency is a
rank order, i. e., a rating determined by the measurement of what
has been produced during the passage of a standard measure of time;
in other words,

Proficiency = Rank Order X ^ro^uc^on
Time
Proficiency, therefore, is relative productivity, measured by the
estimated value of a number of qualitatively differentiated products,
and by the time required to produce them.

Proficiency=VXPX^+V'XP'X^+V"XP"X^+ (7)
As every qualitatively differentiated product is assumed to be
a consequence of the operation of a number of differentiated abilities,
No P's
Proficiency = VxNo. A'sX?^?11 (8)

The result of a test, even though it be a battery of tests, is scored
in a number of products. This score, divided by time, measures the
performer's productivity, or efficiency. If the perfonnance is an
operation, and all the products scored are the products of one and
the same ability, then the "No. A's" in the formula above equals 1,
and the value of the products will vary directly with their number;
in other words,
No P's
Proficiency = R. O.X???- =R. O.XEfficiency (9)
This assumption underlies nearly every test; for example, the
Binet Intelligence Test assumes that intelligence alone produced the
score of products, and that eveiy unit product in the total number
No Ps
of products has the same value. The formula: ?^?, is the formula
of Efficiency. In other words, proficiency is the relative efficiencjr
with which an ability operates, and a rank order of efficiency is
taken to be the rank order of ability. Those who produce the most
goods with the Binet Test have the most intelligence?according to
the Binet testers.

While a similar assumption underlies most tests, the assumption
is more often false than true, for the proficiency of performance
varies more often with the number of abilities employed in production than with the efficiency of a particular operation. Nor must
the value of the diverse component products constituting the total
production be overlooked, as is so often done. We must always
bear in mind that
Proficiency = VXCXE (10)
Every test really results in a complex product made up of component products. It is important to know how many of these test
products can be produced in a given unit of time, or, in other words,
how much efficiency is developed by those tested, but it is equally
important, if possible, to ascertain, by observation and analysis, how
many abilities cooperated in their production, and the relative
value, weight or importance of each ability contributing to the
total product.

The demonstrable diagnosis is a proficiency rating, which resolves
itself theoretically into the measurement of efficiency, and a list
of the analytically discriminated abilities, with an estimate of the
relative value of each ability. This citation and estimate of abilities,
I call the "analytical diagnosis." It is, in fact, an analytico-criticoimpressionistic diagnosis. It is based on observation and measurement, but it is not a measurement. Exact measurement is a good
thing in its place, but any fool may use a tape to give specious exactitude to his opinions. This was the regular practice of the phrenologists, and psychological charlatans will continue to flourish their
tapes and batteries of tests. Science develops partly by measurement, but largely by analytical discrimination and the exercise of
good judgment, which is opinion refined by experience. This the
Binet testers forget when they blindfold themselves and jump from
an artificial performance score, good enough for some uses, to what
they call a "Mental Age" and an "Intelligence Quotient."
Strictly speaking, then, the measured quantity dealt with as a
result of tests is a measure of proficiency, i. e., the number of products
produced in a unit of time by a number of operations. The more
nearly this really composite operation approximates analytic simplicity, the more nearly does proficiency equal efficiency. It is
relatively easy to measure a child's ability to add, but it is more
difficult to measure his ability to write a composition. Nevertheless, even complex performances are measureable, and the competency of one man may be diagnosed as "more" than the competency
of another. In so far as the diagnosis depends on exact measurement,
it is a demonstrable diagnosis; in so far as it depends on analysis and
valuation, it is an analytical diagnosis.

Every performance, then, is the product of an operating competency. "How many abilities were concerned?" This question
requires us to consider the number of abilities into which the competency is to be analyzed. We may specify too many, or too few.
Over specification is cumbersome and over generalization is unenlightening. Biology assumes that self-preservation and reproduction
are the two general abilities of organic life?two are not enough for
psychological diagnosis. The Binet tester, talking about Mental
Age at one moment and intelligence at another, assumes that mentality is the same thing as intelligence, and that all behavior is the
product of a single ability. Common sense and the purpose in hand
determine how many categories it will be desirable to employ for
the purpose of analytical diagnosis.

I discriminate six general competencies, or, in other words, six
universal categories of behavior. They are:
1. Operation = Mechanism ? Body
2. Conformity = Determination = Will
3. Particularization = Mind
4. Organization = Development = Intellect
5. Origination = Intelligence
6. Orientation = Motivation=Soul
134 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Every performance is, as it were, a die, to be viewed from six
different points of view, if the performance is to be adequately known
as the complex-unit it really is. The six categories are to be defined
by contrasting each with the other five in turn. In this way, thirty
different categories of behavior are developed. They are:

1. Operation 1. Ability 1. Direction (Ac) 1. Control I. Initiative 1. Energy (V)
Power
Motivation
2. Efficiency 2. Conformitt 2. Differentiation 2. Trainability 2. Intelligence 2. Appreciation
Balance
3. Productivity (Sp) 3. Uniformity 3. Particularization 3. Comprehension 3. Exploration 3. Concernment
Interest
i. Order 4. Conformability 4. Discrimination 4. Organization 4. Originality 4. Conversion
Convertibility
5. Effort 5. Achievement 5. Persistence 5. Imagination 5. Origination 5. Aspiration
Ambition
6. Endurance 6. Judgment 6. Discernment 6. Culture 6. Confidence 6. Orientation
Force Alertness Educability

Satisfaction

If psychology is a science of behavior and the unit of observation
is a performance, and every performance may be analyzed into the
operations of qualitatively discriminated abilities, then psychology
may also be defined as the science of competency. The thirty
categories of behavior are the outline of a psychology of competency.
These categories have also demonstrated their value for analytical
diagnosis at the Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania. "The Analytical Diagnosis"1 Chart in use at the Psychological Clinic contains the twenty-four items of the former schedule
and a few more. In fact, this new "Analytical Diagnosis" chart
comprises a total of fifty-six items?too many, perhaps, for a perspicuous psychograph. I think the items cover the range of abilities
into which human competency may be satisfactorily analyzed. The
number may be cut down in practice to suit the convenience of the
diagnostician.

1 Humptstone, Henry Judson, Ph.D., "The Analytical Diagnosis." The Psychological
Clinio, Vol. XII, Nos. 5-9, May, 19l9, pp. 171-174.
THE ANALYTICAL DIAGNOSIS. 135
THE ANALYTIC DIAGNOSIS
Name: Race:
Born: Age: Culture L: 1 2 3 4 5
Basis of estimate:
1. Proficiency M's: (See Mental Exam. Blank) Social (B) I. Q.
School P. L.
2. Competency   2 Spec. A's:
(?) Ability   a
(?) Efficiency   b Spec. D's:
3. Speed   3 11. Differentiation (R)  11
(a) Productivity   a Sensib. V. A. K. P. G.
Moral; ^Esthetic
4. Accuracy:   4 12. Consistency:  12
(o) Directions   a (a) Reliability   a
5. Coordination   5 13. A. D. (A. C. A.)    13
(?) Cooperation   a (a) Distribution   a
(?) Planfulness   b
6. Control   6 14. Complexity (R)    14
(c) Motivation
(d) Personality
(o) Comprehension
(6) I. S.
(c) Organizability
7. Effort   7 15. Pers. (P. C. A.)-D    ? ? 15
8. Initiative    ? ? 8 16. Exploration (No)  16
9. Pertinacity .. -  9 17. Discernment L.  17
(a) Endurance  ? ? a (a) Alertness    a
(6) Strength
(c) Health ? .. ? ? ? c
10. Energy, V. .. .. ? ? .. 10 18. Interest (No)
(a) Excitability   a (o) Zest
(b) Vivacity
19. Trainability  19
(?) Retention   a
(?) Capacity   b
20. Conformability  20
(a) Imitativeness   a
21. Imageability  21
22. Originality ..   22
23. Educability  23
(a) Intellect   ?
24. Convertibility  24
(a) Susceptibility .. ?   ?
25. Intelligence  25
26. Achievement L.  26
27. Confidence  27
28. Ambition    .. 28
29. Balance  29
(a) Soc. Orientation   a
30. Judgment  30
