Job Spicifications and Diagnostic Tests of Job Competency Desigend for the Auditing Division of a Steet Raelway Company
============================================================================================================================

(A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY IN INDUSTRIAL GUIDANCE)
By Morris S. Viteles, Ph.D.,
Instructor in Psychology, University of Pennsylvania.
This study concerns itself with the development of job speci-
fications and diagnostic tests of job competency for the auditing
division of a street railway company. The purpose of this study is
to outline the general method of procedure in developing specifica-
tions and tests of job competency and to discuss their application
in the selection and maintenance of an effective working force in
one unit of a particular organization.
The Auditing Division.
The Auditing Division, in which the job specifications and tests
wTere prepared, is devoted to the auditing of the receipts of the inter-
urban section of the railway, both passenger and express. This
division also keeps records of car mileage and calculates the expenses
and receipts of operating cars in terms of car miles, passenger miles,
car hours and other statistical units.
The daily receipts of cash and tickets of each conductor on the
interurban division are audited in this division. At the end of each
day each conductor turns in the cash and tickets collected by him
during the day, and a book of stubs, each stub representing a receipt
issued to a passenger for the fare which has been collected. The
passenger interurban railway receipt auditor calculates the value of
each receipt, and checks the conductor's returns in money and tickets
against the total value of the torn stubs. The railway receipt
auditor does not handle any money. This is counted by a money
counter and a statement of the amount turned in by the conductor
given to the auditor. The latter, however, does count the tickets
and checks them against the stubs.
In addition to the audit of interurban passenger receipts the
daily receipts of the city lines are audited in this division. This
involves a separation of cash from tickets, the counting of the cash
and the weighing of the tickets, etc.
All express business carried on by the interurban line is also
handled by this division. Express rates must be calculated, cus-
(83)
84 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
tomers charged, statements issued, etc. In addition various statistics
concerned with passenger and express business are prepared in this
division.
All of the employes in the Auditing Division are called Audit-
ing Clerks both on the pay roll and in a classification of employes
prepared by a Wage Equalization Board. The implication in such a
designation is that all the employes in the division perform exactly
the same duties and that similar competency is required for every
job in it. As a matter of fact, it was found during the course of this
study that the workers simply called "clerks" were engaged on nineteen
different jobs requiring dissimilar competencies on the part of the
workers.
There existed, neither in the Employment Office or elsewhere
a standard statement of the duties of the jobs in this division (or in
any other unit of the organization) and of the qualifications which a
worker must possess in order to be proficient on any one of them.
Such a statement, known as a job specification, is an essential part
of the machinery of effective personnel administration. Such a job
specification involves:
1. A description of the job with special reference to its duties
and the conditions under which these duties are to be performed.
2. An analysis of the physical qualifications of the job.
3. An analysis of job competency?of the mental qualifications
which the individual must possess in order to make a proficient
worker on a particular job. A complete analysis of job competency
includes a statement of the specific abilities, the knowledge (degree
of intellectual attainment with educational material), and the
temperamental qualities of the worker. A statement of previous
experience is also sometimes involved.
The specific items which must be included in such a description
of the jobs are as follows:
1. Name of the job.
2. Preferred age.
3. Preferred sex.
4. Physical requirements.
5. The competency factors:
(a) Specific abilities.
(b) Knowledge (grade of intellectual attainment).
(c) Prerequisite experience.
(d) Temperamental qualities.
6. Conditions of work:
(?) Hours.
(?) Advantageous and disadvantageous features.
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 85
7. Wages.
8. Statement of duties?a description of the duties of the
job.
9. Analysis of operations?a statement of the units of
operation in the job.
10. Time to learn.
11. Nature of training for the job.
12. Opportunities for promotion.
The object of this study was, in part, the preparation of job
specifications for the Auditing Division. The method of procedure
used in developing them and a discussion of their application in this
division is presented below. Plans have been put under way for the
preparation of job specifications for other units of this organization
and it is expected that a somewhat analogous application of them in
the selection and maintenance of an effective working force in these
other units of the organization will be made.
A. Devising Standard Specifications.
According to the analysis of the preliminary job specifications
developed in conference with the division head there were being
done in this unit of the organization nineteen different jobs, each with
its own name. A further analysis of the specifications from the point
of view of competency for the job revealed a similarity in the abilities,
knowledge and experience essential to proficiency among the jobs.
For seven of the jobs, for example, which differ in duties, the pre-
liminary job specifications revealed a similarity of mental require-
ments. Among six other jobs, likewise differing from one another
in duties, a similarity in mental requirements was revealed. Jobs
for which the competency requirements are the same can be listed
under a single specification, called a Standard Office Job Specifi-
cation. All the jobs in the Auditing Division, I have grouped under
eight such Standard Specifications.
The character of the grouping of the jobs under Standard Spec-
ifications depends upon the similarity of the qualifications which
make an individual competent to fill any of the jobs covered by a
single standard specification. In some cases, in the Auditing Divi-
sion, the grouping is influenced by the fill-in character of some of the
jobs. Applicants must be hired not only according to the qualifica-
tions for work of a certain nature which is going to be done by them
from day to day, but also in accordance with specifications for jobs in
which they are going to fill in. Employes who, for example, do
"money counting" and "mileage record" need possess little or no
86 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
competency in arithmetic or sorting, but since they are required to
fill-in on interurban railway receipt auditing, they must be hired
according to the specifications of interurban railway receipt auditing,
and those jobs are therefore included under the same Standard
Office Job Specification as the latter job.
Below are listed the names and numbers of the Standard Office
Job Specifications developed for the Auditing Division. A copy of
one standard specification is included in this report.
Standard Office Job Specification. Auditing Division).
No. Name. Jobs Covered.
1 Auditing Clerk A Express Audit;
Fare Box Register;
Interurban Railway Receipt Audit;
Mileage Record;
Money Counting;
Milk and Cream Audit;
Transfer Audit.
2 Auditing Clerk B Express Audit B;
Fare Box Checking;
Mileage Calculation;
Shortage Record;
Special Interurban Audit;
Statistical Clerk.
3 Typist Typist.
4 Stenographer Stenographer.
5 Fare Box Clerk Fare Box Clerk.
6 Supervisor Supervisor.
7 Special Express Clerk Special Express Clerk.
8 General Clerk General Clerk.
Advantages of Standard Specifications.
The advantages of using such standard specifications, each one
covering the qualifications for a number of different jobs, are as
follows:
(a) The problem of the selection of employes by the Employ-
ment Department is simplified, especially when such selection is to
be made on the basis of standard psychological tests. One series of
tests covers a number of different jobs in which the operations differ,
but for which the qualifications essential to properly carrying out the
different operations are the same.
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 87
Form 1A
STANDARD OFFICE JOB SPECIFICATION NO. 1.
Name: Auditing Clerk A Dept.: Accts. Div.: Auditing
Sex: M.... F X Age Preferred: 17-21 Tests No.: F-100
X-Essential, O-Desirable. F-101
O-Occasional F-102
F-
General Qualifications:?
Schooling English Mathematics Bookkeeping Dictation
5th Grade .... Corresp  Addition X Accounting.... Letters
8th Grade X Grammar .... Subtract. X Gen. D. E  Reports
High Sch. O Spelling .... Multiplic. X S. E. .... Articles
College .... Inquiries .... Division X Dr. & Cr  General
Technical .... Telephone .... Percentage.... Technical ....
Business   Dols.-Cts. X
Corresp.   Decimals ....
Fractions X
Machines:? Conditions of Work:?
Calculator .... Typewriter: Standing .... Routine X Pay:
Adding X Copying.... Sitting X Special .... Min. $50.00
Billing .... Diet  Walking .... Exec  Aver. $65.00
Bookkeeping .... Stencil .... Reaching X Fill-in X Hours 7.30-12
Money Count-
ing O   12.45-4.47
General Duties:?
Balancing .... Filing: Listing .... Transcribing
Billing .... Alphabetical O Posting .... Writing
Checking X Numerical O Sorting X
Computing .... Chronolog. .... Supervising
Counting X Topical .... Tabulating X
General Description:?Counts, sorts, checks money receipts or waybills.
Calculates and tabulates. Worker is assigned to one particular job of
those listed on Statement of Duties No. 1, but he may be required to fill
in on any other job.
See Statement of Duties No. 1.
Experience :?
Required:?None.
Desirable:?General office work. As posting clerk. Handling and counting
money and receipts.
Training:?Time:?1 month. Nature?On job. Instruction by supervisor
assigned to this. Special class drill in mental arithmetic.
Special Features:?Use of adding machine taught where needed. Use of
money-counting machine also taught.
Handling money in money counting is dirty.
Honesty essential.
88 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
(6) Clerks who are hired on the basis of similar qualifications
can be readily transferred from one job to another as the circum-
stances require. This is especially desirable in such a division as the
Auditing, where the nature of the work is essentially "fill-in."
(c) On the basis of a grouping under standard specifications,
training courses which cover the fundamental requirements for the
different jobs listed under a single standard specification can be
established.
(d) Lines of promotion within the scope of a single standard
specification and among the jobs of different standard specifications
can be established.
(e) In so far as a standard specification is a statement of the
similar qualifications covering a wide variety of jobs, it can be used
in equalizing wages on the basis of similar abilities, experience and
knowledge brought to different jobs.
Statements of Duties.
It has been explained above that a single standard specification
may cover a variety of jobs with different duties. (This is actually
the case with Standard Specifications No. 1 and No. 2 for the Audit-
ing Division.) The qualifications for the jobs covered by a standard
specification are the same, but the duties are different and the
working conditions are different. It is therefore impossible to give
in a single standard specification a complete description of the
duties of all the jobs which are included in it. In making selection
with standard specifications it is important for the employment agent
to know the duties of the particular job which is going to be filled
and that he be able to furnish the applicant with an accurate descrip-
tion of this job. It is to fulfil these needs that a "Standard of
Duties," covering all the jobs subsumed under a standard specifi-
cation, was drawn up. The "Statement of Duties" give the details
of the duties of the jobs or the statement of qualifications which,
together with a general statement of duties, are found on. the
Standard Office Job Specification proper. For every standard
specification which covers more than one job a Statement of Duties
has been drawn up. This form is used in requisitioning and selecting
employes in the manner described under Application in Selection.
Diagnostic Tests of Job Competency.
A job specification is a schedule of the operations and qualifi-
cations of the job. The essential feature of the job specification, from
the point of view of the personnel worker in industry, is the descrip-
tion of job competency?the statement of the abilities, knowledge,
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 89
personality and experience prerequisite to the attainment of pro-
ficiency on the job. The specification of the competency required
for a particular job is, however, of little value unless means for
determining whether the applicant for the job possesses such com-
petency are provided. There must be standards for determining
whether the applicant fills the specification. Such standards are
represented by psychological tests. The test is a diagnostic measure
to be used in determining whether or not the human material comes
up to the specifications which have been established for employment.
By means of it the examiner can make a diagnosis of an applicant's
competency and a prediction of his probable success or failure on the
job for which he is making application. It is a definite, quantitative
method of determining the presence or absence of job competency,
to replace the inaccurate, unscientific method of mere observation.
1. Development of Tests for the Auditing Division.
A series of such psychological tests have been prepared for use,
together with the job specifications, in the selection and in the
maintenance of an effective working force in the Auditing Division.
The procedure used in the preparation of these tests is as follows:
1. A number of tests, involving in their performance the same
abilities which appeared to be involved in the jobs in the Auditing
Division were given to all the workers in this division. The method
of making the analysis of these abilities is discussed in another sec-
tion of this report.
2. The scores made by the employes in this division on the
individual lists were correlated with their proficiency ranks as
workers. The Pearson rank difference formula was used in making
these correlations. Proficiency rank is the status of a worker in
comparison with other employes doing exactly the same kind of
work in this case, as established by the division head and supervisor.
In the computation of the co-efficients of correlation, only the
scores of workers engaged in exactly the same job were used in any
one correlation. The test scores of workers doing interurban railway
receipt auditing were correlated with their rank orders in proficiency;
the test scores of workers doing express auditing were correlated
with their rank orders in proficiency. In a few jobs, such as. stenog-
raphy, "shortage record" and "statistical clerk" no co-efficient of
correlation could be computed because of the small number of
employes on the job. In these cases a direct comparison between
the scores of the individual on the tests and the scores of employes
in jobs covered by the same specifications was made. Moreover, in
90 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
such cases, the procedure was adopted of retaining for the selection
of these employes the series of tests assigned, to the standard speci-
fication covering the particular job under consideration.
On the basis of correlations obtained between the test scores
and proficiency ranks of individuals doing particular kinds of work
certain of the tests given in the Auditing Dvision were discarded,
and ten were retained for use in guiding applicants toward positions
in this division on the basis of specific job competency. The names
of the tests to be used for selection and in other ways indicated in
the section on applications are as follows:
1. Arithmetic A.
2. Arithmetic B.
3. Mental Arithmetic.
4. Number checking.
5. Copy checking.
6. Tabulating.
7. Typist Test.
8. Stenographical Test.
9. Alphabetical Filing.
10. Language Test.
A "critical level" or the lowest score which could be considered
a passing score was established for each test by distributing the
scores on the tests, calculating significant measures and computing
the percentage of successes and failures above and below a given
measure.
2. Grouping into Batteries.
The tests, on the basis of the co-efficients of correlation between
scores and proficiency ranks were grouped into batteries. Each
"battery" of tests is to be used in selecting workers for jobs covered
by some one standard Job Specification. Tests correlating uni-
formly high with the proficiency ranks of jobs covered by a single
standard specification were given a place in the battery of tests
for that standard specification. The batteries are tabulated below
and the standard job specification which a particular battery covers
is indicated in each case. The co-efficient of correlation between
the battery and job proficiency is also given in each case except
where the number of employes covered by the Standard Office Job
Specification is less than ten. In calculating these co-efficients of
correlation the rank order ratings of workers on all jobs covered by
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 91
a single Standard Office Job Specification were used. The following
information is given about each test:
1. Name of Test.
2. Method of Scoring.
3. Time allowed.
4. Critical level.
Since there are a number of tests in each battery, it has been
necessary to work out some method by which a combined score repre-
senting a combination of the scores of the individual tests in the
battery could be computed. Such a combined score, called the
" Total Score," can be computed for each complete battery of tests.
The Total Score represents a pro-rating of each test in direct pro-
portion to the significance of its co-efficient of correlation with
industrial proficiency. The co-efficients of the tests in Battery No.
1, for example, are:
Mental Arithmetic  [-0.60
Number checking  1-0.52
Arithmetic A  h 0.40
The relative value of these co-efficients is 6, 5, 4. The relative
value of the score of each test in the Total Score is exactly the same.
The score for Arithmetic A is 21, for Number Checking is 25, and
Mental Arithmetic, 30, in a Total Score of 75.
The Total Score is the criterion for selection. Applicants who
obtain a Total Score lower than the one which is indicated as the
Lowest Acceptable Score?determined empirically except where
otherwise indicated?are not to be hired for the job for which they
are being tested.
3. Tests for Selection of Clerks for Auditing Division.
Battery 1. Standard Job Specification No. 1. Auditing Clerk A.
Test. Name Scobing. Time Allowed. Critical Level.
F-100. Arithmetic Number right.. .6 minutes 14
F-101 Mental Arith Number right... 3 minutes  30
F-102 Number checking Number right... 2 minutes  8
In each case by "number right" is meant the total number of
correct answers.
To obtain the Total Score for this battery, the score of the appli-
cant in test F-100 is multiplied by 1.5 and the score in test F-102 by
3. The scores so obtained is added to the score in test F-101.
92 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Example.
Test. Score.
F-100 14 x 1.5 equals 21
F-102  8x3 equals 24
F-101 30  30
Total score %  75
The Lowest Acceptable Score for this battery is 75.
The co-efficient of correlation between these results and job
proficiency in this case is +0.68? .07.
Battery 2. Standard Job Specification No. 2. Auditing Clerk B.
Test. Name. Scoring. Time Allowed. Critical Level.
F-100. Arithmetic Number right.. .6 minutes 14
F-100-A Arithmetic Number right... 3 minutes  8
F-103 Copy checking Number right.. .3 minutes  40
Note.?All items correctly checked and copied, including the
samples, constitute the "Number Right" for test F-103.
To obtain the Total Score the applicant's score in test F-100 is
multiplied by 2; the score in test F-100-A is multiplied by 5; the
score so obtained is added to the score in test F-103.
The Lowest Acceptable Score for this battery is 108.
The co-efficient of correlation between this test results and job
proficiency is +0.72?.09
Battery 3. Standard Job Specification No. 3. Typist.
Test. Name. Scoring. Time Allowed. Critical Level.
F-100 Arithmetic Number Right... .6 minutes 10
F-105 Typing Time and Errors  *
F-105 C
F-105 D
F-110 Filing Number Right. .. .3 minutes 21
The Critical Level for the test in arithmetic for typists in this
division is 10.
The typing tests are scored in terms of time taken to finish and
number of errors. Mistakes in spelling, spacing and punctuation
constitute errors. The standards are such that all applicants may
be divided into three classes on the basis of the proficiency of each
in this test. Different divisions can use typists of different degrees
of proficiency and to each division will be sent such typists as best
* Test F-105, F-105 C, F-105 D are tests of the applicant's ability to typewrite. The first is
a test of the ability to copy uncorrected material; the second a test of the ability to copy cor-
rected material, and the third a test of the ability to tabulate rough copy. In so far as
possible, the applicant is tested on the same type of machine to which she is accustomed. If this
is not possible, a time allowance is made by reason of the applicant's unfamiliarity with the type
of machine on which she is required to take the test.
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 93
meets their needs. The actual needs of the Auditing Division are
being ascertained in the course of standardizing this test.
The following is a tentative classification of typists on the
basis of this test:
? Time. Errors.
Class A  6 min  8
Class B 8 min  8
Class C Ab. 9 min.
No Total Score has been compiled for this battery of tests.
In order to be considered for employment in the Auditing Division,
the applicant must receive a Class B classification in F-105, F-105 C,
and F-105D and a passing score in F-100 and F-110.
Battery 4- Standard Specification No. 4. Stenographer.
Test. Name. Scoring. Time Allowed. Critical Level.
F-106 b} ' " Stenographer Time and errors     *
F-110 Filing    .Number Right... .3 min  21 f
F-109 Language Number Right... .3 min 25
F-12 Technical Spelling... .Number Right... .3 min  *
F-13 Sentence Construction Number Right... .5 min  *
No adequate standards have been prepared for the stenogra-
phical test but the discussion of standards, their application and
wages which was given in describing the test for typists (F-105) is
applicable equally well to this test.
F-12 is a Spelling Test and F-13 a Sentence Construction Test
which have not yet been fully standardized.
Battery 5. Standard Job Specification No. 6, Supervisor.
Standard Job Specification No. 7. Express Clerk.
Test. Name. Scoring. Time Allowed. Critical Level.
F-100 Arithmetic Number Right 6 min?...... 14
F-100 A Arithmetic Number Right... .3 min  8
F-103J Copy Checking Number Right... .3 min 40
F-110 Filing Number Right 3 min  21
To obtain the Total Score the applicant's score in test F-100 is
multiplied by 2; the score in test F-100 A by 5; the score so obtained
is added to the scores in test F-103 and F-110.
The Lowest Acceptable Score for this battery of tests is 130.
The co-efficient of correlation between the results of this battery
of tests and job proficiency is +0.65?.12
* Test F-106 and F-106 B are tests of the applicant's ability to take and transcribe notes
of a general nature.
t The Filing Test is included in this battery by reason of the fact that the stenographers m
this division are required to do alphabetical filing.
t All items correctly checked and copied, including the samples, constitute the score for Test
F-103.
94 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Battery 6. Standard Job Specification No. 8. General Clerk.
Test. Name. Scoring. Time Allowed. Critical Level.
F-100 Arithmetic Number Right... .6 min  14
F-101 Number Checking. .. .Number Right... .2 min  7
To obtain the Total Score, the score in test F-101 is multiplied
by 2; the score so obtained added to the score of the applicant in
test F-100. The Lowest Acceptable Score is 28.
These tests can readily be given and graded by a clerk in the
employment office. Each individual test in a battery is given
separately, graded by the clerk and the score entered on the employ-
ment application, to be used for selection in the manner described
elsewhere in this report.
4. Follow-Up.
It has been generally agreed that the psychological test used
in industry can only be properly evaluated by following up the
workers who are hired with the use of tests. It is necessary to ascer-
tain whether the applicant who is hired and turns out to be an able,
efficient worker is the one who makes a satisfactory score on the
test, and, on the other hand, whether the worker who does poorly in
the tests is necessarily the one who does not make an efficient worker
on the job for which she is selected. It has therefore been provided
that the tests presented here be tested, and the standards refined by
following up at regular intervals all workers hired and finding out
whether the work is satisfactory, and if unsatisfactory, the reason.
Provision has also been made that for a period of from three to six
months the employment agent send to the division head for inter-
view and employment some or all of the applicants whose scores in
the tests are belo\v the Lowest Acceptable Score, and that the work
of these so employed be even more closely followed up.
The Psychologist and Job Specifications.
It has been indicated throughout this report that the job speci-
fication is made up of three parts: (1) a description of the duties
of the job; (2) an analysis of the physical requirements of the job;
(3) an analysis of job competency, of the mental qualifications which
the individual must possess in order to make a proficient worker
upon a particular job. The psychologist is especially concerned with
the last aspect of the job specification?with the statement of the
mental qualifications which constitute competency for the job.
There are two contributions which the psychologist can make
in the analysis of job competency.
1. He makes an analysis of competency or qualifications for
the jobs, in terms of specific abilities. He can substitute for such
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 95
vague mental qualities as dependability, alertness, force, good habits
and other vague terms of mental characteristics a category of the
specific abilities which go into each performance?into each job.
2. The psychologist can provide quantitative methods for
testing individuals for the possession of the competency which a
particular job demands. These standards are psychological tests
The method of procedure to be used in developing such tests are
presented in the section on Diagnostic Tests.
The most important contribution which it is the aim of the
psychologist to make to the theory and practice of job analysis is a
more accurate and scientific formulation of what constitutes com-
petency for the job.
Competency for the job consists of four factors?knowledge,
experience, temperamental traits and specific mental abilities. Pre-
requisite knowledge can be described largely in terms of school
contents and processes, as?for example, in the specifications pre-
sented in this report. Experience can be expressed in terms of a
simple statement such as the ones given in these specifications. For
the specific abilities there is not in use an adequate category, and a
full description of the job depends upon a delineation of the specific
mental abilities which the individual must possess in order to attain
proficiency on the job. Psychological tests, which are used to
measure job competency are measures of the specific abilities of indi-
viduals. The description of the job, at least that part of the descrip-
tion which concerns itself with the human being who is going to
fill the job, should, therefore, be largely in terms of specific abilities.
It is very essential that these abilities be named, even though the
psychological tests, involving these abilities, are being developed by
the psychologist.* Link contrasts the older method of "describing
jobs in terms of personal qualities" with the "newer or psychological
method." To being with, he writes, "it makes a thoroughgoing
analysis of one job and then, on the basis of this, selects a set of
tests which seem to involve the same ability as that required by the
job. These tests are then tried out on a large number of workers
whose ability is known in order to find those tests which do this to the
highest degree. When tests which are sufficiently significant are
found, the results are a standard and scientifically accurate measure-
ment of those specific abilities which are required by that specific
job. It is unnecessary to name these abilities even." In my opinion,
it is extremely important to name these abilities od the job specifi-
cation for the following reasons:
* Link, Henry C., "Employment Psychology."
96 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
1. It is a record, in a definite form, of the analysis made by the
psychologist, for his own use and for use by others working in the
same field. The actual accomplishment in industrial testing in
developing job specifications and diagnostic tests have outdistanced
the formulation of the principle of scientific procedure and the
development of a background of theory. The formulation of such
theoretic background and a set of principles to guide the psychologist
in the work is esssential to its ultimate success. The most important
feature in such a formulation of theory is, in my opinion, the analysis
and recording of the specific abilities which establish competency
for a particular job.
2. The employment agent and the operating executive should
know what, in the opinion of the psychologist, constitutes com-
petency for the job in which they are interested, and such com-
petency can only be fully expressed in terms of specific abilities. The
industrial executive will quickly agree to use concepts of specific
abilities in describing workers under him if a set of terms are pro-
vided for him.
The greatest difficulty lies in providing a set of terms which
will be acceptable as an analysis of the specific abilities and which
will be so defined that they can be understood, by the industrial lay-
man as well as by the industrial psychologist. The terms which
have generally been used in place of terms denoting specific ability
are vague concepts of mental qualities which have in them very little
which is actually related to job competency.
. A great variety of such terms have been used in various job
specifications in an attempt to describe job competency.* In the
Description of Occupations of Office Employes prepared by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, the qualifications of the File Clerk are
described as keen observation, quick thinking, good memory and a
mind for detail. Conscientiousness, accuracy and alertness are also
necessary. The qualifications of the Mail Clerk are described as
carefulness, accuracy and honesty and those of the Messenger, as
responsibility, tact and trustworthiness. Other qualities which are
often used in the statement of job competency are, ambition, intelli-
gence, sincerity, patience, loyalty, impulsiveness, reliability, creative
ability, manual or motor ability, willingness, thoroughness, and so on
ad infinitum.
Schneiderf gives a list of sixteen classifications which can often
be applied to the individual in a description of the competency
demands of jobs.
* Discription of Occupations?U. S. Department of Labor; Office Employes.
t H. L. Hollingsworth, "Vocational Psychology," p. 105 ff.
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 97
These are as follows:
(?) Physical strength; physical weakness.
(?) Mental; manual.
(c) Settled; roving.
(d) Indoor; outdoor.
(e) Directive; dependent.
(/) Original (creative) initiative.
(g) Small scope; large scope.
(h) Adaptable; self-control.
(i) Deliberate; impulsive.
(j) Music sense.
(k) Color sense.
(I) Mental accuracy; mental inaccuracy.
(m) Mental accuracy (logic); mental inaccuracy.
(n) Concentration (mental focus); diffusion.
(o) Rapid mental co-ordination; slow mental co-ordination.
(p) Dynamic; static.
The terms listed here are somewhat different in general import.
Some of them are concepts of motivation. Loyalty, sincerity,
patience, impulsiveness are related to the drives, the impulses lead-
ing to certain types of performances. The motive concepts also
include such terms as responsible, irresponsible, phlegmatic, delibera-
tive, which are ordinarily subsumed under the head of temperament.
Some of the terms are concerned with the physical welfare of the
individual; dynamic, nervously quick, are examples of these. Only
a few of these terms are really concerned with the abilities of indi-
viduals; mechanical ability, creative ability, energy, manual are
examples of these, but the terms here used, and they are very fair
examples of those used in the majority of job specifications, are not
at all accurately descriptive or representative of specific mental
abilities.
This study is presented as a preliminary one which merely serves
to open up the problem of the analysis, in terms of specific mental
abilities, of the operations involved in a particular task. Posting,
sorting, checking, tabulating, etc., are patterns of behavior, the
mechanisms of response of which are the individual specific abilities.
An analysis of these abilities, similar to the one made by Young
for the performance of the Witmer Form Board, will have to be
made for all operations in every job if an accurate description of
job competencies in psychological terms is to be obtained. A list
of terms which can be used for such a purpose, is presented
below.
98 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
These terms are descriptions of the specific mental abilities
necessary for success on a given job. They are adapted from the
"Analytical Diagnosis Chart," used in the Psychological Clinic of
the University of Pennsylvania in the examination diagnosis of the
cases which come into that clinic. The terms were originally estab-
lished by Lightner Witmer, Director of the Psychological Clinic,
and later modified by Young* and Humpstone.f In this report is
indicated a method of applying these terms in job analysis. They
have already been so applied in the analysis of the jobs discussed in
this report.
It is not only necessary to indicate the specific mental abilities
which are required on a given job, but it is necessary to indicate the
extent to which each job calls for a specific ability. In many cases,
the difference in competency between two jobs consists not of a dif-
ference in number and kind of specific mental abilities for which the
job calls, but in the extent to which each is called forth in the job.
The difference is not one of content, but of pattern?an emphasis in
one job of certain specific mental abilities, which, by reason of a
difference in the operations of the other job, are not emphasized in
the second job. It is therefore necessary to give a quantitative rating
to each ability with reference to the extent to which it is required for
success on a given job. For this purpose, in the analysis of the jobs
discussed in this report, a 5-point scale, in which each of the numbers
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, represents a degree to which each specific mental ability
is essential for success upon the job, was used. The meaning of each
numerical rating is given below.
1. Negligible.
2. Barely significant.
3. Significant
4. Of great importance.
5. Of utmost importance.
In other words, thinking in terms of the mental abilities which
are called for a given job, 1 means that the importance of the ability
so rated is practically negligible in job success; 2 means that this
ability is called for to such a slight extent on the job that a deficiency
in it on the part of the worker interferes only slightly with the
capacity of the worker to perform efficiently the duties of that job;
3 means that the ability is significant, but that it is not one which
particularly distinguishes this job from other similar jobs; 4 means
that the ability is essential and that it is called for to such a great
* W. H. Young, "Physical and Mental Factors Involved in the Formboard Test," Psycho-
logical Clinic, Nov. 15, 1916.
tH. J. Humpstone, "The Analytic Diagnosis," Psychological Clinic, May 15, 1919.
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 99
degree that a deficiency in it on the part of the worker engaged on the
job would interfere seriously with the efficiency on the job; 5 means
that the job requires this ability to such an extent that a deficiency
in it on the part of the worker would make him absolutely incom-
petent to fill the job.
The specific mental abilities used in this investigation and
suggested for use in job analysis are as follows:
1. Energy. By energy is meant the degree of physical force
necessary for success on the job. It is perhaps illustrated by the
difference between the job of laborer, in which the amount of energy
would be rated as 5 on a five-point scale, and the crossing watchman
at a country crossroad on a railroad in which there are just a few
trains a day, in which case the amount of energy to be expended would
be rated as 1.
2. Rate of Discharge. By this is meant the speed with which
energy is called forth by the job. On some jobs much energy may be
called forth, but this energy is called forth slowly, while on other
jobs it must be expended with great speed. The reverse is also true;
that is, there are jobs in which the amount of energy demanded is
low, but it may be required that this be expended either at great
speed or slow speed.
3. Endurance. By endurance is meant the degree to which the
ability to resist fatigue is required by the job. It is equivalent to
what is ordinarily called "stamina" and refers to the degree to which
the job demands -the ability to discharge energy beyond the limit
of physical fatigue.
4. Control. By control is meant the ability which is demanded
in the direction and execution of large bodily movements. Walking,
for example, involves control to a very great degree. In the realm
of occupations, shoveling dirt from a sand car out on the street
would require control to the extent of 5 on a five-point scale. This
would be contrasted with, let us say, comptometer operating, in
which the emphasis would be more upon co-ordination than upon
control. Control would be rated 5, for example, in the job of running
a street car.
5. Co-ordination. (A) This refers to the job requirement in the
combination of fine muscular movements; in the establishment of
finer adjustments among these movements. The importance of
this ability rates high in such jobs as fine instrument making, comp-
tometer operating, and in fine armature winding.
6. Co-ordination. (B) This refers to the harmonious combina-
tion of eye and muscle action demanded by the job. It is move-
ment controlled by sight. It is important in such a job as telephone
100 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
operating, in which the operator is required to get the plug into a
hole of small diameter, the location of which is perceived through
the eye.
7. Initiative. This refers to the self-starting aspect of the job
demand. It is the ability of the individual to begin a new operation
without instruction. It is required to some extent in running the
trolley car, exhibiting itself when trouble arises in the mechanism of
the trolley car or on the road. It is found to a much less degree in,
for example, the job of interurban railway receipt audit, and to a
much greater degree in that of "shooting trouble."
8. Concentration. This refers to the attention which the job
requires to be given to one unit, or one small part, in contrast to the
distribution of attention over a number of parts. For example, a
man who is feeding an automatic punch press uses concentration of
attention to the extent of 5, inasmuch as he attends only to one
single operation, to one single thing. It is attention to individual,
single component parts of a complex operation or object in contrast
to attention spread over a number of parts of a complex operation
or object.
9. Distribution. This refers to the distribution of attention which
the job requires over a number of different operations or things at
the same time. For example, the motorman distributes his attention
over the street, the control apparatus which he is handling and the
signals which come from the conductor at the same time. A man who
is starting a lathe distributes his attention over a number of levers
in starting the lathe. The sub-station operator may be required to
distribute his attention over a number of switches simultaneously.
Distribution is contrasted with concentration. In some jobs
one is exemplified and in some jobs the other. It is possible that in
certain jobs both may be required to approximately the same degree.
10. Persistence. This refers to the stick-to-it-iveness demanded
by the job. ' It is the ability which the job calls for of giving entire
attention to the matter at hand until it is completed. It is the
opposite of fluctuation of attention, in which attention wanders from
the matter at hand.
11. Alertness. This is the readiness which the individual must show
on the job in meeting changing situations. It is wide-awakeness.
It should be rated as an important requirement on the job of motor-
man and relatively of less importance in the job of running a mimeo-
graphing machine.
12. Associability. This refers to the number of discrete units
which must be associated in one moment of consciousness on the
job. Some jobs require that the individual be able to hold in con-
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 101
sciousness only two or three things at once, and others that they be
able to hold as many as six or seven. In running a street car the
individual will need a memory span of at least four in order to be
successful on the job. In a job such as that of listing clerk a long
memory span will be of great help. In still other jobs, such as feed-
ing a drill press, a memory span of three and possibly less is sufficient
for efficiency.
13. Discriminability. This refers to the ability required by the
job of recognizing differences in size, shape, sound, taste, etc.
The smallness of the difference it is necessary to recognize on a given
job is a measure of the degree of discrimination required by the
job.
Discriminability is employed in each of the several realms, and
we therefore have:
(?) Visual discriminability.
(?) Auditory discriminability.
(c) Tactile discriminability (touch).
id) Kinesthetic discriminability (differences in movement).
(e) Olfactory discriminability.
(/) Gustatory discriminability.
It is necessary to differentiate the kinds of discriminability which
is to be rated in making ratings on different jobs.
In order to bring into relief the discriminability complexes which
it will most often be necessary to rate, the following two items are
provided.
A. Form Perception, or the degree to which the ability to
discriminate differences in shape, is demanded on the
job.
1. Visual. By means of sight.
2. Tactile-Motor. By means of touch and move-
ment.
B. Space Perception, or the degree to which the ability to
discriminate differences in distance, is required.
1. Visual.?By means of sight.
2. Tactile-Motor.?By means of touch and kin-
esthesia, i. e., the recognition of small dif-
ferences in movement through space. For
example, in creeping out on a ledge, etc.
14. Accuracy. This refers to the degree to which the complex
of abilities (Attention, Discrimination, etc.), which makes it possible
for an individual to do with exactness the work to which he is assigned
102 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
is demanded by the job. Important in meter reading and in many-
clerical jobs, and less important in laboring jobs, gross repair work, etc.
15. Memory. This refers to the ease of learning and the per-
sistence of retention required on the job. There are three specific
types of memory, in three specific sense fields, to be considered in
giving a rating on Memory. These are:
A. Visual, or the memory of visual material.
B. Auditory, or the memory of auditory material.
C. Kinesthetic. This refers to motor memory, or the
ability to recall movements.
16. Understanding. This refers to ability to understand direc-
tions as part of the job qualifications. It is the degree of compre-
hension of verbal or written directions demanded. This is probably
involved in all jobs, but the degree of its importance will vary from
job to job.
17. Understanding Q. This refers to the readiness or quickness
with which directions must be understood on a given job. On some
jobs the directions can be read at a pace established by the worker
and plenty of time taken to interpret them. On other jobs it is
essential that the directions be grasped and understood readily.
Trouble shooting is an example of a job in which quickness of under-
standing would be rated high.
18 Observation. This refers to the ability which is called forth by
the job of employing attention so that no detail of the performance
remains unnoticed. The individual must always be aware of what
he is doing and keep accurate tab on minute details of the job which
he is doing. The job of proof-reading, for example, would have to
be rated high on observation because it is necessary for the proof-
reader to notice every minute detail of the proof. A typist, copying
from rough draft, would also be rated high on observation, although
not quite as high as a proof-reader. And in such a job as shoveling
coal, observation would be rated low.
19! Planfulness. This refers to the ability to look ahead, to
forsee the general plan of the work, and to methodically plan or form
a scheme for the method of doing the work as part of the job require-
ments. The job of supervising would be rated high in planfulness.
The job of comptometer operating would probably be rated low.
20. Intelligence. This is the ability of the individual to solve a
new problem. In most jobs new problems are not presented. They
may occasionally arise in the process of running a street car, very
often in "shooting trouble," but very rarely in clerical jobs, and in
most of the other jobs of a producing nature.
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 103
21. Intellect. This refers specifically to the ability to put the
kind of knowledge that is ordinarily obtained in the schools to use on
the job. A job in which no knowledge of school work is at all
required, not even reading and writing, should not be checked at
all. A job in which simply the ability to carry numbers or spell
out words slowly should be rated as 1. A job in which reading and
writing and little more of an intellectual nature would be required
would receive a rating of 2. A job requiring the ability to use
knowledge of about sixth grade standing, a rating of 3. A job of the
intellectual level of the high school graduate would be 4, and a job
which required collegiate or technical training would be given a
rating of 5.
22. Judgment. This is the exercise of choice on a job. It is the
job demand for the selection for a best response from among a number
of possible satisfactory responses, e. g., train dispatching.
23. Logical Analysis. The ability called for by a job for the
consideration in an impartial, rational way of the problems pre-
sented by the job. This ability is employed to any great extent only
in relatively few jobs. A research assistance in a Research
Department is a job which would be rated high with reference to
this ability.
24. Language Ability. The extent to which the use of written
and spoken language is an essential requirement for job proficiency.
Information clerk, correspondence clerk would be jobs rating high
in the requirement of this ability. Listing clerk, laborer would
rate low.
25. Executive. This refers to the capacity for leadership required
on the job. This is a complex, unanalyzed mental ability which
can only be rated in a very superficial way. This is probably a
complex of personality as much as it is one of specific ability, but
it is tentatively included in this list.
In order to facilitate the use of these terms in making job analysis,
Form M. Q. 1 was provided. A copy of this form, giving an analysis
of one of the jobs studied in this investigation, is included in this
report. It will be seen that on the left-hand side of the form are given
the specific mental abilities. To the right of these are five columns
numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, respectively. Each specific mental ability
which is required by the job is checked with an X. The X is placed
in one of the columns marked 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, with reference to the
degree to which it is significant on the job. The three specific mental
abilities which most definitely distinguish the job, that is, which
represent the specific mental abilities of greatest importance for
success on the job are checked with XX.
104 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Form M. Q. 1
Name of Job:?Interurban Railway Receipt S. J. S. No. 1 Tests No. F-100
Auditor.
S. O. J. S. No. 1  F-101
Department:? Accounting Division:?Auditing  F-108
1. Energy
2. Rate of Discharge
3. Endurance
4. Control
5. Co-Ordination A
6. Co-Ordination B
7. Initiative
8. Concentration
9. Distribution
10. Persistence
11. Alertness
12. Associability
13. Discriminability:
a/V
b/A
c/T
d
e
A. Space Perception
B. Form Perception
14. Accuracy
15. Memory:
a/V
b/A
c/K
16. Understanding
17. Understanding
18. Observation
19. Planfulness
20. Intelligence
21. Intellect
22. Judgment
23. Logical Analysis
24. Language Ability
25. Executive
Remarks.
A line connecting the X's on the chart gives what might be called
a "job psychograph." If the form is held so that the specific abilities
come at the bottom of the sheet and the curve strikes horizontally
across the page/ fthe peaks of the curve reveal at a glance the specific
mental abilities, which, in the opinion of the one who is making the
job analysis, are the ones Which are most essential in job success,
SPECIFICATIONS OF JOB COMPETENCY. 105
These abilities can be called the "keystone" specific mental abilities
of the job and they are correlated to the "keystone" operations of
the job or the activities which most clearly distinguish this job from
other similar jobs. In providing tests of job competency, the aim
should be to test particularly these keystone mental abilities, for it
is the possession of these abilities to the extent required by the job
which makes the worker most competent to fill the job. The tests
should be such as to pick individuals whose vocational psychograph
coincides with the job psychograph. The problem in both voca-
tional guidance, in which the job is selected for the individual, and
industrial guidance, in which the individual is selected for the job, /
is to make the vocational psychograph and job psychograph coincide.
