A Case of Special Difficulty with Reading
==========================================

By Bernice Leland, B.S.,
Detroit City Normal School.
Dana sat at the Kindergarten table peering up at the examiner
in eager curiosity. Her face was dirty and her dark blue dress was
smeared with traces of a recent meal. The busy little hands patted
a decorative bow on her gown, twisted her handkerchief into a grimy
string, and smoothed back the unruly tufts of hair which reached
out at unexpected angles, Then, rocking back and forth on two
legs of her chair, she quickly put a series of questions and punctuated
each one with an excited little laugh. "Why was she over here in
this room?Should she stay?Would other children come?What
were in those cases over there?Didn't Bob used to be in this room?
What should she do here anyway?" Whatever the performance was
going to be, she was apparently eager to begin. That was on Sep-
tember 11, 1919. Since that time Dana has been mainly engaged
in the desperate business of learning to read, and the problem spreads
out before her as the puzzle of the universe. Words are spiteful
things, staring at her from the printed page with an exasperating air
of familiarity at times, then escaping her at the critical moment and
requiring in a most perverse manner to be determined with exactness.
However, she goes about it with an ever ready smile which wreathes
her face into an attractive picture regardless of soil and stain, and
during these many weeks of struggle Dana has made some interesting
discoveries.
First?She finds that when she comes upon a word which she
cannot name at sight, she can remember where she has seen it before.
Then she turns quickly to the helpful sentence, reads it and knows
the word. Or, if it happens to be a phonetic word, she repeats to
herself a "key word" and blends the elements without difficulty.
Secondly?She has found that when she spells the word aloud
at once, it is a very satisfactory help. Either or both of these means
she employs readily, of her own initiative, and so, slowly but surely,
Dana is learning to read. However, an interesting chapter precedes
this part of the story.
Dana was first seen by the writer a few days before the examina-
tion. She was then six years eleven months old, the third in a
family of seven, five of whom are boys. One other girl, a twin of
Jack, who is now two and a half years old, died at one and a half
years of age. Her mother is a small attractive woman, thirty-five
years old, of Swiss origin, the wife of a fairly well-to-do railroad man.
(238)
SPECIAL DIFFICULTY WITH READING. 239
They own a well-ordered home in one of the best residence districts
in the city.
Dana had failed to pass the first half of the first grade in June,
1919. The teacher said she was "all right" and would "probably pass
this time." Nevertheless, she was tested, partly because of her
failure and partly because of personal interest, as her two older
brothers were known to have found school progress very difficult.
Neither boy was considered feeble-minded.
Quantitatively, the test scores were quite satisfactory: Witmer
Formboard, 28 seconds, third trial, 7.25 years.
Witmer Cylinders, 70 seconds, third trial, about 6.G years.
Porteus Maze Tests, 8 years. Binet. Scale (Stanford Revision)
G years 10 months. I. Q. 98.7. Her failures on this test were:
Yr. VI. Counting 13 pennies?Correct on the third trial.
Comprehension?One correct.
Yr. VII. Fingers.
Bow Knot?not tightly drawn.
Yr. VIII. Ball and Field?This appeared to be a haphazard per-
formance in spite of considerable regularity of line.
Counting backwards.
Similarities?gave differences.
Definitions?one correct.
Yr. IX. Date.
Making change.
Digits backwards.
Yr. X. All tests. One comprehension correct.
Her auditory span for digits was 6. The quality of her per-
formance was unstable. The exhilaration manifested at each success
was quite out of proportion to the emphasis placed upon the test by
the examiner. One felt her at once to be the type of child for whom
the teacher's voice is lowered, seldom raised, and who needs the
calm, guiding influence of a well-balanced personalitj^. This was
especially evident during the Porteus tests, which she completed in
almost hysterical triumph.
The double chevron pattern with design cubes puzzled her.
She puckered her face and went at it, but there was an inadequate
quality about her attention. The imperfect particularization which
led her to try block ten of the formboard in recesses eleven and nine,
and nine in seven could not compass the confusion of this pattern.
She placed six of the blocks correctly and would have been satisfied
had not the examiner suggested, "Is it like mine?" Then she
completed the test correctly. In order to do this an accurate visual
memory image must be held for a sufficient time to enable the child
240 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to push the block into place. Subsequent experience with Dana
has added some significance to her failure with this test and to the
fact that on the cylinder test she used the method of keeping to the
block until correctly placed, thereby comparing perceptual images of
block and recess, as she could not do with the design.
To persist in particularization required obvious effort. In other
words, she was easily distracted, but immediately returned to the
task, lengthening her time by only a second or two here and there.
She might have counted thirteen pennies correctly on the first trial
as she did on the third if she had made the necessary effort to control
the situation. Likewise on the comprehensions. Without a doubt,
she lost a part of the problem as her attention lapsed now and then
for an almost unappreciable time. This is verified at home and in
the school room where she is by no means dull of comprehension.
On the contrary, her grasp of the situation set forth in the story or
reading lesson, or concretely confronting her is quite sufficient. Her
mother states that she can send her on errands if she "can keep her
still long enough to make her listen to what is wanted."
In the matter of school subjects Dana scored almost nil. She
had practically no reading vocabulary,?she knew the names of A,
S, C, T, and could write. She could count but did not know any
combinations. When the examiner dictated "I see a tree" she
wrote "? ees tree." After a little instruction on "see" she wrote
"g see ^ tree". Apparently, she was carrying around some dis-
torted memory images.
It hardly seemed as though she could have come through six
months of first grade teaching without a better knowledge of reading
if there were no difficulty more than that of attention, which was
evident but not very severe. Training would at least improve that,
so we decided to give her a chance in a small group.
The first notes made in the school are dated September 18, 1919.
The date of this report is April 12, 1920. Observations during this
time are as follows:
Dana was frequently unable to tell the name of a letter taught
to her the day before, a few hours before, nor, at times, a few minutes
before. She could find the letter at once among her printed alphabet
cards, however, if it were named for her. For example, " Give mem"
?correct response at once.
She could write the letter from dictation, copy it, or hold the
memory image long enough to walk to the blackboard and write it.
Her alphabet cards present the printed form only, which meant that
she must not only translate probable visual into motor activity but
render the print into script. Often writing the letter was followed
SPECIAL DIFFICULTY WITH READING. 241
at once by her saying the name. She could arrange the speech
organs ready to say the letter but the name would not come.
She knew whether the letter presented was new or one previously
studied even though she could not name it. Often she could tell
just when it was first taught, where on the table she had placed a
row of them repeating the name each time she placed the letter, and
how far the row had extended.
Over and over and over again, a letter was presented to her,
named, written, matched until finally the name came more readily
with the subsequent presentations. As soon as possible she learned
to spell simple words, mostly phonetic. She promptly began using
this knowledge of spelling to help her determine the names of letters.
She could remember in what word she had seen and heard the letter
and she spelled it aloud. For example, "1" was very troublesome.
When it was presented on November 19, after drilling on it since
November 5, she at once repeated "ball, b-a-1- it's 1." One day, she
was told "e." The teacher then said "I'll tell you how to spell me
and then you build it." "0," she replied, "I know. It's m, and
that new one." But she could not call the name "e." When she
learned i, her attention was called to the dot and that the name of
the letter was the same as the organ of sight. "Oh, yes," she replied,
"I can think eye just the way I do tea." This association had
not been suggested to her, so far as is known, and it was such
evidence as this occurring day after day, which indicated that
associative processes in general were active and adequate.
From October 15 to November 3, and again from November 20
to January 12, she was excluded because of scarlet fever, first her
brother and then she herself being ill. It was found when she
returned in both cases that she remembered eveiy letter known pre-
vious to her absence. This was a real test of retentiveness and the
result was extremely encouraging. On January 19, she completed
the alphabet. This had been accomplished during daily periods
averaging about fifteen minutes each and she was taught alone at
this time. Some letters, notably 1, n, h, f, had taken a longer time
than the rest.
Meantime, she was working away at reading, about thirty min-
utes each day with three other children. The more letters she knew,
the more rapidly she acquired words. As spelling simple words had
helped her to determine letters, now naming the letters aloud helped
her to read other words. The weak visual memory was thus rein-
forced by both auditory and kinaesthetic.
She has completed the Aldine Primer now, 130 pages of the
Aldine First Reader, the Sunbonnet Babies Primer and 25 pages of
242 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the Mother Goose Reader. She makes considerable use of the little
library in her school room, frequently securing a new book from the
shelf when her other work is completed and earnestly searching out
sentences or phrases which she can read. She is quite dramatic in
her interpretation, and she can answer either fact or thought ques-
tions on what she has read. She reads and executes with perfect
composure such lessons as require her to make a little speech to the
children about the day's activities, or to lead the others in play or
dismissal. As suggested before, phonetic synthesis gives her no
trouble, once she has determined the elements. But notice, that
this determination does not come easily. She gets at the phonogram
just as she does at many words, spelling it aloud and tracing her
association to a key word.
Dana began Number Work after the Christmas recess. She had
had no instruction at all before and could not read the printed sym-
bols at all. At present, she knows all about 18, 17, 16, 15, 14, 13,
8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, but it requires repeated introductions to establish
the symbol. She has referred to suggestive cards hanging before her
in the room for the digits until she can read them, but when she
writes the symbol it is frequently reversed. This is especially true
of 5, 3, 7, 6. However, as with words, she is conscious of her diffi-
culty and has assumed a critical attitude toward her work which is
very helpful.
This afternoon she said, "Look at my fives (5's). Are they
turned around today? I think they are right." They are. The
other children are trying to help her. This morning Robert said,
"Dana, you know your 5's. Make them the right way around."
"Yes," she replied, "I know 5's now." Simple thought problems to
date have given her no trouble.
Briefly stated, Dana's case appears to be one of low trainability
in the specialized areas of visual memory. Somewhere between the
primary receptive centre for vision and the region of the gyrus where
memories of letters, words, and numbers are stored, there are "resist-
ant pathways" which make it exceedingly difficult to produce an
"easy discharge." The condition is comparable to a mild patho-
logical one of letter and word blindness, differing from it in degree
and in cause which in Dana's case is not disease, accident or injury.
It must be a lack of development. Her history is entirely negative,
so far as can be determined from several interviews with her mother
who appears to be perfectly frank and truthful.
Dana's greatest liability is the special memory defect. This is
complicated by an attention which is not wholly adequate. It is
very doubtful that she would have made anything like adequate
SPECIAL DIFFICULTY WITH READING. 243
progress in a regular grade. What has been accomplished is based
upon the plan of diagnosing the case by tests and subsequent attempt
to teach and continuing instruction according to these findings.
The names of the letters are taught usually in the latter half of the
first school year, the A1 grade. But how could Dana have com-
pleted the Blst without this tool which was supplied when she needed
it, and is still freely used? Eventually, she casts it aside as she
comes to see the word as a pattern and not as a series of smaller
units which she must name before the whole can be interpreted.
When a new word is presented to her, she spells it to herself at once,
and upon each of many subsequent presentations. When she is
asked to build it, she does this also. Then she picks out the letters
in any order whatever, arranging them in correct order when she has
them all in her hand.
Can Dana make good in school and later in the world? I con-
sider her case a hopeful one not in the sense that a "cure" can be
affected perhaps, but because she possesses important assets which
overbalance her difficulty, serious as it is. Among these is an ade-
quate retentiveness which must compensate largely for the special
disability. After all, the reading vocabulary necessary to carry her
along in society successfully is not endless. Furthermore, she has
an eager desire to learn so that all available energy is poured into the
learning process and not dissipated in an effort to beat the game or in
forcing herself to endure a situation which is not satisfying. It
seems, then, that her reading difficulty may in time become a minor
consideration.
In intelligence, she certainly equals many a so-called "bright
child." No better evidence of this is needed than the manner in
which she uses what abilities she has to make up for what she has
not. In this respect she is a strong contrast to another of her group,
who, finding it extremely difficult to learn words, makes no use of
the means of self-help as Dana does. He is utterly helpless before a
word which he does not recognize at once. Dana exercises her intel-
ligence not only upon school subjects but upon other problems which
arise all about her in the school room. And she is very happy at
school, for she feels that a little girl who can not read glibly may
nevertheless make an acceptable contribution to society.
She, with two others of her group, has constructed a "costume"
for the rose to wear in the "show." Dana contributed a very fair
share of planning to this little project and it is acceptable to the
children.
Her idea that the cap must "stand up" suggesting the upright
position of the budding petals has been carried out. Though the
244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
finished article is extremely crude, it represents the exercise of certain
highly desirable qualities, notably, planfulness, initiative, a sense of
responsibility and leadership, as well as conformity in activity which
concerns the social group.
Dana is growing calmer too, as her unstable, giggling behavior
appears to be settling down into something like childish poise. She
works quietly and steadily at any task assigned to her now. She is
sufficiently sensitive to failure and to just criticism, so that she does
not repeat the same errors of conduct or judgment. She is affec-
tionate and by no means difficult to manage, yet not dangerously
subject to suggestion. Her personality is decidely attractive, which
is no mean asset-
Whatever her limitations on an educational scale may be, Dana
does not belong in a special class as organized at present, primarily
for feeble-minded children. The recommendation in June will there-
fore be that she be placed in the slow moving group beginning the
second grade in September, under a new plan of organization affecting
all first and second grades in the city. Under this plan each child
works in competition with others of his competency level. We shall
hope that in this way steady progress, though slow, and the consider-
ation of understanding instructors may keep alive Dana's natural
abilities which would otherwise atrophy and become useless.
