The Educability of a Two-Year-Old
===================================

By Helen Squier Skerrett, M.A.
In an article entitled "The Trainability of the Human Infant,"
published in the Psychological Clinic for May, June, 1922, I
showed that a certain baby at from five to seven months old had a
sufficient amount of active trainability to profit very definitely from
our attempt to teach him to hold his own bottle. Within certain
well-defined fields and limits, therefore, even an infant in arms is
trainable. Whether or not this trainability has, by the age of two
years, become sufficiently general in its scope to justify a formal
attempt to teach any of the things commonly included in the realm
of education it is the purpose of this present article to discuss.
1. The Memory Span of a Two-Year-Old.
It is usually conceded that the memory span?the number of
units comprehended by the span of attention?and the ease with
which one or more than the memory span can be taught any specific
subject, is a fairly good index of educability. A child with a memory
span of only one would be regarded as quite uneducable. A child
with a memoiy span of two would be regarded, unless there was
some evidence to the contrary at hand, as somewhat trainable, but
still not educable.
When Bob was twenty-two months old, I could not, by any of
the usual methods, or even by any means which I could devise
myself, find any evidence that his memory span was more than two.
There were, in fact, times when it did not appear to be even quite
two. Sometimes he would repeat two digits after me correctly, but
he was as likely as not to get the order of the digits reversed. He
could sometimes put one specific picture block on another at command, and I noticed a decided improvement in this as his amount
of practice in the exercise increased. When he was twenty-two
months and four days old he was given a book containing sixteen
different animal pictures, six of which he recognized at sight, and ten
whose names he had to learn. His interest in the book was so great
that he carried it everywhere with him, and named over the animals
whenever he could find somebody to help him. Twenty-four
hours after he had first seen the book he could name every animal in
it. While we have no data to show a constant correlation between
the length of the memoiy span and the degree of retention, yet it
seemed to me quite impossible for a child to memorize ten new
(221)
222 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
names in twenty-four hours with the memory span of barely two
that Bob was exhibiting at this time. The fact that I could not get
him to repeat three digits even on ten repetitions seemed to me to
make the discrepancy between his memory span and his performance
with the picture book all the greater.
I therefore determined to make a very careful study of Bob's
memory span. But still he never gave me more than two digits
correctly, and sometimes not even two in correct order. He could
sometimes imitate two simple movements in succession, but
never more than two. His tapping of blocks after me was hopelessly confused. I got nowhere by repeating a favorite word two,
three, or four times and asking him to say it after me. He could
obey a command involving two things, but never more than two.
About two weeks after his performance with the picture book
he began to develop a decided echolalia. I could not carry on a
conversation without having him repeat several words after me
every once in a while. There were three major differentia I noticed
about this echolalia: (1) the words he repeated were just as likely
to be disconnected as arranged in meaningful phrases. (2) His
echolaliac repetitions were always given in a monotonous, measured
tone just above a whisper, and were easily distinguishable from his
ordinary speech. (3) The number of syllables he repeated in echolalia was markedly greater than any number I had ever gotton as
the result of a direct request. I made a careful check on this last
point. One day I happened to use the phrase "teething ring," and
he repeated it after me mechanically. I then asked him to say
"teething ring," but even after several attempts, the best I could
get from him was "teeth ring." A little later I happened to say,
" I guess not," and heard him repeat it after me. At once I requested
him to say "I guess not." But the best I could get from him was
"I?not." About a week later the sentence, "Not in that high
grass, It's too wet" became, in his echo, "High?grass?too?
wet." Five minutes later, I asked him to say "High grass too wet,"
but the best I could get from him even after several repetitions was
"high too wet."
It seemed to me apparent from the nature of his conscious repetitions that the phrases he echoed were without any real significance
to him. That is, he had heard the words in special groups so seldom,
that groups of words or even two syllables or words did not tend to
form single units for him as they do for older children, and as they
began to do for him about a month later than this; I had many
examples of four and even five distinct units in an echoed sentence,
but the "high too wet" was the longest conscious repetition I could
THE EDUCABILITY OF A TWO-YEAR-OLD. 223
get from him at this stage of the game. He was then able to repeat
any single word after me, but he was not yet talking in sentences.
Shortly after this, however, the echolalia decreased to a marked
extent, and the number of words he said in groups consciously, to
express some thought of his own, increased rapidly. It was not,
however, until he was really talking in conected phrases, or "head
lines," at twenty-four months, that I could get him to repeat simple
sentences consciously. At twenty-four months he gave Terman's
"I have a little dog" as "I have little dog," and "the dog runs after
the cat" as "the dog runs after cat." But still I could not get a
memory span for digits of more than two.
When he was two years and six days old, Bob was present for
the first time when I was teaching another boy. He watched the
performance with the keenest interest, but did not once make a
sound during the half-hour lesson. I had occasion to get the memory
span of the other boy, and, in so doing, to get the other boy to repeat
series of three and four digits some twelve or fourteen times. Bob
said nothing at the time, but the next day he was imitating several
different sounds he had heard in the course of the lesson. I assumed
the manner I had been using the previous day and asked Bob to
repeat 1-2. He did this correctly, and I then asked for 1-2-3. He
repeated this also, with exact imitation of my measured tone and
concentrated manner. Thereafter he gave me 5-3-1 and 8-4-2, thus
showing beyond a doubt that his memory span for digits was a good
three. A week later I got several more repetitions of three numbers, and two repetitions of four numbers on four trials.
On the day when Bob was twenty-five months old, I got the
series 1-2-3-4 and 8-4-2-5 on the second repetition of each series. On
this same day, at the same sitting, however, Bob could not always
give me two picture blocks that I asked for, when there were eight
of these blocks on a table before him. In fact, he would repeat such
a command as "Give me the lion and the deer" after me, and then
fail to give me the two animals called for, though he never failed to
respond correctly when I asked him for only one animal. He was
more successful in putting one animal on another at command. On
that same day he could touch two parts of his body when I touched
the corresponding parts of mine, but he could not touch three parts
in succession in imitation of my movements.
Conclusion.
It seems to me incredible that a child of two years could rise
from an inability to repeat three digits on ten repetitions to the
ability to repeat four digits on two repetitions in the short period of
224 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
months. The fact that his ability to repeat three digits correctly
and four on a short number of repetitions made itself manifest for
the first time immediately after he had watched another boy struggling with the memory span for digits has in it, I think, the solution
to the apparent discrepancies in the situation. There is a certain
amount of technique required even in the simplest performance.
The totally untrained child of two years has not had sufficient practice in any phase of activity to be able to express himself automatically. That is, no matter what he is doing, a part of his attention
must be given to the mechanism of his performance, rather than to
the actual thing which he is trying to do. This one fact alone is
sufficient to cut down his reproduction span by at least one unit.
If we can by training or example make any specific reproduction
route function automatically, we can get, by means of that route only,
a reproduction span that is probably about equal to the comprehension span. But the other reproduction routes are practically unaffected by this specialized instruction, and will continue to give a
smaller reproduction span than the probable comprehension span
until they, too, have become automatic.
I find in my notes just one very specific bit of evidence, that
not all that goes into a child's brain comes out again: When Bob
was about a year old, there were certain stunts which he learned to
do. His attendant would ask, in the good old historic fashion,
"How big are you?" and then say, "So big." Whereupon Bob
would raise his hands above his head. When he was doing this
stunt, however, he was quite incapable of saying the words "So
big." It happened that this particular stunt was dropped during
the period when Bob was learning to talk. I am absolutely sure that
during that time he did not once hear the expression "So big."
After he had become a more or less expert conversationalist, however, I happened one day to ask him, "How big are you?" He
answered in words "So big" without putting his hands above his
head. Apparently the necessary mental image for the phrase was in
his possession before his speech mechanism had become sufficiently
efficient for the vocalization of the phrase.
