Statistical and Non-Statistical Interpretation of Test Results
==============================================================

By Samuel W. Fernberger, Ph.D.,
Assistant Professor of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania.
Some time ago, a survey was made to determine standards for
children of the fifteen-year-old level at the University of Pennsyl-
vania.* This age is a critical one for vocational guidance and the
study is thus relatively important. From a preliminary study, it
was decided to test three groups of children as follows: Group I,
children applying to a Junior Employment Bureau for assistance in
obtaining jobs; Group II, children who were working and also attend-
ing Continuation School; Group III, children in High School who
were not working. A battery of tests was given each child which
included?shortened Binet, Witmer Cylinders, Dearborn Formboard,
Monroe Reading, Courtis Arithmetic, and Woodworth and Wells'
Hard Directions Test. One hundred boys and one hundred girls
were each tested in Groups II and III. One hundred and thirty
boys and seventy girls were tested in Group I.
One of the important results of this study was the discovery
that the performances of the High School children (Group III) were
considerably better than those of either of the other two groups.
The performances of Group II were slightly better than those of
Group I, but these two groups may be considered as parts of a larger
group which contrasts sharply with Group III. In all three groups,
the performances of the boys were slightly better than those of the
girls. The High School children give higher intellectual and more
intelligent performances than those in the two working groups.
It was thought advisable to determine the degree of statistical
validity of these differences. For this purpose, the Binet I. Q. and
the times of the first trial of the Dearborn Formboard were selected.
The probable errors of the averages were calculated separately for
boys and girls for all three groups. These results are given in Table I
for the Binet I. Q. and in Table II for the Dearborn Formboard.
It will be noted that the variations in the size of the averages are
relatively great in both cases when one compares the values for
Group III with those for Groups I and II. The probable errors,
however, are quite large indicating great variability within each
group. The probable errors for the Dearborn Formboard results
are relatively very much larger than those for the Binet I. Q.
* R. E. Learning, "Vocational Guidance at the Fifteen-Year-Old Level."
(68)
INTERPRETATION OF TEST RESULTS. 69
Table I.?I. Q.
Group. Average.
I B  87.6
I G  83.8
II B  92.6
II G.:  92.2
III B  117.0
III G  107.2
Table II.?Dearborn First Trial.
Group. Average. P. E.
I B...
I G...
II B..
II G..
III B.
Ill G.
194
227
178
197
150
170
72.75
110.68
93.75
75.96
65.14
63.42
Then the probable errors of the differences were calculated by
the formula, P. E.d = VP. E.^ + P. E.b. Then a value z was
calculated by the formula, z = D/P. E.d, i. e., the difference divided
by the probable error of the difference. One then looks up in a
special table* a value Pz corresponding to the calculated z. The Pz
is the probability that the difference will not vary by an amount
greater than itself. It is, therefore, a reliable "index of significance."
For mathematical certainty that the difference is significant, the
value Pz must be 0.9999 or unity.
Table III.?I. Q.
Boys-Girls.
D
P. E.d
Pz
I- I
II-I I
III-III..
3.8
0.2
9.8
16.8
14.2
12.0
0.1286
0.0161
0.4198
Table IV.?I. Q.
Boys.
D
P. E.d
Pz
I-II...
I-III..
II-I1I.
5.0
29.4
24.4
13.8
12.7
12.5
0.1919
0.8824
0.8116
Table V.?I. Q.
Girls.
D
P. E.d
I-U...
II-III.
8.4
23.4
15.0
16.4
15.5
13.6
Table VI.?Dearborn.
Boys-Girls. D P. E.d Pz
I- 1  33 133 0.1339
II-I I  19 121 0.0859
III-III... 20 91 0.1180
Table VII.?Dearborn.
Boys. D P. E.d Pz
I-II  16 119 0.0699
I-III  44 98 0.2385
n-III.... 28 114 0.1301
Table VIII.?Dearborn.
Group. D P. E.d Pz
I-II  30 135 0.1180
I-II I  57 128 0.2385
II-II I  27 99 0.1445
* "W. W. Johnson, The Theory of Errors and Method of Least Squares, N. Y., 1892, p. 154.
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
These values are to be found in Tables III-VIII. Tables III-V
contain the values for the Binet I. Q., while Tables VI-VIII contain
those for the Dearborn Formboard. Tables III and VI compare
the boys and girls in each group. Tables IV and VII compare the
different groups for boys and Tables V and VIII compare the differ-
ent groups for girls. Each table is similarly constructed. In the
first columns are indicated the groups compared. In the second
columns are given the differences with the probable errors of the differ-
ences in the third columns. In the last columns are given the values
of P2, the index of significance.
In the consideration of the I. Q. for boys and girls (Table III)
none of the differences are at all significant. That for Group III is
the largest but this indicates less than a fifty per cent probability
that the difference is not due to chance factors.
Comparing the I. Q. for boys (Table IV), the differences between
Groups I and II are very insignificant. Group III shows a much
greater significance; indeed, comparing Groups I and III there is
better than a four to five chance that the difference is not due to
chance. Comparing the groups of girls (Table V) none of the differ-
ences show a great degree of significance. That for Groups I and II
is the lowest, however, and that for Groups I and III is the highest.
In the case of the Dearborn Formboard (Tables VI, VII and
VIII), none of the differences are at all statistically significant?none
in fact show a difference as significant as a one to four chance.
The obvious reason for the low degree of significance of the differ-
ences is to be found in the size of the probable errors rather than in
the size of the differences themselves. Take, for example, Groups I
and III Boys for the Dearborn Formboard. The difference is 44
seconds which is nearly one-third as large as the lower average?a
relatively large difference indeed. But there is so much variability
within each group that the probable errors are so large that the value
of z = (D/P. E.d) is small.
It was therefore thought advisable to try and correct the values
so as to obtain greater statistical significance. The obvious method
is to lower the time limits beyond which the performance is con-
sidered a failure. In the present experiment, a period of 10 minutes
was allowed for the Dearborn Formboard and, if the task was not
completed, it was scored a failure. Five failures were recorded for
Group I; one failure for Group III. It is obviously the extreme
cases which give the large variations and which give extremely large
values when the variations are squared. Hence we arbitrarily cut
off the "tails" of the distribution curves for the upper limits by
arbitrarily calling all performances over 400 seconds failures. In
INTERPRETATION OF TEST RESULTS. 71
this new procedure, we record 17 failures for Group I and six failures
for Group III. The averages and probable errors for these new
"corrected" values are to be found in Table IX. We have reprinted
in this table the original "uncorrected" values for comparison.
Table IX.
Group.
Average.
I
1-12 cases (cor-
rected)
Ill
III-5 cases (cor-
rected)
194
162
150
135
Table X.
Girls.
P. E.d
Pz
I-III
I?III (cor-
rected) .
44
27
98
74
0.2385
0.1971
The size of the probable errors are considerably reduced by the
assumption of a shorter time limit for failure. But it will also be
noticed that the elimination of the few longer values from the calcu-
lation of the averages also considerably reduces the size of the aver-
ages themselves. The subsequent calculations, described above,
were carried out for the "corrected" values and the results are given
in Table X. It will be noted that the probable error of the differences
is considerably smaller for the corrected values. But the size of the
difference is relatively even more decreased. Hence the index of
significance of the difference is not so large as for the uncorrected
results?being reduced from 0.2385 to 0.1971. Such a procedure as
we have applied to these results can only be applied to performance
tests where a time record is kept. In the case of the Binet I. Q. the
final result is a ratio and no extreme values can be properly eliminated.
All of this means that the differences calculated, do not seem to
be great enough to have mathematical significance. The two tests
calculated were chosen because they seemed to show the greatest and
most clean-cut differences. And, indeed, when one considers only
the differences and disregards the probable errors these differences
are very marked. But the extreme variability within each group
increases the size of the probable errors so that, mathematically, the
significance of the difference is obscured. These results also indicate
the extreme relative importance of the "tails" of the curves of distri-
bution both for the size of the average and of the probable errors.
In the non-mathematical interpretation of the results, one fact
gave added conviction to the significance of the differences; namely,
that when one compared two groups, the differences for all of the
tests in the battery were invariably in the same direction. Hence,
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
for both boys and girls, the averages for Group II showed greater
competency than for Group I and the averages for Group III showed
much greater competency than for Group II in every test of the bat-
tery. And, in comparing the sex results, the boys were almost
invariably, although only slightly, better in all the tests than the
girls of the same group.
Furthermore we do not see how one can expect mathematical
significance in a mental test which is going to be of any value for
purposes of diagnosis. It is upon the variability within the group
that the examiner is able to make his diagnosis and prognosis. The
greater the variability within the group the more chance the examiner
has to form the basis of his diagnosis, and hence, the better the test.
Hence the ideal for mental tests is great variability within the group
which is utterly incompatable with mathematical significance when
one compares the results of one group with another.
It seems possible to draw several conclusions from these results:
1. Mental tests, as they are now developed, show such a degree
of variability within a relatively homogeneous group that the differ-
ences between two groups do not have statistical significance, even
though the differences may be great. In this connection, the "tails"
of the curves of distribution assume a relatively great importance
both with regard to the size of the averages and of the probable
errors. Such a degree of variability is the thing desired in a mental
test?with the reduction of the variability one has a correspondingly
great reduction in the value of the test for the purposes of differen-
tiating the members of the group.
2. From this it would seem that, if tests are to have a diagnostic
value, which means great variability within the group, we can never
hope to obtain differences between groups which will have statistical
significance.
3. The modern tendency to over-statisticize test results seems,
therefore, to be erroneous. It would seem better to treat the raw
material with as little statisticizing as possible. In so doing one is,
of course, forced to a non-statistical interpretation of the differences.
4. This emphasizes the point of view that less weight is to be
put on final test scores. From this viewpoint, mental tests become
merely a standardized means of having the subject do something so
that the trained examiner may observe his behavior and thus may
arrive at a qualitative analytic diagnosis of the individual case.
