An Ancient Score Card
======================

By Elmer E. Jones,
Director of the School of Education, Northwestern University, College
of Liberal Arts, Evanston, Illinois.
Good teachers in all ages have tried to understand their students
and shape their instruction according to individual needs. They
have used various devices and methods for discovering interests,
native abilities and aptitudes in their pupils, long before the more
scientific methods employed now in educational measurements and
mental testing were thought of.
The vocational aspects of education have always been close up
in the background of the good teacher's mind. It has never been
possible for him to forget that training to live is the real, vital and
consequential objective of instruction, even though the subjectmatter may have been purely traditional and intended as cultural
only. The really efficient teacher has always endeavored to point
out the usefulness and practicality of even the most abstract subjectmatter of instruction. The so-called cultural subjects have really
made their strongest appeal in certain vocational turns given them
by excellent teachers, who felt profoundly their usefulness. The
question in education is not so much the mastery of a particular
subject of a curriculum, as the mastery of the principles of living a
large and useful and beautiful life.
The educational objective pertains rather to the future success
of the student, his perseverance, his energy, the clearness of his
vision, and whether he sees great and important problems that
should be solved, and whether he has the capacity to work steadily
and with precision at these problems that burn in upon his soul.
Great teachers try to bring the curriculum of study into functional
relations with achievement, rather than to give narrow technical
information. To understand the youth and bring one's own subject
to him, full of living ideals for his own achievement seems to be the
highest objective of successful teaching.
There is a danger that in our enthusiasm for the splendid things
now being developed in educational measurements and mental
testing, we fail to remember that in the past decades in American
education teachers have endeavored to do precisely what is being
done now far more scientifically. Teachers have been interested
in mental traits, in the ambition of their students, their intellectual
honesty, and in their ability to achieve. They have believed in a
thorough diagnosis of their students previous to giving them instruc(26)
AN ANCIENT SCORE CARD. 27
tion. In fact, thay have had precisely the same objectives in mind
that we now have when we talk about I. Q.'s and correlations.
Some twenty years ago when principal of a large high school,
the writer used a simple score card to check what appeared to be
native capacities and abilities in students. At that time it proved
very helpful in diagnosis and in assisting in certain phases of vocational and educational directing which we were undertaking. It
was also extremely helpful in administrative problems which involved
a thorough understanding of individual students and individual
differences among students. It was also helpful in dealing with
parents of atypical children, whether the brilliant or the stupid ones.
The following score cards representing the actual markings for three
students made over twenty years ago may serve to illustrate how
such a study of each individual in the high school may function in
directing the education of individual students. In developing this
score card, we had in mind continually prognostic evaluations. It
was our effort to have such a record of every child in the high school,
in addition to his academic grades, that we could make some estimate
of the future achievemnt, and the probable success of the individual.
It was frankly assumed that success is quite dependent upon a
combination of native powers and abilities, which will function well
in the social situation of the present age. On the other hand it was
also frankly admitted that the life success of an individual is many
times quite dependent upon the environmental conditions that
surround him. Many a youth possesses all of the requisites in native
endowment, but is so handicapped by ignorant and lowly parents
that he cannot rise above them. When youth lacks parental stimulation of the right sort, and receives community stimulations which are
degrading, it matters very little how superior his native abilities and
powers may be. Success for him is well nigh impossible. To this
there are, of course, notable exceptions.
A study of these charts and later achievement of the pupils from
this high school indicate quite clearly that poverty alone caused
several of them to falter at the very threshold of an educational
career. Sickness, death of a parent, necessary support of kin,
economic necessity to work, even the failure of a particular crop are
influences which have casued many youth to fail in achieving success.
In judging of the future success of a student from his academic grades
and from any number of mental and social educational tests great
care must be taken. There is always the possibility that some
unforeseen situation in the environment may completely change the
life activity and hence the educational achievement and future
success.
28 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Notes on outstanding abilities or defects:
Best student in a series of years. Mathematics easy. Worked out many
original demonstrations in geometry. Timid, rather bashful, yet manly. Great
reader of fiction. Influence of father good. Not inclined to social activities.
Poor speaker in public. Does not have to work hard to get any assignment of
the school. Orderly, systematic, dependable. 1 predict for him great success.
Notes on outstanding abilities or defects:
An excellent student along literary lines and in dramatics. Successful in
music and art. A leader among girls, though not dominating. Somewhat
vain over personal beauty. Short story accepted by good magazine. Vivacious,
full of energy. Good debater, sympathetic and trustworthy. A beautiful
character.
CHART No. 1.
Score Card for High School Students.
Name, No. 1. Age, 18 years. Class, ?.
Rating of Student.
QaV*?r
Go
? A6-5
GQ
70
15
OR
SO Z5 Cjo 03
Mtn-tal Capacity
XwVe.Uectua\ Honesty
AvrVprhcn
Xridustfy
Tnde-p^nderice S Original
Promise ?y &UC-C-2SS
CHART No. 2.
Score Card for High School Students.
Name, No. 2. Age, 17 years. Class, ?.
Rating of Student.
Qftlou;
?o_
G O
?o
Z?
IS
43"SO 55 qo
Dental Capac+Y
iTrV&Uec-Voal Honesty
Energy
Bmfihon.
Xnd\J&+<-^
EI
>
X"rxi(ipeTi4e-nae. s. Ofi^inalil^
(romisfc. of success
AN ANCIENT SCORE CARD. 29
Notes on outstanding ablities or defects:
Dishonest, tries to bribe teachers, always in some disgraceful prank, takes
pride in breaking school regulations. Cannot learn algebra or geometry. Fairly
good in history. Very ambitious to be a bum. Disfavor by all students. Caught
cheating several times. Politician, very active Democrat. Bad home training
and environment. Chances for success in life are very slight. Very ambitious,
but studies and prepares for bad career. Teachers have exhausted every effort
to get this boy to see life's problems differently but he seems bent toward
perdition.
When we speak therefore of prognostic values we must always
take into consideration limitations which might be placed upon the
individual external to himself which may completely invalidate even
the most scientific diagnosis. These score cards undertook to
measure certain fundamental traits and capacities which seemed
quite objective at that time as being necessary to success in life.
By mental capacity we meant the clearness with which a student
could think; his accuracy in securing information, the precision of
his impressions from his observations and reading, and the quality
of his memory and imagination, whether it is passive or productive;
the sureness of his reasoning powers and the saneness of his judgments. Alertness and quickness in all the mental processes were
also given consideration.
Intellectual honesty is probably one of the most necessary traits
in educational achievement. Does the individual collect and use
facts just as they are? Is he interested in the truth, just for the
truth's sake, and is he willing to work for the discovery of truth?
Does this mere accomplishment bring joy? Is he ready to defend
CHART No. 3.
Score Card for High School Students.
Name, No. 3. Age, 16 years. Class, ?.
Rating of Student.
BeWu
SSL
GO
64&L
10
is
-2&
"30 SS" Qo qS"
-Herrtal Capacity
2Gnt<s.Uectual HoncsT\j
?.nei
A*rit?t+ion
Xndus+v-N
3ixieper\d?nce a. Ongmalrty
Rottusc of success
7
30 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the truth against great odds? Are his opinions based upon the
truths that he himself has discovered and probably correlated and
articulated with social demands, and does he make an honest search
for truth? Does the individual possess a desire to hear all sides of a
debate before reaching a decision, and is he fair to all opponents in a
discussion? When the truth is known is he fearless in defending it?
With reference to energy (the third item on the chart) we mean
a quantitative and qualitative estimate of the student's vitality?
his endurance in a struggle, either mental or moral or physical; his
grit, his stick-to-itiveness, whether he has the capacity to continuous
effort without fatigue, and how actively these efforts are put forth
in the accomplishment of educational and other tasks.
By ambition, we mean the ability of the individual to project
himself into the future and the character of his desires for success.
What are his thoughts concerning his future career, and how he
regards his present achievements in relation to his future success,
and the wholesomeness of his forward look toward his own life process.
The fifth topic on the card deals with industry. Here we have
reference particularly to school work?the persistency with which
the student engages in all of the activities of the school, the organization and coordinations of facts, the seeking of opportunities to
work and to gain new light, the ability to work alone and always to
keep at it. Consideration also is given toward extra school activities
and to those which are present within the school that pertain to the
all around development of the individual. This problem deals with
the whole investigative interest of the individual student.
By independence and originality we mean the type of original
investigations carried on by the student?the largeness of his
thoughts, his mental freedom from textbooks and even his disagreement with ideas presented by teachers. This topic deals with
the independence of the student in all intellectual matters, whether
he can work if left alone and whether his opinions are arrived at
independently or whether they are copies; how free is the individual
from traditional ideas and traditional matter and how freely is his
independence of spirit expressed in the presence of classmates and
teachers.
The promise of success is the most difficult topic on the card,
because here we are dealing with prognostic values. We can only
prophesy of the success of an individual upon the conditions of
success in general. Of course, we mean by this section of the score
card those natural abilities for success, whether they are favorable
or unfavorable. What are the social and environmental conditions
in which the student is placed which will probably influence his future
AN ANCIENT SCORE CARD. 31
career? Is the student capable of overcoming serious obstacles and
is he free from discouragements? Is his optimism able to overcome
even the most serious difficulties? Does the individual possess tact
in dealing with others, and has he a meeting personality? Does he
have ability to fit into a scheme which society is demanding? Is he
politic, gentile, and is he the sort of individual that invariably meets
with success? These are some of the problems that confront one in
deciding the probability of the success of an individual.
After a lapse of twenty years it is comparatively easy to
determine the validity of the score cards as filled out for diagnostic
purposes upon high school students at that time.
The score cards indicate approximately the individual differences
that we would expect to find among students. There are approximately five groups; a very exceptional group showing a high range
of possibility for future success; a group just below which shows
capability and efficiency but not quite so good as the superior group;
a great middle group of those possessing average ability; a poor
group just below the middle group having possibilities in certain
directions but limited as to general capacity and leadership; and a
fifth group consisting of those who show the lowest possibilities of
success.
The three score cards filled out above may serve to illustrate
something of their prognostic value. Number 1 is easily selected as
one of the most distinguished students that ever attended this high
school. The prediction made for him is "great success." He was a
most original lad, easily excelling in any subject in the curriculum,
showing very great originality along all lines and having great learning capacity in general subject matter outside of the regular curriculum of study. He was a great reader and had apparently read most
of the good books in all the private libraries of the city. He is at the
present time a construction engineer for one of the biggest railroad
systems in the United States. He is a most successful man. He
attended a state university where he took many honors and won
great distinction for his scholarship along engineering lines.
Score card No. 2 represents a young lady who would be classed
probably in the second class from the top, being just below the most
distinguished group. Along certain lines she possessed very great
powers and was successful both in music and art, was a rather
thorough-going student and possessed all of these qualities which
present the highest charms in true womanhood. She was absolutely
trustworthy and her diagnosis at that time has proven to be correct
in the main. She is at the present time recognized as a fine character
in the community, extremely intelligent, an excellent mother and
32 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
apparently has maintained her rank up to the present time. She
has contributed several magazine articles to good magazines and has
shown great civic interests in her community, and is regarded by all
as an ideal mother citizen. I would still place her in the rank just
below the most distinguished.
Score card No. 3 gives the record of a young man who has always
presented a serious social problem not only to his own parents and
his own home community, but to society at large. He has not made,
thus far, a single wholesome contribution to society, but has always
been regarded by everyone as a menace to it. This record is precisely
what he promised in his high school days. At that time everyone
despaired of his ever being anything but a "bum," and so far as I
can learn, he has fully lived up to everyone's expectations.
These three score cards have not been selected at random but
have been chosen because of their rather great outstanding diagnostic
value. However, it would not be difficult to duplicate numerous
cases similar to these. It should be said that there are some surprises.
Occasionally a high school student who showed little signs of distinguishability and was classed as low as the third or fourth group
has achieved rather remarkably and may now be classed in group
No. 2. For example, one student who absolutely failed in academic
work in the high school because the work that was required for him
to do was not at all suited to his particular needs, has gained distinction as a business man and a leader in the industrial world. He could
not learn Latin and English; but he is probably the wealthiest man
among all the students that ever attended this high school.
By actual count, 62 per cent of the score cards that were kept
in the series of years amounting to 380 students, show definite
prognostic values, 10 per cent are relatively correct in diagnosis
though certain outstanding errors in judgment were made; the
remainder have doubtful significance as to their prognostic values,
though certainly usable in administrative matters.
At a later period when it was my privilege to direct the study
of graduate students in the university, I was confronted by many of
the same problems that presented themselves when dealing with
high school students.
The main question constantly recurring is "What is the future
promise of this man?" How much energy has he? How hard and
how long will he work at a particularly knotty problem? How deeply
does he feel the tremendous questions eonfronting educational theory
today? Will he keep on growing for years so that future achievement
will be assured? These and many other questions continually present
themselves, if one is really interested in properly directing the activAN ANCIENT SCORE CARD. 33
ities of graduate students. In order to keep a record of men who
aspired to advanced degrees, I used the same score card previously
used for high school students. The following three are fairly representative samplings of three different types of graduate students, and
show some prognostic values.
Number 4, as his card will indicate, represents the finest type
of mind; a personality full of charm and effectiveness, a prodigious
worker, very energetic along many lines, and ambitious to achieve
real success in order that his success may be of service to the educational world. He is now well known throughout the United States
for his productive activity in certain lines of research, and is one
of the outstanding men in the country in the newer movements in
mental testing and educational measurements. It was perfectly
clear to me when he was my student that he was an outstanding man
and there was no doubt about his future success.
Number 5 represents a type of man who is applying for the
degree of Master of Arts in the American university and occasionally
aspires to the doctorate. A man full of ambition, but lacking in
certain of the fundamental qualities for leadership in scholarship or
research. He possesses a very great ambition, but mediocre energy
and industry, and not having superior independence and originality,
and only fairly good mental capacity, the success of this individual
Notes on outstanding abilities or defects:
Excellent mind, hard worker, ingenious in use of apparatus, sympathetic and
loyal, wholesome ambitions looking far ahead. There is no doubt in my mind
that he will get some place near the top. He cannot escape success.
CHART No. 4.
Score Card for High School Students.
Name, No. 4. Age, 27 years. Class, ?.
Rating of Student.
IntaUtc+ua L VVonssrhf
.sa
Go
ZQ S5j OoTcji"
>
"i?TM
Ind u s?*Vvy
f
Xnd!epGv-jidi2n(!.e *s- Original rV-^
"R-orrusi sottess
34 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Notes on outstanding abilities or defects:
Too much talk about what he intends to do and be and not enough accomplishment. Just a little lazy. Indifferent when poor results are accomplished.
Apt to be very optimistic or very blue. Will not be very successful unless some
one is behind him prodding him.
Notes on outstanding abilities or defects:
Poor thinker. Wants to be an investigator but has no idea how to go about
it. Uses poor methods of attack. Little originality. Can never succeed in anyproductive educational activity.
CHART No. 5.
Score Card for High School Students.
Name, No. 5. Age, ? years. Class, ?.
Rating of Student.
Belouj
60
<0 5
-70
34.
So
ZS
?24
C|0 qs
3<k-i?2.
Tf>ft.Tvta\ Qrapao-h|
:-n-re.\lecJnja\ Honesty
Energy
Ambl"hoa.
Xr,dosiv\|
3jndap?"ndc-nce. i Original'"Hj
Prarmse 0"y Suc-cass
CHART No. 6.
Score Card for High School Students.
Name, No. 6. Age, ? years. Class, ?.
Rating of Student.
GO
GO
6A.
6 5
7I
I5
"5,0 Z-S
rf\en+a\ Capac.rt\|
InVaUecVDal VAones+\j
H-ne-rg-\|
i:
T~nr< u stvvi
Thicpt-nde-nce &.Ori^na1 dv|
^cmne Success
^5"
AN ANCIENT SCORE CARD. 35
is not at all assured. But his score on the card and his later achievement proved that the diagnosis was correct. He wrote a fairly good
dissertation for the master's degree, but when thrown upon his own
resources in a rather important position after taking his degree, he
made a dismal failure, and at the present time is occupying a position
of about the importance that his competency deserves. If this man
had been fortunate in being placed in such a position in life that he
would have been under the constant stimulus of others who were
working, he might have succeeded far above his present status; but
when thrown upon his own responsibilities, he failed. Such graduate
students rarely secure the Ph.D. degree though they have little
difficulty in securing the degree of Master of Arts.
Number 6 represents another poorer type of graduate student
who sometimes secures the degree of Master of Arts, but more
frequently labors along for two or three years in graduate studies
making little headway with them and finally drops out of graduate
study entirely. Occasionally, however, one of the caliber of G. M.
may secure the Master of Arts degree by very hard work. This
student had a relatively low mental capacity, was extremely honest
m all his endeavors but lacked the fundamental capacities necessary
for success in graduate study. It was apparently impossible for
him to grasp much of the subject matter that was presented in
graduate study. He showed no originality in going to sources or in
taking notes upon important documents. He worked hard but to
little effect. It was a great relief when he left the department and
took a teaching position in a small town as principal of the high
school. His mental capacity and training do not fit him for a position
of greater importance. His score card rather clearly indicates the
type of man he is, and is prognostic.
Recent investigations by Rugg, Stenquist and others show that
individual scores given as a result of mental or educational tests
are reliable only within a probable error so large as to render the
score practically useless. The final judgments of efficiency placed
m the score cards presented in this paper are the summaries of a large
variety of tests, observations and experiences in dealing with these
students for a period of one, two or three years. There is no doubt
a probable error in such extended observation, and judgment, but in
no sense is such judgment subject to the error of scoring an individual
m a group by a single mental or educational test. Each score in each
mental trait is the resultant of numerous previous judgments and
comparisons in dealing with the student over an extended period of
time.
