An Analytical Study of the Intellingence of a Group of Adolescent Delinquent Girls
==================================================================================

By Anna Spiesman Starr, M.A., /
Graduate Student, University of Pennsylvania. ^
Part i.
Delinquency as I See It.
With the development and socialization of Misdemeanants
Courts, the problem of girl delinquency has been a major considera-
tion. Much has been done in the development of case work tech-
nique, of educating'the public to realize its share of responsibility
before it condemns and of bringing all the knowledge of specialists
to focus upon the individual problem before judgment is made.
In place of the arrest and speedy conviction in the Magistrate's
Court of a few years ago, each case now has the benefit of all the
efficient treatment that the modern court can give her; the burden
of effort being one of adjustment rather than punishment. What-
ever has been learned by such methods, is applicable to the general
problem of delinquency and what has become evident in other fields
may be of service here. The technique of case work in itself stands
justified and established, the problem now is rather the "why" and
the "how" of delinquency.
The present study is based upon a series of psychological exami-
nations of adolescent "women offenders" detained at the Municipal
Court. The tests used were those already standardized?the Witmer
Cylinder test, Memory span, Block test, Reading, the Fundamental
arithmetical processes, and the Dearborn Formboard. Each test
was given with the idea of its contributing to a qualitative diagnosis
rather than measuring conformity with already established forms.
The description and the results of each test with their correlations
are treated in the second part of this report.
Gross classifications of the causes of delinquency have been
made long ago and still remain debated. The supporters of each
claim a panacea for good citizenship if "only the environment" or
"only the heredity" or "the wages" were adequately established.
It must be realized, however, that rather than being a simple phe-
nomenon arising from a single cause, delinquency is a synthesis?
the resultant of many contributing factors. It is the subtle and
* Adapted from a report presented to the Hon. Charles L. Brown, Judge of th? Municipal
Court of Philadelphia.
(143)
144 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
intricate reactions of such a complexity that baffle us. The possi-
bilities of various combinations of etiological factors are as numerous
as the individuals themselves.
When any individual is so badly handicapped as to be a social
invalid or cripple, society accepts him as such and provides for him.
The work of the court in its province of probation deals rather with
the vast group whose aggregate of mental, physical and social endow-
ments is so near the point of instability that failure in any single
factor to function at its maximum proficiency in the adjustment of
a definite situation, will so tip the balance that the individual finds
himself in the class of non-conformity or even dependency, wonder-
ing how he got there. Probation has essentially a preventative
policy, it is not all salvaging. It must prevent the tipping as well
as re-establish the balance.
In order to deal effectively with such a complexity as the ado-
lescent girl tending toward delinquency or having already arrived
there, Probation Officers must know in each case, the assets which
are to be pitted against the deficiencies. Just here is where psychol-
ogy has the opportunity to make a necessary and a tremendous
contribution. To the psychologist has come the duty of stating
specific items about each case which will assure the Probation Officer
that all the girl's competencies, her assets, as well as deficiencies are
noted and a tentative prognosis made, giving an index of their quality
as well as quantity. It is ineffective, wasteful, for any Probation
Officer to work with a case trying to do the impossible. No task
should be set to the girl for which she has not the competency. The
inevitable failure disheartens both the probationer and the officer.
If Mary has a poor memory, as shown by tests, it should be known
and Mary should not be sent to work at the switch board no matter
how much she wants to go; no matter what soical prestige such a
position would give her. If in Jane's mediocre equipment a specific
ability is found, we owe it to her and to society to find useful expres-
sion for it. The consciousness that a job calls for a specific ability
arouses pride in anyone who can hold that job. All of us are more
efficient feeling we have found our niche. The floater in industry
is the niche seeker. At present the psychologist cannot place every-
one, but he can place some, and he can tell where others should not go.
The Psychological Clinician's field is more than giving tests and com-
piling statistics; even now it is possible to determine the individual's
mental status, the possibilities of his intellectual development and
the approximate range of possible occupations.
These contributions become more important when we consider
feeblemindedness as a social status. Whoever cannot manage his
A STUDY OF DELINQUENT GIRLS. 145
personal affairs, with ordinary prudence, due to a lack of mental
development, is, according to English law, feebleminded. Here in
our own country, in practice at least, social conformity and economic
independence figure very largely when the mental defective appears
before the Jury for a possible commitment. If normality so much
depends upon maintaining one's self on a fairly sound economic
basis in a way not objectionable to one's own neighbors, taking
inventory of every possible contribution thereto is imperative. The
state rightfully cares for the obviously defective; their care is assured.
It is the doubtful, the partially handicapped individuals, who form
the bulk of probationers. With these we must realize the psycho-
logical fact that one's competencies may deteriorate through disuse
though we can not add to them.
The theory that mental retardation or feeblemindedness is the
invariable cause of incorrigibility is untenable. Who does not know
the intelligent incorrigible? Intelligence seems to be a factor deter-
mining the kind of delinquency indulged in, rather than determining
to be or not to be delinquent. Furthermore, in comparing the pro-
ficiency levels made by the group of Court Cases with those made
with the same tests by a group of High School Freshman and a group
of Continuation School, girls?all of about the same age?the Court
Cases in each instance fell below the standard of the regular Fresh-
man and above that of the Continuation School group. To be sure
mental equipment largely determines at which level the delinquent
operates, and comparatively few cases found at court are above the
lower limits of accepted normality, but if we use court statistics or
those compiled at Reformatories are we not judging from a selected
group? Are not the Court Cases the unsuccessful delinquents, the
ones apprehended? How about the successful one? The idea that
delinquency means only unsuccessful behavior is erroneous, and we
must study and learn from the successful delinquent before we really
understand those apprehended. Just because the clever thief secures
and retains his booty, does not justify his theft. He is still a thief.
So with the delinquencies of the adolescent girl whether or not she
escapes detection.
The social background of these 300 cases studied presented no
peculiar characteristics?the picture is typical of an unselected group
?f young women offenders as they come one by one to be under the
jurisdiction of the court. They were all between 16 and 25 years of
agej more than half were 18 years or under. The mode was 16, 17,
18 years; the mean 18.7 years; the median 18 years. Practically
all had begun school at 6 years of age; a few had started later and
by far the great majority had completed the 6th grade. About one-
146 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
third of them claimed to have reached the 8th grade and 16 to have
entered High School?a few had attended no school.
A detailed tabulation made in 200 cases of the birthplace of the
delinquent and of both her parents showed that the large majority of
cases were native born, but very often of foreign parentage. In this
particular group, about one-half (48.5 per cent) have American born
fathers and mothers. This is somewhat higher than is usually
expected.
As a side light on the economic status of the families represented,
I inquired as to the number of children in each family to see how
many might be dependent upon the father's wage. Not all of the
children in every case shared the family budget for some had married
and left home. The maximum number of children in any of the 200
families was 16; the minimum 1; the mode 4; the average 5.4
children.
Leaving school at 14 or 15 years, and entering industry for the
most part at 15 and 16 years, the majority of girls were employed
in mills and factories or as domestics. Of 200 cases, 8| per cent
started to work in department stores; 46 per cent in mills and fac-
tories; 26 per cent as domestics; 6| per cent in clerical positions;
3 per cent as telephone operators and 10 per cent in miscellaneous
jobs. The range of the industrial picture fits in with that of the
school. Inquiry was made in regard to present position and the
result shows that the mills, factories and housework still retain the
greatest numbers.
If we put these social data together, we have as a picture, an
American girl about eighteen years old?perhaps of foreign parent-
age?one of a family of four or five children. She started to school
at 6, attended until she was 15 and had only reached the 6th grade.
After leaving school, she had begun to work at a mill or at house-
work, and now somehow, she had gotten into difficulty and had come
into the hands of the court. Surely in such a picture we find no
flagrant discrepancies or bad fortune. Plenty of girls who never
come to court share these same characteristics. Here it is that the
persistent "Why" of delinquency arises. It is easy enough to explain
in the cases which do not fit such a high level, but if the majority of
girls who have come to court are of this type or better, an analytical
diagnosis of each individual must be made.
Part ii.
Tests, their Results and Correlations.
In making this psychological study and in giving the tests, I was
not primarily interested in detecting the decidedly feebleminded
A STUDY OF DELINQUENT GIRLS. 147
cases, for that was being done by the regular staff of the department.
Moreover former investigation of a similar group had taught me
that there are a very few "committable cases," a slightly larger
group of "perfectly normal" ones and that the great percentage are
they who may or may not be able to maintain themselves adequately,
depending largely upon external circumstances. As long as the
"Fates were good," they remained above the line of social sufficiency,
but quickly fell below with adverse circumstances. The purpose of
the present investigation was to determine: (1) if most of this group
are deficient in the same specific competencies; (2) if so, which are
the deficient competencies and (3) whether or not the lack of these
specific competencies is reflected in the general behavior; (4) also,
of how much value to the Probation Officer's problem of restoration
is the information gained by such analytical examination.
The tests given were chosen for two reasons.
1. Each must be of a sufficiently low performance level to insure
the majority of cases being able to pass them. Special attention to
be paid to the extent of improvement through repetition rather than
simply comparing the time element with already standardized norms.
2. Taken together, the tests must be such as would measure
each specific competency as classified by Dr. Witmer.
The tests were given in about the same order and under as
favorable conditions as possible. No girl was urged to co-operate
against her will, though encouragement and praise were freely given
during each examination. Their co-operation was splendid, and in
several cases a rivalry as to efficiency in performances would prompt
one to ask, "Did Jennie beat me in this one?"
In scoring the results both the time element and the quality of
the performance were considered. For the most part, the rating
was that of the five-point system, one indicating failure, three a
nediocre type of performance and five the maximum possibility, two
rating between one and three, four between three and five.
In most studies of similar groups the interpretation has been
placed upon the time element and tests have been employed to deter-
mine the intellectual level and scholastic training at the expense of
the motor possibilities thereby failing to give adequate valuation to
the specific competencies. Granting that most cases which come
within the jurisdiction of the court are deficient to some extent
along some line, the real issue is to determine whether such deficiency
is a general dullness of all competencies or specific retardation and
defect of a single competency or group of them. In the former case
it would be the relative inferiority of all components of mental life,
in the latter the decidedly poor quality of one or two. Such a deter-
148 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
mination would be of value because if only one competency is
deficient or defective, there always remains the possibility of compen-
sation through the other efficient ones.
Memory Span.
The first test given in each case was the so-called memory span
test. Several digits were repeated distinctly but in an even tone
without rhyme or grouping. After each series correctly reproduced
a second series having one additional digit was given. When two
series of equal length had been given and the girl failed to reproduce
either of them correctly, her maximum memory span was thus deter-
mined to be the number of digits correctly repeated upon the single
presentation. The second series inaccurately given was then repeated
until correctly recalled.
An indication of trainability was shown by the number of repe-
titions necessary for the accurate recall. The digit series used were
those especially prepared and used at the Psychological Clinic of
the University. No digit followed another in its natural or reversed
sequence; neither was there any rhyme or familiar grouping in their
order as presented.
Many experiments have been worked out along this type and
the burden of results indicates a very close relationship to exist
between adequate associability and memory with the individual's
general competency. It is without doubt one of the most valuable
tests employed for diagnostic purposes.
Results.
Dioits. Casks.
3 2 Median.... 6 digits
4 17 Mode 6 "
5 87 Mean 6 "
6 114 Maximum.. 9 "
7 57 Minimum. .3 "
8 18
9 5
See Table?Trials for next higher series.
Trials fob Next Higher Series.
Trials. Cases.
2 42 Median.
3 44 Mode...
4 36 Mean  6
5 43 Minimum. . 2
6 31 Maximum.. 10 plus
7 24
8 23
S 17
10 9
10 plus 31
A STUDY OF DELINQUENT GIRLS. 149
Witmer Cylinder Test.
For the first two trials, the Witmer Cylinder Test was given as
standardized by Paschal. This consisted of presenting the board
with cylinders in place and saying, "I am going to take these blocks
out and place them in the center, and I want you to put them back
as quickly as you can;" then removing the blocks and adding "You
may use both hands. Begin when you are ready, and do it as quickly
as you can." The time was recorded, but especial attention was
paid to the quality of the performance, to the manner of approach
and of placing the blocks and to the repetition of errors of the same
type; also how quickly the plan of the construction of the board
seems mastered; whether or not a purely trial and effort method was
employed. Three minutes was taken as the maximum of time, and
any performance requiring more time was scored a failure.
If it was apparent that the subject did not comprehend the test
or was unable to finish it, a minimum of instruction was given. If
the subject seemed satisfied, having misplaced two or more blocks
and made no effort to change them, the performance was scored
a failure.
The second trial was introduced by praise and an urge to "do
even better this time." Increasing efficiency and reduction in time
were the notable features of this performance.
At the third performance, these specific directions were given.
"This time do it my way; whichever block you pick up first, put
that one away correctly before you pick up another block. If you
happen to put it in a wrong hole, take it out right away and find the
right one for it. Remember! Each block in its right place before
you pick up another one."
By thus varying the procedure in this third trial, its level of
complexity is somewhat raised. The first performance is an intelli-
gence test "the solving of what, for the subject, is a new problem"
(Witmer). The second indicates memory, trainability, efficiency,
planfulness. The third imposes a specific procedure and requires the
subject to carry out a plan which for the most part differs from the
one she employed in the other two trials. It affords a good picture
as to the manner of choosing blocks for placement and whether or
not the subject has really worked out the plan of the test.
A successful performance of the cylinder test involves motor
co-ordination, initiative, - complexity and energy rate. It involves
also distribution of attention, analytic and persistent concentration,
associability, memory and trainability. Dr. Paschal found it to be
"an adequate measurement for children at the six-year level and
that their proficiency increased with their advancement in school."
150 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
He also found in his work with adults "a positive correlation or rather
high proportion between the cylinder test performance and manual
or mechanical capacity." This is just the phrase in which it seems
to me that this cylinder test is of value in our work at court. If
the girl can do it successfully the picture is one of quality?how well
she did it. But in the case of the failures it tells another story; an
inability to pass a mechanical test at the six to ten-year level and the
quality of the perfonnance is indicative of the special deficiencies
involved.
Results.
Table 1.?General Distribution in Time, First Trial and Best
Performance.
QUINTILE DISTRIBUTION.
First trial (300 eases) :
Lowest. Lower. Middle. Hiohek. Highest.
135' 85" 67" 60r 47'
Best Trial:
65' 50' 45' 40' 34'
Average of successful performances:
First trial, 72'. Best trial, 48.6'.
Table 2.?Qualitative Distribution as Estimated on a Five-point Scale.
200 cases (600 performances):
Rating. 12 3 4 5
First trial  15 19 136 30 0
Second trial  1 7 107 82 3
Third trial  1 14 72 101 12
Best trial    0 3 51 133 3
These tables show the extent of trainability of the group along
the line of motor response and this is the field of their greatest train-
ability. The average time of the first performance being cut from
72" to 48.6" in the best of three trials. The quality of performance
too tends to improve. In the first and second trials, the mode is in
the mediocre rating; in the third trial the mode is decidedly in the
fourth or higher rating.
Dearborn Formboard.
The Dearborn formboard presents about the same type of prob-
lem as the cylinder test but at a higher level. Not only does it
involve the replacement of some of the blocks but it also requires
the rearrangement of those left in the board in order to make the
others fit. It differs from the cylinder in that the problem is spread
out over a single plane rather than involving varying depths along
with the top surfaces as in the cylinder. On the whole, the girls
enjoyed doing this test more than any of the others. They seemed
A STUDY OF DELINQUENT GIRLS. 151
to enjoy finding its solution after they were so apparently baffled.
It provided an excellent opportunity for observation of analytical
and persistent concentration of attention, rate of improvement and
degree of efficiency attained.
The Design Block Test.
The design block test was given primarily to measure discrimi-
nation and to test visual acuity. The blocks were the familiar ones
used in kindergartens and the subject was asked to copy simple
designs of four blocks from the pattern presented. The first design
was a square within a square and the second, a cheveron. The third
design was a single stripe of a dark color on a lighter background
and this the subject was asked to reproduce after having looked at
it for about fifteen seconds. The fourth pattern was a zigzag with
eight blocks and if each pattern had been easily reproduced, the direc-
tion was given: "Watch what I do to my blocks and when I am
through, you do just the same to yours." I would then rearrange
the pattern, moving the blocks of one row in position to the opposite
side of the figure. For the girl who could very easily do the first
simple patterns, this was a more adequate measurement of her
abilities.
Memory and analytical concentration are especially involved
here. The pattern presents a stimulus of visual imageiy, and analy-
sis of its parts and their relations, retention of that image and the
transfer into the motor field for expression. This seems like such an
easy thing below the level of the adolescent girl, but experience in
watching the quality of the performance removes any doubt as to
the level involved. Practically every girl could copy the designs
but often only after several attempts and by the trial and error
method. The performance of this test evidently throws light upon
the ability to "see what you are looking at" and often gave added
meaning to the way in which the formboards had been done.
Fundamentals in Arithmetic.
To ascertain the precision and accuracy of the abilities involved
in activities other than those shown in the motor reactions, simple
arithmetic problems were given. First sums of simple addition were
given abstractly or in money changes; then those involving subtrac-
tion of simple numbers; problems of multiplication such as how
much are 5 times 7, 3 times 2, 4 times 8, 9 times 6, and later such
questions as "If oranges were 36 cents a dozen, how many could you
buy for 15 cents?" No problem presented was beyond the fourteen-
year level as given in Terman's Revision of the Binet Tests. Each
152 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
case was given a qualitative rating, 1 indicating ignorance or inability
to answer with any degree of accuracy; 3 indicating accuracy in the
fundamental processes themselves and an ability to apply them in
simple problems. Ratings 4 and 5 were reserved for performances
better than 3, and 2 meant for the most part accuracy in the abstract
problems but failure in application.
This test showed to what degree each girl had retained her
school knowledge; for the vast majority were doing more difficult
problems when in school. It indicated their intellectual level, the
level at which they were putting knowledge to use. In a fair way it
shows the tendency to incorporate any knowledge into a working
whole.
Qualitative Rating of Fundamentals in Arithmetic. 54 cases.
Rating. Cases.
1  5
2  24
3  18
4  7
5  0
To follow out this intellectual level further, two reading selec-
tions were given of about the same difficulty as the one presented
by Terman at the ten-year level. The selection was printed in clear
type as a news item and the girl was asked to read it aloud. Then
she was told, "Tell me what you read about?everything that you
can remember." Time, errors and memories were recorded. Then
the second selection was presented using the same procedure.
No person can be said to have the ability to read unless she can
make use of it to recount what she has learned from the printed
symbols. Some instances showed an amazing visual picture had been
set up by the reading and in retelling it, many imaginative and im-
possible details were added. Other cases claimed to have no idea
of what had been read. Judging from the previously determined
memory span and general position in life, such a statement might in
some cases be easily conceived.
The scoring was again on the five-point scale taking into con-
sideration the time and quality of the reading and the number of
accurate memories recalled. The maximum time (as in Terman)
was 35 seconds, 2 errors being allowed and 8 memories required.
The selections as given were: A. "The morning paper stated
that Mr. James Wolf is to be the manager of the New Moving Pic-
ture Palace at the corner of Brown and Pine Streets. Before the
building is completed several thousands of dollars will be spent for
A STUDY OF DELINQUENT GIRLS. 153
decorating the interior. The Palace will be opened about July the
fifteenth, and will show only the best pictures."
B. "The workmen engaged in putting up the buildings for the
New Art Film Company at Los Angeles struck last night for higher
wages. They are now getting eight dollars a day. Some of them
will be out of work for a long time. The work is so nearly done
that pictures can be made soon."
The result of both of these selections closely correlate; usually
the time was increased a few seconds in the second as did also recall
of memories tend to be slightly increased. The qualitative rating
tended to remain constant.
Qualitative Rating of 100 Cases?Reading.
Rating. Casks.
1  7
2  25
3  59
4  9
5
Summary.
Distribution of Qualitative Rating of Mental Competencies as Indicated
by the Tests?121 Cases.
I II III IV V Mode.
Movement:
Rate
Coordination
Initiative
Complexity
Attention:
Concentrate analysis
Persistance
Distribution
Alertness
Interest
Imagination:
I mage ability
Associability
Trainability
Memory
Complexes:
Understanding
Planfulness
Observation
Intellect
12 72 28 1 (3)
3 80 27
6 74 19
25 23 7
26 58 25
4 77 27
7 58 11
6 48 11
5 36 6
17 32 17
16 76 15
40 58 11
7 57 25
18 53 21
20 41 9
(3)
(3)
(2)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
Intelligence  14 81 16
An ideal grouping of psychological tests would be one requiring
a minimum of time and apparatus and one which would bring into
154 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
play each mental competency at its maximum proficiency level. I
have attempted here to plot the particular competencies the perform-
ance of each test involved and from such an analysis to see just how
efficient this choice of tests would be. The classification of the
competencies is one evolved at the University Clinic. It is true
that quantitatively several of the competencies appear to merge
into each other and so the classification is not entirely exclusive.
It does, however, present the "high spots" necessary for normal
mental equipment and I have indicated only those competencies
especially involved in each test.
Compiling the qualitative rating of the competencies as given
for 121 consecutive cases, I found that the mode rating in each com-
petency (except the competency of movement) falls into the middle
or third group; that the mode constitutes 50 per cent at least of all
the cases rated, with the same exception and that of visual imagery.
Although each competency was not rated in each case?rating being
given only when established upon sufficient evidence?the mode is
distinct enough to have a real meaning. It indicates on the one
hand that in most cases the level of aggregate competencies rises
above the class of incompetency, but on the other hand does not reach
the level of assured sufficiency. In other words, the mental equip-
ment of the cases studied barely reaches that point of proficiency
which is necessaiy to get along with under favorable conditions.
This point of proficiency is seen to be even less stably established by
the fact that in many cases there are specific competencies below
the median level in combination with others at or below the median.
This spreads the instability to an even larger group of individual
cases. The special aptitude of a higher rating (IV or V) is thus
robbed of any special power by being forced to compensate for a
deficient competency of an allied type.
The idea of such a compensation is well illustrated in the case of
Stella, a Polish girl (mental age 13 years), who had attended school
irregularly and had barely reached the fifth grade at 16 years. She
had an auditory memoiy span of 4 digits (the memory span of a
normal six-year-old is 4 to 6 digits). Her rating in the fundamentals
of arithmetic was III; her reading scarcely better than II. The
Design Blocks showed her to have a poor visual imageiy and her
analytical attention was particularly poor. But she did have train-
ability and persistence. Such a combination is not promising but
her highest proficiency in industry can only be realized if her job is
a simple mechanical one, requiring attention directed to a single
place?not scattered?and one in which speed counts. With both
formboards she did very well, cutting down her time with the cylin-
A STUDY OF DELINQUENT GIRLS. 155
ders from 62" on the first performance to 43" on her second. With
the Dearborn she failed on the,first performance?was unable to
solve it in 5 minutes?yet in the second trial she completed it in
42 seconds and the third trial in 39 seconds without making a single
serious mistake. Her two assets, trainability and persistence, will
tend to compensate for her lack of auditory memory span and poor
general equipment; but she can function only at a low intellectual
level. If the assets were not recognized and utilized, the level would
be lower still.
In some cases where the ability to hear is below par, the indi-
vidual makes up for that deficiency by having a keen visual imagery
and so strengthens the stimulation of audition with visual stimuli.
That particular transfer works well as a rule but it does not help the
"would be" telephone girl. The girl with a good distribution of
attention can work well watching more than one thing at a time;
the one who is slow to grasp a new idea (poor analysis) but who has
good retentivity and trainability can be kept at a job until she con-
quers it, for the firm realizes that once a new idea is "in" it will
remain. Industry is so highly specialized now that specific require-
ments may not be hindered by a real deficiency upon which that
particular job makes little or no demand. It is to industry that
competency analysis will be a real contribution, and since the "job
problem" is an urgent one to the delinquent such an analysis is of
the utmost importance to her.
A closer study of the distribution of the qualitative rating of
competencies brings out some interesting indications. By com-
paring rating II with IV we see the quantitative tendency of the group
ranking above and below the middle group in Initiative, Rate and
Co-ordination of movement; but in Complexity of movement even
the mode falls into Rating II. In Memory, more are below the
median than above it. This is also true in Intellect?knowledge put
to use. With the other competencies the distribution is surprisingly
even. Low in Complexity of movement, Memory and Intellect.
Is not this very combination of deficiencies pictured in their beha-
vior? Their simple direct almost flagrant misconduct, so often fail-
ing to profit by experiences or to remember their promises or our
threats. "Oh, I forgot." "Honestly, I didn't think." Both very
familiar excuses. We must somehow determine whether it is real
deficiency or laziness and make our demands accordingly.
A vital factor in the difference between successful and unsuccess-
ful non-conformity is Imagination?by means of which, the individual
is able to foresee the probable result of one or more modes of behav-
ior. Then judgment enters, approves, accepts, or rejects the con-
156 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
templated procedure. Less than one-fourth of this group showed
the components of Imagination?imageability, planfulness, memory
and intellect?above the line of mediocrity. Mediocrity here means
the bare sufficiency to get along if no extra demand is made. I found
only one girl who could repeat three moves with the design blocks
upon a single presentation?she was a shoplifter and needed imagina-
tion in her business. Most of the others were able to follow two
moves. This suggests that the reason that just this group "hap-
pened" to be arrested is that each lacked or failed to use sufficient
imagination to foresee the inevitable result.
One hundred and twenty-eight of the three hundred cases had
been examined and rated according to the Terman revision of the
Binet series. This series of tests tends to overweight language ability
and school proficiency. By presenting their results scored by another
than myself a more complete picture would be made. The average
I. Q. (intelligence quotient) is 65?below the line of the doubtful
class. This group was a more or less selected one because only
those who showed evidence of deficiency in the preliminary examina-
tion are given the complete Binet series.
Perhaps it would be more comparable to take the average of
500 consecutive cases which were examined just previous to this
group of 300. The average I. Q. of that group was 75?recognized
as the borderline group between the definitely acceptable score and
the decidedly questionable one. What the average of both groups
indicates is mediocrity. No matter if you score on the motor side
or on the scholastic side, the result is mediocrity. If you estimate
the economic status of delinquents you find wide irregularities, incon-
sistant and ever changing levels. Delinquents are not always and
completely anti-social; if they were, they would be incorrigibles?
untrainable, hopeless. The delinquent is the unstable, will-o'-the-
wisp person, measured by any norm you choose, and any who would
attempt to stabilize one of them, must know the material with
which they must work. Intelligence is only a factor. Furthermore
it is a complexus and not a unit characteristic. It is not enough to
say that Alice has a mental age of 12 years, an I. Q. of 75. Many
different Alices, presenting many different problems, may all rate the
same I. Q. but in reality widely differ. That is why the qualitative
rating comes nearer being a personal index, than does the Binet score.
It comes nearer answering the question, what in Alice's general
mediocre equipment stands out as the very best. What is her chief
power? Where can it best be used?
From a psychological approach, the program for directing the
delinquent toward acceptable citizenship would bear such slogans as
A STUDY OF DELINQUENT GIRLS. 157
"Treat her as an individual. Know her assets. Take account of
her deficiencies, congenital and acquired; definitely choose the envi-
ronment which will tend to make conformity the easiest thing for
her; recognize her desires and ambitions; give her work that she
can do, and at the same time is hard enough to hold her interest."
Society can learn much from the fable which says that people
are like seeds?so much depends upon the seed itself, the manner of
seed it is. And then there is the ground, good ground, poor ground,
ground that is good for some things but not for others; the rains,
the wind, the sunshine?just enough but not too much and well dis-
tributed; besides these there are the possible accidents; the blights,
the mischievous small boy, as well as the storms at harvest time.
The farmer can only store the seed up to planting time; then he
chooses ground, controls irrigation and stamps out blights. He
works with the idea of making the very most out of the possibilities
at hand. So must society.
The problem of the adolescent delinquent girl may well be
approached from an analytical basis such as has been employed in
the present investigation. From such an analysis a theoretical solu-
tion of her problem can be evolved and possibly a practical applica-
tion therefrom deduced. Mal-functioning of the mind or physical
nature denotes a disturbed equilibrium within its field. Does not
mal-functioning of behavior, which is delinquency, also intimate a
disturbance? Before any therapeutic measures can be intelligently
applied, it is necessary to know the etiology of the delinquency and
range of the individual's probable development.
Conclusions.
From the analytical study of these 300 unselected white delin-
quent girls, between the ages of 16 and 25, it appears that:
I. The mental equipment of the delinquent girl is in most cases
of the doubtful level, the majority being neither definitely above
nor below the standard accepted as normal. Whether or not it is
adequate, depends largely upon the environmental demands made
upon it.
II. In her mental equipment, there are definite assets and specific
defects, which must be recognized and taken into account if the delin-
quent is to be taught to function at her highest level of proficiency.
III. In order to know her possibilities and limitations, an
analytical study should be made in each case.
IV. In many cases it is not only a deficiency, a lack of the quan-
titative development of the mental competencies, but the quality of
158 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the competencies is also defective. This presents a serious aspect
when it comes to trainability and makes the prognosis unfavorable.
V. Specific defects and deficiencies are reflected in the individ-
ual's behavior. By measuring the extent of the ability with adequate
tests, the range of possibilities may be determined. Special appli-
cation may be made in the field of industry.
VI. The competency motif of this group measured qualitatively,
shows a general mediocrity throughout, with complexity of move-
ment, memory, imagination and intellect especially deficient.
