A Day in Coutre? Problems in Correctional  Guidance
====================================================

By Anna Speisman Starr, A.B.,
Psychologist for the Juvenile Division, Municipal Court, Philadelphia?
There was an air of restlessness in the crowd outside the Court
Room?a kind of an expectancy, mingled with dread, but it was in
no wise reflected within the Court Room where a few officials, gathered
about His Honor's desk, were arranging the case records to follow the
order of the day's "court list." The Court Room itself had a quiet,
peaceful dignity, simply furnished, and lacking the heavy, somber
trappings of former days. It did not seem like a great public hall of
Justice but rather like a friendly council chamber. A clerk came in
bringing a small bowl of gay spring flowers and placed them on the
desk?casually announcing that the Judge had arrived. Then each
official took his place and stood solemnly while the Judge himself
entered and the clerk cried lustily, "Oh yea, Oh yea, Oh yea, all
persons who stand bound by recognizance or otherwise may have
to do before His Honor, Judge of the Municipal Court, in and for the
County of Philadelphia may appear and they shall be heard. May
God save the Commonwealth and this Honorable Court. Call the
first case." That mandate alone seemed formidable?perhaps it
was for this that the crowd outside was waiting.
A slight, dark-haired Italian girl, defiant and yet afraid, entered
the room from the rear, while her parents merging from the crowd
entered through another door. Angelina had been held in detention
while "her case was being investigated" and this was the first time
she had seen her father in several days. He still looked stern. To-
gether they stood before the Judge, who turned to the father and
asked what was their trouble. In a loud voice assertive of his own
dignity the father said: "My girl?she no mind?she say yes?I sa}r
no?she go out and I lock the door. I her father and she musta mind
me." The fat, little mother looked pleadingly from one to the other,
afraid to oppose her husband, bewildered by their child's defiance,
and hoping that the Judge might understand. Angelina, just sixteen,
haughtily interrupted "He is too hard. He is cruel. This is not
Italy and I am free. Didn't I make eighteen dollars last week?
That is as much as he ever makes. I can support myself, I don't
have to stay at home."
And then in a quiet even voice, the Court Representative
presented the salient facts of the situation and the outcome of the
investigation, and the family group listened while someone else told
(256)
A DAY IN COURT. 257
of their trouble. The parents had come from Italy just after they
were married and had settled with friends, keeping to a large extent
their racial customs. There had been illness and loss of work so that
now Angelina's wages were a boon, had it not been for the privileges
she demanded. Angelina was going with American girls to dance
halls, of which parental authority disapproved; she preferred choosing
her own friends and scorned her father's choice of a husband for her?
he striving to settle her early and well and she struggling to be unfet-
tered. A week ago, Angelina had retained a part of her pay and had
purchased some bit of feminine finery. The father became angry,
made harsh demands and she defied him by leaving the house. When
she returned, the door was locked. The family bore a good reputa-
tion in the community. Angelina had done well in school and was
regularly employed.
It was plainly a case of misunderstanding rather than wilful
defiance and this His Honor tried to show them?that the father's
idea was not all tyranny but too keenly felt responsibility?that
Angelina, being a part of the old as well as the newer order of things,
must try to choose the best of each; that being American meant
translating her parents' ideals into hers and not totally rejecting
them.
The next case was an American girl of Irish descent, who had
already been before His Honor several times, and in answer to his
recognition, said, "Sure it is not a bit of my fault this time." The
Judge had first seen Ellen in the Juvenile Court, when at the age of
seven she had been sent with four other children to a Temporary
Home, for their father had gone to jail as the result of a drunken
brawl, and their mother was ill. The Judge had remembered the
child because she ran away and on being returned to him, gave as
her excuse, that she "wanted to see if Tom really had made their
double bike go." Later she had been back as a truant and another
time she followed the circus to the next town. She had always been
fearless, scorning whatever recreation convention allotted to girls
choosing a freer, more adventuresome role with her brother. At
fifteen she had gone to work at the factory and to dances at "the
social halls;" at sixteen she was arrested in a raid by the Federal
authorities for Violation of Section 13 (selling liquor to uniformed
men) and now she was "back again." This time she was arrested
for Disorderly Conduct and admitted that if she hadn't "sassed the
cop by swearing at him she would be still working at the new job she
got two days ago." Being arrested had come to mean the inevitable
bad luck which she had learned to endure, but which was becoming
more persistently present.
258 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
It was reported to the Court that Ellen had not worked for
several weeks and that she had lost her last two positions because
of her violent temper. She had begun to feel that everyone "had a
pick on her, that there was someone watching her." Her mother
complained that she had to handle her with soft gloves; she could
change so quick from being like her father to being real nice when
she wanted something. She had not been home for three weeks?
not since that morning her mother had asked her to go to bank to
deposit a Liberty Bond in safe keeping and she had "hocked it."
"Well it was mine as much as anyone else's and Uncle Jerry might
have willed it to me anyway. He always said he liked me and didn't
I go to Flannigan's for him the last time he was down?I should
worry."
There was something in her feigned bravado, in the nervous
restlessness of her behavior that made His Honor read and reread
the Doctor's report and to continue the case "under advisement."
Sally was a wretched creature as she supported herself against
the Court rail. All her flimsy finery seemed like tinsel, nor could the
bravado of her stare altogether hide the look of craving which changed
again to one of pleading. She had made such a brave fight not "to
show the habit" but she could not hide it longer and when her needle
was presented as evidence, she gasped, then sank on the bench
muttering "That's the dam thing?but, it has been a good friend
to me." That day, there were three others on the list, all suffering
and pleading for just one sniff to make them forget.
Case No. 4 was called, and a tall, flushed, loosely jointed woman
of twenty-six came in and stood beside her mother. Nellie had been
known to the Court for several years, always getting into just enough
trouble never to be entirely free from the efforts of some social agency.
The question for decision today was "all this being so, what's to be
done." The difficulty had been noted years before. The school
teacher had told Nellie's mother that she would never learn much
and suggested sending her away to a school, where she might be
taught things not in the public school program?but sending Nellie
away seemed too much like deserting her and Nellie's mother kept
her home, not at all abashed by her school difficulties or failure to
progress. In her early teens "Nellie was very sassy" and quite
overruled her mother. At twenty she had an illegitimate child which
was placed in an Orphanage and died. Since then?six years ago,
twenty-five different city agencies have worked on Nellie's case?
seven of the number being Clinics and Hospitals, to one of which
she had been admitted six times. She is also known to three divisions
of the Court?Domestic Relations, Criminal and Misdemeanants. In
A DAY IN COURT. 259
the last division alone she has had seven hearings. Her problem is
still unsolved. When committed to Institutions, like the House of
the Good Shepherd, her behavior would be good until she became
restless. In the County Prison she was cowed by fear. Upon her
release, she would be home with her mother only a few weeks until
her mother would complain that "Nellie acts silly and swears dread-
fully" and beg that something be done because when "Nellie is home,
everybody fights."
In 1917, Nellie was employed at house cleaning, where she met a
plumber's helper and a few days later, married him. That adventure
had not been successful either, for he deserted her shortly after their
baby was born. She said of Tom, "He is too lazy to want to work?
I certainly do love him. I don't see why he left me. He said I had
a big mouth. He didn't have much money and he thought my
mother would take me in. When he beats me again, I'll take my
own part. He wanted to get out of the Army. He punches his own
head, he does. There must be something wrong?please can't you
get me a job?"
Many attempts have been made to secure the right kind of a job
for her?a place which afforded enough variety not to become monot-
onous, a task not requiring wisdom which she lacked, and a place where
the people would accept her limitations and yet encourage her to use
her abilities. When she did work the quality was good but never
lasted long. Irresponsibility, childish petulance, never seeing her
own deficiency, firmly believing she was always right, resenting
discipline and not profiting by experience?all these militated against
her and as usual Nellie was out of a job. She had worked by the
day, on a farm, and in domestic service, but none of these "suited
her."
Physically, Nellie looked very well and although she suffered
chronically from one thing or another, she managed to keep fairly
strong through her wide acquaintance with Dispensaries and Hos-
pitals. As to her mentality, the diagnoses had agreed; though
recognizing her as deficient?no examiner, neither Psychiatrist nor
Psychologist, had considered her mentally a "committable case."
I wice she had been held under observation in what Nellie called the
"Psycho-patrick Ward," but both times she was released. Neither
could she be long committed for crime, for no single one of her offenses
had been serious?begging, violating probation, street walking,
disorderly conduct. Vigorously and knowingly did Nellie argue, "I
never stole nor did I kill and you can't put me away." One must
aspire to be an all-wise Judge who, with due regard for personal
integrity, shall decide the rights of society in such a case as this.
260 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
When the next case was called, a neatly dressed girl walked in
smilingly and each person about seemed to catch it. The Probation
Officer was reporting Mary's progress to the Judge and was petitioning
for her release. Mary had also been known to the Court for some
time but never before under such auspicious circumstances. Two
years before when the Travelers' Aid Agent had brought her to the
Court for protection, she appeared defiant, skeptical, under-nourished,
and revengeful; had run away from home, angered and irritated by
her family's taunts, and determined never to conform. It had been
a long fight, a real struggle, for as Mary herself had mused, "I must
have been a funny kid in those days.' '? There were but two ideals to
which she bowed the knee?one the worship of absolute fairness, the
other the ambition to "be polite." She had been detained at the
Court House because she had refused to give her name and during
that first week, trying to escape through the window, she had fallen,
breaking her leg. Then came an attack of fever and long weeks of
convalescence with ample time for reflection. The first person
toward whom Mary warmed was her nurse, who, kind and gentle
toward her in her loneliness, had never exhorted her to "tell who she
was." The nurse had become genuinely fond of Mary and the experi-
ence of being accepted and "treated like a real somebody" stimulated
her to have faith in herself and gave her courage to smile at the world.
At times, she had lost her temper and thereby her job; once she had
run away but later returned, and once she had been falsely accused
of theft, but today she "walked into Court just to show him I did
make good."
Following Mary's case, was Julie, worn, haggard and toothless.
She had had a checkered career?in her youth, a power in her under-
world realm, now a picture of decay and despair. There she stood,
callously, with a cynical sneer, waiting for what Justice would mete
out to her, ready to defy it whatever it was. She scorned imprison-
ment, likewise pity. Against her stood the record of many arrests
for drunkenness, pandering and prostitution. She knew the Judge
was reading her medical report and she also knew that venereal
infection meant enforced medical care, so she had little interest in
her sentence?the possibilities were too few. It was more satisfying
to remember her former power than to sense her present position
and with an effort toward something of her old time spirit, she swept
from the room, unheeding what the Judge had said.
The tipstaff called, "All persons witnesses in the case of Barbara
Uvensky are now summoned to appear," but no one answered.
Before the Judge stood a stout, well-built country girl, wide eyed,
wondering, gullible. " Where do you live? " asked the Judge. " Why
A DAY IN COURT. 261
are you here?" "I live up the State. He said when I would come
it would be fine and I thought I would surprise him. He said there
are many good jobs here in the city but I could not find one. It is
too big. And I cannot find him."
Barbara had been brought in by the Station Guard, who dis-
covered her wandering about and bewildered. Her story was a simple
one?of ambition, aspiring to reach something the mining town did
not afford; of adventure, to try the new as her parents had done; of
faith in her power to succeed, then to go back "all dressed rich"; of
stupidity in failing to realize what she was doing. But, as she said,
the city was too big and no one seemed to know "him." She was so
frank in her expectations, so miserable in her disillusionment, and
she tried so hard to keep up her courage and fight back the growing
homesickness, that everyone smiled at her in sympathy and shared
her joy when the telegram from her father was read urging that she
be sent back immediately.
Paet 2.
What spirit moves back of such a Court, to quicken the Judge
in his sympathy and insight? In former days, a Court hearing was
the first step in administering Justice, and amid unverified accusations
he who argued best or talked the most, established the case. It is
true that today's atmosphere was wholesomely free from irrelevant
details, for, being a Court whose fundamental concept is to adjust
individuals rather than to penalize them, the purpose of such a hearing
was to assemble the facts that had been verified and to make clear
not only the present situation but also to uncover and deal with the
causes involved. Society is not avenged by such a Court, it is pro-
tected by it.
This shifting of emphasis from the punitive idea to one of social
adjustment has increased in those Courts where the offense is against
individuals rather than against property and in many such cases, the
offenders are their own victims. It means that society recognizes
individuals as socially ill, or out of tune as it were with the standards
of their race and age; it means that society is beginning to demand
that the individual live up to the top notch of his social proficiency,
that he respect the desires and pleasures of others, even if such con-
formity means personal restraint. The socialized Court is far from
being sentimental, it exacts the utmost one can give and strengthens
them that they may give more. For ages society said "An eye for
an eye," but finally realizing how futile is such a policj', she has begun
to ask "Can I teach you to see?" Such a question is a double one?
for it really asks what is it that distorts your social vision and can
262 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that obstacle be removed. If it can be removed, every possible effort
is required to that end.
In the functioning of no social agency, is it more imperative to
study and to know the individual than it is in a Court, for to the
Court come only those whose maladjustment is critical. It has been
said that criminal responsibility is not a quality of the offender but
rather the demand made by society that the offender shall suffer in
return for pain that he has inflicted. Obviously the offender should
be judged not only by the outward act but also by the state of mind
accompanying it. As soon as the offender becomes the object of
consideration and not the question of his punishment, the Court must
ask " why did he do it?what were the motives and what the purpose."
To adjust individuals one must know those individuals, and knowing
the girl offender does not mean knowing merely a few facts about her
recent behavior. It means knowing something of her health and her
attitude as she met the different milestones in her life, whether it was
whooping cough, school, adolescence or her first factory job?what
were her opportunities and what did she make of them? What have
been her ideals and ambitions and how far has she realized them?
Where does she stand now, physically, mentally, socially? Is she
interested in her job; is she making good; where does she play and
with whom? What does she hope to do and why? Looking closely
one can observe in subsequent behavior the traces of early experiences
and so often readjustment means only recognition of the true relation-
ship between cause and effect.
For instance, take the case of Mary who had really made good.
The first day she appeared in Court, the Judge saw before him a
sensitive, defiant and self-pitying girl, whose outlook was at least
distorted. She was the elder of several children?a dreamy, proud
child, who had resented living in the last shanty of the row. It was
not the poverty so much as the family's meek acceptance of it and
their toleration of needless dirt that fretted her spirit. When she tried
to keep her things apart from the others, the children called her fussy.
One day, when her father heard her imitating the "Book-lady" and
grandly say to imaginary guests "Pray do be seated," he laughed
at her scornfully and beat her for putting on airs. She had had little
schooling but cherished the little she had; at home she lived in a world
all her own, not trusting a person to share it. On that first day the
Judge did not know any of this; he did not even know her name, but
he knew other things about her. Assembled on his desk were the
physician's reports telling him that she had long suffered from malnu-
trition, that while there was no organic disease, her general body tone
was low; the psychologist's report noted her intelligence as normal,
A DAY IN COURT. 263
her trainability good, her quickness of response promising; the
psychiatrist warned of an impending nervous break. The picture
was before him?human material good enough at the start but now
ready to break trying to meet demands far too great. The Judge
knew that once the crisis was over, an adjustment might be made?
that what she needed was to gain faith in people by having them put
faith in her. People who are happy, who are efficient, who are in
tune, are those who are adjusted?the social balance of the misde-
meanant is not adjusted, it is disturbed. The function and purpose
of the Court is to re-establish such balances and through experience
thus gained, learn some methods of prevention in other cases.
From an analysis of Angelina's case, the prognosis appears
favorable because there the difficulty is one of a material disturbance
?there is physical strength and mental vigor on both sides and the
crux is an economic and educational one. Ellen could never be
adjusted for any length of time, because she is fundamentally too
erratic, unstable and impulsive, with embryo delusions of persecution.
Nellie's handicaps seem almost too many to ever allow her to be
competently independent. Her physical strength and mental equip-
ment though inadequate, still are not below the borderline of possible
sufficiency?but her motivation and training are. When her deficient
competencies function, they must call on the others for compensation
in order to meet the situation but the others barely adequate in them-
selves, have no residue to share. Nellie wants to be busy, to be
important and to feel she is choosing her own way. In an environ-
ment where her desires and interests would be satisfied, she could
do quite well; but that environment is not in the hustle and com-
plexity of competitive city life, especially when her economic status
demands that she be self-supporting. Nellie might do very well
(that is never get arrested) if she had money enough to pay others to
amuse her. The best solution society provides for such as she is the
Industrial School, where for undeterminate sentences the Nellies are
taught what they can learn, are disciplined toward self-control and
kept contented by simple joys and interests. These schools are jails
?if being in jail means forced to remain there, but they are not jails
of idleness and revenge. Their function is to afford an opportunity
of becoming physically restored and socially adjusted.
A day at Court tends to make one philosophical and to question
seriously whether or not the methods employed are the most effective.
Granting the progress already made, we feel the insistent demand
that every available resource be used to help meet the situation.
Should society revengefully punish an individual who has so little
to say in the choice of her equipment for life? Do people will their
264 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
delinquency? Are we social beings simply because of a wiser choice?
Must not society come to recognize more fully its responsibility for
child life and its adequate training? Every law breaker, every
offender was once a child and society had a greater chance then to
help make him into a good citizen. But on the other hand we cannot
expect that society shall suffer because certain individuals are selfish
through ignorance, defiance or evil intent. Society has begun to see
that no person should be unnecessarily handicapped, but at the same
time to demand the best from each of us in citizenship. To such a
concept is the socialized Court dedicated and it works for the fuller
realization of its ideal.
