Sergent X, A Study in Vocational Guidance
==========================================

By Morris S. Viteles, Ph.D.,
Instructor in Psychology, University of Pennsylvania.
Late one afternoon in September one of the officers of the Training Section brought down and introduced to me Mr. X, former
sergeant in the Chemical Warfare Service. Mr. X, dressed in the
elaborate costume of the Knights Templar (it was the week of the
convention in this city) appeared to be the very impersonation of
good health and cheerfulness. His face, round and ruddy, bespoke
a jovial personality; his bearing and conversation were those of the
cultured, college trained man. During the early part of our conversation I looked upon him as a visitor interested in the work of the
Board, and it was with surprise that I received the news that he was
an applicant for the benefits of vocational training. Physically he
seemed and proved to be in the best of condition. His condition
was purely a mental one, as he put it, "loss of memory" following
upon gassing. He had been gassed during the fall of 1918 but had
felt no evil effects until the middle of the following January. His
story, as he told it, as he had gleaned it from former companions-inarms and the chaplain of his regiment, was that he had suddenly
suffered an entire loss of memory. He had forgotten his name, his
home address, his rank, his duties?everything connected with his
daily life. He had been removed to a Base Hospital, but of his life
in this hospital he has no recollection even unto the present day.
His first recollection is that of finding himself upon a ship, returning
from somewhere, he could not remember from where. He recalled
his name, possibly because he had found it inscribed in a little book
in his pocket. Baggage he had none at all. There was present a
shadowy flitting idea that there had been a war, that in some manner
he had been connected with this war. Remembering only some
vague reference to the Spanish-American War he took it for granted
that he had had some association with this struggle. Of his trip
across he remembers nothing more. Neither does he recall anything
of the first few weeks he spent at Plattsburg. Gradually, however,
at this convalescent hospital there came an appreciation of his condition?vague memories flitted like shadowy clouds across consciousness. Correspondence with his parents brought up old associations.
With these came other associations until there was a slight basis for
the redintegration in consciousness of his past life.
1 The material for this article was obtained during service as a Vocational Adviser with
the Federal Board for Vocational Education. Acknowledgment is due to this organization for
permission to publish it.
(36)
SERGEANT X. 37
Following the realization that he had lost his memory, that
something which he had possessed had gone from him, he undertook a systematic re-establishment of old associations. He sent to
his home for all the letters which he had sent from France and
reread these carefully. He reread all the letters which had been
sent to him and which he had stored away. He wrote to the chaplain of his regiment, to his "Buddies" and from their letters reconstructed some of the experiences he had passed through "over
there." Before long he was discharged from Plattsburg and returned
to his home to carry on more intensively the task of reconstruction
which he had set himself. The method I have outlined was entirely
his own?one evolved by the use of the intelligence with which he
was so evidently gifted. Within a short time he felt in a condition
to resume the job he had left to enter the army. His progress and
his condition at the present time, including the reasons which had
moved the Training Office and the medical officer to refer him to
the psychologist of the office, can best be brought out by a r?sum6
of the case as it is presented in the case record.
The first report upon the case, received from a physician in
May, gives a diagnosis of: "Gassed, which results in impaired
memory. Cannot tell if memory will improve as it was formerly."
A r6sum6 of the Vocational Survey made during the same month
gives the following facts: Mr. X was a sergeant in the Chemical
Warfare Service. He is now thirty-two years of age. His educational history includes the first three years of the course in chemical
engineering in Lehigh University, the reason given for leaving at
the end of this period being an eye condition. In addition he has
had a three-months' course in bookkeeping. His disability is again
given as an "impaired memory," the nature of the permanent disability being uncertain, with a recommendation "that a thorough
mental examination be made as his condition appears to be somewhat unusual and may require special treatment." His occupation
before entering the service was that of chemist in a glue factory.
His preference for a future vocation is a continuation of the same
work in an executive position. In a memorandum is the note,
"good appearance and intelligent except for impaired memory.
Appears capable of doing high grade work." The training recommended by the vocational adviser is a course in the Alexander
Hamilton Institute to prepare him for an executive position in the
glue industry. A note, however, raises the question of the advisability of training. "An examination," it states, "may show that
he will need special training to remedy the condition of his
memory."
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The blank devoted to "an inquiry concerning the soldier" bears
the same information with additional data on the soldier's vocational
experience, which indicates six months spent in a machine shop and
some time devoted to clerical work in the accounting department of
the glue concern in which he was employed as a chemist. His army
experience included such varied occupations as company clerk, Bn.
commissary sergeant, supply sergeant, Bn. Hdqrs. mess sergeant.
Additional light is thrown on the case by a report sent in by
the Red Cross in May stating that "before going into the service he
had three years in college specializing in chemical engineering."
"As a result of being severely gassed," the report states, "he has
suffered a complete loss of memory and is only gradually regaining
this faculty. He remembers only the rudiments of his work, but he
is most anxious to be trained in some kind of laboratory work. . . .
He is of a happy disposition and is helping himself in every way
possible, but he seems to be in need of some kind of definite training
as soon as possible."
In the meantime, while the status of his case was being investigated and action delayed at his suggestion Sgt. X had returned to
his position as chemist in the glue factory. In July an examination
was made by a psychiatrist and following is a report of his examination:
Patient is a well-nourished adult, white male, thirty-one years
old, single, by occupation a chemist.
Previous Personal History.?Scarlet fever; mumps; whooping
cough; measles during childhood.
Chief Complaint.?Loss of memory?general information. Loss
of strength. Easy exhaustion.
Present Condition.?Gives following information that has been
built up by himself through letters that he has written home, papers
in his pockets, and men in his regiment to whom he has been talking
since his return home.
Gassed April and September, 1918. On last occasion discharged
after five days in hospital. Three months later he was still feeling
bad effects, frequent headaches and lack of endurance. Memory
failed in January, 1919. Discharged April, 1919.
Mental Examination.?Improved. Memory for recent events
improving, but he cannot concentrate very well. Things outside
routine laboratory work are very hazy to him. Finds it hard to
retain anything. He tires easily both physically and mentally.
Neurological Examination.?Left pupil irregular. Right 0. K.
Tremor tongue. (Had accident to eye at age of ten.)
Diagnosis.?Amnesia-Hysterical.
SERGEANT X. 39
Disability?25%.
Note (District Medical Officer).?"Training must be tentative
and free from strain."
It will be noted that the medical examiner, a psychiatrist, gives
a diagnosis but no rating on a trainability scale?no answer to the
all-important question whether it would be feasible to attempt to
train this applicant for a new vocation at this time.
Late in August, in reply to a letter from the District Vocational
Officer making inquiry as to his condition, the following statement
was received from Sgt. X: "There has been a slight improvement
in my condition, as I am gradually getting accustomed to my old
work, although it has been necessary to practically relearn all of it.
At the present time I am about 75% what I was before enlisting.
I was able to take my former position because our superintendent
had held the same position at one time, there was another executive
here who was familiar with this line of work, and both of these men
helped me out when necessary, so this has given me three months of
good practical training. I now have the routine work going satisfactorily but still have some difficulty with the special and extra
jobs which turn up from time to time.
"Another difficulty is that I tire very readily and naturally
that holds me back somewhat, but lately I have started treatments
similar to those received at the hospital in Plattsburg arid so far
they seem to be helping.
"My principal work is testing glues, and that combined with
five years' experience gave the V. A. the idea of training for an executive position, but in thinking over the proposition the technical end
appeals more to me?something along the line of efficiency expert in
the line of adhesives."
It was in September that Sgt. X appeared in my office. He had
encountered certain difficulties in carrying on his work and had
deemed it wise to consult with the Board on the advisability of taking
advantage of the training which was open to him. He experienced
little difficulty in performing the actual work required in the testing
process. After he had started, as he put it, the job carried itself
on automatically, but in the calculation of formulas which the nature
of the task demanded he experienced great difficulty. There was
an insufficiency of recall which made him an inefficient worker,
unable to compete on equal terms with others doing the same work.
Referred to the Training Section he presented a problem which
demanded immediate solution before any adequate action could be
taken on the case or before any plans for training could be developed.
The question put to the district medical officcr by the Training
40 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Office was one which concerned the capability of Sgt. X to profit by
training. "Is his condition such," they asked, "that any kind of
training at the present time will be energy wasted?" It must be
remembered, moreover, that training from the point of view of the
Federal Board for Vocational Education was training that was not
primarily therapeutic in value but training which would lead to the
employment of the individual in some specific vocation?which
would result in improved vocational efficiency. The report of the
psychiatrist on the examination of Sgt. X provided merely a medical
diagnosis, and no prognosis on trainability. The note by the district medical officer that "training must be tentative and free from
strain" did not answer the question asked by the Training Office.
The medical officer realized this condition and turned the case over
to the author of this report for a psychological examination; for a
recommendation on the advisability of training the applicant for
the position of chemical engineer, the completion of the technical
course to insure vocational efficiency?a course which had been
decided upon as a result of a conference with the applicant.
In the psychological examination my aim was merely to sound
the subject's trainability, to determine whether his memory was in
such a condition that the return of old associations could be expected,
and whether new associations could be established with the probability that there would be a retention of such associations. A
preliminary talk revealed the fact that a Wassermann test had proven
to be negative, so that progressive degeneration on the score of
paresis was not to be expected. The subject gave me a detailed
account of his method of building up the memory?the perusal of
old letters, communication with his friends, etc., as I have indicated
above. At times, in the narration of some incident there would be
a slight hesitation and the strain of recall could almost be sensed.
Sgt. X cited several amusing instances which the difficulty of recall
had produced at various times, not the least amusing of which was
his account of an attempt to recall a song made only for the ears of
doughboys in the presence of a young lady. During the process of
recalling the words he had no idea of the character of the song or the
nature of the words. He was given to understand what was the
character of the tests which were to be given to him and the reason
for testing him. With an attempt to employ positive suggestion of
a nature which is so valuable in the treatment of hysteria of any kind
we passed into the actual examination. His auditory vocal memory
span proved to be seven with eight on ten repetitions. The visual
memory span was also seven with eight on eight repetitions. The
initial performance on the Dearborn Formboard took 157 seconds,
SERGEANT X. 41
with a decrease in the time for the completion of the test to thirtytwo seconds in the fourth trial. The rate of improvement was steady.
The solution of the problem was an intelligent one. With the
Witmer Cylinders the approach to the solution also revealed
a high level of intelligence and he showed the same steady improvement in succeeding trials. With the Taylor Number Test he reached
number seven on the first trial and number twenty-four on the tenth
trial. The rate of improvement was not, however, steady, the fluctuations in the order of trials being as follows: 7, 12, 14, 8, 17, 12, 15,
19, 18, 24. It can be readily seen, however, that there is sufficient
retainability to warrant the pursuance of vocational training. The
results with the longer series of numbers (one more than the memory
span) and further experimentation with educational material revealed
the fact that the auditory and visual memory were more impaired
than the kinesthetic. This was borne out by statements of the
subject to the effect that when he returned to his job he found no
trouble in picking up the method of doing his work?that when he
started, the job automatically finished itself. To retain the formula
for the chemical operation was a more difficult task. To establish
the associations more repetitions were needed than before the loss
of memory, but once established the associations were generally
retained. In my opinion there is no doubt that the auditory and
visual memory are adequate to warrant training, although a greater
number of repetitions and more intense stimulation, will certainly
be needed to insure retention than would have been needed before
the attack of amnesia. I took care to inform Sgt. X of my findings,
because of the therapeutic value of bolstering up faith and of suggestion in hysterical amnesia. On the basis of my findings the
following report was made to the Training Office:
"Mr. X was examined by me at the Psychological Clinic of the
University of Pennsylvania on September 10, 1919. In my opinion
it would be advisable for him to enter training at the present time.
Such training will doubtless lead to improved vocational efficiency.
Whatever training is given him along educational lines should be
immediately reinforced by practical application. The kinesthetic
memory seems to be the least impaired, so as far as possible there
should be established associations of educational material in other
sense realms with kinesthetic sensation and memory.
"The prognosis is good. Mr. X possesses a high degree of intelligence which will enable him to meet situations if his memory does
not respond immediately. With the course of treatment suggested
to him during our conversation complete redintegration can be
looked forward to."
42 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
On the basis of this report the following recommendation for
training was made and approved:
Character?Chemical engineering.
Place?Carnegie Institute of Technology.
Duration?Two years.
Relation of man's disability to occupation?
(A) Vocational handicap?Impaired memory has proved a
serious handicap in his former occupation as laboratory man. After
a trial of five months he finds he cannot carry on.
(B) In what way will the proposed training enable the man to
overcome his vocational handicap?
The training will first cover such review work as is necessary to get
him to the point at which he was before the loss of memory occurred.
This will be followed by advanced courses to complete his course for
graduation as a chemical engineer. He has already completed
three years of this course at Lehigh University."
This recommendation was approved. In the opinion of the
examiner, the applicant is well equipped to carry on this work and
with a little application he will successfully complete the course
outlined for him.
The problem presented by this case was one of vocational and
educational guidance. In practical guidance of this kind, at least
four factors must be taken into consideration. These are as follows:
1. Health, or physical condition of the subject. In the guidance
of disabled soldiers this factor attains greater importance than in
the guidance of children, the chief reason for guidance of the former
being physical disability.
2. Desire. The interests of the individual must be taken into
consideration in practical guidance. As with health, the interests
and desires attain greater importance in the counseling of disabled
soldiers than in the guidance of children. As a result of education
and experience, the desires of these adults have taken on a more
definite trend and greater force than have the desires of young
children.
3. Economic and Social Factors. Certain kinds of training
and vocational objectives which, from the point of view of other
considerations in guidance, may seem desirable cannot be considered
by reason of the economic status of the subject's family, the relatively low remuneration from the occupation and certain other
economic and social factors which must be properly weighted in
guidance. These do not assume great importance in the guidance
of disabled soldiers, because the cost of training and maintenance
is provided by the Government.
SERGEANT X. 43
4. Competency. The most essential factor in guidance is the
capacity of the individual to learn and to become proficient in the
occupation which he is being advised to enter. At least four elements
must be considered in predicting job competency?native ability,
education, experience, and temperament or personality. It is not
difficult to ascertain the education and experience of the individual,
but it is in the determination of his native ability and temperament
that the greatest difficulty is being encountered. It is still largely
the custom in guidance to make a judgment on the existence of
these abilities by the method of haphazard observation, in the same
manner that industry haphazardly decides whether certain applicants for jobs are suitable candidates for these jobs. For this method
of haphazard observation in vocational guidance must be substituted
a more scientific determination of the general competency and the
specific abilities of the subject. The psychological test is the instrument for such scientific determination, and the qualitative analysis
of competency into its component specific abilities is the method
of such determination.
My purpose in presenting this case is to illustrate the modus
operandi of such a scientific analysis of the competency of subjects
in practical vocational guidance. It is recognized that in this method
there are many weaknesses and that there is much still to be done
in the analysis of qualifications required by jobs and in providing
a more complete analysis of the abilities of human beings. In the
analysis of temperamental factors, moreover, we are still at the
beginning of things. But already there is at the disposal of the
psychologist material and a method for making an analysis of competency more exact than that produced by the method of haphazard
observation such as is often used of the vocational adviser and
medical man. Although a comparatively new development, the use
of the material and method of the clinical psychologist will result in
a more certain prediction of vocational success than that given by
the haphazard method.
