The Americanization ot Tony
===========================

By Marion H. Blood, B. S.,
Graduate Student, University of Pennsylvania.
Tony was my first social service case; the child had failed to
attend the clinic regularly, and the hospital sent me into the crowded
back street where he lived to visit his home and discover what kept
him from his treatments. The house at the address given me proved
to be a dilapidated, tipsy looking, two story affair, with a front porch
that tilted rakishly forward, and a patch of front yard that was hard
packed and bare. The place looked more like a shack in a mining
village than a city tenement. An Italian woman sat on the stoop;
three young children climbed or toddled about the porch and tiny
yard. A shy, ragged, apparently undersized boy, whom I afterwards learned was Tony, stood in the doorway. When I advanced
and timidly asked for Mrs. Sarsoni the woman on the porch rose and
came toward me with a weary smile. As soon as I saw her I knew
the cause of Tony's absence. Tony was soon to have a wee brother
or sister. I talked with Mrs. Sarsoni and she explained that she
would not be able to take Tony to the hospital until the expected
baby was several weeks old, and that there was no one else with
whom to send him, his father being fortunate enough to have regular
work.
"Why not a neighbor?" I inquired.
At this suggestion Mrs. Sarsoni shook her head violently.
"Tony afraid" was all the explanation I could get at that time.
Later, from Tony's attitude toward the boys of his block, from his
mother's conversation and from what I myself observed of the
people on the street, I pieced together the truth; the neighborhood
was made up of native Americans of the type who bray their nationality to the smoky heavens and question the Lord's wisdom in
placing other people upon the earth; the adult members of this
group treated their Italian brothers with such superiority and contempt, the younger ones employed such scathing invectives and
such barbaric behavior, that Tony looked upon all my countrymen
as creatures to be feared. However, I lacked this knowledge upon
my first visit; the facts that confronted me were these: if Tony
were to become a healthy citizen, he must have regular treatments
at the clinic, and that some one must be found to take him to the
hospital. As no other volunteer seemed available at the moment I
offered myself as escort, and arranged to call for him the next Monday afternoon. While I was negotiating with Mrs. Sarsoni on the
(44)
THE AMERICANIZATION OF TONY. 45
front porch Tony eyed me suspiciously from the hallway. When,
just before leaving, I advanced toward the doorway to speak to
Tony, the small boy backed into a dark corner and his expression
reminded me for all the world of a rabbit caught in a hedgerow. I
made my pleasantry as brief as possible and hastened away leaving
the child in peace.
As I came within sight of Tony's home on the following Monday
I saw Tony sitting dejectedly on the door-sill and no sooner did he
spy me than he hopped up and scuttled off into the house, only to
reappear in a moment clinging to his mother's apron. After greeting Mrs. Sarsoni, I held out my hand to Tony and suggested that we
should be on our way; he only regarded me with terror-stricken
eyes. My attempts at reassurance had no outward effect upon him,
and only when his mother spoke to him in Italian (and at that moment
her tone held none of the "liquid music" of southern European
tongues) did he release his clutch upon his mother's garment and
approach me. After further hesitation he took my outstretched
hand and trudged off at my side. He was outwardly sulky, but my
intuition told me there was some real cause for his behavior, either
shyness or actual fear, and so I tried to ignore his silence and talk
of matters that might interest him.
It was not, however, until we neared our destination that Tony
spoke. As we approached the entrance to the hospital his grimy
little fist squirmed uneasily in my hand and he croaked through the
silver tube in his throat, "How many things are they going to make
me swallow today?" I was encouraged, and took this as a sign of
advancement until I realized the truth?it was only that his fear of
me had been overshadowed by his deeper fear of the great surgeon.
Tony had been the "pet case" of my predecessor on the social
service staff, and now as I looked into the child's frightened, appealing eyes I began to understand Tony's hold on her. There was in
the expression of those dark eyes something of the rabbit-in-thehedgerow look, and it made my throat ache. I gripped Tony's fist
more tightly and with my free hand fished about in my pocket for
the pennies I had received as change when I paid the car fare. As I
passed the pennies to Tony his face changed. It could scarcely be
said that he smiled; there was just a quiver at the corners of his
mouth and his eyes lost their frightened expression. He released
his hand, reached for his trousers' pocket, and gravely brought forth
an empty cigarette box, into which he put his newly acquired wealth.
He returned this improvised purse to his pocket, and we entered the
hospital; when the door closed behind us he gave me his hand with
an almost trusting air, although the old expression came back to his
46 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
eyes and the harsh voice croaked, "Do you think they'll make me
swallow more than one thing?" I tried my best to be reassuring;
but as the "thing" that Tony had such dread of "swallowing" was
the bronchoscope through which the doctor investigated and treated
the interior of Tony's chest, and I knew practically nothing of the
treatment, my words lacked positiveness and brought no sign of conviction to Tony's face. However, my attempts at kindness (whether
it was my conversation or my coins I shall not try to determine)
seemed to give the child confidence in me and brought about a
decided change in his attitude toward me. Both in the waitingroom and in the clinic Tony exhibited a distrust of the surgeon and
his attendants, and turned to me for help; he screamed and kicked
and clung to my skirt when his turn to enter the operating room
came, but upon my saying that I should like to see how brave he
was and upon my offering to accompany him, he permitted himself
to be placed upon the operating table with nothing more than a
frightened little catch in his breath. In fact his behavior so accentuated the difference in his feeling toward me and his attitude toward
the rest of the world, that as we were about to leave the clinic the
assisting interne turned from Tony (ragged, frightened, and not
fresh from his bath) to me and spoke with the stern professional
dignity of the newly fledged physician.
"Tony has not been coming to the clinic regularly." .
"No-o?" I replied in a somewhat noncommital, slightly rising
tone?I was very new in the work.
"He has not," said the surgeon, "and he should be here every
week."
"I'll see that he's here again next Monday," I promised.
The young man's voice grew so kindly that Tony crept round
from behind my skirt, and I am sure he would have patted my
shoulder had I been a small woman.
"Do," he said, "and in a few weeks you'll have a perfectly well
little Tony."
I bowed deferentially, took my supposed small son's grimy fist,
and departed?but not in peace. I was in a quandary to know how
I could get Tony back the next Monday and the Monday after that,
and so on.
When we arrived at Tony's home, his mother regarded our
friendly relationship with wondering eyes, but she smiled a true
Italian smile.
" You been kind to my Tony. He no more afraid of you. He?
all the time?fear people?much."
Tony himself gave me a shy smile when I said goodby and
lingered in the doorway as I started up the street.
THE AMERICANIZATION OF TONY. 47
That night after I went to bed the solution of the problem
came to me?I would ask the master of the Boy Scout Troop in
Tony's neighborhood to see that the young Italian got to the clinic
each week. The next morning I started action on my plan and by
the following Monday I had the assurance of the Scout Master that
Tony should be properly looked after. Our arrangements had been
made by telephone, and toward the end of my conversation with
the young philanthropist, the connection had been poor and I had
only partially understood something about his having "to send a
new scout ... so many of the boys in that section worked ... he
didn't know . . . hoped everything would be all right." I had
assured him I was sure it would be, and left the telephone feeling
greatly relieved.
When, in the middle of the Monday forenoon on which the new
plan was to go into effect, I stopped at Tony's home to tell Mrs.
Sarsoni that everything was arranged I found Tony in tears; the
Scout Master had preceded me and my young friend was overcome
by distrust. I reasoned with him to no purpose; I explained that
he would be taken to the hospital by a boy a little older than himself?that the boy would be kind to him and "would wear a suit
something like a soldier's uniform." Tony only shook his head
stubbornly, yet with a dejection that touched my heart.
He sobbed, "I don't want to go with 'Merican boy. He call me
dago?Italian rat?bad names. I don't like 'Merican boy. I?
want?to?go?with?you." And he ended with such a howl of woe
that his mother fled from the room.
Tony and I spent a bad half hour together and at the end of
that time Tony was not convinced but he was partially reconciled to
his fate. He agreed to trust his welfare to the young American on
the condition that I should see him in the clinic and that, when I
saw him there, I should have "something nice" to give him. We
parted with a trustful, although somewhat soggy, smile on Tony's
face, and a hopeful, almost moist, one on mine.
At three o'clock I put in my appearance at the waiting-room of
the clinic. I glanced anxiously along the crowded benches, nodding
absently to several eager faces that turned to me for recognition.
Tony didn't seem to be there; perhaps after all?but no! On the
farthest bench, in the farthest corner of the big room sat my little
Italian boy and by his side sat a boy scout, the blood of whose ancestors had in no wise been adulterated since the happy days when
they had roamed the African jungles. Tony attempted to greet me
with a smile, but the effort ended in a fearfully twisted expression;
as I placed my hand on his shoulder, he hid his dark little face against
48 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
my coat; he didn't cry but his breath whistled fearfully through his
throat, and his shoulders heaved rather pitifully. I patted him
reassuringly the while I turned to his black protector who was
scarcely taller than Tony.
"It was good of you to bring Tony," I said in my best social
service voice (I'm afraid we all have a professional tone at times),
a tone that is ever so faintly patronizing, and not as warm as it
might be.
Instinct?or something that is less scientific?warned the young
guardian that all was not well. His voice had a degree of apology
in it. (I make no attempt to reproduce his inimitable dialect). "I
was the only one of the troop that could come. Mammy said it
wouldn't do?you'd laugh or scold, and I didn't want to come?I
was afraid you'd not like it, but Mr. Blank said I was just the 'chap'
for the job, that a scout must do kind acts, and you'd be glad to see
me. Are you? We've just come from the South?we're new to
Northern ways." Throughout the speech he looked at me with
eyes not unlike Tony's, yet with a dawning hope that Tony's lacked?
plainly he too was frightened, yet he hoped it was without reason.
He had a kind of dignity that the overcoming of fear imparts. I
dropped my professional air and until the surgeon put in his appearance I "sat at the feet" of these two small "aliens" (for regardless
of where his birthplace may have been the negro is scarcely made to
feel himself other than alien) and learned the vulnerable points of
my native land, and the remedies for her weaknesses. To be sure
we talked only of Tony's neighbors and of his guardian's new found
boy scout friends. I saw the narrow superiority and lack of understanding that caused Tony's timidity and distrust; I saw the tone
of equality and kindliness that was giving the young negro hope
and dignity. In the fifteen or twenty minutes that we waited I
found myself understanding my two companions better and better,
and through them their parents and their grandparents. Tony,
too, forgot himself as he told his own woes and heard his companion
tell the wonders of his brief experience as a member of a truly democratic group. When Tony's turn came to enter the operating room,
he hesitated only an instant, then put his hand in mine and entered
without even so much as a whistle. When the treatment was over
I escorted my two friends down the corridor and parted from them
with the understanding that they would return the next week.
Before going, the darker of the two lads asked me rather timidly
what I thought of getting Tony into the scouts. If the assistant
surgeon had seen us at the moment of parting I'm not sure whether
he would have taken us for mother and sons or for fellow countrymen,?neither do I care.
THE AMERICANIZATION OF TONY. 49
My work kept me from seeing Tony again for more than a
month, then I met him with his escort at the door of the hospital;
they both whipped off their caps and grinned. I greeted them with
handshakes which they returned shyly, but with pleasure in their
eyes. Neither one showed the slightest evidence of fear or distrust.
We talked for a moment, then Tony put his finger on the hole in his
throat and said to his companion with scarcely a croak, "You talk
to the lady?I'll go on?I'm late."
"You like to come to the clinic, now, Tony?" I asked.
"Sure," he said. "It don't hurt?I'm an American and an
American ain't afraid of nothin'." And he swaggered through the
doorway and up the corridor.
His guardian watched him with a rather proprietary air, then
he smiled at me proudly, "He's a good scout," he said, "but I guess
I'd better go with him. He is such a little fellow, you know, and he
might get scared if I'm not there," and he trotted on to protect
his fellow countryman.
A few days later I went to see Tony's new brother. Tony stood
by while Mrs. Sarsoni and I admired the baby in our individual
ways; when that ceremony was completed we turned our attention
to Tony and I remarked not only upon his improved health, but
upon his changed attitude toward life?only I didn't speak in those
terms. The mother beamed on Tony, on the baby, on me.
"My Tony no longer afraid. The American boy good to him.
They say he American boy, too, and my Tony say he be good American?him and his brother Patrick." She patted the baby's head
and smiled as Tony and I left the room to join Mose who was whistling gaily on the front steps.
