Failures due to Language Deficiecy
===================================

By Cornelia Mann, B.S.,
Psychologist and Registrar, George School, Pa., Formerly Clinic Teacher,
University of Pennsylvania.
That language is the medium through which thoughts and ideas
are transmitted is an indisputable fact, and this is especially true in
the school room: Here language is the fundamental and essential
basis for the acquisition of all knowledge. Personal experience is
indeed a factor in much of our knowledge but, obviously, the experi-
ences of others, brought to us through the medium of language, are
far more potent and widespread in their scope.
Even the simplest and earliest forms of our present education,
the Three R's, are not, as one might suppose, assimilated by the
child through experience. On the contrary they are presented over
and over again through words, written and oral, and the child reads
and repeats the words. He must be well drilled in these simple
processes before he can undertake the more complex problems of
education. It is thus easy to see how all school work, from the very
first grade, depends on language.
The language ability of the young children all over the country
differs widely. The equipment of the candidates for admission to
our schools varies as greatly as do the homes from which the children
come. The child who does not know English is undoubtedly handi-
capped. To discover how great a difference this makes, the children
in two different kindergartens in this city were given psychological
tests to determine their fitness for first grade work. The vocabulary
test of the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Scale was used to
determine their language ability. It was not given strictly according
to Terman's method of procedure, but was changed so that the
child was given every chance to give a correct answer without actually
telling it to him. In one kindergarten there were sixty-six children,
ranging in age from four to six years, from American families of good
stock. In the second kindergarten the children came from homes
where English was practically never heard. The difference in scores
made on the Binet test, which is universally used on school children,
is significant.
In Kindergarten I the test was given with very few deviations
from the standard method. The changes made were in the wording
of some of the tests above the age of the children. They comprise
the following:
Year 6, test 4, b. "if your house gets on fire."
(230)
FAILURES DUE TO LANGUAGE DEFICIENCY. 231
Year 7, test 5. "Do you know what a fly is? A butterfly?
Can you tell me the difference between them? How are a fly and a
butterfly different? "
Year 8, test 1. " Let's make believe that this is a big field with
a fence around it (pointing to field and fence). Suppose somebody
on the outside threw your ball in here and you didn't know where
it went. You only knew that the ball was someplace in the field.
Take the pencil and show me how you would walk to find the ball.
Start here at the gate."
Year 8, test 2, b. "When you are on the way to school and
think that you're going to be late."
Year 8, test 2, c. "If one of your friends hits you without
meaning to do it."
Year 8, test 4. "In what way are wood and coal alike? What
is the same about them."
Year 9, test 5. "Can you tell me a very short story about a
boy, a river, and a ball."
With barely one or two exceptions the children answered the
questions readily. The responses given were the usual ones found
by Terman in his experiments. When a child failed to pass a test
the reason was undoubtedly that the test was above his mental
ability and not that he had not enough language equipment to under-
stand or answer the questions. The children were neither bashful
nor afraid to answer. Their responses came without hesitation and
were too often augmented by little stories. The children showed up
well in the test in every way.
The results show that 77 per cent of the four-year-olds and
75 per cent of the five-year-olds had an I. Q. of over 100. The
average increase in mental age over chronological age is six months.
Of the four-year-old children, five passed the comprehension test at
the eight year level, one recognized the similarities and one gave the
definitions. One child knew the months at the nine year level, and
at the ten year level three passed the Healy A test and one repeated
six digits. Of the five-year-old children, ten passed the compre-
hension test at the eight year level, three the ball and field test, six
gave the definitions, four recognized the similarities, one passed the
vocabulary test and two counted from twenty to zero. At the nine
year level two made sentences using three given words and one made
change. Four passed the Healy A test at the ten year level, two
repeated six digits, two repeated sentences of twenty to twenty two
syllables, and one recognized absurdities in sentences. Two children
passed the ball and field test at the twelve year level. In all there
were forty tests at the eight year level or above, which were passed
by the five-year-olds, and thirteen by four-year-olds.
232 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
A comparison between failures on two tests at the six year level,
the coins and comprehension, yields rather interesting results. Of
the four-year-olds, twelve failed to know three coins and nine passed
the comprehension question. Seventeen five-year-olds did not know
the coins but only eight failed on the comprehension question.
In Kindergarten II the tests were changed in every way possible
without actually indicating the answer. In all comprehension ques-
tions the form was "What do you do?" In year five, test two, the
examiner simply asked, as she pointed to the color, "What is that
color? " In test three of the same year, if the child did not respond
to "Which lady do you think is the prettiest? Put your finger on the
prettier one." The form "Which do you like best?" was given.
In test four the question was changed to "What is a for."
Only two children in the whole kindergarten passed the test given
according to the standard method. In years six, seven, and eight
the changes made were like those in Kindergarten I. In asking for
differences the question was augmented by "A fly doesn't look like
a butterfly, does it? How can you tell a from a when
you see it." Where words could be dispensed with they were omitted.
In asking a child to draw a diamond, for instance, the directions were
simply "Make me something like this."
Throughout the test the examiner had to coax and encourage
the child to speak most distinctly with a great deal of emphasis and
to use gestures where possible. In giving the child three commis-
sions each object used was pointed out as the word was spoken. The
children did no spontaneous talking or laughing and they had to be
continually urged to answer the questions. They were shy and
gave responses in monosyllables. With possibly three exceptions
none of the children answered any of the questions as well as 90 per
cent of the children in Kindergarten I. The results of the individual
tests given below, show the poor quality of the answers.
Marie was just seven years old and was to be promoted to first
grade within a week's time. Her work in the kindergarten had been
satisfactory. According to the Binet test, given most leniently, her
mental age was three years and four months. She did not know the
names of the parts of her body nor could she understand the question
asking her to tell them. The examiner used every form of question
possible and then, pointing to a button on Marie's dress, asked if it
were her nose. A shake of the head, "yes" was the only answer, no
matter how the question was put. Finally Marie pointed to her
nose when the examiner asked her to show her her eyes, and to her
lips for her hair. The child gave no response to "Point to," or
"Put your finger on." She did not know whether she was a boy or a
FAILURES DUE TO LANGUAGE DEFICIENCY. 233
girl. First she said the former, then the latter. Finally she stuck
to the answer, "boy." She could not compare two lines correctly,
probably because she did not know the meaning of "long" or "short."
The examiner placed a long pencil ;and a key before her and asked
her which was the longest or which the shortest, Marie could not
tell for she could not understand the question. She was unable to
pass the comprehension questions at the four year level or any tests
at a higher level.
Josephine was very much in the same position as Marie. She
was six years and one month old and was doing well in kindergarten,
but her mental age was only three years and four months. She did
not know the names of the parts of her body. She could not under-
stand the question concerning the comparison of lines nor could she
answer the comprehension question. She failed on all the tests at
the five year level and above. Like Marie she speaks no English
and understands very little. In her home English is not understood.
Angelina was five years and three months chronologically but
on the Binet scale only three years old. Her understanding of the
language was veiy limited. She was unable to name a key, a watch,
or a penny. She pointed out three things in the pictures, but when
the examiner asked her what the boat was she did not know. She
was unacquainted with her last name or else could not understand,
the question asking for it. The only four year tests that Angelina
completed successfully were repeating four digits and discriminating
form. She passed none of the five year tests. Angelina had a very
limited vocabulary.
Josephine would "make six in two months." She had not
"finished five." On the Binet scale, however, she was only three
years and ten months old. She passed all the three year tests but at
the four year level missed two because of her lack of understanding
of the questions. She did not know the meaning of long or short
and consequently could not compare the lines. She failed on the
comprehension questions for the same reason. Of the five year tests
she succeeded only on the aesthetic comparison and on executing
the commands. Josephine is greatly handicapped because of her
inability to understand what is said to her in school.
Filipina was five years and eleven months old but her mental
age according to the Binet scale was only three years and two months.
She knew very little English though she had been in school five
months. At first she gave no answers to the questions. She did
not know her mouth, ear, or hair and she gave the names of key and
watch in another language. She named three objects in "The
Dutch Home" but she called the cat a dog and gave the Italian
234 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
name for bread. Filipina passed three of the four year tests, the
discrimination of form, copying the square and repeating the four
digits. She answered the comprehension questions, but as the
examiner could not understand Italian any better than Filipina
could answer in English, Filipina went without credit.
Angelo would "finish six in five months" but he understood no
English whatever. He had never talked in the kindergarten and
seemed to have learned no words of the language. The examiner
was unable to draw a single word from him, though he did the per-
formance tests after the method had been illustrated by moving his
hands.
Tony was typical of the children in Kindergarten II. He was
ten months retarded on the Binet scale and his answers were not the
standard ones. To "What do you do when you are cold?" he said,
"Stick under the bed." He answered the other comprehension
questions in monosyllables. Of the four year tests lie passed all but
repeating the digits and the syllables. The two five year tests that
he failed on were the aesthetic comparison and executing three com-
missions. His definition of horse was, "He falls," of fork, "Get
hay." Of the six year tests he knew the coins, counted thirteen
pennies and realized that it was morning because he "got up."
When the examiner asked him what he did if he were going some
place and missed the car, he said, "Write to Santa Glaus." His
description of the pictures was just adequate. For "The Dutch
Home" he said, "Mudder in chair?sister here?has blind eye?
pussy on floor."
Rita was five years and four months old but she was not on the
promotion list. Her mother does not understand English but her
brother who lives at home can speak the language. Rita passed all
of the four year tests and all of the five but the aesthetic comparison
and knowing her age. She passed the definitions though she said
that a fork was "to put feeds on," and a horse was to "give milk."
Rita failed on all the six year tests but knowing the coins and the
time of day. Her answers to the questions about the mutilated
pictures were typical of those of the whole kindergarten. The only
part of this question which makes any impression is "What is the
matter." The fact that "something is gone" does not count. To
Rita the woman without arms had no basket; the one without eyes
had sores; and the one without a mouth had no hair. She copied
the diamond satisfactorily and she gave one of the best descriptions
of the pictures offered by any of the children. Though Rita fell
below her age five months on the Binet scale, she understands the
language fairly well and can use it to some extent. In spite of the
FAILURES DUE TO LANGUAGE DEFICIENCY. 235
fact that her mother cannot understand English Rita is fast learning
the language.
Mamie, five years and nine months old, came from a home where
English can be used if necessary. Mamie herself has comparatively
good command of the language. With the opportunities at hand she
has learned well. She passed all the four and five year tests but
making the patience rectangle. This she made in the wrong color.
She repeated the sentences at the six year level and knew her right
from her left hand. She also recognized the coins. Of the seven
year tests she passed three, tying the bow knot, counting her fingers
and describing the pictures. Mamie started to count the objects in
the pictures and the examiner had to repeat the directions three or
four times before she was on the right track. Her idea of the man
paddling a boat, like another one of the children, was that he was
"sweeping the water." Mamie's mental age was five years and ten
months, one month above her chronological age. She was one of
the four girls out of the whole twenty-eight who tested above age.
Yet the actual quality of the answers was not as good as that of the
four year children in Kindergarten I. Her definition of a chair was
"for to sit," of table, "for to cat," of fork, "to eat the macaronies."
She told the examiner that the woman without arms couldn't close
her eyes, and that the woman without a nose was sick. Of the one
without a mouth she said, "Her ain't got 110 feets." Mamie's
description of the pictures was barely adequate.
Dante was one of the three boys out of twenty-two who had an
I. Q. of over one hundred. His real age was five years and four
months but his mental age was five years and six months. His
answers to the Binet questions were the standard ones given in
Terman's "Measurement of Intelligence" and not merely a poor
English attempt at a sentence showing only that he knew the answer,
just as his mother's answer to "How old is Dante?" was "He will
be six on the twenty-seventh of September," rather than "He finish
five, September." Dante was to be promoted within a week and
he knew enough English to be able to understand the work of the
first grade.
Florence was the daughter of a prosperous Italian Real Estate
Agent who spoke English. She was the best child in the kinder-
garten on the Binet scale. Her chronological age was five years and
four months, but her mental age was six years and two months.
She passed all of the five year tests and all of the six but the mutilated
pictures. At the seven year level she passed the description of the
pictures and at the eight year level the comprehension question.
She gave a similarity between an apple and a peach, but she failed
236 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
on the other two of the series. The failures, however, were not due
to lack of English but to lack of knowledge.
Taking the results as a whole, they are very poor. Instead of
an average increase of six months in mental age over chronological
age, as in Kindergarten I, there is a decrease of eleven and nine-tenths
months. Only 14 per cent of the children had an I. Q. of over one
hundred, and the highest of these was one hundred and twenty-one.
In Kindergarten I, 28 per cent had an I. Q. of one hundred and
twenty-one and over. Among the Italian children there was only
one who passed an eight year test. This is exceedingly small in
comparison with the fifty-three eight year tests passed by four- and
five-year-old children in Kindergarten I.
A comparison of the failures on the coins and comprehension at
the six year level shows that thirty one failed on the comprehension
and fifteen on the coins. These results are exactly opposite to those
of Kindergarten I where nearly twice as many failed on the coins as
on the comprehension. Here again the figures show that the children
in Kindergarten II do not know the English language. What English
they have learned has been through buying things at the store. They
are more familiar with names of coins than with English language
that children of kindergarten age are usually able to use.
Results of these tests reveal a decided discrepancy in the language
ability of the children of the two kindergartens. In one, the children
will enter first grade knowing little or no English; in the other they
will have all the knowledge of the language that is to be expected at
their age. Yet the public schools in one city are supposed to be
standardized; one to be as good as another; the work in correspond-
ing grades to be the same. As a matter of fact some children enter
first grade with so little grasp on the English language that the
teacher must first make herself understood before she can teach
reading, writing and arithmetic, and while she is doing that the
amount of grade work that she teaches is falling below standard.
Just as the children in Kindergarten II fell below those in Kinder-
garten I on the Binet scale because they did not know the English
language, so will they fall below in school work and at the end of
their first year there will still be a great discrepancy. Congenital
differences in children cannot be eradicated, but the School System
can teach English to those who are handicapped because they do not
know it. This great discrepancy in language ability of the children
before they enter the first grade can at least be made a small one.
Children under six years of age learn a language easily. Unless the
schools give an adequate English vocabulary to those children who
will not receive it at home, they are not performing their function of
FAILURES DUE TO LANGUAGE DEFICIENCY. 237
education. At the present time the teacher of first grade in a foreign
section of the city must first make herself understood and then teach
reading, writing and arithmetic, using a very limited vocabulary in
the process. She cannot spend all her time teaching English, so she
must work in spite of the language deficiency of the children. She
teaches what she can, but no matter how great her efforts she cannot
produce as proficient candidates for second grade as can a teacher
who has no language deficiency to cope with. Our schools are not
standardized in actual practice and they will not be until the children
enter first grade with equal equipment. One great difference, the
knowledge of the language of the school, can be taught the children
before they are given grade work. If this is done they will be able
to learn reading, writing and arithmetic with much greater efficiency.
