Chidren Appling for Working Certificates
=========================================

(An Aspect of Vocational Guidance)
By Rebecca E. Leaming, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.
Introduction.
Practically the first work done in the field of vocational guidance
was in the nature of generalization. Studies or so-called "surveys"
were made of the various occupations, industrial pursuits, trades and
professions. Much time and effort was put into the writing of these
discussions and many books and booklets were published telling all
about the profession of nursing, the trade of millinery or carpentering
and so forth. These were at least a beginning and they were undoubt-
edly helpful and a step in the right direction, but they were theo-
retical. The final conclusions in all of these studies had to be that
an individual could go into a given field of work if he had the neces-
sary abilities, if he had the training, if he had the desire, and if he
had the chance.
One of the first departures from theorizing regarding vocational
possibilities was a sharp turning from the job to the individual. An
attempt was made to get a picture of the individual's assets and
liabilities. Psychological examinations and tests were given to dis-
cover in which class of the generalizations already mentioned an
individual's chances of succeeding were at a minimum. Then the
individual was advised to keep away from that particular profession
or trade. Some attempts were made to discover on the positive side
for what profession or trade the person was best fitted. This, how-
ler, usually resulted in the examiner or adviser discovering that the
person who would be apt to succeed in one field gave indications that
he would be just as able to succeed in several others.
More recently still, those interested in vocational guidance have
tried to get at the individual's wishes and desires in regard to a
vocation, after first estimating his assets and liabilities. This attack
of the problem from the emotional, or motivation, side is a very
important one and up to the present has received far too little atten-
tion in the study of vocational guidance, whether from the angle of
child or job. At the present time, too, the tendency seems to be to
study vocational guidance more or less apart from the individual.
That is, the things which are receiving a great deal of attention now
are (1) defining of "vocational guidance", (2) where and how voca-
tional guidance should be done, and (3) who should do it. The fact
(163)
164 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that an examination of the individual is negative rather than posi-
tive in its results seems to have somewhat dampened, for the present
anyhow, the ardor for more intensive work along the line of the
individual. This is particularly true among educators.
There is one side to the problem which has been given far less
attention than any other and that is a study of the actual jobs which
a child can get in a given moment in a given locality. If it has been
decided that he is best fitted for a certain kind of work and he desires
to do this particular thing, where can he be sent for the chance to do
it? What are the chances for a beginner in that line? Where are
the openings? What usually becomes of the young people who start
in with this job? Several people have said that before we go any
further in vocational guidance we had better get together and decide
whether, after all, vocational guidance in its best and most efficient
form will not have to be a very specifically localized thing. The
generalizations which formerly held the center of the stage will play
an important part as background for the person who is going to do
vocational guidance but it looks for the present as if the best results
will come from an intensive and thorough study of local conditions
and will be determined by them in a very large measure.
Very little work has been done in trying to discover what posi-
tions the child of working age fills and is able to fill. Very little has
been done in endeavoring to study specifically the actual positions
into which the eighth grade, the high school, the college and even
the technical school graduates actually go. A differentiation must
be recognized here between the studies already made of the profes-
sion of lawyer, or teacher, the trade of carpentering or millinery, and
a study which should be made locally of the people who take training
in these fields and are actually holding such positions. The general
studies cannot fail to be of value to anyone interested in vocational
guidance, but the problem will have to be reduced to an intensive
study of the locality in which the guidance is being done before we
can get the best possible results for our efforts.
The problems of vocational guidance are many and they are far
from being satisfactorily solved. While we are working on the prob-
lem of perfecting our means of determining the individual's abilities,
and his adaptability for certain lines of work, we should certainly be
making careful intensive and extensive studies of the openings which
are available for the young worker, both before and after he starts
working. This study aims to make a beginning toward the considera-
tion of conditions as they actually exist today in the working world
for 14- to 16-year-old children. This age is chosen for discussion
because of the Pennsylvania law which provides that no child may
APPLYING FOR WORKING CERTIFICATES. 165
work until he has passed his fourteenth birthday and has completed
the sixth year of school. The law further provides that from the
time he is 14 until he is 16 he must have a certificate of permission
issued by the school authorities for every position which he holds.
The Problem.
From July, 1918, to June, 1919, the Board of Public Education
of Philadelphia, through its Emploj^ment Certificate Department,
issued 19,345 general employment certificates, or "full-time working
papers". These were issued to employers of children between 14 and
16 years old in accordance with the Pennsylvania Child Labor Law.
Of the 19,345 certificates issued, 9,567 were for children leaving school
and securing papers for the first time.
Nine hundred and eight of these "working certificate" children
were interviewed for this study and they form a typical cross-section
of the group. From the information secured in these interviews, an
attempt has been made to secure some definite information on the
following problems:
1. The number leaving school seemed large in proportion to the
number enrolled in the school census (332,314 children between the
ages of 6 and 16). Of these 56,608 were between the ages of 14 and 16.
Of the total number, 301,123 were attending public, private or paro-
chial schools. Of the 14- to 16-year-old children, 43,774 were attend-
ing one of the three types of schools mentioned above, while 11,364
were not in school but employed and 1,470 were out of school, but
not employed. Why are 23 per cent of all the children from 14 to 16
enumerated by the census not in school?
2. Is there a general dissatisfaction with school among parents,
and a distaste for the school routine among the children of this group?
Why?
3. Is this group composed primarily of successful or unsuccess-
ful school children?
4. Is economic necessity a primary factor in causing this group
to leave school?
5. What is the nature of the jobs held by children in this group?
Are they intelligently chosen?
6. How are the jobs obtained?
7. Do these children plan for the future?
8. Is there a real need for vocational guidance in this group?
Procedure.
Five hundred and thirteen children who applied to the Bureau
for their working papers were interviewed consecutively regardless of
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
whether they were applying for working papers the first time or not.
About a month later, 395 other children were interviewed. The
second group was composed of those who were just leaving school
and who were applying for first certificates only. It is to be under-
stood that these children had already secured positions and were
merely applying for their official working permits. The children
were questioned carefully by one of the Counselors in the Junior
Employment Service, who was accustomed to interviewing cihldren,
and an attempt was made to secure the following information as
accurately as possible:
Name of child Old job
Sex Wages
School attended Reason for leaving old job
Grade completed New job
Date of birth How obtained
Number of certificate Wages
Reason for leaving school Plans for future
A cumulative record card is kept on file in the Department on
which all of the positions which the child holds and the length of his
stay in each position are enumerated.
The children were interviewed for this study after they had been
through the doctor's examination and while they were waiting for
the final issuing of the certificate.
The information was recorded on sheets prepared for the pur-
pose. Later tables of wages, reasons given for leaving school, ways
in which positions were secured, plans, etc. were worked out. Then
the schools were approached with the idea of securing the following
information about each child:
Age at which child entered first grade
Number of grades repeated and which grades
Marks given for the last three reports before the child left school, in
the following:
Effort
Conduct
Standing
Results.
Distribution of Sex and Age.
Bors. Girls. Totals.
Group I. Group II. Group I. Group II. Group I. Group II.
Aqb.
14 138 164 129 118 267 282
15 150 73 96 40 246 113
Total 288 237 225 158 513 395
APPLYING FOR WORKING CERTIFICATES. 167
Number of Certificate for which Child was Applying,
Group I. (Group II were all first certificates.)
First :  239
Second   145
Third  59
Fourth  36
Fifth      14
Sixth  3
Seventh      10
Eighth  4
Ninth    2
Tenth  0
Eleventh  1
Average . 2.08
Grades Completed.
Group I. Group II.
6B  298 94
7A  54 120
7B    56 56
8A  10 44
8B  62 31
9A    0 3
9B   0 1
10A  .  0 1
1 yr. H. S     18 2
lyr. H. S    11 35
yr. H. S    3 2
2 yr. H. S  0 3
2J yr. H. S  1 0
3 yr. H. S  0 2
4 yr. H. S  0 1
Average .. 6.80 6.78
Reasons for Leaving School.
Group I. Group II.
Dislike of School  249 183
Financial Reasons    191 180
Miscellaneous  73 32
Total   513 395
Reasons Given for Leaving School.
The reasons for leaving were accepted as given, without an
attempt at verification. It was practically impossible to verify the
reasons because of the time involved. For example, where financial
difficulties were cited as a cause it would take at least three or four
visits, by a skilled social worker, to the child's home to determine
whether the economic situation was such as actually to force the child
to leave school and secure work. For this reason the preceding tables
may be a better study of the emotional attitude of the children than
168 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of the real condition causing them to leave school. It gives us, at
any rate, a picture of the things which they considered sufficient
excuse to quit school and go to work.
The reasons are very similar on the whole in the two groups
studied except that in the second group we notice considerable refer-
ence to failing in school and not being promoted. This may be due
to the fact that the second group was interviewed nearer the time
when school was closing for the summer and promotion and failures
were playing an important part in the minds of the children. The
first group was interviewed after the second term was well on its way
and failure and promotion had ceased to figure so largely on the
child's horizon.
In the enumeration of reasons, distaste for school shows the
greatest number of cases. Financial reasons come next. Miscel-
laneous reasons or excuses represent the cases where, according to
the child's story, neither dislike of the school routine nor financial
pressure at home was the primary cause for leaving. In this group
we find such reasons as "very good job was offered", "advised by
doctor", "larger than other pupils in class", "eye trouble", "moving
to country", etc. Under miscellaneous reasons and in fact under all
the reasons given we have to consider the following factors:
1. Youthful labor at this time was in demand and good
wages were being paid.
2. Friends who are leaving school frequently make the child
want to leave with them.
3. /Twenty-seven said they left because they dreaded the
change from a comparatively small, familiar grammar school to
a large, unknown high school and we may assume that some
others who did not admit it were influenced by this same reason.
Judging by the school records which were secured, it appears
that a good deal of the dislike of school may be attributed to the
inability to get along satisfactorily there. Two hundred and forty-
three children out of the 513 in the first group gave dislike of school
as a reason for leaving; 143 of these children had repeated one or
more grades. Inadequate adjustment is undoubtedly a large
reason for leaving school.
School Reports.
Group I. (No school records for Group II.)
347 Public School Records obtained
61 Parochial School Records obtained
77 Public School Records not obtained
8 Parochial School Records not obtained
28 Children never heard of at school named on record.
APPLYING FOR WORKING CERTIFICATES. 169
Age Entered First Grade.
Yuars. Public School. Parochial School.
5 years  29 0
6 years   132 30
7 years  56 2
8 years  30 2
9 years .  10 0
10 years  5 0
Not given   85 19
Number of Grades Repeated.
Grades. Public School. Parochial School.
0  64 30
1  70 12
2  45 10
3  47 1
4  41 0
5   31 0
6   27 0
7   11 0
8  9 0
9    0 0
10  1 0
11  1 0
Total  347 53
Note?A grade in Philadelphia represents one half of a school year.
Public School Reports.
Number of Times Each Grade was Repeated.
1A .. 79 5A  77
IB . 78 5B  . 63
2A  85 6A  63
2B  72 6B  50
3A  80 7A  48
3B  73 7B   31
4A  75 8A  7
4B  62 8B  ... 6
H. S. 2d half Jr. year  1
School Standings.
Parochial School. Public School.
Grade. Effort. Conduct. Standing. Effort. Conduct. Standing.
E  0 10 11 19 0
VG  3 16 4 5 5 7
G  24 27 10 74 86 14
F  21 8 29 127 94 137
P  4 0 9 32 50 75
VP  0 0 0 8 8 32
Not given  0 0 0 90 85 82
Key: E = Excellent F = Fair
VG = Very good P = Poor
G = Good VP = Very poor
170 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
This study, especially the school records, has been commented
on by an authority* on Junior Employment. Her remarks are
extremely pertinent and sum up the situation very admirably.
I quote from her remarks: "The causes for this lack of interest
in school, for 'incorrigibility' and failure of the children are not
for this report to determine. The psychologist would say that they
were not properly classified within the different grades. The
physician might add that malnutrition, diseased tonsils, defective
hearing or many another malady could have retarded progress
in school. The economist might find that in these particular
families low wages or irregular opportunities for employment for the
wage-earner prevents a sustained good standard of living which
insures sufficient vitality for a successful attack on school work. The
modern educator would recommend a more varied or more flexible
curriculum which would interest the child who is not stimulated by
academic work. No doubt all four would agree with the social
worker that every one of these elements must be considered if we
wish to reduce the number of school failures who start forth to work,
unprepared, at the earliest opportunity. Merely passing a law
requiring school attendance until the age of 16 will not solve their
problem. Theirs is only a manifestation of the difficulty which
begins in the early grades. It is a challenge to the modern move-
ments in education."
Work?How Obtained.
Method. Group 1. Group 2.
Walked in and applied  152 43
Through friend who worked there  120 95
Saw "ad" in paper  89 71
Through a relative  87 71
Had worked there before  28 6
Through Employment Bureau  16 5
Saw sign outside  11 21
Inquiries of family  0 15
Advertised.. >        j  0 9
Employer?friend of family  0 9
Friend   0 7
Neighbors  0 7
Through school or college  1 7f
Getting a Job.
The results obtained in interviewing this group of children seem
to confirm the suspicions entertained regarding the method of secur-
* Miss Dorothea deSchweinite, In Charge of the Junior Employment Bureau for White-
Williams Foundation and the Bureau of Compulsory Education of Philadelphia.
t To the above add: for Group 1, Attendance Officer?3; Continuation School Teacher,
Solicited by employer?2 each; Minister, Municipal Court?1 each. For Group 2, Father's own
business, Knows foreman?5 each; Solicited by employer?3; Truant Officer, Knew manager,
From former employee, Friend of father?2 each; Offered position, Minister, Manager of Orphan
Horn*, Working for Aunt, Court?1 each.
APPLYING FOR WORKING CERTIFICATES. 171
ing work which is prevalent among them. We find that 195 children
walked in and asked for work. This is significant. Since they had
secured the position in this way we may conclude that this is the way
accepted by both employer and children for getting a job. The
next most frequent way for them to secure their position is by hearing
of an opening in an establishment where a friend or relative is already
employed. We find 283 children secured their positions through
friends or relatives who were working and "asked" for the child.
In 160 cases the child got a job by seeing an advertisement in the
paper and going in person to answer the "ad". These are the most
frequent ways of getting jobs. Twenty-one used an employment
bureau, 32 saw a sign "Boy (or girl) Wanted" hanging outside an
establishment and went in. Thirty-three children had worked in
the same place before and knew of openings so that when they became
dissatisfied somewhere else they went back to their former employer
and asked to be taken back. Thirty-three cases here reported indi-
cate that the employer is frequently willing to take the child back.
We must remember, however, that during the time that this study
was being made youthful labor was in great demand. The remainder
secured their positions in some more or less random way, through a
teacher, an attendance officer, the minister, a business school or the
municipal court.
Friends and relatives who figure so largely as means of obtaining
positions do not take into consideration the individual desires, com-
petencies and health of the children for whom they secure jobs nor
do they usually know very much about the jobs which they get.
Certainly trained people are needed to determine the child's com-
petency; to get at his desires; to look into his health problems and
finally to secure for him the best job possible. These same people
ought to help the child over his difficulties in adjusting himself to
his work. They should be available at all time for the child to
consult when he needs advice and guidance in his work. The turn-
over rate in this group is very high. Consultation with trained
counselors would reduce this constant changing by getting the
child into a place for which he was better fitted and then helping
him to stick there. Junior Employment Bureaus are giving these
children guidance and advice and helping them secure positions,
the best attempt which has been made so far to handle this proposi-
tion. As they now exist there are many criticisms of these bureaus
which can be offered. One of the most conspicuous of these is their
distance in most cases from the place where the child is working.
This renders them inaccessible enough to diminish their usefulness in
advising the child after he starts working. Furthermore, the work
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
they can do is extremely limited because there are always a certain
number of jobs available and no more. The counselor has to pick
the best of these jobs, the position for which the applicant appears
best suited. Can you call the following performance vocational guid-
ance? A boy or girl comes to the office in urgent need of a position
and the counselor, studying the list of positions available, and his
applicant, picks out the most promising ones. He presents these to
the candidate who signifies his preference and is then sent to the one
he selects. It is true that these children are followed up and that an
endeavor is made by the time they become 16 to get them to start
along some line where they will really learn something and to con-
tinue some sort of education, if it is at all possible for such arrange-
ments to be made. The task is difficult but these bureaus are a
decided step in the right direction.
Kind of Work for which Child was Employed.
Kind. Group 1. Group 2.
Did you know   46 40
Helper (textile and hosiery mills)  136 79
Messenger (inside and outside) office boy or girl  120 120
Stock boy or girl  21 20
Paper box work  24 0
Store clerk   21 22
Clerical work  19 18
Apprentice or learner  17 19
Work on artificial teeth  14 4
Packing, filling, labelling  13 0
Doffer  13 v 11
Helper (miscellaneous)    12 3
Bobbin boy or girl  0 4
Miscellaneous   57 55
Total    513 395
The Work Itself.
Our results seem to indicate that a very large percentage of the
positions into which the children who obtain certificates go are quite
definitely "blind alley" jobs. But it is quite possible that we shall
have to change our connotation of "blind-alley" since many indus-
trial jobs today fulfill all the requirements of what we called "blind-
alley" some years ago. There is, however, a distinction in jobs for
these children since many of them, from the point of view of future,
are decidedly more hopeless than others.
The boy goes into some kind of position as office, errand, messen-
ger, or stock boy or into a mill where he is a "helper"?a combina-
tion of inside messenger, errand boy and an apprentice. The girl
usually becomes either stock girl, inside messenger, cash girl, or inspec-
APPLYING FOR WORKING CERTIFICATES. 173
tress, paper box or bindery worker, machine operator, worker in
establishments where false teeth are made or helper in the textile or
hosiery mills. The last two predominate, probably because Phila-
delphia is a center for those industries. In-the textile mills, these
children mend, wind, thread, cut, fold, trim or act as rail-setters,
doffers, bobbin girl or boy. In the hosiery mills they do seaming,
sorting, trimming, folding, turning, singeing, examining, boxing,
mending and even knitting and topping in some cases. Employers
seem to find more places in large manufacturing establishments
where they can use girls who have to attend school than boys of the
same kind. The boys fill office and errand positions to a larger degree
than they fill positions in the mills.
In manufacturing establishments these children are usually called
"helpers". "Helper" is a word used to indicate that the boy or
girl will probably take up the trade at which he is "helping" but he
cannot be called an apprentice until he is 16. This is due in part to
the union regulations, the labor laws, the working men's compensa-
tion laws and a general dislike to taking on workers in steady posi-
tions where they will be required to lose two half days a week at
Continuation School. In this study sixteen cases were definitely
mentioned as apprentices, eleven machinists, three tailors, one optical
worker, one gold beater. Many of the "helpers" may be pseudo-
apprentices but a study which is being conducted at the present time
by the Junior Employment Service of the Bureau of Compulsory
Education of Philadelphia is showing quite conclusively how pitifully
small is the number of real, established, systematic apprenticeships
or schemes of training. Nineteen employers have answered their
questionnaire on this subject so far. Ten stated that 14- to 16-
year-old children were of no value in their industries; nine said that
they were useful but the work assigned to the young worker was
quite simple and required little training. Visits to business organiza-
tions practically always show the same attitude toward 14- to 16-
year-old children.
Taken as a whole, the positions which these children fill are
vague and ill-defined. They are neither systematized nor supervised
and very little training in them is provided. Yet the children, as
well as their parents, seem to feel that as a "helper" or "messenger"
they will continue their education in business or in the factory to as
good advantage as they would in school.
In many cases the child has no supervision. No attempt is
made to train him. He learns whatever he can pick up. In the so-
called "blind-alley" job, the bright child undoubtedly gleans a great
deal of information. It is possible, for him to acquire a really thor-
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ough industrial education if his powers of observation, his memory,
his retentiveness and his trainability are good enough. This is the
exceptional child?the one whom financial trouble or some other
social mal-adjustment forces to leave school and go to work. But
the percentage of this type of children who go to work around the
ages of 14 and 16 is extremely small. The largest percentage of
children are those who did average or below average work in school.
. What becomes of these children? Thrown into industrial and
commercial life without any direction or supervision?their powers
of learning for themselves are neither keen enough nor sufficiently
developed for them to acquire any real training, so they drift on from
one mechanical job to another, learning almost nothing. A child of
14 or 15 is too young to go into a regular apprenticeship in any of the
trades. This means that a child going to work at 14 has two years
in which to drift around doing odd jobs, here and there, losing the
habit of study and acquiring habits of indifference, carelessness and
lack of responsibility and an attitude of living from moment to
moment. By the time those two years are over, many children are
completely spoiled. They have had so much experience by the time
they reach 16, that they will not consider settling down to the grind
of learning a trade. The outlook for them as workers of the future
is far from promising.
Wages.
Rate. Groop 1. Group 2.
Did not know   118 92
Piece rate..  3 2
Hour rate ($.20-.30)  10 3
Day rate ($1.50)   1 0
No pay  0 2
Weekly rate
$2.00-5.00  8 4
$6.00    21 18
$6.00-8.00  51 55
$8.00  99 57
$8.00-10.00  60 45
$10.00  65 43
$10.00-12.00  18 12
$12.00   22 0
$12.00-14.00  14 6
$14.00-18.00  20 13
$18.00-40.00  0 3
Monthly rate ($24.00-50.00)  3 5
Wages.
It was found in interviewing these children that those who were
getting a certificate for the first time were the ones who did not know
what they would earn. There were 210 children in the two groups
APPLYING FOR WORKING CERTIFICATES. 175
who were not informed as to wages. After they had held over two
positions and were applying for the third, or fourth certificate there
were very few cases in which the child did not know his wages before-
hand. The child becomes more wise and wary, less trusting and
dependent, as his working career progresses. He learns to find out
before he signs up for a job, the wages, hours, something of the
working conditions, the work he is expected to do and so forth.
When he first starts out a job is a job and they all seem pretty much
the same to him. Experience teaches him some of the "tricks of
the trade".
From the tables it appears that there is a great variety of wages
but in reality most of these earn from $5 to $8 a week. In cases
where the wages are given as more it means that pay for time lost
while at continuation school will be deducted from the amount speci-
fied as the wage. Where it runs $5, $6, $7, it means in general that
pay for the time spent at Continuation School has already been taken
off and the amount stated is what the child will actually receive
each week.
The fact that nearly one-third of these children did not know
how much they would earn points to the fact that the financial aid
which the child would bring into the home was not a vital factor in
many cases. At the time these interviews were held the parents were
earning good wages and this further emphasizes the fact that the
families were not in desperate straits financially. There probably
were cases in which the financial help furnished by the child contrib-
uted very materially to the support of the family. It is to be regretted
that it was impracticable to investigate the financial situation in
families of these children and to determine in how many cases the
child's financial help was necessary. The number of cases giving
financial necessity as the reason for leaving school serves as a mask
for a great many reasons, one of which, dissatisfaction with the
school, has been pointed out. For this reason, the figures give a
very inaccurate idea of the real situation.
The child cannot, on $7 or $8, maintain himself as an independ-
ent economic unit and he usually gives no thought to this fact or to
calculating or planning for the time when he can. Many families
simply allow the child to buy, with his earnings, his own clothing or
some the extra finery or small luxuries which cannot be provided for
him in the family. In some cases where real financial pressure exists,
the child turns his entire wages into the family budget. There is a
strong feeling, in most families, however, that the child should have
what he earns. The child does not, as a rule, spend his money wisely
and for that reason his wage frequently does not assist the family
very much.
176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
These children, when viewed en masse in the large room where
the certificates were issued, presented a very prosperous appearance.*
There were very few poor, ragged or destitute-looking children in the
group, such children, for example, as one is accustomed to see fre-
quently in the public libraries in poor neighborhoods. Failure in
school and a school curriculum not comprehensive or flexible enough
to suit the needs or interests of these children played a far larger part
in their leaving school than financial trouble.
Reasons for Leaving Old Job. (Group 1.)
Didn't like it  57 Fought with boss  15
Returned to school    43 Work unhealthy  7
Fired    33 Hours too long  6
Found better job   26 Left to work for father  4
Not enough wages  26 Work too dusty.    3
Work too hard  22 Work too cold  3
Too far from home. .  16 Miscellaneousf  13
Leaving Former Positions.
A survey of the reasons given for leaving former positions indi-
cates that the 14- to 15-year-old child is not well adjusted to his work.
It may be that in the nature of things he cannot be well adjusted.
We can see, however, a decided need of someone for the child to con-
sult before leaving his job, for one of the numerous reasons given.
It is more than possible that some slight adjustment could have been
made in many of these cases which would have corrected the thing
which caused the child's dissatisfaction. Furthermore, we see here
again a need for someone to consult with these children not only
when they contemplate leaving a position but also when they take
the job. Someone to point out to them the advantages and disad-
vantages, what they may expect and what they cannot hope for.
The large turnover which is found at present among these children
could be considerably reduced by more careful work with them in
selecting their jobs and in adjusting them to the job after they have
selected it. The need for personnel workers is being recognized uni-
versally but nowhere is there greater need for personnel work than
among this group of 14- to 15-year-old child workers.
Plans for the Future.
Plans. Group 1. Group 2.
No plans whatsoever  209 99
Hosiery worker  45 14
Electrician's apprentice when 16 yrs  32 21
* It must be remembered that these children were interviewed in the spring of 1920 before
the period of economic depression had begun.
t No chance to get ahead, Wanted electrical work. Wanted work out-of-doors?2 each; Work
not steady, Got sick, Leaving Town, Work too dirty, Girls not nice, To go to Business College,
Father objected to place?1 each.
APPLYING FOR WORKING CERTIFICATES. 177
Plans for the Future.?Continued.
Plans. Group 1. Group 2.
Learn some trade (nothing definite)  10 34
Machinist  26 25
Stenographer  26 19
Auto-mechanic  25 9
Business College  15 19
Weaver  13 0
Typist    10 12
To advance in present work   0 13
Factory worker  0 12
Draftsman  5 10
Dressmaker  7 7
Office work  0 7
Travelling salesman  6 2
Clerk ,  6 7
Machine operator  5 0
Tailor  2 5
Civil Engineer  0 5
Railroading  1 5
Business man  2 6
Return to school for an education  4 3
Telephone operator  4 2
Paper box worker  4 - 3
Cabinet maker  3 2
Printer  3 0
Leather worker  3 0
Shipper  3 0
Compositor  0 3
Miscellaneous*  49 43
Plans for the Future.
Perhaps one of the most striking characteristics in the young
person today is the complete lack of plans for the future. This is
not confined to one group alone. It is just as true of the average
college student as it is of the boy or girl of 14 or 15 who is starting
out to work. It seems as if our present day education, environment
or something tends to discourage, at least not encourage, plans for
the future. Most of the college students have plans for their next
immediate step and probably in some vague and hazy way have the
general outline of an idea of some place in the world which they would
like to fill. The children in this group are conspicuous in that they
* For group 1: Plumber, toolmaker, gold beater, baker, carpenter, spinner, sailor, farmer,
cigar worker, real estate dealer, telegraph operator, optical worker?2 each; domestic, sign painter,
file setter, embroiderer and beader, pottery worker, bookbinder, shoe worker, engraver, jeweler,
saleswoman, glazier, nurse, clothing designer, bricklayer, dental laboratory assistant, milliner,
violinist, painter, pattern maker, steam fitter, 1 each.
For Group 2: Mechanical drawing, office boy at Reading Terminal, lawyer, electrical engineer,
painter, junk dealer, musician, carpenter, jewelry, 2 each; chauffeur, shoemaker, looper, artist,
comptometer operator, pattern maker, farmer, bank work, pawnbroker, poultry business, chemist,
baker, aviator, plasterer, inspectress, engraver, housekeeper, florist, work with father, undecided?
1 each.
178 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
have no plans for the future, no plans even for their next immediate
step, not even ambitions, ideals or desires. This is rather a sweeping
statement and undoubtedly the usual number of exceptions can be
found to prove it. It is very convincing, however, to work with this
group for a long time and to be impressed time and time again by
the fact that the future simply does not figure at all in the calculation
of these children. They do not even think of it, much less plan for it.
We are not surprised, with this in mind, to discover that 308 had
no plans for the future. Fifty-nine were planning to be hosiery
workers, probably following in the footsteps of some members of the
family or some admired friend. In somewhat the same way, thirteen
were planning to be weavers. Electrician, automobile mechanic and
machinist seem to hold an almost romantic interest for boys and these,
as an expression of future plans, can very nearly be considered as the
expression of cherished desires or dreams rather than actual practical
plans. We are not surprised that they come well up in the list of
expressed plans. Stenographer with the girls holds something of this
same romantic charm. Personal fitness and possibilities do not
interfere with the plans at all. Business College is another of these
more or less hazy plans, a sort of medium through which the boy or
girl is supposed to pass and come out with his whole possibilities in
life vastly improved. It is looked upon as a remedy for all dissatis-
factions with working conditions and the Business Schools are only
too keen and eager to encourage this view.
With the exception of typist, which was the plan of ten children
taking up a trade, dressmaker, travelling salesman and clerk, the
rest of the plans are varied and cover a wide range of possibilities.
Most of these children, however, were not even considering whether
they would eventually be self-supporting or how soon this could
be accomplished.
Conclusions.
From the results obtained in interviewing these 908 children it
may be concluded that the indications which led to this study had
real significance.
1. A large number of these children leave school to go to work
as soon as their age and grade permit them to get working papers.
2. Their reasons for leaving are due largely to dissatisfaction
with school, either their own or their parents. The pressure of
financial difficulties is a factor but it is frequently over-estimated by
parents and children, due to discontent with school.
Even in times when work is plentiful and wages high, large num-
bers of children leave school, which shows that financial pressure at
APPLYING FOR WORKING CERTIFICATES. 179
home is not the great cause for leaving. Furthermore, the small
amount which they earn per week does not materially increase the
family budget. The dislike of school and the urge to work and earn
money for the "frills" which the family cannot supply are far more
frequent causes for leaving than any real need for money.
3. The study of school reports shows us that these children do
not come from the successful group in school. The fact that they
dislike school undoubtedly is often due to inability to get along in
school. The curriculum does not suit their needs or abilities. These
children do not conform to the hypothetical average type for whom
the curriculum is planned so they drop out, "not liking school" or
"compelled by financial necessity to leave".
4. The kinds of work which these children are employed to do
indicate that most of them will be added to the great mass of un-
trained, poorly-paid, routine workers with which industry is so
crowded. A study of this community has disclosed almost no appren-
ticeships or training systems and the outlook for education on the
job is not bright. There is a crying need for systems of training
workers.
5. The reasons given for leaving jobs indicate the immaturity
of the worker and his poor adjustment to industrial conditions. Few
of them are the more significant factors which influence older workers,
such as the unhealthfulness of the work,?the irregularity of employ-
ment, or the lack of chance for advancement. Their reasons are
mostly matters of like and dislike. They all tell a story of poor
adjustment to work and working conditions.
6. The usual wage for these children is $6, $7 or $8 a week.
7. One of the great needs of this group is to be taught to think
in futures. A great many of the problems of the social worker and
educator of the present time can be eliminated if the children of
today, who are the adults of tomorrow, can be taught to consider the
future and plan accordingly. After all, can planfulness be imparted?
It may be a congenital imagination complex. If so, these children
cannot be taught planfulness per se but something should be done to
keep them from drifting aimlessly on with nothing in view beyond
the next moment.
8. They need some organized system of securing definite infor-
mation as to where opportunities for work exist in their community
and how they can best take advantage of them. These children
need to have all the vocational possibilities put before them; they
need to know something of the competencies and training required
for each profession, trade, occupation or job and also of the nature
and conditions of the work involved.
