Test and Norms for Vocational Guidance at the Fifteen-Year-Old Performance Level
================================================================================

The Psychological^Clinic
Copyright, 1923, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XIV, No. 7
December, 1922
(A Comparative Study of the Proficiency of Six Hundred Children)
By Rebecca E. Leaming, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.
In 1919 and 1920, the Junior Employment Bureau in Philadelphia, which is maintained by the White-Williams Foundation in
co-operation with the Bureau of Compulsory Education, attempted
to give psychological tests to children who were suspected of beingabnormal. Neither the time nor the facilities for thorough testing
were available then, but the need for a mental examination of all
applicants, whether normal or abnormal, was made evident by this
attempt. There were, however, no collections of tests of either general
competency or specific abilities which could be briefly administered
and yet yield a comprehensive enough picture of the child's abilities
and disabilities to be of real value in placement work. There are
very few tests for older boys and girls with such standards that when
a test is given the results can be compared with other results to find
out where an individual stands in relation to his group, or to other
groups. The Binet-Simon Scale provided the only available standard
and that is not very satisfactory at the fifteen-year-old level. Presumably this group of children between fourteen and sixteen years
of age who applied to the Junior Employment Bureau for help in
securing jobs were all normal children, and yet some of those who
were tested gave I. Q.'s of less than 70. This, according to Terman,*
indicates feeblemindedness. The attempt to test each child psychologically was abandoned by the Bureau until a collection of tests
could be found which would be brief yet comprehensive.
Working in this same direction, the Psychological Clinic of the
University of Pennsylvania has maintained for the last two years a
clinic for investigating the competency of boys and girls at the
fifteen-year-old level with a view to vocational guidance.
* Terman, L. M. The Measurement of Intelligence. Houghton, Mifflin Co., 1916, p. 81,
(193)
194 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The most urgent need at the present time, in this work, is a
standard of norms with each test, for each group tested and comparative standards for all groups of children encountered in vocational guidance work. My experience with the Junior Employment
Bureau and my connection with the Vocational Guidance Clinic of
the Department of Psychology prompted me to undertake the determination of some of these norms. The direct inspiration for the
study was supplied by Dr. Lightner Witmer, under whose supervision and helpful criticism the investigation was conducted.
Vocational guidance is a term which, in recent years, has come
into widespread use. It is a general term which includes many
things. Primarily, it means a determination of the general ability
level of the individual and of any specific abilities or defects which
he may have, in an endeavor to place him in a position educationally
and economically where he will be able to use his abilities to the
best advantage to himself and society. This is closely allied and
sometimes confused with Educational Guidance, which is clearly a
phase of Vocational Guidance. Vocational diagnosis precedes educational as well as occupational guidance. In order to handle the
vocational guidance problem successfully it is necessary to make an
analysis of the individual's competency, but it is also important to
have an analytic chart of the abilities required for eveiy possible job.
Dr. Viteles'* idea of the psychograph of an individual corresponding
to the psychograph of some job is an ideal for vocational guidance,
which in its complete realization is a long distance off.
The time for vocational guidance is as early as possible in the
life of the individual child when an educational career may be planned
which will take cognizance of particular abilities and defects. Vocational guidance, however, may be useful at any time of life, but for
many reasons a crucial period is at the age of from fourteen to sixteen years. This may be designated as the fifteen-year-old level,
but we must set no arbitrary limits. The fifteen-year-old level is
the age of physical maturity. This level, is in general, the age of
earliest maturity, but children at this level may include individuals
ranging in age from twelve to eighteen or twenty years and perhaps
even more widely.
There are other reasons for pointing to this age level as a crucial
period. It represents the moment when a child begins to be considered a unit member of society. He must take some place in the
world as an adult. The term "child" carries with it the idea of a
* Viteles, Morris S. Job Specifications and Diagnostic Tests of Job Competency Designed
for the Auditing Division of a Street Railway Company?A Psychological Study in Industrial
Guidance. The Psychological Clinic, 1922, Vol. xlv, Nos. 3-4, May-June, pp. 83-106.
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 195
need for support and direction. A "child" must have parents,
foster-parents, a guardian of some sort. He is not an independent
unit of society. He is merely an attachment to, or a responsibility
of, some other unit such as a parent, guardian or institution. But
at the fifteen-year-old level, the social standard for normality requires
the child, if necessary, to get out into the world and prove himself
capable of handling his own problems in such a way as to secure a
minimum of success which involves paying his own way, at least in
part, and keeping out of serious trouble with the other members of
the community.
A criterion of social proficiency is the ability to earn a living,
even though it be a poor one. Fifteen-year-old boys and girls may
not be able to support themselves in ease and comfort, but they
must be capable of offering for sale a service that is reasonably
acceptable at some price.
If he does not begin, at the fifteen-year-old level, to contribute
to the productive work of society, he ought to have demonstrated
that he possesses enough ability to be worth his keep while he is
being trained and educated for some particular field which his particular gifts seem to indicate. If, for example, he has a high
degree of intelligence and intellect, commonly called "mental
ability," they may justify further systematic education and
preparation for a professional career. If he has a talent for
business, he may be taught the "tricks of trade" before he is
turned out into the world , to carry on some of the industrial and
commercial pursuits of society. A talent for art, for music, or
literary creation may justify training him along these special lines.
Mechanical ability may warrant our providing a manual high school
training course, in order to fit him for this particular field. If the
analysis of the individual's competency does not justify further
educational development, the object of vocational guidance is to
find for each individual applicant a productive field, pleasing to
himself, in which he may be expected to develop maximum efficiency.
Mentally, as well as socially, the fifteen-year-old boy or girl may
be considered an adult. In the Stanford Revision of the BinetSimon Scale, Terman* considers sixteen years the mental age of the
average adult. He says "native intelligence, in so far as it can be
measured by tests now available, appears to improve but little after
the age of fifteen or sixteen years."
The compulsory school laws of many statesf require children to
* Terman, L. M. The Measurement of Intelligence. Houghton, Mifflin Co., 1916, p. 140.
t Child Labor, Compulsory School Attendance and Mothers' Pension Law* of the State* in
Brief. National Child Labor Committee, New York City, N. Y., 1919.
196 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
remain in school up to the age of fourteen, and aim to give him the
proficiency of at least fifth grade (in many states, Pennsylvania for
example, sixth grade proficiency is required). When they reach the
age of fourteen, however, and have advanced beyond the fifth or
sixth grade, the individual, for the first time, may decide what he
will do next. He may drop out of school, get working papers and
take his place in the world as a wage earner. He may go to high
school, intending later to go to college or a professional school. He
may prepare himself for some trade either through an apprenticeship
or in a trade school. He may take up a business course requiring
only a grammar school preparation. No matter what he decides to
do or what he actually does, this is the time when a decisive action
is made by somebody.
Before this period any vocational or educational guidance, except
for the mentally defective, the physically handicapped or the unusually talented, has to be largely informational. It consists of a
mere telling what fields of occupation exist and something of the
requirements for each. Now comes the time when the guidance
must take the form of action. It is therefore necessary that we
know something about the differences in children at this age. We
must know something of their physical development, their mental
equipment, their competency, their efficiency. We must secure some
psychological tests which differentiate abilities and we must define
the fifteen-year-old level of competency and proficiency.
Some years ago, Dr. Ide* in connection with her work at the
Psychological Clinic gave some indices of competency at the sixyear-old level. At this level the individual's competency can first
be satisfactorily determined. The criterion at this level is congenital
competency. One of the items to be ascertained at this time is the
child's educability. Dr. Idef concludes that "children of five may
be expected to pass the Witmer Formboard Test and that the memory
span of five-year-old children is four digits."
The next important age level is the fifteen-year-old level and
here the index to be determined is the minimum of proficienc}'- acceptable of a unit member of the social group. The assumption is that if
he has not this minimum of proficiency he is held out of society in
some institution for defectives, offenders or dependents or is kept,
as a dependent, under guardianship in his own home. This investigation seeks to determine what normal fifteen-year-old children are
like and what they can do.
* Ide, G. G. The Educability Level of Five-Year-Old Children. Psych. Clinic, 1920, 13,
146-172.
f Ide, G. G. The Educability Level. Psych. Clinic, 1919, 13, 179-195.
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 197
What do we expect of the normal child of fifteen? We ought to
eliminate from consideration all children who are decidedly infantile,
even if they are fifteen years old or older. There are many boys and
girls, more boys than girls, who at fourteen still have the physical
development and mental maturity of the pre-pubescent child. This
does not indicate that they are permanently in a backward or dull
group. Frequently physical growth is accelerated later on, and then
they catch up to their group norm, and by eighteen or twenty have
reached normal development.
Unfortunately children at the fifteen-year-old level do not constitute a single homogeneous group. It is impossible to get a large
group at this level who will be just children. For this reason three
groups were singled out and tested separately.
A year's experience in the Junior Employment Bureau had suggested that the children who applied there for help in securing jobs
were the poorest group of working children. They may well be
called the "job-hunting" children. They either could not get a job
for themselves, could not hold a job once they secured it, or did not
know where to look for a job. This group of presumably low grade
working children was selected as the first group to be tested at the
fifteen-year-old level. It was decided to test one hundred boys and
one hundred girls. Many more boys than girls apply to the bureau
for jobs and as the time for making this study has to be somewhat
limited, one hundred and thirty boys and only seventy girls were
tested.
The next problem was to find a group of higher grade working
children. The state law requires that all children between fourteen
and sixteen years of age must attend continuation school two half
days a week while working. One hundred boys and one hundred
girls in continuation school were tested as representatives of the
better grade of working children. As these children were employed
and were attending continuation school regularly the inference seems
reasonable that they were regularly employed with some measure
of satisfaction to themselves and their employers. These children
are therefore called the "job-holding" children.
A previous study* has shown that a large percentage of the
"job-hunting" children had left school to go to work because they
were unsuccessful in school work. To find the relative proficiency of
a group of children who are successful in school work it was decided
to test one hundred boys and one hundred girls at the fifteen-yearold level who are attending high school.
* Learning, R. E. Children Applying for Working Certificates. Psych. Clinic, 1922, 14,
163-179.
1.98 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
These three groups seem likely to give us a fair survey of "the
fifteen-year-old level" within the limits of normality. There are not
likely to be any geniuses nor any feebleminded among the six hundred
children selected at random within the three groups. We may conclude, therefore, that the six hundred children recruited for testing
from the Junior Employment Bureau, the Continuation Schools,
and the High Schools, give us a representative picture of the distribution of abilities actually existing among normal children at the
fifteen-year-old level.
The Selection of Tests for the Fifteen-Year-Old Level.
When the attempt is made to select a group of tests to use with
children of from fourteen to sixteen years it astonishes one to find
how very few tests there are which are especially designed for this
level or which are even tests, in a strict sense of the word, for children
of these ages.
The battery selected for this investigation leaves much to be
desired. It is possible, however, that they are the best of the existing
tests for an individual or clinical examination limited in time and
yet comprehensive enough to explore the various abilities of each
child to be tested.
Some objective scale or graded standard is needed to use as a
background against which the results of our other tests may be examined, checked, criticised and evaluated. The Binet-Simon Scale*
is probably the best known, the most generally used and the best
standardized of the scales; so the starred tests of the Terman Revision
of this series were included for this purpose. This scale gives us a
mental age or, in the Witmer terminology, a performance age level,
and an intelligence quotient or, according to Witmer, an index of
proficiency. Whatever may be said for or against the Binet Tests,
they at least are the most widely used and the best standardized of
all psychological tests, and for this reason serve as an excellent point
of departure and provide a background for the other tests. We
are enabled by this series of tests to decide whether our subject can
give the performance which is the assumed standard for his age level.
We can, furthermore, decide how far short of this requirement he
falls or how much more than the required amount he can produce.
Although the Binet Tests appear to be tests of intellect rather than
of intelligence, although they depend largely on language ability,
and although the better the environment the better the chance for a
high score, as Termanf himself admits; still, they provide a very
* Terman, L. M. The Measurement of Intelligence. The Stanford Revision and Extension
of the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale. Houghton, Mifflin Co., 1916.
fTerman, L. M. Measurement of Intelligence, p. 95.
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 199
handy scale for measuring the proficiency of the individual. So
there is something to be said in favor of using the Binet Scale as a
part, at least, of the psychological examination of these groups when
we are called upon to test them for vocational guidance. There is
one side of the Binet which has not been very widely discussed but
which is important. There is a great difference in the quality of
the responses on these tests, even when the quantitative results
remain the same. This test enables the examiner to make estimates
on some of the important items of the analytic diagnosis which the
performance tests do not. For example, on the Binet the examiner
may observe and rate complexity, alertness, understanding, observation and intellect. A satisfactory analytic diagnosis can be made
by observing the child's reactions on the Binet Scale, although some
of the items can be rated with much greater accuracy than others.*
The Witmer Cylinders t are somewhat more difficult than most
formboard and puzzle tests, although they are below the level of this
group so far as testing intelligence is concerned. This test, however,
is an excellent means of observing and judging the performance of
the individual from the qualitative side. His control, co-ordination,
rate, attention, imageability, planfulness, observation and efficiency
can be well rated by observing the performance on this test. As an
intelligence test for this level it does not entirely fill the requirements. The problem involved is too easily solved by most children
at this age. This fact is not surprising, as the test is considered at
its best at the six-year-old level. It may be interesting to note,
however, that in spite of this fact there was one failure with the
cylinders among the boys and one among the girls of the "jobhunting" group; that is to say, they failed to solve the problem
and complete the test within the time limit of five minutes.
Two performance tests of the formboard or puzzle type should
be included in a collection of tests so that one may be used as a
check against the other. The element of chance or accident may
affect the results of one performance test, but if two are given the
results obtained can be compared one with the other and a much
safer conclusion can be reached as to the child's ability with that
type of test.
The Dearborn Formboard lC,t unlike the cylinders, seems to
provide a real intelligence test for this level. The problem here is
complex enough to make the child exercise his intelligence before he
* See Humpstone, H. J., The Analytical Diagnosis, Psych. Clinic, 1919, 12, 171-173, for the
meaning of the analytic diagnosis.
t Paschal, F. C. The Witmer Cylinder Test. Hershey Press, Hershey, Pa., 1918.
J W. F. Dearborn, J. E. Anderson, A. O. Christiansen. Formboard and Construction Tests
of Mental Ability. Jour, of Educ. Psych., 1916, 7, 448.
200 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
can solve it. The way in which the children attack the problem and
work at it indicates that they are thinking it out. As one examiner
remarked, "Let me make my analytic diagnosis on the Dearborn
Formboard. You can fairly see the wheels going around in the
child's head while he is solving it." The test gives the examiner an
insight into the way the child sets about solving new problems. It
is probably the best variety of formboard test for children of this
level. This test, therefore, plays a double role in the examination
of children from fourteen to sixteen years?it provides a real intelligence test of the performance type and it furnishes an opportunity
for the examiner to observe and analyze the performance of the
child under laboratory conditions. It is a valuable test to have in a
collection to be used for the purpose of vocational guidance. Unfortunately, up to the time of my investigation there existed no real
standardization of either the procedure or the results. The procedure used in this testing was that used by Dr. H. J. Humpstone.
The four long blocks are removed and the blocks remaining in the
board are arranged to give four short holes. The time limit set for
solution is ten minutes.
Memory span seems to be one of the foundations of intellectual
development, whether through education or training. The visual
and auditory memory span was included in the collection of tests.
It appears to measure the number of discrete units over which the
individual can successfully distribute his attention and still organize
them into a working unit. It cannot be omitted from any battery
of tests which aims to be at all comprehensive. It figures in the
Binet-Simon tests at practically every age level, but the digit series
as provided in the Terman Revision of this test are not as satisfactory as the Humpstone* arrangement. There are places where
the digits follow in sequence, make combinations or provide other
tricks which help the child to get more than his true span would
permit. For example, in the fourteen-year-old tests we find this
combination 2 18 3 4 3 9 and the second one is 9 7 2 8 4 7 5.
There are a number of associations that can be set up in either of
these series which pad the true memory span. For this reason,
Humpstone's arrangement of digits is the best to use in calculating
the true memory span, because these series have been worked over
and over in an attempt to rule out all sequences and combinations.
Both visual and auditory memory span should be given, largely for
the purpose of noting any marked difference in the individual's
ability to do one better than the other. Defects in one of the types
* Humpstone, H. J. Some Aspects of the Memory Span. A Study in Associability. Psycho .
logical Clinic Press, Philadelphia, Pa., 1917.
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 201
of imagery can frequently be picked out for further testing in this
way. As a rule the visual is one digit or more greater than the
auditory. The Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Scale demands
a memory span of seven from the fourteen-year-old child and eight
from the superior adult.
Binet claims that "the ability to comprehend and act upon
uniform directions without further explanation or demonstration
forms a most important element in the complex mental processes."
In order to test this important ability to follow directions the Woodworth and Wells Hard Directions Test* was included in this group
of tests. The test seems to have some value but the scores do not
distribute widely enough. By following the most obvious and least
tricky directions the subject will make a score of 12 or 13. It is
difficult, however, to make a score of 17 to 20. It requires alertness,
intelligence and accuracy to make a high score.
In addition to the results of the purely psychological examination, we need a measure of school proficiency. Those who have
worked with school children know quite well that a child who has
completed a certain grade may not have the proficiency supposed to
be required to complete the grade. There should be, therefore, at
our command some quick means of estimating his school proficiency,
at least in the fundamental three R's. The Courtis tests, while very
helpful and satisfactory when there is plenty of time for an examination, are too long to give as part of a brief examination. The first
two problems in each operation in arithmetic from a shortened
Courtis Scale f were given in the testing of this group, but no attempt
was made to discover in which operations the child was proficient
or not proficient. It was purely a test of his ability to handle the
four fundamental operations in arithmetic accurately and with a
reasonable speed. This was not an entirely satisfactory procedure
and some better method might easily be devised to test proficiency
in arithmetic.
The Monroe Silent Reading TestJ for 6th, 7th and 8th grades,
while a good test for silent reading, leaves much to be desired when
the aim is merely to test the proficiency in reading. What we really
want to know is the degree of facility with which the child makes
use of reading, writing and arithmetic as tools. We want to know
how thoroughly he is trained in these necessary operations and how
* R. S. Woodworth and F. L. Wells. Association Tests. Monograph Supplement of the
Psychological Review. 1911, p. 68. No. 57.
t Courtis Standard Tests?Arithmetic Special Edition, Univ. of Pa.?School of Education?
Bureau of Educational Measurement, Research Tests in Arithmetic.
J Univ. of Pa.?School of Education?Bureau of Educational Measurements Standardized
Silent Reading Test, Devised by Walter S. Monroe. Test 11 for grades 6, 7 and 8.
202 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
completely he has them at his command. When we are aiming to
test the child's reading from this point of view the Monroe Test
recommends itself only because there is no better.
Mrs. Wooley* includes in her "new scale of measurements for
adolescents" at the fourteen, fifteen and sixteen-year levels a cancellation test, memory span 7, 8 and 9 digits, a substitution test, a
language completion test and an "association by opposites" test.
Healy and Fernald Construction puzzle tests A and B she places at
the fourteen-year level; Healy and Fernald Problem Box at the
fifteen and sixteen-year level, and the "Flower Pot" and "Egg"
construction puzzles at the sixteen-year level. Woodworth and Wells
Hard Directions Test she places at the eighteen-year level. Here
also she places the Yerkes Point Scale, as a part of her collection
tests. Tests such as the cancellation, the substitution and the
language completion tests were omitted from this collection not only
because of the limited time the child was at our disposal, but also
because of our interest in the analytic side of our diagnosis. Preference was given to tests calling for performances that could be
observed and noted, such as the formboard puzzle tests and the oral
responses to the Binet tests.
With tests which are entirely written, the final judgment has to
be of necessity primarily quantitative?how much has the child
done, how long did it take him, or how much did he get correct? It
is difficult to makes a qualitative analysis of his performance. Both
kinds of test have a place in the examination of children. The
time available for testing and the purpose of the examination will
determine what tests shall be given. There are many more written
tests of the cancellation, substitution and language completion type
available for the examination of children of these ages than there
are tests which call for an overt performance which may be carefully analyzed and studied. A great assortment of construction
puzzles of the formboard type are needed which will provide real
'problems for testing the intelligence of normal fifteen-year-old children
and adults.
As Mrs. Wooley states in the discussion of her scale, "No one
test yields a satisfactory measure of ability, a group of tests probably
does give a significant result." There is no one test which can
be quickly applied to measure the ability of these children as they
come up for consideration in vocational and educational guidance.
We must use a series or groups of tests, but we cannot make out a
list of tests which will consume, in their administration, so much
?Wooley, Helen T. A New Scale of Measurements for Adolescents. Jour, of Ed. Psych.,
1915, 6, 521-550.
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 203
time per child that the value of the result is completely overshadowed
by the time consumed in the examination. On the other hand, we
can not cut out our tests down to such a minimum that the series is
inadequate in comprehension. If we do we cannot expect to obtain
from the examination a convincing picture of the mental level, the
specific assets and defects of the particular child.
The tests finally chosen for this investigation are: On the physical
side?Height, weight, an estimate of maturity, an estimate of general
health, a notation of specific defects: on the mental side?two construction puzzle or formboard tests, a starred or shortened form of
the Binet-Simon Tests, memory span, tests of school proficiency in
reading, writing and arithmetic and the Woodworth and Wells Hard
Directions Test. This seems to be about the minimum to which a
series of tests can be reduced and still be comprehensive enough to
be of real value in giving us a clinical picture of each child coming
up for vocational guidance. A convenient blank for recording the
results of individual examinations was provided. How the child
does a test is, if anything, more important for a diagnosis of competency than a score in terms of speed or accuracy. Each examiner,
therefore, filled out a Witmer Analytic Diagnostic Chart* for each
child. This chart offers a survey of twenty-four items, as for example, Endurance, Control, Alertness, Trainability and so forth. A
rating on the five point scale was given under each item: 1, very
deficient; 2, deficient; 3, average; 4, superior; 5, very superior.
At the end of the day when all the tests were scored a composite
analytic diagnosis was made for each child by combining the three
which had been made independently by three different examiners
upon the observation of the child's performance with the Witmer
Cylinders, the Dearborn Formboard or the Binet Scale. Naturally
there were few l's or 5's. The usual ratings were 2, 3, or 4. The
majority rating on each item was taken for the final sheet, i. e., if
there were two 3's and a 2 a rating of 3 was given. If all disagreed
the average was taken. Later on, these final analytical diagnoses
were combined and a composite diagnosis sheet for each of the three
groups was made. The results of this analytical study will be reported
some time in the future.
Procedure.
There are many objections to having different examiners test
the children in a group, especially when individual clinical examinations are given. It is impossible, however, for one person to give
* Humpstone, H. J. The Analytic Diagnosis. Psychological Clinic, 1919, 12, 171-173.
Witmer, Lightner. Performance and Success. Psychological Clinic, 1919, 12, 145-170.
204 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
600 individual clinical examinations in a comparatively short space
of time, so that several examiners had to be used for the testing of
this group. I was present at all examinations, however, and made
all health and maturity judgments in order to keep them as uniform
as possible.
The assistants included three members of the staff of the Psychological Clinic: Miss Mary E. Gallagher, the clinic recorder; Miss
Charlotte Easby, the clinic teacher; Miss Margaret Brooke, the
assistant social worker; and two graduate students in the department of psychology, Miss Alice M. Jones and Mrs. Helen W. Brown.
Two seniors in the department also gave some assistance, Miss
Margaret Frankeberger and Miss Belle Hitchner.
Five boys or five girls were sent at one time into the testing
room. One examiner took a child and started immediately to give
the Binet examination, making out an analytic diagnosis sheet after
the examination was over. A second examiner started one child on
one of the written tests (reading, arithmetic or directions) and then
gave the Witmer cylinders to another, making out the analytic diagnosis sheet on this second child while he was doing the cylinders.
The third examiner started a child on one of the written tests and
gave a second child the Dearborn Formboard, during which performance he filled out an analytic blank. As the children completed
each test they were moved around from one examiner to the next
until the whole group had finished all of the tests. Usually the five
children finished at the same time and another group of five would
be sent through. It was found most efficient to have three examiners
work at the same time. Five cases were examined per hour. When
the Binet Test, which took the greatest amount of time, was too
long and held up the group, one of the other testers would give the
vocabulary, the fables, the arithmetic problems and the forward and
backward memory span, leaving just enough of the tests to be given
by the Binet examiner to enable her to make out her analytic diagnosis chart with some degree of accuracy.
Results.
In presenting the results obtained on the various tests with this
group of six hundred children, it has seemed best to differ somewhat
from the usual procedure of presenting elaborate tables.* Five
measures only will be presented for the boys and girls of each group
of children on each test. These are the maximum, the minimum,
* Complete tables containing the distribution of results and the usual statistical measures for
each test are on file in the Laboratory of Psychology, and these results may be consulted at any
time. The tables are being perfected through the addition of new measurements, as the results
of examinations in progress are reported to the Director of the Psychological Clinic.
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 205
the twenty per cent mark, the median, or fifty per cent mark, and
the eighty per cent mark?in other words, a quintile distribution.
The maximum and minimum are not in every case the very lowest
or the very highest measure or score which was made by any individual in that group. This quintile distribution of results on a given
test represents what may be called the "norm" of performance, for
a child of the fifteen-year-old level in the group of which he is a
member. The determination of these norms is based on the assumption that as long as an individual maintains his place as a member
of a group, he may be looked upon as a normal unit member of that
group; for example, any child who is in high school, doing satisfactory high school work, must be considered a normal member of
the high school group, and all of the results which these children
may give?no matter what the range of variation?must be considered normal results. Since this distribution must be looked upon
as the range of scores within which any measure must be considered
normal for a fifteen-year-old child, we must be sure that our maximum
and minimum are true results. The assumption on which this
investigation is based is that all of the six hundred children tested
were or normal mentality?therefore, any results made by these
children are presumably normal results for this age level. The
results seem to substantiate this presumption. It is possible, however,
for a maximum or a minimum score to be an inaccurate score. This
may be due to an error on the part of an examiner, although every
effort was made to eliminate errors of this sort. It may be due to
some condition whereby the individual test was not able to give a
true measure of ability, or it may be that the individual, in spite of
our assumption, should not be classed as a normal member of his
group. It seemed justifiable, therefore, to inspect the rank order
distribution of results, and if a maximum or a minimum measure
seems to be out of range with the other values, to discard such scores
as "not true values." The following tables were prepared in this
way: Out of the 9600 values calculated, with the 600 children, 18
were discarded as inaccurate or "not true." This small number of
cases discarded affects the results very little, and it seems to give a
more accurate, certainly a more consistent, range of distribution for
normal results of a given group than would otherwise be obtained.
There is some possibility, of course, that the minimum and
maximum measures which have been discarded are true measures
and that the addition of a much greater number of cases might fill
in the gap between these measures and the next higher scores which
have been taken as the actual minimums or maximums. For the
present, however, it seems justifiable to accept the measures picked
206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
out by the inspection of results when there is some doubt as to the
validity of a maximum or minimum. All measures are preserved
in permanent tables which, with the results of further investigations,
will be published at some future time. The tables are prepared for
clinical use and are therefore arranged in a manner which seemed
convenient for quick reference.
Discussion.
Binet Tests.
As a part of a clinical examination the Binet-Simon Scale is a
valuable test. As a complete psychological examination it is almost
valueless, and to diagnose a child as superior, normal, borderline or
feebleminded on the basis of the Binet I. Q. alone is little short of
criminal.
Many objections can be raised to the Binet Test, but as all of
these have much more weight when the test is used alone for diagnosis, I hope in a subsequent paper to discuss these objections at some
length. For the present, I shall consider it as one test in a battery
selected for making clinical diagnoses.
The I. Q. is easily affected by external factors. It is a fair
measure of a child's language proficiency, the product of his environment as well as of his congenital ability. It also serves to indicate
his home training, the general social level of his group and his own
intellectual level (knowledge organized and usable). It is, however,
a very poor measure of his "intelligence" in the much used sense of
general performance level. Many of the tests in the scale depend
upon the understanding of the English language in its finer shades
of use and meaning. Some of the tests favor the child with a natural
ability to use oral language as a tool. Too little attention is paid to
performance tests which indicate mechanical skill or intelligence in
the sense of an ability to solve a new problem. Home training
shows up very clearly in the questions of comprehension, "what is
the thing to do," "what ought you to say" and the like.
One of the most surprising discoveries is the very low range of
the Binet Intelligence Quotients. The starred tests were used, but
before this study was started complete Binet Scales were given to a
number of subjects and then the I. Q. was reckoned, first on the basis
of the complete examination and then on the basis of the starred
tests. It was found that in most cases there was no difference and
in all cases where there was a disagreement the difference was
negligible.
Terman defines feeblemindedness as anything under an I. Q. of
70 and says that an I. Q. of 70 to 80 indicates "borderline deficiency,
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 207
sometimes classifiable as dullness, often as feeblemindedness" and
that 80 to 90 indicates "dullness, rarely classifiable as feeblemindedness." All of the six hundred children tested were normal and yet
technically one hundred and thirteen cases out of the four hundred
making up the working groups should be diagnosed as feeblemindedness or borderline deficiency and forty-eight of these children should
be called definitely feebleminded. Two high school boys gave I. Q.'s
of 82 and seven girls gave I. Q.'s under 90, three of them scoring less
than 80. The lower limit of mental normality falls far below the
I. Q. usually accepted.
If a child has made a high Binet Score it is impossible to predict
what he will be able to do with the performance tests. He may do
very well, he may be mediocre or he may fail miserably. The chances
seem to favor his making good scores on the Directions Test, the
Monroe Reading, and the Arithmetic. Even this prediction, however, is not always safe.
The Binet does give a good clinical picture of the child's intellect,
language ability and social orientation, and for this reason, it was
valuable as one of the tests used in making the diagnosis.
Memory Span.
The memory span results show that the mode for each group
on the auditory digit memory span is 7 or 8. The mode for the
visual digit memory span is the same. The mode for the two high
school groups is 8, while in the other groups the mode is sometimes
7 and sometimes 8. There are only two cases of an auditory digit
memory span of four and two where the visual digit memory span
is 4. As these are only two cases out of six hundred, as the individuals with the auditory span of 4 are not those with the visual
span of 4, and as the individuals who gave 4 were in every case
satisfactory on all other tests, it seemed fair to conclude that these
results were accidental and not true measures of the memory span.
For some reason, it was assumed, the child's true memory span was
not obtained and these four cases were eliminated from the determination of norms.
An auditory and visual digit memory span of at least 5 at the
fifteen-year-old level is necessary to maintain a place as a normal
member of society. There may be exceptions* to this in cases
where the visual or auditory imagery is defective and in consequence
the true operating memory span cannot be accurately obtained. In
these cases the span can usually be tested out in some other way,
by tapping tests, for example.
*Starr, Anna Spiesman. Article on memory span to appear in a coming number of the "Clinio".
208 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
No high school boy and only one high school girl failed to give
an auditory digit memory span of more than 5. From this we may
assume, until further investigation and the amassing of greater
numbers of results prove otherwise, that a memory span of 6 is
necessary for successful high school work. In fact, there were only
three boys and four girls in the high school group who failed to
give a memory span of more than 6.
A memory span of more than 7 or 8 does not seem to have
diagnostic significance. Large scores may be due to special facility
in using language, to echolalia, to the grouping of the digits or unusually good visual or auditory imagery. On the other hand, a
span of less than 5 may be looked upon with suspicion. A span of
three or less indicates mental inferiority certainly and feeblemindedness probably.
A brief discussion seems in place here regarding the reverse
memory span which is given at the nine, twelve and sixteen year
levels of the Binet Scale. (This test will be discussed at greater
length in a paper on the Terman Revision of the Binet-Simon Scale
which is now in preparation.) This test shows some very peculiar
characteristics and I very much question its value as a diagnostic
measure. The ability to produce a long reverse memory span, 6 or
7 digits or more, seems to be a specific ability which has little relation
to the mental level at which the individual functions. It is diagnostically significant when an individual of this age group cannot
give a reverse span of 4 or even 5. The individual at the fifteenyear-old level may or may not give 6, however, depending on whether
the particular child tested possesses the specific ability for a long
backward memory span. There were several cases in the high
school group of girls where the I. Q. was high and the results of the
other tests were entirely satisfactory who could not give the backward memory span of six digits required at the sixteen-year level of
the Binet. It was the large number of these cases which called
attention to the fact that many more factors than have yet been
analyzed out are evidently involved in the ability to do this test,
and that until it has been studied further, too much weight should
not be given it in making a diagnosis.
Performance Tests.
Performance tests are important not only because they test, as
we believe, intelligence and mechanical skill, but also because they
cause the subject to perform and we are thus enabled to study
carefully a sample of his behavior under controlled laboratory conditions. By analyzing his behavior we are able to make a rating of
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 209
his comprehension, rate of movement, coordination, planfulness and
all of the other items included in the analytic diagnosis.
The Witmer cylinders are a satisfactory test for this age level,
but do not present as difficult a problem of the Dearborn Formboard.
With the cylinders there are a number of children in this age group
who solve the problem involved almost at once and the performance
which is observed can be said to be composed more of an exhibition
of mechanical skill (largely rate of motor response and coordination)
than an exhibition of the exercise of the intelligence and all of the
factors making up the analytic diagnosis. Of course, in these cases
the comprehension and intelligence can easily be rated as veiy high
by reason of the quick understanding and solution of the problem.
With the Dearborn Formboard the problem is one step more
complicated. In the cylinders the spaces are there waiting for the
blocks to be placed. In the Dearborn, on the other hand, when the
blocks are laid on the table for the subject to replace them in the
board the blocks represent halves of the geometrical figures divided
longitudinally, while the spaces left vacant in the board represent
halves of the figures divided transversely. Thus the spaces left
vacant in the board have to be reconstructed before the blocks can
be replaced. This additional element of complexity adds considerably to the value of this formboard as an intelligence test for children
of this age level.
One of the interesting things to anticipate is whether the individual's discrimination of form and his observation will be sufficiently
good to enable him not to confuse the hexagon and the diamond in
the Dearborn Formboard as is done in such a large number of cases.
This seems to be a very difficult bit of discrimination. Another observation which is valuable in rating the individual is his method of
attacking the problem; whether he uses trial and error, simply
moving the blocks around from one position to another until they
can all be fitted in somewhere or whether he studies the situation
carefully and follows a plan of action which he formulates for the
solution. The time rating alone gives no indication as to the method.
It is possible, and is in fact often the case, that the trial and error
method, which must be considered an inferior method, can solve the
tests more quickly than a well-planned system for solution. The
reaction time of the individual figures in this. An individual who
moves rapidly can make several incorrect moves, correct them and
find the correct move, while an individual of slow reaction time but
precision of thought and movement will not yet have completed the
same move.
These performance tests are invaluable for making diagnoses for
210 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
vocational guidance, as they enable the examiner to observe and
analyze so many of the analytic elements of personality needed for
giving direction and advice.
Arithmetic.
The problems which were selected as an Arithmetic Test proved
fairly satisfactory. They gave some measure of the child's ability
to handle the four fundamental operations of arithmetic. A better
test could, no doubt, have been devised. The main reason for
making this test was that all existing tests which were examined and
considered as possibilities consumed too much time in the giving.
Experience has indicated, however, that it would probably be advisable to have, in addition to a test of the simple arithmetical processes,
some indication of the individual's ability to use these processes in
problems requiring reasoning. In making such a survey again the
writer would add to the examples given, problems involving reasoning,
before the application of straight arithmetical principles. As it
seems desirable to shorten the test, two alternatives appear: first,
to make each problem shorter; or second, to give only one problem
involving each operation.
The degree of inaccuracy, even among high school students, is
amazing. Fifty per cent correct is looked upon as a satisfactory
score for a high school student. Only fourteen high school girls and
sixteen high school boys got the whole eight correct. The distribution of cases where a score of 6, 7 or 8 was made is visibly more in
the high school group than in either of the other two groups. This
may indicate one of two things: either the more accurate child is
the one who remains in school, or they have been made more efficient
by the additional school training. An investigation of the reasons
why children leave school has led me to prefer the former alternative.
Success in this test may indicate an innate ability to handle figures,
an accuracy of mental processes or a high degree of efficiency training.
For general purposes, it is not important to know which of these
is being measured. No matter whether the child makes a perfect
score on the test because of his ability to handle figures, his careful
and precise manner of thinking and attacking problems, or because
of his efficiency training, the world will judge him by the objective
results. Either he does or does not do these examples correctly.
For the purpose of a psychological diagnosis, it is important to know
on what basis the problems are completed and it is extremely difficult
sometimes to determine. The time consumed may be a clue to this.
The child with a specific ability for figures is the one who will do the
test most quickly. The efficiently trained individual will probably
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 211
run in second place, and will closely approximate the first, while the
child whose correct results are due merely to extreme care and precision will be apt to be considerably slower than the other two. One
thing which was not considered in the grading of these tests, but
which is an important factor, and which should probably not be
overlooked, is the number and kind of errors made in each individual
problem. Two children may get the same score of, say for example,
6, but the errors which have caused one's problems to be marked
wrong may be gross and ridiculous, while the errors which have
caused the other child to miss two problems may be very trifling?
a mere matter of one plus or minus in a figure in the problem. In a
more detailed study, and for purposes of individual diagnosis, a consideration of the type and number of errors is important, but again,
the objective standard of the world can be applied to these children.
Reading.
A reading test would seem to be of vital importance in testing
the school proficiency of a child, since so much of the material presented in the school curriculum must be read and comprehended.
The more quickly and accurately the child can read, the better his
chance of success.
One difficulty is the system of scoring. The Rate Score is a
helpful scale representing, as it does, the number of words per minute
which a child is able to read. This gives us some idea of how many
words a child of a certain age and school training should be able to
cover in a certain amount of time. The Comprehension Score,
however, is not so helpful. This represents a purely arbitrary
score. It has no relation, so far as the author has been able to
determine, to the Rate Score. It would seem logical that the Comprehension Score should be the proportion of material covered which
was correctly comprehended and that it should be, in this case, expressed as a percentage of the Rate Score, or by some system of
evaluating the comprehension of the ideas contained, in their relation
to the speed with which the words are read. Instead of this, the
Comprehension Score is a summation of individual values placed on
the separate paragraphs which make up the test. The paragraphs
are not well evaluated. The "oil-milk" and "air-rain" comprehension, worth only 2 and 3 respectively, are much harder than the
last two, worth 4 and 5 respectively.
When you get a final score of twenty-five, for example, with a
Rate of 133, you merely know that the Comprehension Score is not
the perfect score which should be made with that rate. But this
may be due to several factors. Your child may have skipped one or
212 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
more of the paragraphs, either reading them and failing to write the
answer, or omitting the reading of them entirely. His final rate is
taken as the place which he has reached, regardless of mistakes or
errors, at the end of five minutes. When the Comprehension Score
is added up, the paragraphs which he has skipped, of course, are subtracted from his total Comprehension Score. Another child might
have answered these same questions incorrectly, so that you cannot
say that a Rate Score of 133, with a Comprehension Score of 25,
represents anywhere nearly the same thing in two different cases.
The comprehension in the case of the child who skipped the reading
entirely might be perfect, or very nearly so, while in the case of the
child who had read them and failed to comprehend them, the comprehension would be given a lower rating.
The same general tendency is shown with the Monroe Silent
Reading as with the Arithmetic Test, that is that the child who does
well in the general psychological tests, especially the Binet, is apt to
do well in the Monroe Silent Reading Test. No mathematical correlation has been worked out, but an inspection of results leads the
author to the conclusion that there is a definite correlation between
the ability to make a high I. Q., and to make a good score on the
Monroe Silent Reading. In no case did a child who tested low on
the general psychological tests make a brilliant score on the Monroe
Silent Reading; especially was it noted that although the reading
might be fair, the comprehension was almost invariably very low.
A low comprehension score was a frequent occurrence with a low
Binet I. Q. The impressions gained from giving the Monroe Silent
Reading, scoring as a diagnostic test as well as a test of school proficiency, are that it tests something of the same intellectual ability
which is required to make a good I. Q. This ability is probably
specific language ability.
There is a marked difference between the results of the two
working groups and the results of the high school group on this test.
Twenty per cent of the working group make a rate score of 120 or
more, while sixty per cent of the high school group score 126 or more
in Rate. This means that sixty per cent of the High School group
make a comprehension score of 32 or better, while only twenty per
cent of the first group make a comprehension score of more than 30.
Hard Directions Test.
The Woodworth and Wells Hard Directions Test marks off the
high school group more sharply than perhaps any other tests included
in the battery. No high school boy or girl made a score of less than
14 out of the possible 20 on this test, while the boys and girls of the
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 213
first two groups made scores as low as 5. There are fifty-seven boys
and girls in the first group of two hundred who made less than 14
and forty-seven in the second group of two hundred who made less
than 14. Twenty-five per cent of the boys and girls in the high school
group made a perfect score and another twenty-five per cent made
a score of 19. This test requires a high degree of the ability to
quickly comprehend directions and quickly give the correct response.
Inspection of the results leads to the conclusion that there is
some correlation between speed and accuracy in this test. As a
rule, the children who make a score of 19 or 20 do the test in a shorter
time than those who make a lower score. Good language ability
and a rapid rate of reading help very much in the solution of this
test, while from the point of view of the analytic diagnosis the factor
which comes out most strikingly in this test is alertness. The success
of the solutions depends largely on intelligence and discernment, but
alertness enables the individual to realize the situation and respond
quickly. As in the case of the arithmetic test, it may be that additional training secured in the grades between the sixth year and
high school enables the high school children to make a better record
on this test, or it may be that the more competent children go on to
high school.
Certainly the ability to comprehend and follow directions accurately and quickly is an important asset in any field of work which
an individual may pursue. Perhaps, as has already been stated, it
is the keystone of intellectual ability. In any case, I consider this
test vitally important in vocational work.
Not only do high school children have to follow directions
quickly and accurately, but it is very necessary for the working boy
or girl to possess this ability if he is to be successful at his work.
Conclusions.
1. Too much time is required to give the battery of tests selected,
although every effort was made to cut it down to the minimum and
great efficiency was developed by the examiners in the course of the
experiment. The battery still leaves much to be desired in the
way of fine qualitative differentiations. Although it sorts out the
various mental levels in a general way, there is need for greater discrimination between the various members of a group. It would be
helpful to add tests of specific abilities, as they are necessary for
vocational guidance work. A better reading and arithmetic test
must be secured and some quick and expeditious way should be found
to secure the school standing of the pupils tested.
214 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
2. The results already obtained indicate that many more cases
are needed with each test to establish authentic norms and comparative standards. It will be interesting to see how the norms
change by the addition of hundreds of new cases. An investigation
is being conducted at the present time which indicates that there
will be little difference in the norms for the one hundred high school
girls and the four hundred obtained by adding these one hundred
to three hundred new cases.
3. The "job-hunting" children, Group 1, and the "job-holding"
children, Group 11, appear to be essentially one and the same group.
The children of the first group occupy the lower half of the distribution of results for the two groups taken together. While these
two groups give evidence of being one big group with the upper and
lower end indicated by the first and second group, respectively,
there is a marked qualitative difference between this composite
working group and the high school group. The difference in results
between the working group and the high school group is striking and
uniform throughout the tests. This is shown even with tests for
which school training cannot be supposed to give any special fitness.
4. The range of normal competency extends from the poorest
case in the working group to the best case in the high school group.
Both of these two cases are normal fifteen-year-old children and so
also are the many variations between these two extremes.
5. The results show that the boys do better than the girls, especially in the high school group.
6. The high school group is easily to be differentiated by the
superior competency of the group from the two groups of working
boys and girls, but it is surprising what poor scores are made in
nearly every test by at least a few high school pupils. The mental
level of high school normality extends much lower on the scale of
general competency than has hitherto been considered possible.
7. Looking at the results with reference to their value in vocational guidance, this investigation discloses four distinct types of
children, in conformity to which every child tested may be definitely
classified. There are:
(1) The superior children who do well in both the performance
tests and the intellectual tests {i. e., the Hard Directions, Arithmetic,
Reading and Binet tests).
(2) The children who do poorly in both the performance tests
and in the intellectual tests.
(3) The children who do well in the intellectual tests, but make
indifferent or even poor records in the performance tests, and
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 215
(4) The children who give excellent, sometimes even remarkable,
exhibitions in the perfonnance tests and yet do very badly with the
intellectual tests.
Children of the first type, the superior children of general competency, maybe expected to adjust themselves in any environment
and to succeed at almost anything that they may attempt.
The children of the second type are inferior children in both
intellectual and mechanical competency. To give them vocational
guidance it would be necessary to discover some special ability which
an ordinary battery of psychological tests cannot be expected to
discover, or else they must be recommended to secure training in
efficiency at some occupation requiring only a low level of mentality
or skill.
Children of the third type have a fairly high intellectual level,
but the performance tests disclose either deficiency of intelligence
in the sense of the ability to solve what for the individual is a new
problem, or a deficiency in mechanical skill, the ability to work
expeditiously with concrete material. Shall we advise a child of the
third type to continue his school work and seek some intellectual
field of activity? If the deficiency in performance is a deficiency of
intelligence, surely not, but if it is a deficiency in mechanical skill a
child of this group may be expected to succeed at some profession
requiring originality in intellectual operations. If, on the other
hand, the deficiency in the performance tests is taken to indicate a
lack of intelligence, then the child ought not to be advised to push
on in school work. If he does, he will join the ranks of those who
have been over-educated beyond their performance ability. They
pass examinations and acquire knowledge, but are unable to use
their acquired knowledge successfully in any occupation of high
intellectual level. They disappoint their instructors and themselves.
They join the ranks of failures in the intellectual occupations.
The children who conform to type 4 are not intellectual, but are
either intelligent or skilful in mechanical operations. They should
be made ready quickly, with a minimum of efficiency training, to
take their place in the world in order that they may pit their intelligence and skill against the intelligence and skill of competitors in
some productive field.
216 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Bibliography
G. Arthur. An Application of Intelligence Tests to the Problem of School
Retardation. School and Society, 1919, 10, 613-620.
P. B. Ballard. Norms of Performance in Fundamental Processes of Arithmetic.
Jonr. of Exp. Ped., 1914, 2, 396-405; 1915, 3, 9-20.
P. B. Ballard. Child Labor, Compulsory School Attendance and Mothers'
Pension Laws of the States in Brief. National Child Labor Committee,
New York City, N. Y., 1919.
K. M. Cowdery. A Statistical Study of Intelligence as a Factor in Vocational
Progress. Jour, of Delinquency, 1919, 4, 221-240.
F. N. Freeman. Clinical Study as a Method in Experimental Education.
Jour, of Appl. Psych., 1920, 4, 126-141.
G. W. Taylor. Vocational Guidance in High School. Psych. Clinic, 1915, 9,
161-166.
G. G. Ide. The Educability Level. Psych. Clinic, 1919, 13, 179-195.
G. G. Ide. The Educability Level of Five-Year-Old Children. Psych. Clinic,
1920, 13, 146-172.
T. L. Kelley. Educational Guidance?An Experimental Study in Analysis and
Prediction of Ability in High School Subjects. N. Y. Teachers' College,
1914, pp. vi + 116.
E. Lodor. The Continuation School Girl. Psych. Clinic, 1920, 13, 202-210.
W. McClelland. The Distribution and Reliability of Psychological and Educational Measurements. Brit. Jour, of Psych., 1920, 10, 315-318.
W. McClelland. Methods of Making Surveys in Public Schools. Add. and
Proc., Natl. Educ. Assoc., 1914, 840-843.
W. F. Book. Preliminary Report on a State-Wide Mental Survey of High
School Seniors. Bull, of Exten. Div., Indiana Univ., 1920, 6, 31-67.
Pintner and Fitzgerald. An Educational Survey Test. Jour, of Educ.
Psych., 1920, 11, 207-223.
L. W. Pressey. Influence of (a) Inadequate Schooling and (6) Poor Environment
upon Results with Tests of Intelligence. Jour.of Appl. Psych., 1920, 4, 91-96.
W. M. Proctor. Psychological Tests as a Means of Measuring the Probable
School Success of High School Pupils. Jour, of Educ. Res., 1920, 1, 258-270.
W. M. Proctor. The Use of Psychological Tests in the Vocational Guidance
of High School Pupils. Jour, of Educ. Res., 1920, 2, 533-546.
W. H. Pyle. A Manual for the Mental and Physical Examination of School
Children. Bull. Univ. of Mo. Exten. Ser., 29, 1920, 21.
E. C. Sanford. Methods of Research in Education. Jour, of Educ. Psych.,
1912, 3, 303-315.
E. B. Skaggs. The Correlation of General Intelligence Tests and School Standing. Jour, of Educ. Psych., 1920, 11, 169-171.
C. W. Valentine. An Introduction to Experimental Psychology in Relation
to Education. Bait., Warwick and York, 1915, pp. x + 194.
J. E. Wallace Wallin. Individual and Group Efficiency. Psych. Bull., 1912,
9, 309-397.
H. T. Woolley. A New Scale of Mental and Physical Measurements for
Adolescents and Some of Its Uses. Jour, of Educ. Psych., 1915, 6, 521-550.
H. T. Woolley. Further Suggestions Regarding Mental Tests. Jour, of
Educ. Psych., 1916, 7, 427-433.
Analytic Diagnosis. Humpstone, Henry Judson. The Analytic Diagnosis.
Psych. Clinic, V, XII, pp. 171-173.
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 217
Arithmetic. Courtis Standard Tests?Arithmetic?Special Edition. U. of P.
School of Education. Bureau of Educational Measurements. Research
Tests in Arithmetic.
Arithmetic. Manual of Instructions for giving and scoring the Courtis Standard
Tests in the three R's. 1914 Edition. Issued by the Dept. of Co-operative
Research, 82 Eliot Street, Detroit, Mich.
Binet. Terman, L. M. Measurement of Intelligence. The Stanford Revision
and Extension of the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale. Houghton Mifflin
Co., 1916.
Cylinders. F. C. Paschal. The Witmer Cylinders. Hershey Press Co., Hershey,
Pa., 1918.
Dearborn Formboard. W. F. Dearborn, J. E. Anderson, A. O. Christiansen.
Formboard and Construction Tests of Mental Ability. Jour, of Educ.
Psych., 1916, 7, 448.
Hard Directions Test. R. S. Woodworth and F. L. Wells. "Association Tests."
Monograph Supplement No. 57 of the Psychological Review, 1911, p. 68.
Memory Span. Humpstone, Henry J. "Some Aspects of the Memory Span
Test?A Study in Associability." Psychological Clinic Press, Philadelphia,
Pa., 1917.
Reading. Monroe Silent Reading Test. U. of P. School of Education. Bureau
of Educational Measurements. Standardized Silent Reading Test. Demised
by Walter S. Monroe. Test II, for grades 6, 7 and 8.
Physical Measurements. Hastings, W. H. Manual for Physical Measurements.
Y. M. C. A. Press, Springfield, Mass., 1902.
Witmer, L. Reference Book in Clinical Psychology and for Diagnostic Teaching.
Psychological Clinic, Vol. XII, Nos. 5-9, pp. 145-170.
Note
The Table of Norms, appearing on the next following pages, begins the
issue of a series of standard tables, to be called The Witmer Diagnostic
Standards, which will be continued, augmented and amended as the occasion
offers.
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Table of Norms?Fifteen-Year Level
Group I. The "job hunters"?130 boys, 70 girls.
Group II. The "job holders"?100 boys, 100 girls.
Group III. A High School group?100 boys, 100 girls.
Group IV. Another High School group?300 girls.
Group V. A combined group?400 girls, Group IV, and girls of Group III.
Note 1.?Those who did not complete a test with a time limit are recorded as failures. The number of such
failures is entered in the table following the highest score made within the time limit. For example, 234+2
means that there were two failures to complete the test in the time limit of three hundred seconds.
Note 2.?Twenty cases, eliminated from the table because of excessive scatter, are reported at the end of
the table.
1. Height (inches).
Group I
Group II
Group III....
Group IV
Group V
Boys.
Min.
20%
Med.
80%
Max.
Girls.
Min.
20%
Med.
80%
Max.
2. Weight (pounds).
Group I
Group II
Group III...
Group IV
Group V
97
100
90
112
115
108
127
130
128
178
178
170
110
109
106
106
105
121
117
120
120
120
153
138
168
165
168
3. Age (years, months).
Group I
Group II....
Group III...
Group IV.
Group V
14?0
14?1
12?4
14?10
15?2
14?0
15?8
15?7
14-10
16?0
15?10
15-8
21?0
16?6
16?2
14?0
14-1
13?2
12?2
14?9
14?8
14?1
13?11
12?2 14-00 14?8 15?6
15?5
15?2
14?9
14?7
16?6
15?6
15-5
15?6
19-2
16-0
16?3
18?5
18?5
4. Intelligence Quotient.
Group I
Group II....
Group III...
Group IV....,
Group V
71
79
107
95
116
103
105
125
117
119
147
81
93
108
101
103
100
107
119
114
115
116
121
143
141
143
5 M ental Age.
Group I
Group II....
Group III.
Group IV....
Group V
8?0
9?6
13?0
11?3
12?4
15?10
13?10
14-8
17?4
16?0
16?0
18?3
17-6
17?6
19?0
8-6
8?9
11?2
10?7
10?7
10?6
12?1
14?7
13?6
13?7
12?8
14?0
16?0
14?9
15?3
15?2
16-0
17?4
16?1
16?9
17-8
17?9
19-0
18?3
19?0
6. Memory Span (Auditory Digits).
Group 1  5 6 7 8 10 5 6 7 8 9
Group II  5678 10 5678 10
Group III.... 6789 10 5789 10
Group IV  .. .. .. .. 6 7 8 9 10
Group IV  .. .. .. .. 5 6 7 8 10
TESTS AT THE FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD LEVEL. 219
Table of Norms?Fifteen-Year Level?Continued.
7. Memory Span (Visual Digits).
Group I...
Group II..
Group III.
Group IV.,
Group V...
Boys.
Min.
Group I...
Group II..
Group III.
Group IV.,
Group V...
20%
Med.
80%
Max.
Girls.
Min.
20%
Med.
8. Cylinders (First Trial, seconds).
236+3
158
178
49
50
47
57
53
80%
104
94
76
103
Max.
228+1
287
172+1
234+1
234+1
9. Cylinders (Second Trial, seconds).
Group I...
Group II..
Group III.
Group IV.,
Group V..,
174
115
73
37
39
38
45
42
125
83+1
104
130
130
Group I...
Group II..
Group III.
Group IV.,
Group V...
10. Dearborn (First Trial, seconds).
160
118
122
320
579
220
510+
579+3
495+1
133
105
73
100
94
228
157
166
180
175
440
270
251
320
300
562+?
532+1
420+1
580-1 11
580+14
11. Dearborn (Second Trial, seconds).
Group I...
Group II..
Group III.
Group IV.,
Group V..,
Group I...
Group II..
Group III.
Group IV..
Group V...
127
156
105
442
315
190
110
70
70
107
97
12. Arithmetic (Score).
197
147
120
203
180
322+2
399
395
555+1
555-11
13. Arithmetic (Time, seconds).
Group 1  210 320 415 716 1244 146 330 472 641 1081+1
Group II  219 311 423 578 1131 256 345 427 655 1287
Group III 126 206 280 364 670 125 264 345 466 684
Group IV   ?? 115 258 320 415 920
Group V.""! .. !! "  115 260 325 424 920
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Table of Norms?Fifteen-Year Level?Continued.
14. Reading (Rate).
Bots.
Min.
Group 1  27
Group II  31
Group III  69
Group IV..
Group V...
20%
69
69
108
Med.
119
146
80%
146
146
146
Max.
146
146
146
Girls.
Min.
20%
98
Med.
81
108
133
133
133
80% Max.
119 146
146 146
146 146
146 146
146 146
15. Reading (Comprehension).
Group I...
Group II  5
Group III.... 16
Group IV..
Group V...
25 45
33 45
40 45
39 45
40 45
16. Hard Directions (Score).
Group 1  5
Group II....'. 7
Group III  14
Group IV..
Group V...
18 20
18 20
20 20
20 20
20 20
17. Hard Directions (Time, seconds).
Group I...
Group II  74
Group III  82
Group IV..
Group V...
197
206
131
300
295
174
380
385
218
1120
689
345
128
115
65
95
65
205
189
150
151
150
280
250
200
195
195
340 962
344 898
258 600
242 666
245 666
ELIMINATIONS.
6. Memory Span (Auditory). 14. Reading (Rate).
I. B.4 III. G. 27-43
II. B.4
7. Memory Span (Visual). 15. Comprehension.
I. B.4 I. B. 0-2 G. 2-2
H. B. 4 II. B. 7-10 G. 2-2
9. Cylinders (Second Trial). 17. Hard Directions (Score).
IV. G. 200-208 I. B. 0-0
11. Dearborn (Second Triat). II. B. 3-5 G. 6
III. B. 300
