William
========

Diagnostic Teaching
I first saw William at the Saturday morning clinic when he came
by appointment for a second examination. He is a commonplacelooking American boy with a pale freckled face, light tawny colored
hair, dull blue eyes, and thick expressionless lips. His frontal
regions are slightly depressed. Though he is thirteen years eight
months of age, he looks about eleven, undersized and under weight.
There were no other noticeable abnormalities. At that examination
he passed the second grade reading test and the third grade spelling
test. The examiner drilled him on the word "expedition," which
William wrote " expetion," omitting the syllable di. He was then compelled to spell it aloud three times, before making the second attempt
to write it. This time he wrote "expedtion," omitting i. His work
in numbers indicated that he had a good memory span, a normal
ability for mathematics, but a lack of efficiency training. The final
diagnosis was postponed until after the attempt to teach had
been made.
From the case record I gleaned some of the following information:
William's first examination at the University clinic was March 22,
1920. He had been brought by his mother and his teacher because of
backwardness. He is in the fourth grade A when he should be in the
seventh grade at least.
Family History: William's birth was normal, but his mother,
while pregnant, used to worry about him and prayed that he would
not be like her husband's feeble-minded brother who was living with
them at the time. She herself has been in Kirkbride's asylum twice;
the first time was following the birth of the first child.
William's father has been drinking since he was fifteen, but not
to excess. He goes on sprees there or four times a year. He is not
interested in the educational or physical welfare of the children.
His father was a heavy drinker and died of Bright's disease when
sixty years of age. His mother could not read, because she had never
gone to school, but was "bright in managing the family." She supported her children and her drinking husband by taking boarders.
She had been married before, and had had thirteen children, all but
four of whom died. Only one of the four remaining was really good,
and that one was William's father.
William's maternal grandmother was a Swede. She was accidentally killed. His maternal grandfather was an American Indian.
(116)
DIAGNOSTIC TEACHING. 117
His brother Paul (eight years old) was examined at the clinic the
same day for backwardness.
William is not very good at home. He lies and takes things.
He is also troublesome in school. After school hours he sells newspapers, making three dollars per week. He enjoys this work and
likes to make money with which to buy things for himself.
William has now had eight lessons of one hour each. As his
school report emphasized his backwardness in reading and spelling,
I first tested his reading ability. We began with Coe and Christie's
"Story Hours" for second grade. As this proved too easy, I tried
him on Jones' fourth grade reader. Some of these stories proved too
difficult. The first story selected showed that William has a very
limited vocabulary, for he did not know the meaning of words such
as solemn, steady, ponderous, professor, flaxen. "A Boy's Diving Trip "
by Robert Louis Stevenson had a vocabulary which was as unknown
to him as a foreign language would be. A simplified version of
Browning's "Pied Piper," arranged alternately in verse and prose,
was a happier selection, though he stumbled over nearly all the
words of three and more syllables and even on some words of one and
two syllables such as nests, laugh, huge, quiet, journey, speaking,
heavy, chamber. He reads in jerks, pausing after every three or four
words, and never changes the expression of his voice, and regardless
of all punctuation marks. Sometimes by spelling the word to himself he was able to pronounce it correctly. Thinking that he couldn't
possibly take in the sense of what he was reading when read in such
a manner, I asked him to tell me what the story was all about. With
the book closed he was able to give a fair outline of parts of the "Pied
Piper," and his responses to my questions and suggestions showed
that he understood the story quite well and was even amused at
parts of it.
We then tried the third grade "Riverside" reader, which seemed
to be nearer to his ability. My procedure was to have William read
two or three pages while I took note of all words mispronounced and
syllables skipped. I soon found that words of more than two
syllables with which he was not familiar were either skipped altogether
or were called by something else which they resembled slightly,
whether it made good sense or not. Mischief was called handkerchief, effort was called offer, see : he, now : how, rough : rush, Sir
Ronad : Sir Walter Raleigh. But generally he left out the syllables
which seemed uncomfortably abundant, those on the end getting the
least attention; ed, ing, and final s seemed to be his pet aversions.
Was this just slovenly carelessness, or poor visual and auditory
imagery, or the result of bad training and poor environment? The fact
118 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that a small part of a word would suggest another that he had had in
his past experience showed that his visual associational area was
adequate, but it also indicated that he either lacked or was not using
other abilities. Either his apperception was stronger than his present
sensations, or that he relies upon an old memory rather than use
energy in acquiring new memories.
To find out whether there was a real specific defect and if so,
its relation to other performances, I gave him a series of performance
tests. I first used the design blocks to test his visual imagery. He
copied a simple, four-block, two-color design very quickly, so I then
gave him a complicated design of thirty-six four-color cubes. He
copied this carefully and slowly, showing planfulness and good method.
He first did the outer border consisting of twenty blocks, then the
central set design of four, all correctly; then he filled in with the
remaining ten. The colors were correct, but he had four of these in
the wrong position, and did not notice the mistakes. When asked
if they were all right, he looked at the model, and changed the position of four correct ones to correspond with the four incorrect ones;
when asked again, he looked more carefully at the model and corrected them. These results confirmed his method of reading. He
has fair discrimination, and adequate visual imagery when he exerts
himself to use it. He fails on the small details because it takes too
much effort to analyze. I then tested his visual retentiveness
by showing him the four-block chevron design for two seconds. He
was unable to copy it from the first glance, but succeeded on the
second glance. A double design of eight cubes arranged in two rows
of four gave him no trouble, only one glance was necessary. This
confirmed his good imageability and the visual memory span of seven
given in the clinical report.
The Healy puzzles showed his good visual and motor imagery,
and his trainability with concrete material. On the second trials
he remembered how he had placed the blocks, and reduced his time
considerably. The Knox triangle and cross were easily solved.
William showed discrimination and intelligent method, he was interested and enjoyed doing them.
I then gave him some simple problems in mental arithmetic,
such as: "If you can get 12 pencils for 20 cents, how many for 60
cents?" 36. A quick and correct answer. "If you can get 10 pencils
for 25 cents, how many for 75 cents?" 30. A quick and correct
answer. "If you can get 3 oranges for 10 cents, how many for 80
cents?" After much thought he said 30, 26. "Now think." After
a pause he said 24, but could not tell me how he got it. "If you get
3 apples for 5 cents, how much would a dozen cost?" He gave the
DIAGNOSTIC TEACHING. 119
correct answer 20, but could not tell the process. He said that he
"divided 5 into 20."
Though he said he had never had fractions in school, he made only
one mistake in the following examples: ? of 12, \ of 24, ^ of 25, | of 24.
He remembers his multiplication tables and applies them well enough
for fourth grade work, but he cannot visualize the process. However, I feel confident that ability could be developed with training.
These tests showed me some of his abilities, and that his special
defects were neither visual nor motor imageability; he has enough
intelligence to solve new problems if they are not too complex; his
trainability is adequate for manual and simple "intellectual arts."
His associability (memory span) is good. His attention is good
enough when he is interested, though it could never be called "alert,
persistent, and analytic." There was slowness, a lack of energy, of
animation, of keenness, a general impression of laziness, a disinclination to make an effort, of not developing according to his maximum
ability for improvement.
Feeling that I must get at something more specific, and knowing
that his reading and spelling showed greatest lack of training, I devoted the remaining lessons to these school subjects. We continued
with the third grade reader. When he stumbled over a word, I made
him spell it aloud, reread the passage where it was contained, and after
he had finished the story, I would point to these words at random
and make him read them again. Then to my slow dictation, being
careful to pronounce each syllable distinctly, he wrote them on the
blackboard. His spelling was a feat of originality, syllables were
omitted and other letters were substituted. He wrote these words
as follows:
fortunate fortiante particularly particlary
surprised surpiced magnificent magnicent
cavern carven beautiful beauful
advanced advince three there
nation nishon . came come
automobile autobull (always reads come for came)
This showed that he either had very bad training, or that there
was a decided defect in the association of auditory and written language, probably both. William is not deaf, though it might indicate
a lack of keen discrimination for sound. He says his eyeglasses suit
him perfectly. When he hears a word he can repeat it accurately,
showing that his auditory kinesthetic complex is adequate, but he cannot associate the sound of that word with its written and printed
symbols. He probably has never been taught to distribute his
120 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
attention over the whole word, or to give attention to the syllabification of words. He gets a part of the word, and that satisfies him,
so he either skips a syllable or relies upon past memories of certain
letter combinations and gives out a different word containing that
particular combination. When he writes the word, the old careless
habit supervenes, and he writes it as he would probably read it, not
as he just heard it. He always pronounces "automobile" correctly,
but after many drills he wrote it "auto-bull" or "autobill."
As he had never been taught the phonic method, I first taught
him the vowels and consonants as a basis for syllabic division. He
soon learned the vowels, and could underscore them in each word,
but he was not always successful in dividing the words into the correct
number of syllables. After each reading lesson, I drilled him in this
way on the words which gave him difficulty, and also gave him
phonetic drills on words ending in ion, ian, ough, ing, ed. We began
each lesson with a review of the words he had learned the day before.
The first review showed that he had retained 10 out of 16. The four
errors were:
quiet quieet
effort aford
journey jarney
conquered conkered
The second review he failed on 8 out of 25, and another time 12 out
of 24. Once I gave him a list of 20 words to take home to study.
The next day he knew all but one. He said that his mother had helped
him to learn them, by making him write them several times.
After a few days I found he was beginning to apply "phonics"
to his reading but not to his spelling and writing, so I kept up the
drills every day.
On the fifth day I reviewed him in the spelling of 32 words
that he had been drilled on at previous lessons. He failed on 9.
Later in the lesson, when he was writing from dictation, I inserted
these nine words at random and he made only six errors, showing
that motor and visual memory plus a little more time reduced his
failures one-third.
The reading lesson that day showed that he was improving
slowly. When he came to a long difficult word, before attempting
to pronounce it, he spelled it to himself, and integrated the syllables
without my assistance. This resulted in a loss of time but a gain in
accuracy. He did not skip the final s, ed, ing, as formerly, but he
still read come for came, was for were, and other grammatical errors*
showing that acquired habits due to environment still persisted.
DIAGNOSTIC TEACHING. 121
On the sixth day I gave him an intensive drill on the following
eight review words:
conquered automobile magnificent enormous
echoes caution beautiful conversation
After an interval of thirty minutes, he wrote them all correctly.
He can learn when he applies himself to the task, but it takes more
repetitions and more time than with the average boy. I also discovered that a great deal depends on his mood. On the seventh
day he failed on 12 words out of 25 on which he had been drilled at
least four different times. That day he appeared sulky and unwilling
to make an effort. He showed plainly by his facial expression and
general manner that he enjoyed the stories but was bored by the
spelling.
At the end of his eight lessons, I felt there had been some progress
made. His reading had improved, and he had acquired a new method
for simplifying spelling, but whether he will use it or not is a question,
for one of his defects is a lack of ambition to improve, and to exercise
what abilities he has. He shows plainly that he has not had the
proper training at home nor in school. He needs discipline as well
as special training in school subjects, if he is to acquire sixth grade
proficiency before he is sixteen. Above all he needs proper incentives
to apply himself. However, he cannot be blamed altogether for his
lack of interest in acquiring school proficiency, because due to our
present abnormal labor conditions, William can make a good wage
without physical strength, manual skill, and sixth grade efficiency.
He is now making S3 per week after school hours selling newspapers,
and is to make from $15 to $18 per week this summer as a messenger boy.
When comparing all his abilities with his defects, my conclusion
is that from the social point of view he is normal. He will be able to
support himself even if labor conditions are not so favorable as at
present, for he has enough intelligence and trainability to be useful
in industrial and manual arts, and to conform to socio-legal requirements. From an analytical viewpoint, I should rate some of his
abilities from 3.1 to 3.4, others at 2.4 and 2.5. From the Barr
classification I should say, "His mental processes are normal but
slow, and requiring special training and environment to prevent
deterioration."
My summary of diagnostic teaching reads as follows:
William is retarded psychologically, because his mental processes, though normal, are slow. He is retarded pedagogically,
because of poor training and lack of ambition. He could get along
122 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
better in school if he would apply himself and use a little more energy
in that direction.
His visual and motor imageability are good, 3.5 on the five point scale.
Trainability in manual and intellectual arts, 3.4
Attention (persistent and analytic) 2.4
Energy and rate of discharge 2.4
Educability in school subjects 2.5
The predominant defect found as the result of eight hours' teaching was in the association between auditory and written language.
M. Alice Weir,
University of Pennsylvania.
