The Post-Meningitic Imbecile
============================

Clinical Reports
A mother's patience with a fretful baby turns to alarm as a
rising fever becomes apparent even to her unpractised eye. The
doctor's face is very grave as he listens to that sharp, peculiar little
cry which heralds a dread disease. As the days drag by, as the weeks
succeed the days, the mother and the doctor watch the raging con-
flict between the forces of life and death?the delicate surface of a
baby's brain their battle-ground. The heat of battle burns and scars
and destroys soft tissues, which, once gone, will never grow again.
At last, death apparently relents and calls his forces off, but as he
vanishes he wears a grin which the mother does not see. The doctor
gazes after him with suspicion.
* * *
A delicate child of three years, a child often under the doctor's
care, is just beginning to talk. His mother is delighted. He has
already learned to walk.
* * *
It is the first day of school for a little boy of six. As his mother
dresses him?he is unable to dress himself?she ponders over his unre-
sponsiveness to discipline, his disobedience, his inability to perform
errands, and hopes that school will solve the problem.
A few months later, an anxious mother, who realizes that her
child is not as other children, a troubled teacher whose precious
energy is spent in vain on a little pupil who cannot do the work, and
a pitying nurse, hold a consultation.
* * *
A shy, tired, tow-headed little fellow of six years and eight
months, drapes himself across the formboard in the clinic room of a
psychological laboratory, his head on his arm. He looks like any
ordinary, every-day little boy, whom you might meet in a friend's
home, or your own. He plays with the blocks, loses interest, gives
up the job, and gazes around the room. Aroused and encouraged by
the examiner, he makes a better effort, and fits the forms correctly
as sudden flashes of mental light illuminate the fumbling and indi-
cate the right move. In six minutes and fifty seconds the blocks are
placed. A memory span of six does little to offset an Intelligence
Quotient of 63.
* * *
(123)
124 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
A reluctant examiner turns his steps toward his private office
where a little boy's mother awaits him. He has no words of hope
to cheer her. He must tell her that death was the victor, when, six
years ago, he made the battlefield barren and went off with a grin.
Louise Hubbard, M.A.,
Graduate Student,
University of Pennsylvania.
The Imbecile in School.
Russell is a tall boy of 15 years and 7 months who has been
sitting in a sixth grade room at school, head and shoulders above his
classmates. His short trousers help somewhat to camouflage the
disparity in size, which would be cruelly emphasized by the long
trousers to which his age and height would entitle him. Only in
physical stature, though, does Russell surpass his classmates, and
there is no pitiful subterfuge to soften the evidence of his pygmy size
in the midst of his fellows who tower above him in mental stature.
To the meaningless strings of words and shapeless piles of figures
which confront his eyes and bombard his ears, they give easy com-
prehension. They walk along with careless unconcern where he
flounders befogged and bewildered in a pathless marsh. The sun
shines clearly for them while a gray, obstructing mist wreathes itself
slowly in and out around the efforts of his brain. When Russell finds
himself thrown into the maelstrom of rough and ready boys' play,
he is almost equally at a disadvantage, because he does not under-
stand the laws of give and take.
So, because he has been a misfit through all his school career,
because his promotions depend upon his outgrowing the seats he
leaves behind, because of unruliness and temper in the class-room,
and babyishness, with tearful flights to the teacher for protection on
the playground, this slender boy sits in a psychological clinic with
his closely-cropped, bullet head winged by large out-standing ears,
and his squinty, skewed eyes peering through spectacles. The
examiner is kind. She helps him with the puzzles he cannot solve,
and praises him for learning them so easily. She also helps him
with the colored patterns which he cannot reproduce?and he is
allowed to depart in peace.
Russell would not have understood, had he heard them, the
heavy-sounding terms and phrases used in a discussion of him after
his departure: "chronologically fifteen years, mentally six"; "train-
able, but not educable"; ""MGI"; "Spring City would be ideal";
CLINICAL REPORTS. 125
"has practically reached the limit of his development". Russell's
bad behavior is explained. It is the reaction of the human organism
against mal-adjustment, against an environment from which it gains
no benefit and to which it makes no contribution.
Louise Hubbard, M.A.,
Graduate Student,
University of Pennsylvania..
General Physical and Mental Deficiency.
Poor Miss Mary was a pathetic little creature. Although seven
years of age, she had the physical development of a child of four.
Her face was narrow, pinched and colorless. Her thin light hair
was unruly, and stuck out at unexpected angles all over her head.
She breathed continually through her mouth, which did not add in
any way to her attractiveness. Her shoulder blades protruded notice-
ably and there was an accompanying lack of chest development.
She was under-nourished and under-developed. She was an amiable
little thing, extremely amenable to the wishes of the examiner. The
presence of the class did not affect her in any way?she showed no
signs of self-consciousness and retained her calm, quiet manner
throughout the testing.
Mary is not able to get along in school. She spent two years
in kindergarten and is now in the first grade. During the last three
or four years, she has had a series of falls without apparent cause.
While playing, she suddenly falls and loses consciousness. She has
had no very severe illness which might account for these mysterious
attacks, and there is no history of convulsions. She cannot dress
herself, but is clean in her personal habits and extremely fastidious in
her eating.
She solved the formboard slowly and showed deficient trainabil-
ity. She met her Waterloo in the cylinders. She made four consecu-
tive trials and failed all. Even with instruction, she failed the Healy
A puzzle twice. She showed an irregularity in performance and
great distractability. Her attention fluctuated constantly. Her
memory span was three?below normal. She had very poor image-
ability and low trainability. She was persistent, but in an undirected
planless way. She experienced great difficulty in learning a few
letters, showing marked deficiency in retentiveness and associability.
After watching her performance on the various tests, there was
little doubt that Mary was feebleminded, as well as physically defec-
tive. Her little body was starved for air, receiving just about half
126 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the amount it needed. It may be that her reported fainting spells
can be traced to this cause. Any over-exertion taxes her strength
beyond endurance. It may be that along with her other physical
imperfections, she has a weak heart. A thorough medical examina-
tion would not be out of place and might help a little. It may be
that through correction of her physical defects, her mental status
can be raised. At present, the only possible diagnosis is Middle Grade
Imbecile with general physical and mental defect and deficiency.
Helen Wilson Brown, B.S.,
Graduate Student,
University of Pennsylvania.
Post-Infantile Paralysis.
Francis had that most desirable and much sought after quality
of personal magnetism. His serious and highly intelligent appear-
ance attracted everyone. His chestnut hair was brushed slickly back
from his forehead and his quiet hazel eyes missed no detail in his new
surroundings. Unlike the usual boy of twelve years of age, he con-
veyed no impression of out-of-doors and ruddy healthiness. His was
rather the frail, delicate, indefinable charm of the hot-house plant.
His serious thoughtful gaze spoke of intellectual pleasures rather
than physical.
At seventeen months of age, Francis had infantile paralysis.
In his case, it was fortunately confined to the spine. He had no
mental disturbances whatever. But a serious general paralysis
resulted. At four years of age, he was pronounced a hopeless case.
At seven years of age, his left arm, which was utterly useless, was
removed. Since then, however, he has been gradually improving.
At the present time, his gait is practically normal, although he has
had great difficulty in the past with locomotion. The upper part of
his right arm is still defective. He can raise it or move it forward
from the shoulder. This makes a fall a serious matter for him, not
being able to catch himself or to break his fall with his arm. But in
spite of all these handicaps, he is an excellent swimmer and horseman!
Surely this in itself shows a remarkable strength of character to over-
come such difficulties. In addition, his school work is excellent. Due
to ill health, he did not enter school till seven years of age, and for the
first year he attended about three months out of the usual ten. But
he accomplished all the work required, nevertheless, and was pro-
moted. He was able to pass examinations to skip the sixth grade
and is now in the seventh. His conduct in school has always been
CLINICAL REPORTS. 127
irreproachable. His teachers say that he has an abnormally logical
mind with real devotion to the natural sciences. He did splendidly
with the tests given him in clinic, even solving an adult Maze test
in less time than many graduate students.
Francis is undoubtedly a very superior boy. His physical handi-
cap has probably resulted in more stress being laid on his mental
development. In spite of this he is naturally a highly intelligent and
intellectual type of boy. He is certainly in the best 10 per cent of
children of his age, and probably in the best 1 per cent.
Helen Wilson Beown, B.S.,
Graduate Student,
University of Pennsylvania.
An Institutional Case.
Stella, aged ten years, nine months, is a little German Jewish
girl. Judging from her sister who accompanied her to the clinic it
would appear that the family was one of the small merchant class
typical of their race. The family is not willing to recognize that
anything is wrong with the girl. To them she is just a little bit
backward. However, to the teacher of the special class of which
she is a member there is apparent a very real deficiency, and to any
one accustomed to seeing deficient children she gives a typical pic-
ture of mental deficiency. Her expressionless face, without a glim-
mer of intelligence or interest in the world about her, showed a very
low mental order. She has a low limit of physical power. She is
anemic and easily fatigued. Her fatigue is so great that on simple
tasks such as repeating numbers in the memory span test when she
reaches her limit, such mental fatigue sets in that she goes to pieces
completely and can not remember even the simplest combinations.
Her span of associability seems to be very definitely four or five ideas
and no more. Her fatigue is so great that her teacher cannot tell
her to do anything in school and ever have her do it, for she fatigues
before she can be told. On an alertness test she could not follow
more than one direction, showing, as she showed in practically every
test that was given in a clinical examination a low order of attention,
which means poor alertness, no retention and consequently no reflec-
tion and no reasoning. Her language is infantile, motor co-ordina-
tion poor, senses dull, discrimination of form almost totally lacking.
In all clinical tests calling for a display of intelligence her method is
always that of a very low trial and error, wholly planless. Her I. Q.
is 45.
128 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The above paragraph is a picture of Stella as she appeared in
the clinical examination. She is lacking in every mental ability
which would go toward success in even the lowest type of labor.
She is non-educable and non-trainable. Consequently she becomes
a case for institutional care, a purely custodial case. While she does
not show any stigmata of degeneracy nor of physical inability, except
her anemia and great fatigueability one might reasonably expect that
she is organically as inferior as she is mentally. It is reported that
a distant relative was like Stella, and while the relationship is distant
it would bear investigation. The general level of the family is not
high, and it may be that other members more closely related are
somewhat deficient also, although not as bad as Stella. Stella is a
typical low grade imbecile on the Barr classification, and at the same
time typical of so-called hereditary feeble-mindedness. There is no
proo/ that the case is an hereditary one; it may be the result of
accident or disease in utero. The hereditary factor, however, is one
worth investigation if the cause is to be determined.
Leigh C. Douglass,
Graduate Student,
University of Pennsylvania.
