The English Convict
====================

:Auhtor: Professor Karl Pearson

STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 21
Book Reviews.
New issue with an introduction
Published by H.M. Stationery Office.
1919. Price 3s.

The history of the treatment of crime
leaves a dark stain on civilisation. In Eng-
land extraordinary pains have been taken to
elicit the facts of crime, particularly as re-
gards its connection with the accused. Little
investigation, however, is made into the
facts of the prisoner's life and condition
Most guilty persons are treated as fully res-
ponsible, sometimes when not responsible at
all. The recognition of Mental Defect and an
appreciation of the poor physique of many
prisoners has led to more rational ideas. The
last fifty years have witnessed attempts to
correlate Crime and Responsibility; these
were usually the work of theorists with an
inkling of the truth, who put Theory first,
Fact second, if indeed actual facts were
recorded.

Two lines of investigation are necessary,
one a close enquiry into selected cases, the
other a complete investigation of every
individual in groups of prisoners, and com-
parison with samples of the ordinary popu-
lation. The study of the Individual De-
linquent has advanced most in America.
The statistical and comparative method,
which really comes first, will always be
associated with the name of an Englishman,
the^late Dr. Charles Goring, cut off in his
Prime. The work under review is a new
issue of an abridged edition; its value is en-
hanced by an Introduction by Professor
Karl Pearson. Its moderate size makes it
more suitable for many than the larger one.
The important facts are recorded in sufficient
detail, yet the book remains readable and
interesting. No social worker should neg-
lect this contribution to an understanding of
Crime.

In Part I. Goring disproves the alleged
existence of a " Physical Criminal Type.1'
In Part II. he establishes the comparative
Mental and Physical inferiority of Criminals,
and the dangerous ifact that they are a pro-
duct of the most prolific stocks in the com-
munity, namely the improvident and the
feeble-minded. The influence of the " Force
of Circumstance," of Age and Heredity,
and Vital Statistics are the subject of other
conclusions drawn in this epoch-making
book.

W. A. Potts.
The Measurement of Intelligence, by
Lewis M. Terman. Published by George
Harrap & Co. Price 6/-.
This book is very well worth reading by
anyone desirous of dealing with the measure-
ment of intelligence. It is probably the most
careful and well considered revision of the
Binet-Simon Scale that exists up to the
present time, and the author, whilst follow-
ing very closely the general method employed
by Binet, at the same time does away with
the main difficulties inherent in the Binet
Scale. In the Scale as arranged by Terman,
for example, the various tests for children of
different ages are more closely fitted for those
ages. For children below 14 years of age,
the tests have been made on the basis of work
with 1,000 unselected children?a much
larger number that were dealt with by Binet.
Again Terman replaces the somewhat mis-
leading concept of mental age, by one of more
definite implication?i.e., the intelligence
quotient.

The book contains interesting general
chapters on the Binet-Simon method, and on
the significance of the intelligence quotient.
Very detailed instructions are given . for
applying the tests, and for correcting then,
and the diagrams published with the book for
use with the tests are clearly arranged, and
well printed.

It is possible that the author somewhat
overestimates the intellectual aspect of
deficiency, and the scale will need some
22 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
modification for use with English children
of the same ages, especially perhaps in the
direction of vocabulary tests.
The Psychology of Special Abilities and
Disabilities, by Augusta Bronner,
Ph.D. Kegau, Paul, Trench, Treubner
& Co. Price 10/6.

This book is an interesting contribution to
an aspect of the study of Education which
has been, so far,?too much neglected.

It is an experimental investigation of the
actual capacity of individual children, with
a view to suggesting suitable educational
treatment. The book is made up almost < n-
tirely of case studies, chiefly of children
brought before the courts as delinquents,
and suggests in many cases, how such delin
quency might have been avoided had the
needs and disabilities of the children bee^i
realised earlier in their careers.

It is sometimes difficult to see how the con
elusions have been arrived at with regard to
the capacities of the children, but there is 110
doubt that more work on similar lines would
be of great value, especially as a guide to the
treatment of children in special schools.
There are some interesting critical com-
ments in the book on the failure of the
school system to acquire any useful know-
ledge of the individual.

The Boston Way. Plans for the Develop-
ment of the Individual Child?compiled
bv the Special Class Teachers of Boston.
Published by The Romford Press, Con-cord, N.H.

This book is a compilation of devices and
methods which have been found valuable in
the actual practical teaching of children in
Special Schools.

Its chief merit lies in the fact that it has
been written by the teachers in the Schools
themselves, and it offers a variety of sugges-
tions for teaching all those subjects that are
ordinarily included in the curriculum of a
Special School.

The methods suggested are such as have
been proved to be of service, and are the
result of considerable experience and careful
observation.

The value of the book is increased in that
it offers no suggestion as to the relative use-
fulness of the teaching methods set forth, but
leaves the teacher to select from them accord -
iug to his or her judgment.

It is refreshing to find those engaged it?
the practical work of special teaching, pub-
lishing results by which their fellow workers
may profit.
L.G.F.
