Post-Graduate Course on Mental Deficiency
==========================================

A course of Post-graduate Lectures on Mental Deficicncy supplemented by
a course of Clinical Instruction consisting of visits to Homes, Schools and
Institutions for the Mentally Defective and the examination of individual cases
lias been arranged by the Extension Board of the University in co-operation
with the C.A.M.D. and will commence on Monday, May 31st, and end on June
5th, 1920
The Course is intended for qualified medical practitioners and preference
will te given to those who are engaged as Certifying Officers to Local Author-
ities under the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, as School Medical Officers, Medical
Officers of Institutions, or otherwise definitely dealing with defectives.
LECTURES TO BE GIVEN AT THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON,
SOUTH KENSINGTON.
Lecture I. By A. F. Tredgold, Esq., M.D., F.RS. Edin.
Subject:?General Introduction.
(a) The nature of Mental Deficiency. Its relationship to the normal and to
other abnormal conditions.
(b) Causation. Intrinsic and extrinsic. Brief account of the chief factors
concerned.
(c) Pathology. The essential pathological basis. The chief morbid compli-
cations.
Lecture 2. By John Thomson, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.
Subject:?Classification.
(a) Definition and; distinguishing features of the three grades of mental defi-
ciency, that is, idiocy, imbecility, feeble-mindedness, (children and
adults).
(b) The chief clinical types of mental deficiency.
(c) The chief clinical complications.
Lecture 3. By Cyril Burt, Esq., M.A.
Subject:?General Psychology of Defectives.
(a) Statistical definition of Mental Deficiency. Line of demarcation between
deficiency and mere backwardness. Distinctions between deficiency and
instability, and between general deficiency and specific defects.
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 41
(b) Psychological characteristics of defectives as regards sense-perception,
movement, association, memory, liabit, imagination and reasoning.
Lecture 4. By W. A. Potts, Esq., M.A., M.D.
Subject:?Feeble-minded persons, (children and adults).
(a) Definition. Number. Incidence.
(b) General description, physical, mental.
(c) Social relationship. Employment. Pauperism, crime, illegitimacy,
inebriety. Scholastic and manual capabilities.
Lecture 5. By A. F. Tredgold, Esq., M.D., F.R.S. Edin.
Subject:?Moral Imbeciles.
(a) General account. Importance and difficulties of diagnosis and administra-
tion.
(b) Definition according to Mental Deficiency Act, 1913- Discussion of terms
of definition.
(c) Description. Physical and mental features.
Lecture 0. By Cyril Burt, Esq., M.A.
Subject-.?Mental Tests.
(a) Educational Tests: for reading, spelling, number and manual subjects.
(b) Ps\rchological Tests: for general intelligence (the Binet Simon scale) and
for specific capacities.
Lecture 7. By R. Langdon-Down, Esq., M.A., M.B., M.R.C.P.
Subject :?Diagnosis of Mental Deficiency.
(a) Chief data to be considered in the diagnosis of mental deficiency (e.g.,
famity- history, previous personal history, physical and mental character-
istics) .
(b) Chief conditions from which mental deficiency has to be differentiated
(e.g., normal; temporary conditions of mental hebetude, etc., dementia,
insanity, mental instability).
(c) Diagnosis of the three degrees of defect, i.e., idiocy, imbecility and feeble-
mindedness as required by the Mental Deficiency Act.
Lecture 8. By Meredith Young, M.D., D.Ph., Barrister at Law.
Subject:?The Law relating to Mental Deficiency.
(a) Elementary Education (Defective and Epileptic Children) Acts, 1899 and
I9i4- Chief provisions as affecting Certifying Officers.
(b) Mental Deficiency Act, 1913. Summary of chief provisions, methods of
control, methods of procedure for placing in Institutions or under
guardianship, procedure in petitions, etc.
Two special demonstrations in connection with the work of School Medical
43 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
Officers will be given by F. Shrubsall, Esq., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P., Principal
Assistant Medical Officer, London County Council, on two late afternoons.
The 'Course of Clinical Instruction will consist of: ?
Visits to the Industrial Colony, Darenth; Royal Eastern Counties Institu-
tion, Colchester; the Fountain Temporary Mental Hospital; Special Schools of
the London County Council and various Homes and Institutions where cases
will be demonstrated clinically. Opportunities will also be afforded for the
examination of various types of defectives under the supervision of the lecturers
and other specialists, including examinations for petitions under the Mental
Deficiency Act, 1913, and of children under the Elementary Education (Defec-
tive and Epileptic Children) Acts, 1899 and 1914.
All students will have the opportunity of visiting the larger institutions, and
as the number of smaller establishments is very considerable, it is hoped to be
able to limit the attendance at each of these to two or three students only, so
as to afford ample facilities for individual examinations.
An endeavour will te made to afford facilities for those attending the
Course to fill in the required legal certificates, and every effort will be made to
adapt the clinical work to the particular requirements of each student.
FEES AND APPLICATIONS.
Fee for the course Three Guineas (?3 3s.)
The number to be admitted to the Course will be limited and early appli-
cation is therefore desirable. All applications, with the fee for the Course,
must be received not later than May 1st, 1920.
All communications respecting the Course must be made to Miss Evelyn
Fox, Central Association for the Care of the Mentally Defective, at the Uni-
versity of London, South Kensington, S.W.7, from whom additional Forms of
Application may be obtained.
