Editorial
==========

[The Council of the Central Association for the Care of the Mentally Defective do not
hold themselves responsible for the opinions of their contributors.]

The Council of the Central Association for the Care of the Mentally Defective
agreed on November 28th, 1919, to issue a paper to be called " Studies in
Mental Inefficiency," especially designed to meet the long felt want of some
means of communication between the various branches of work for the Mentally
Defective.

The Editors feel that at the outset it will be extremely difficult to meet the
needs of the very varied interests concerned. They would therefore welcome
any suggestions which will make the paper more helpful to individual readers
or groups of readers.

They would also be glad to receive questions on points covering special
departments of the work such as administrative problems, legal difficulties, 01
queries on the staffing and equipment of Institutions. The questions will be
answered by experts or after consultation with experts.

It is most important that the Paper should draw attention to any develop-
ments in any branches of work for defectives. The Editors therefore would
be most grateful for information to be included under " News and Notes."
Reports of individual cases raising special diagnostic and legal difficulties would
probably be of interest to readers.

The Central Association have often been consulted about the possibility 01
arranging a course of directed reading for teachers and others interested in the
care of the mentally defective, who wish to keep in touch with the most modern
literature on subjects bearing directly or indirectly on mental deficiency.

The Editors feel that this paper might very usefully serve as a medium
for such a study circle and would be prepared to consider the possibility of
arranging a course of reading if there seemed to be a sufficient demand. They
would therefore be glad to have the views of subscribers 011 this matter.

It has not been possible to secure advertisements for the first number,
owing to the very limited time between the decision to issue " Studies in
Mental Inefficiency " and going to press. The Editors however, will be glad
to receive advertisements for insertion in the next issue. All communications
at to advertisement rates, etc., should be addressed to the " Advertisement
Manager," C.A.M.D., Queen Anne's Chambers, Tothill Street, S.W.i.
lit will only be possible to make the paper a success if the Council of the
Central Association for the Care of the Mentally Defective receive the co-opera-
tion of all interested in work for defectives, not only by making the paper known
and securing subscribers but also by supplying information which will be of
general interest.
