To the Editor
=============

Dear Sir,
May I take the liberty of asking the opinion of your readers, on the "Individual versus
the Class method of teaching, as applicable
to the work required for Mentally Defective
Children."

We want all the help and guidance from
the experience of those who have proved
either or both methods.

We can only afford to use the method or
methods that will develop both the mental
and moral character of each child as well as
the physical side of his body.

One Authority says :? "Individual work
is admirable training in self-confidence and
self-control, and the power to work alone."
This may apply to the teaching of such subjects as Speech, Number and Hand work,
while co-operative work proves of more
value in physical culture.

In speech training, the skilled teaching of
the individual child strengthens his personality. It is Dr. Montessori, who says,
"Clear articulation produces clear thought";
and until the pupil feels he is understood,
and has the sympathy of his teacher, great
difficulty is found in obtaining the effort.

His success with a mechanical toy or a line
produced with a piece of chalk, will bring
forth an exclamation or remark that simultaneous work will never do.

By taking the beginner by himself, we
have a chance of being sure that he is following the instruction, because the rate of progression marches with his ability to proceed.

The slow pupil has his own speed; the more
active progresses at his more rapid rate.

The function of education is not only to
produce the " individual " method; there is
the social side which is gained from the
" Class or co-operative " method of teaching. This, perhaps, is best seen in the training given in Physical Culture (which
includes singing, free play, games).
All children being ready imitators, movements are soon copied; and the slow are
inspired to more activity.

Much can be said on both sides, but I do
not wish to take up more space.

I am, etc.,
A. H. Martin.
N. Junction Street Special School,
Leith, N.B.
2nd December, 1919.
