Cental Deficiency 
===================

:Type: Book Reviews
:Author: A.F. Tredgold, M.D., F.R.S., Edin
(Third Edition)

Bailliere, Tindall and Cox. Price 25/-.
The most striking characteristic of this
book is the sane, level-headed way in which
the whole subject of mental deficiency is dismissed. Theories are not supported unless, in
Dr Tredgold's opinion, there is considerable
Proof of their truth. This is as it should be
*n a book which is generally recognised as the
best English text book on the subject. As
compared with the first edition the alterations are so many, and the amount of new
matter is so important, that it is a new book.

Compared with second edition, the most
important new feature is the extension and
rewriting of the chapters on criminal defect'ves and moral imbecility, two of the most
important in the book. They give a clear
Picture of"these most important subjects and
should be absorbed by all who have to certify
defectives. One particularly notes Dr Tredgold's insistence 011 the point that it is not
intended that a feebleminded patient who is
alsoi vicious should be certified as a moral imbecile but as the feebleminded patient he or
she really is, and the equally important point,
that the inclusion of moral imbeciles in the
Mental Deficiency Act was intended to cover
a class of defect which cannot be certified as
feebleminded. It is not easy to offer any
criticism 011 a book written by such an
eminent authority, but I should have expected some reference to Dr Goddard's book
on Feeblemindedness. Some of Dr Goddard's
yiews as for instance that feeblemindedness
is transmitted in accordance with the Mcndehan law of heredity and his doubt as to
whether insanity causes much feeblemindedness are startling but they are supported by
such and extensive and minute investigation
of family histories that they demand consideration. In the chapter on Mental Tests,
^r. Tredgold is conservative. Perhaps he is
right, but personally I consider a standardised series of tests and the working out of
the proper mental age of every patient of the
utmost importance. No mention is made of
any recent work on this subject, not even
the best of all, the Stanford revision of the
Bine-t Simon Tests and the use of the Intelligence Quotient by Professor Terman. Many
of the tests given by Dr Tredgold such as
Bourdon's cancellation are valuable to him
because of his experience, but to> the ordinary
man they are useless because there is no indication of the reaction of normal children of
different ages to these tests.

I would also1 like to see pictures of high
grade defectives, those with a mentality of
nine to twelve years who look like normal
people. This class forms such a large proportion of those seen in practice, whereas the
photographs in the book are all low grade.
These are minor matters.

Nothing however can alter the value of Dr.
Tredgold's thorough and scientific work or
the fact that his book is indispensable not only
to all medical men interested in mental deficiency but to the large number of laymen who
are now taking such a great part in the work.
F. Douglas Turner, M.B.

Mental Tests. P. B. Ballard, M.A., D. L>itt.
Published by Hcdder and Stoughton. 6/-.
It is now some fifteen years or more since
Binet and his pupils began their experiments
in testing the intelligence of children, in order
to identify the sub-normal in the schools of
Paris. Binet worked out a standard or norm
of performance for a given age, testing only
the simpler mental processes. He fixed his
standard by the results of his investigation
and proceeded to measure the capacity of the
individual in relation to that standard, propounding the theory that those were defective who fell below that norm of performance,
by two years under the age of nine, and ty
three years after nine. Whatever criticism
we level at the form of the test or its use in
the particular problem, we have accepted the
principle of age-performance and have extended the range of its application, in the
class-room and outside. In America, new
editions of the tests have been prepared and
the system lias been adopted, not only for the
discovery of the subnormal child but for the
standardising of the normal in the school.

Tests have been used with success for the
classification of adults in the army and they
have been introduced as a measure of intelligence, supplementary to the ordinary examination for Matriculation in the University of

Columbia. At this stage in the experiment,
the co-operation of teachers with, psychologists is important, for the classroom is the
place where statistics may be easily collected
and standards criticised. Dr Ballard's book
comes at an opportune moment and will
serve as a valuable introduction to the system for those in search of a means of improving the examination test or of an aid to the
diagnosis of defect. Dr Ballard has given us
access to Binet's tests, translated and modified, to meet the requirements of English
children, by Mr. Cyril Burt, the psychologist
to the London County Council, in collaboration with Dr Simon. No less helpful is it
to find Mr. Cyril Burt's graded reasoning
tests for normal children of a latter stage of
growth, and criticism of tests of efficiency in
the primary subjects of the curriculum. The
chapter on the interpretation and keeping of
statistics was a happy addition to the work.

A bibliography: would be welcome in the next edition. F. L. Bowman.

Bibliography

:Reference type:  Journal Article
:Record-number: 17150
Year: 1920
Title: Reviews of Recent Books
Journal: Studies in mental inefficiency
Volume: 1
Issue: 4
Pages: 87-88
Date: 1920/10//
Short-title: Reviews of Recent Books
Alternate Journal: Stud Ment Ineffic

Accession-number: PMC5109067
Name-of-database: PubMed Central
Language: eng
Copyright:Attachment: 	



