News and Notes
================

News from Local Associations.
-----------------------------
Ipswich Association.?Occupation Centre.?The I.V.A.M.D. propose to
open an Occupation Centre for high grade mentally defective boys between the
ages of 14 and 18, and low grade mentally defective children under 16. The
Centre will be open five mornings a week, three sessions being devoted to the
boys' class, and two to the low grade class. It is hoped, however, that as the
work dcvelopes, it may be possible to run both classes daily, but at present funds
will only allow of the scheme being started on a half-time basis. The staff will
consist of one fully qualified head teacher, and a part time instructor for the
boys' class. T '? 

The Ipswich Board of Guardians have agreed to pay part of the salary of the
Head teacher, and they will command her services for afternoon classes for the
defectives at present detained in the Workhouse.

The following subjects will be taught: drill, singing, educational games,
simple 3 " R " work, handwork, and boot repairing. For the low grade class
there will be a very simple curriculum, designed to teach the children habits of
self-control and to make them less helpless in every day life.

It is estimated that the cost of the Centre for the first year will be about
?2so ?125 for half salary of teacher, ?70 for the Instructor, ^55 for running
expenses. There will be about ten on the roll of each class, (it is anticipated thiat
this number will increase, as the Centre becomes known), making the cost per
head about ?12 10s. od.

Lancashire Associations.?As we stated in our last issue, the Lancashire
Asylums Board are anxious that four Associations should be formed to cover the
whole geographical area of the County of Lancaster. A step forward in this
direction was made in March when a Meeting was summoned by the Liverpool
and District Association for the Care of the Mentally Defective, at which most
of the Education Authorities and Boards of Guardians in South West Lancashire
were represented. It was formally decided to extend the Association to cover
the whole of that area, the Association to be known as the South West Lancashire Association.

Leeds Association.?A Conference of social workers was held by this Association on January 16th last, at which addressess were given by Dr. Middlemass,
Medical Officer of Leeds Mental Deficiency Committee, on the Moral Imbecile,
and Mr. S. Wormald, the Secretary of the Association and Executive Officer of
the Mentajl Deficiency Committee on " The Social Problem of the Mentally
Deficient."

These were followed by a discussion and the following Resolution was
unanimously adopted by the Meeting ?
" That as there is a considerable amount of evidence to show that many
persons who are brought before the Courts on criminal charges are mentally
abnormal, this Conference hereby suggests to the Leeds City Magistrates
the advisability of considering the question of the appointment of a medical
expert in mental diseases whose dutv it would be to confer with the Magistrates in all doubtful cases."

On February 5th, a treat was provided by the Voluntary Care Committee
for ajll defectives under its supervision. It was attended by about 250 guests
of ages ranging from 60 to 8. After the guests had had tea an entertainment
was held at the Albert Hall, to which parents and friends were also invited,
which was thoroughly appreciated by the audience. This is the second party
which has been held, and, apart from the pleasure it gives the defectives, it is
an excellent opportunity of bringing the members and visitors together
Wiltshire Association.?At a Meeting of the General Committee of the
Wilts. Voluntary Association in December, the following" resolution was passed
and forwarded to the Statutory Committee for the Care of the Mentally
Defective:?" That the Education Committee be urged to appoint an expert on
their staff so that Magistrates coujld avail themselves of his help when dealing
with abnormal cases."

This Resolution was unanimously adopted by the Statutory Committee and
by the Public Health Committee, and was also passed at a meeting of the Wilts
Justices.

Devizes Workhouse.?With the permission of the Guardians a Voluntary
Committee is being formed in Devizes to undertake to provide recreation and
amusements for the mentally defective inmates. It is also probable that the
Devizes Guardians will consider favourably applications for Out-County cases.
Semington Workhouse.?It is hoped that spinning will be started as an
industry immediately.

Yorkshire Association.?At the Annual Meeting of the Yorkshire Association held in January, an account of the Birmingham Scheme for the Treatment of Persons who are Mentally Defective or otherwise unsuitable for ordinary
Punishment, was given by Dr. W. H. Potts, mental expert to the Birmingham
Justices. Dr. G. A. Auden, Senior School Medical Officer, Birmingham, also
spoke on the Education of the Mentally Defective and pointed out the importance
of the establishment of Backward Classes.

As a result of the meeting a Resolution was passed urging the Mental
Deficiency Committees in Yorkshire to ask the magistrates in their respective
districts to consider the advisability of appointing expert persons to assist them
in cases of suspected mental defect.

Bradford Education Committee.
-----------------------------
The Care Special Sub-Committee of the Bradford Education Committee
have made some important recommendations. They propose that a systematic
examination by a medical expert be made of
(x) every prisoner having a previous conviction against him;
(2) every prisoner charged with cruelty, offences against chastity, theft,
and incendiarism;
(3) every prisoner charged with aiding and abetting any crime;
(4) any prisoner who, from his conduct, attitude, or bearing, or from
peculiarities in the commission of the alleged crime, or from some
other abnormality, should appear to those in authority to be mentally
abnormal.

A copy of the Resolution has been sent to the Home Office, the Chairman
of the Watch Committee, the Stipendiary Magistrate, the Chief Constable, the
Magistrate's Clerk, and the Central Association for the Care of the Mentaillv
Defective.

New Joint Institution.
----------------------
At a joint Conference of representatives of the Six North Wales County
Councils, on December nth, it was decided that it was desirable that a Joint
Institution for these Counties be provided.

The Poor Law Institution at Forden has now been sold by the Guardians
to the Montgomery Mental Deficiency Committee for the sum of ?S,ooo, with a
view to being converted into a Joint Institution for Mental Defectives.

New Certified Institution.
--------------------------
St. Catherine's Home, Durham, bas now been Certified for Mentally
Defective girls and young women. It has for some years past been a Diocesan
Training Home. Only County of Durham cases are admitted.

Short Courses for Teachers.
--------------------------
The Seventh Short Course of Training for Teachers of the Mentally Defective, organised on behalf of the Board of Education by the C.A.M.D., is now
being held at Colchester. The Course consists of Lectures (Medical, Psychological and Educational), and Classes in Physical Training and various branches
of Manual Work. The students are paying frequent visits to the Royal Eastern
Counties Institutions and its branches where clinical demonstrations are being
given by Dr. F. D. Turner, the Medical Superintendent.

A further course, mainly for more advanced students, will be held in
Manchester from July 5th to July 23rd.

Course of Lectures in Psychological Medicine.
--------------------------------------------
A series of lectures and practical courses of instruction are being given by
the London County Council at the Maudsley Hospital, Denmark Hill, S.E.5.
The first part of the Course consists of lectures and demonstrations by Sir
Frederick Mott on the "Anatomy of the Nervous System," Dr. Golla 011 the
" Physiology of the Nervous System," and by Dr. Lowson on " Psychology."
In the second part Dr. Hubert Bond will lecture on the " Diagnosis, Prognosis
and Treatment of Mental Diseases," Sir Bryan Donkin 011 "Crime and Responsibility," Sir Frederick Mott on the " Pathology of Mental Diseases," Dr.
MacDougall on the "Psychology of Conduct" and Dr. Bernard Hart on the
" Psychoneuroses." Clinical Demonstrations will also be given by Dr. F. C.
Shrubshalp, and by Dr. Golla and Sir Frederick Mott.

Problems of Adolescence.
-----------------------
A summary of the lectures on the above subject, given by Mr. Kenneth
Richmond last February, in the course of lectures arranged by the C.A.M.D. at
the Fabian Hall, will be given in the issue of the " Child " for May, 1920.
(Published by John Bale, Sons and Danielson, Price 2/-).
Should the demand be sufficient, the C.A.M.D. would be prepared to have
reprints made, price 4^d. each.
