General, Psychology
===================

:Type: Book Reviews
:Author: Walter S. Hunter

Cambridge University Press, 1919. Price 12/-.
The structure of this book is an interesting
variant on familiar text-books of psychology.
After a brief introductory chapter on the
subject-matter and methods of the science,
the student is plunged at once into the
technical field of animal psychology. The
author admits in his preface that this chapter
is " the least well rounded and comprehensive "; and this is true. It is so because
many of the integral topics, as, e.g., instinct
and habit, are postponed to later sections,
where their more general treatment is
possible. This is an inevitable outcome of
the chosen structure of the (book, and is
clearly one of the disadvantages of reversing
the more usual order of treatment, and failing
to introduce the student to the general concepts of the science before dealing with
specialised questions. The same difficulty and
dissatisfaction arises throughout the first part
of the book, which discusses individual and
applied psychology, abnormal, social and
racial psychology in turn. Yet we agree that
there is much to be said for taking the student
immediately to the concrete practical issues
of these special aspects, which are indeed the
main growing points of psychology to-dayNormal human adult psychology has undoubtedly been overstressed in elementary
studies in the past.

There is much in the book that is controversial from the standpoint of general theory,
but as a whole it shows the sensible and'
balanced attitude which one requires from a
text-book. The author's way of dealing with,
for example, the issue between the behaviourist and the introspectionist is a simple one,
that of claiming that the subject matter of
psychology is divisible " into two significant
classes: the facts of consciousness and the
facts of behaviour." One feels that the writer
is at least a behaviourist, but he is too
scrupulous to deny validity to facts which will
not yet fit into his cherished system. Other
Gordian knots are cut for the beginner by
concise definitions which avoid controversy*
e.g., " By behaviour is meant the musculo
and glandular activity of an organism"; 9
tropism is " any inherited form of response i*1
animals devoid of a nervous system "; " a*1
instinct is an inherited co-ordination of
reflexes."

The second part of the book deals with
general human psychology, and is admirably
consistent in its treatment. Biological back'
ground and experimental method are assumed
throughout, and the fruitfulness of these tvf?
inspirations is clearly shown. The author
rightly insists moreover on the inter-relation
of the various fields of psychology. The
general psychologist is now everywhere laying under toll the specialised coiitrilt> ^
abnormal, social and individuals no less essential that the worker oUtlook
these departments should broad en 1
hy a familiarity with the main tren s
sections and of normal psychology as ^
Professor Hunter's book will stanc
extremely useful general accoun ma-n
specialised workers. This is in a .
Point of interest and merit for su
mental inefficiency. The chapters of pa
interest to these, on individual anc
Psychology, are too abbreviated to yie c
thing of fact or principle to knowledgable
workers in this field. Yet we recominen.
strongly to readers of this journal as an a
able survey of the present situation
Psychology. _ T
Susie S. Briereey.

The; Nervous Child, by Hector Charles
Cameron, M.A., M.D. Hodder and
?Stoughton. Price 6 / -.

This book is written by a man who loves
children and who has studied not on y
sick, but also the healthy child. An intima
knowledge of both is necessary for a u
appreciation of the book which should be reac
by all who have the care of children an ov
their work. It gives most helpful suggestions
as to how to deal with both normal c 1 rer
and those of a nervous temperament.

It is impossible in a short notice to do more
than give a very brief outline of the ^ 0r^'
Six chapters are devoted to giving advice on
the management of children in general and the
remaining eight on that of exceptional
children. Aocording to Dr. Cameron, the key
to successful management is a healthy en
vironment, and to secure this self-discipline
and training is essential. If those who have
the care of children are calm and cheerfu
the children will tend to be the same.
Healthy natural impulses must not be
checked. " The hasty slap is nothing else
than the motor discharge provoked by the
irritability of the educator . . and the chi c
Who is a good observer on such points discerns
the truth and measures the frailty of his
judge."

Dr. Cameron points out how large a part
general negativism plays in those very difficult cases where there is constant refusal of
food and how over anxiety merely increases
this symptom. " The one way to banish
negativism is to cease to oppose, and to practice this aloofness not so much at meals, but
in all our conduct to him."
The chapter also on want of appetite is
helpful. A suggestive example is given of a
child who vomited regular at the mere sight
of the cloth being laid, but never when in the
care of a particular nurse, whose management
of him was particularly restful.

"Many suggestions for dealing with particular difficulties are given, but the main argument of this most interesting book is that a
healthy and rest-giving environment is essential if the " Nervous Child " is to be cured.
This book will be a real help and enjoyment to those who feel that a doctor's visit
should result in something more than bottles
of medicine.

If we can judge from the reputed condition
of French children born in 1870, the rising
generation of small children is likely to have
a large proportion of nervous children among
them; this makes Dr. Cameron's study all
the more important at the present time. All
those concerned with the care of (children
should not only read the book, but have it in
their possession.

W. G. Richards, M.B. (Cant.)'
