The Lilian Greg Occupation Centre for Mentally Defective Children
=================================================================

:Author: Elfrida Rathbone.

Studies In Mental Inefficiency

The Lilian Greg Centre was opened in October 1919, in memory of the late
Miss Lilian Greg, was a very brilliant teacher, who threw up a great career to devote her life and energies to developing to the utmost the life of one mentally
deficient child whom she had adopted. In this work, Miss Greg was singularly
successful and made the little girl, Marjorie Pasley, a joy, not only to herself
but to all who came in contact with her. After the death of Miss Greg and her
adopted child, her friends felt that they would like to introduce into the lives of
other defectives the joy, and method of love, that had proved so successful.
I feel very diffident about the writing of a purely experimental piece of work at
so early a stage and it is only possible to give an impression of the work and
an outline of what we hope to make in the future.

A Committee was formed last year, with the help of Miss Evelyn Fox, of the
Central Association, and Miss Darnell, of the London Association for the Care
of the Mentally Defective, to consider the advisability of opening an Occupation
Centre for children living in the districts of South Islington and Finsbury, who
were excluded from the Special Schools as uneducable, and were under the care
of the London Association for the Care of the Mentally Defective.

The Centre is open every morning between 9-30 and 12. We have about 23
children on our books and a steady average of 16 to 18 attend each morning;
colds and illness are the only reasons for absence. They work in a large
room which we rent from St. Jude's Church, King's Cross, and are under the
care of a paid teacher and a voluntary helper. In the afternoons this same
teacher works a second Centre at Toynbee Hall so her post is a full-time
one. For some months we had had a class for elder boys and girls there on
two afternoons a week, but we felt that daily steady work with a few every
afternoon was of more value than two afternoons with a larger number.

The ages of the children attending the King's Cross Centre are from eight
to sixteen, the majority being ten or eleven years old. We have two boys of
fourteen and one big girls at present. We have had no difficulties in mixing
ages because all need to be kept constantly and incessantly in sight and
mind, so the usual difficulties have had no chance of arising.

The children come from various homes, some being very poor and neglected.
We have, for instance, one boy who lives in a dark Lack room in which a family
of five ate and three slept. He never went out, as he was blind, and was unable
to retaliate when teased in court. Another child, on the contrary,
is the idolised darling of a family of well-to-do artisans. Her life, however, was
equally dull, as she used to sit lonely and companionless at a window day after
day.

The main object of the work is to teach children to be rather than to da.
The workers, therefore, concentrate mainly on developing initiative, imagination
and discipline, rather than on the attainment of manual dexterity. As the
children we now take are only those who have been excluded from the Special
Schools as uneducable, they can never enter the world as wage earners, but will
eventually have to go to institutions. We, therefore, strive to develop their
characters sufficiently to enable them to become helpful, instead of helpless,
members of such institutions. Dancing, therefore, drill, acting, quick construct-
I've handwork takes the first place; reading, writing and finished handwork come
second. All progress is necessarily very slow, but all except one have improved
almost out of knowledge and begun to show results even after three months'
work.

The apparatus used and the various occupations are mainly such as poor
mothers could supply and use to keep the children busy and happy. For instance,
lx>bbins dyed with Dolly Dyes and chestnuts are used for threading; boot boxes
for making dolls' houses, shops and carts; ribbon roll&rs, typewriting ribbon
wheels, and strips of wood for the construction of toys; chalks and brown paper
for drawing, and egg cups and sand for making moulds; meat skewers for sand-
pencils; and we make use of clay and any odds and ends in various ways. The
children themselves often bring old matchboxes, etc., and are always particu-
larly interested in constructing something with material brought by themselves.
The children belong mainly to two types, the very lethargic " stay put "
kind and the intensely restless. At first, the difficulty of getting the slow to
move or show any interest is only equalled by the difficulty of getting the restless
to sit still or to concentrate for even five minutes. Perhaps the simplest way of
describing the children would be to tell you about four typical ones.

There is Willie, aged ten, a little street arab, brought up on the kindness of
the street, always dirty, neglected and cunning, but affectionate and eager. He
loves to be in the limelight, and when he first came gave infinite trouble to
focus attention on himself. Gradually the interest in the work has got hold of
he and he now works steadily by himself and can construct a passable toy
aeroplane unaided and sew on rug canvas, and more wonderful still has learnt
to sink his individuality and play games with the others, really enjoying the
game and forgetting himself.

Then there is Gladys, aged twelve, a very good child, but spastic. When she
first came she could hardly walk; she now helps to carry the tables, put the
chairs in their places, and can to a large extent use her fingers.
Next comes Emily, a Mongol of eleven, who consigned us to the infernal reg-
ions on our first visit and responded to our early advances at the Centre with a
deep "Can't," followed by a blow if the effort was persisted in. She is now quite
a pleasant member of the community and can make sand pies and thread beads,
and can act as a rather comic Red-Riding Hood.

Jimmy and Alfred are our show boys: they have been with us from the
start. Jimmy was the saddest little boy I have ever known, a very delicate,
Pigeon-chested, lifeless little fellow and always crying. He is now our reliable
chief, always smiling and working very hard, and is nowT learning to read. He
has ceased to stutter and his legs are beginning to look like legs instead of sticks.
He still frets unduly in the holidays, but the feeling of being a success has taken
the sad look out of his eyes, for good we hope. Alfred is a very vigorous youth,
but his mother says that since he has been to the Centre he no longer gives any
trouble at home, as he employs himself all the time and does what he is told.
The children are either brought by their parents or collected in groups at

central points by the teachers. The difficulty of coining to and fro four times
in the middle of a busy morning's work is a great one for the parents. One
mother, however, gave up a job worth 10/- a week to do so and said that the
benefit the child derived from the Centre was more than worth it. It is, however,
a serious matter and guides are expensive. We, therefore, bring or take home
any within a reasonable distance and allow tram fares to others.

On arrival at the Centre, the children put their lunch, which they bring in
grubby little pieces of newspaper, into brown paper bags made by themselves
with varying success, and all showing a heavy hand with the paste. These are
stencilled by themselves on the outside, to be recognisable by their owners.
We then have a hymn, " Father we thank thee for the night," and a song, then
breathing exercises, nose-blowing, etc. After that comes a simple drill or balance-
ing exercises, such as walking on blocks of wood. We use ordinary fire-wood
blocks of wood for this and have found this exercise very useful. After this, we
do occupations of all sorts. Supposing our subject for the day to be " The
Three Little Pigs"; we tell the story very simply, getting the huffing and
puffing, etc., done by the children, and so introducing our breathing and
articulation work. Then next we draw the little pig, an oval and a triangle
forming our design. We work it as a finger-play, then draw it on slates. The
second grade only colours a ready-drawn pig. Then follows a dance or games.
Afterwards, the first grade will perhaps construct a paper, straw and brick house,
while the second grade play with sand or clay.

We then have games and lunch. The children are given cocoa, which costs
about 2/- a week for the whole school.

On other days the children will sew or construct dolls' houses and toys;
every day the work varies and the mood of the children often necessitates an
entire change of programme, there are days when anything in the shape of
exciting work must go by the board and soothing occupations only can be used1.

After lunch, we generally have our toy band or a story and sing, after which
they go home. They help each other to put 011 their things and soon learn to
button other people's buttons, often when the effort of doing their own has
proved too much for their perseverance.

The life of the school and the effort of control necessary to live in a company
is extraordinarily valuable to these children unable to excel in the outside world;
at school, you may become a caretaker or a leader, valued for your service to
the community and able to give and not only to receive help. It is this altered
the attitude of mind which is one of the main causes of the rapid increase of happi-
ness in the children's lives. They suffer so at home from the fact that they are
clogs and not cogs in the wheel; at school, among weaker or less virtuous people,
they can excel and live a life of work and play like the normal happy
child, they have always envied.

As for the cost of the Centre, the two chief items are rent and cleaning, and
the salary of the teacher. The cost of the former naturally varies very con-
considerably according to the Centre. For instance, at King's Cross, we pay ^65
a year for rent and cleaning and about ? 5 for heating, whereas at Toynbee Hall
Centre no rent is paid. The salary of a teacher capable of doing the work is
?200 a year for the full-time post at the two Centres. I think this is the very
lowest salary possible, as the work requires a great deal of initiative, imagina-
on and education. Each child is a problem and] must have individual care and
think, and, unless the teacher has a living wage and enough to rest on, no
good work is possible. The cost per head, therefore, is rather expensive, but
to my mind quite legitimate, as the children trained at these Centres will become
decidedly less costly to keep in after years and therefore return a part of the
value of the money which has been expended. Certainly, if happiness is worth
aiming at, Centres are a very cheap investment. The mothers say that the
children are so much healthier, happier and more obedient that they can
look after the other members of their families much better than they could do
in the old1 days when the defectives needed1 all their time and energy.

It is felt that nothing the Centre can do is comparable in value to what the
mother will attempt to do and does for the child. The Committee, therefore,
help the mothers to take a holiday, arranging for the defective to go to relatives.
Grants are made to defray railway fares or towards the cost of the board while away.
This year five of our children went away with their mothers, and the results in
all cases were amazingly pleasing. All came back stronger and better and
brighter for the change and helped to face a long strain once more.

The relationship of the Centre to the parents is a great joy, they are always
so helpful, grateful and understanding; and try so hard1 to make it a partnership
of work for the benefit of their child' so that the work though strenuous is amaz-
ln? ly interesting and worth doing.

Note. The above is an account of a full-time Centre. It is however quite
possible to adopt such a scheme to a Centre which will only be open part-
time.?Ed.
