To the Editor
===============

Correspondence.

Dear sir,

In your last number, the Rev. A. H.
Baverstock writes in favour of the small home
and against the suggestion in .my recent
article that large Institutions will be compulsory on local authorities. I would like to
thank him for the very courteous way in
which he deals with me. With much that he
says I sympathise, but the question is a practical one, not one about which we must let
our feelings run away with us. I speak from
personal knowledge of running small homes
as well as an Institution when I say that,
though I admit there are some advantages
in the small home, chiefly those of more
varied diet and less routine, their effect on a
defective is largely imaginary and on the
whole I do not think they compensate for its
disadvantages. My experience is that the
happiness of the patients depends considerably more on the personality of those immiediately over them than on whether they are
in a small home or in an Institution. During
the war it was not possible to enlarge this
Institution by building, and my Committee
met the demand for beds by taking large
houses in the neighbourhood; I have now
under my care three branches of 60 beds each
and one of forty beds in addition to the
parent Institution. The practical points
raised in this letter and the conclusions I
came to in my article are the result of my
experience in running these.

If an authority has to provide for say only
a thousand defectives, would Mr. Baverstock
really in practice suggest putting them into
twenty-five houses of 40 patients each
dotted about the country ? Is it practical to
have twenty-five Matrons, twenty-five cooks,
laundry maids, gardeners, needlewomen, etc.,
twenty-five kitchen fires, etc., and miany times
twenty-five! retail tradesmen supplying
twenty-five separate houses at retail prices,
when all these activities can be concentrated
in one place and the supplies bought wholesale? The twenty-five homes are bound to
be in separate places as otherwise you have
merely an Institution under another name.

Another practical difficulty: in an Institution much of the work is done by the patients,
the higher grades doing the skilled work, the
lower grades the unskilled. It is waste to
put high grades to do work that can be done
by low grades. With small homes, classification in an area will be by the home and in
any individual home the patients will be of
one type. In the higher grade homes you
will have an overplus of la,tour doing little, or
wasting itself on low grade tasks. In the low
grade homes all the labour will be paid
labour and the cost will be as heavy as running a hospital. Again, if in the h'igh grade
hemes you arrange that each heme sha'll confine itself to one trade (the expense of providing instructors will make any other course
impossible) think what work it will entail to
send the boots from twenty-four homes all
over the county every week to the one home
that does the toot repairs and so on, through
all the activities of the various homes.

Amongst these, thousand defectives
would be about 250 requiring school
instruction. Hew is it possible; to
supply this, to supervise it, to coordinate it, in small homes? Another point
is the impossibility of supervising a number
of small places, the time wasted in travelling
and the difficulty in obtaining staff good
enough to undertake the greater responsibility. Again, there is more life, more going
on, more to see in an Institution ; a small
home can be v,ery monotonous and deadening. I realise Mr. Baverstock may say I a,m
thinking too much of the expense, but I submit these points are not merely ones of cost;
they are practical points the future administrator will have to look out for. The number
of defectives to, be provided for in Institutions
is so very much larger than most people
imagine that the expense will in any case be
almost prohibitive and an authority will be
compelled to consider it.

I am, ctc.,
F. Douglas Turner,
Medical Superintendent.
Royal Eastern Counties' Institution,
Colchester.
