An Introduction to Child Psychology
===================================

46 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
Book Reviews.
, by
C. W. Waddle. Harrap & Co., London,
I9I9- PP- ii and 317. 6/-.
The progress of child psychology is now so
rapid and its positive contributions to educational science so rich and so diverse that, as
Dr. Waddle wisely remarks in his preface,
" Satisfactory treatment of the entire field is
no longer possible in a single volume." Yet
the novitiate teacher must be introduced to the
scientific study of children. This book is on
the whole the best attempt that has been made
to effect such an introduction. The fact that
it makes no claim to comprehensiveness is one
of its virtues. In its broad, suggestive treatment of some of the more fundamental
problems it avoids shallowness and dogmatism,
and it succeeds in building up what is the
essential thing for for the student to acquire,
a point of view. That is far more valuable
than any number of rounded-off laws and principles. The impression that one desires jleft
in the mind of the young teacher is that child
psychology is a vigorous and growing science,
with a considerable body of knowledge already
formulated in its bearings upon its technique,
yet full of controversial questions to the solution of which he may with sufficient discipline
be able himself to contribute. An adequate
understanding of the issues in debated problems yields far more psychological insight
than the easy assimilation of ready-made conclusions. In this respect the temper of the
book is excellent, for the complexity of the
problem of child psychology and the need for
further critical inquiry are throughout indicated. Ample reference is made in the text
and in topical bibliographies to the available
descriptive and experimental studies. Yet the
author contrives to avoid the " scissors and
paste " effect, into which volumes of this type
have been known to fall. The argument is
connected and well developed.
The opening chapter, which makes a survey
of the historical background, is perhaps the
least satisfactory. It ranges too widely, and
in the available space a superficial treatment is
inevitable. It is, so to speak, anthropologically unfair to decry such customs as infanticide and human sacrifice out of their primitive
religious and social setting, and press them
into an argument with which they have very
little to do. The account of the growth of the
child study movement is more adequate. The
chapter dealing with the methods of the scientific study of children gives a useful summary
of the relative merits and demerits of the older
methods, the biographical, the "clinical," and
the questionnaire, and the cautionary remarks
as to the use and value of statistics are quite
in. place. A brief and judicious reference is
made to intelligence tests and the Binet-Simon
scales, but no exposition of the theory or
formulae of correlation psychological interests. The whole problem of tests for general
and special abilities should have had fuller
discussion. The "biological perspective" in
child study is well developed, and the significance of current problems in heredity is treated as adequately as is possible in such a space
and setting. Three typical child activities,,
play, language and drawing are discussed in
ampler detail, and the fruitfu,lness of genetic
studies clearly shown. These chapters are the
most valuable in the book. In the otherwise
broad and balanced treatment of the moral
nature of children, there are two grave defects. The author fights shy of psycho-analysis, making but one reference to Freud and
Jung, the discussion of moral development
and delinquency being thus left inevitably
formal and external. Furthermore, not a
shadow of an attempt is made to deal with
sexual instinct and sexual development. It
is incredible that serious authors can still entirely omit reference to what is the central
problem of moral development. The statistics
and the psychology of feeble-mindedness in
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 47
relation to juvenile delinquency are discussed
with some understanding, and Dr. Waddle
finally suggests that "delinquency is about
one third a eugenic and two thirds a euthenic
problem."
Susie S. Brierley.
Report on the Care and Control of the
Mentally Defective and Feeble-minded
in Ontario, by the Honourable Frank
Egerton, Justice of Appeal, Commissioner.
Published by order of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario. Published by A. T.
Wilgress, Toronto.
This Report is specially interesting as the
author approaches the question of the mentally defective not from the point of view of a
medical man, but from that of a practical man
whose position has brought him into very
close contact with every kind of social problem. In order to arrive at a conclusion as to
the various means which should be employed
for the care, training and protection of defectives in Ontario the author has made a wide
and very understanding survey of work carried out or projected in this country" and in
the United States. The evidence, which he
has collected or marshalled in an easy or compact form, should be of real assistance to all
interested in the work for defectives in this
country.
Stress is laid on certain special aspects
which might well be emphasised in this
country. Foremost among these is the need for
an organised supervision of all ascertained defectives in the community. The author has
collected ia considerable body of opinion as to
the very large numbers of defectives who are
apparentlv able to fill some humble place in
the world but who, if they are to do this with
safety to themselves and to others, should be
in close touch with trained visitors. He gives
some interesting figures from the tests of the
^?S. Army:?"Out of 1,668,812 recruits
(June 7th, 1919), who were psychologically
examined, there were found with mental ages
bellow seven years, 4,780 men; mental age
seven to eight, 7,875, from eight to nine,
14,814; from nine to ten, 18,875; but "The
result of these examinations has gone far to
indicate that many men who in ordinary life
are treated as normal and apparently behave
as such, fall far short of the standard set up
by psychiatrists for the entirely well-balanced." In connection with this problem of
the defective in the community, he emphasises the importance of early training for
defective children. Dr. Fernald's views are
quoted, from which it appears that he thinks
that a fair proportion of high-grade cases who
have been properly trained in any Institution,
may deserve a chance in the community
"The moron is not an Institution problem
only."
Though emphasising this aspect of the
problem, the author does not lose sight of the
imperative necessity of caring for defectives
of anti-social tendencies. A proper method
of ascertaining and dealing with the criminal
defective is laid down as essential. His evidence strengthens the conclusions arrived at
by Dr. Goring.
Evelyn Fox.

Bibliography

:Reference type:  Journal Article
:Record-number: 17158
Year: 1920
Title: Reviews of Recent Books
Journal: Studies in mental inefficiency
Volume: 1
Issue: 2
Pages: 46-47
Date: 1920/04//
Short-title: Reviews of Recent Books
Alternate Journal: Stud Ment Ineffic

Accession-number: PMC5109083
Name-of-database: PubMed Central
Language: eng
Copyright:Attachment: 	



