Some Rambling Experiences in the Training of Lowgrade Defectives
=================================================================

:Author: Margaret Macdowall.

A true man wants to move the world if he can; he is not satisfied with taking a stone out
of the way if he can lift the earth itself to a loftier level."  ^ ^ pierson
Thinking for a moment of education as a whole, I consider we teachers of
these little ones hold an exceedingly responsible and important position therein.
We are, as it were, dealing with the foundation of the building, the source of
the river, the very ends of the roots of the tree. In each case the whole depends
on its beginning.

There is an old saying: "Take care of the pence, and the pounds will take
care of themselves.'' Every farthing we save helps the nation by some means.
How much more, then, shall we help by our efforts, by giving ourselves, soul,
mind and 'body to raising these children from labour-taking inefficients to labour-
saving self-helpful citizens; even if it takes two to carry water or hew wood, they
set a more able person free for more effective work. 

Mercier says "Education is a preparation for life, to fit the child for life
when he is no longer a child." I ask everyone to consider well the needs of
this section of humanity, and their absolute right to have the best preparation
possible, so that their maturity may be borne with dignity and happiness, in-
stead of being objects of disgust and too often unwilling, inefficient service. I
do not believe that any human being need be merely the subject of pity and'
forced attention, except through his own fault. If all that are helpless, in body
and in mind, could be recognised as given to increase our knowledge, each
medium would be respected as suffering either actively or passively for the
common good.

We are seeking digestible food for the minds and bodies of those who have
no desire to express themselves, either physically or mentally; or who desire so
much that there is a constant overflow of energy?disorder reigns, and nothing
is expressed. 

The process reminds me of Southey's "Waters of Lodore" : ?
"And dinning and spinning,
And foaming and roaming,
And dropping and hopping,
And working and jerking,
And guggling and struggling," etc.

When such a case is given us for education, we know he has not paused
long enough to register his impressions. He can often run aimlessly about, and
as a rule his desire is to destroy, and to throw everything away. He is possessed
by active negativism; the fact that he is desired to go in one direction would
make him wish to go in another. Dr. H. C. Cameron's book, " The Nervous Child," teaches us much about negativism and how to overcome it. All our efforts must be in suggesting quietness. I have been successful with some
children by training them to rest; giving gentle, soothing movements so long
as they offer 110 resistance, changing the second it appears, as resistance is the
thing we are trying to wear out.

We must bear in mind that this little mind is always in a tumult, and that
tumult loves tumult. He cannot resist trying to stir us to irritability. The
longer we refrain, the morci hopeful the process. When the child realises we arc
not to be moved to tears or their like, but only to laughter, he will give up his
active resistance, and consent to be. guided.

The early history of these restless cases is an unhappy infancy, sleepless-
ness, constant crying, and generally there hias been great difficulty in getting a
food to agree with and nourish them. I believe that if unnaturally restless
babies were taken in hand from birth, and iwere kept quiet, with no change of
nurse or scene, much suffering might be saved.

Children of the opposite character are spoken of as such good babies. They
seldom cry; they have lacked the needful nourishment to awaken desire, and
make practically 110 observations in babyhood. They therefore remain a bundle
of potentialities only, until it is realised that there is something wrong. Fifty
years ago such children often grew to manhood and womanhood without getting
greatly further than they were at birth. In these days the trouble is noticed
during the first year, and efforts made to rectify it when the child is four or five
years old.

I find very helpful Sir Clifford Allbutt's words: " The child tosses not his
limbs in meaningless effervescence. He unwittingly weaves mansions in his
brain." Our part is to help him to build his mansions, to create in him the
desire to know, to possess, and later to express.

It is probably difficult for people to get a clear idea of a child who never
moves by his own will, who loves best to be carried everywhere, who would be
greatly more inert than an infant of four weeks old; who will sit before food
within reach and make no effort to take it, though the act is within his power.
We begin by putting such a child on his back on a table, and tossing his
limbs for him, singing and talking, making his exercise as attractive as possible;
getting him to sit up and lie down; stiffening the muscles as he is able to bear
it; trying to give the natural movements of an infant; strengthening every part
of the body in readiness for balance later on. We use a little chair with wheels
and a stick through the arms, so that the child is quite safe. The chair must be
just the right height for the feet to be comfortably on the floor. Then we kneel
on the floor and go backwards, taking his feet in our hands, and teach him to
step rhythmically. By and by we feel that he is moving by his own will. We
then put attractive things about the room, and in time he goes because he wants
to, and the foundation of the mansion is begun ! Balance and self-guidance are
not far away.

Movement in this case is our watchword ill opposition, to Rest for the rest-
less cases. We must get it in every possible form, making it attractive enough
to move the little one to laughter, and to desire more. It is well to bear in mind
that we must never persist in movement that a child resists, or we defeat our end
by developing the muscles we are not dealing with.

One of our chief temptations is to guide and help too much these children
who have no desire to express, and also children who are paralysed or physically
defective from any cause. It is not inspiring for us to think that because they
are helpless we must not expect them to overcomet that we will lead and guide
them through life, giving them bodily aid. We must exercise self-control, and
help them with our minds only, and train the children to depend on themselves,
each moment letting thjem do every mite they are capable of by their own will J
feeling each day has been ill-spent if we have not added something to their power.
It is much harder work to stand at the foot of a staircase, fixing our attention on
a child going up alonq, than to lead or carry him up, but to the child s future it
makes all the difference in the world :?

" Love has two elements; the elements of severance, which is only an
appearance, and the element of union, which is the ultimate truth.
" Just as when the father tosses his child up from his arms it has the
appearance of rejection, but its truth is quite the reverse."
Tagore.

I have spent much time and thought upon the best way of gaining the inter-
est and attention of a class of children in these first stages. I have come to the
conclusion it is by touch. We comfort infants always by touch, and these little
ones need the same treatment.

We must imagine five or six little ones who have not great interest in their
surroundings or in each other; I find that a handshake all round stirs them, as
they look for their turn, and watch the process. The temperament of each child
needs consideration, and the shake must be done in a manner likely to attract
the individuality of each member. Sometimes getting them all to hold a bright
hoop together is successful. Some action in unison is the best thing. The
greater difficulty is to know what to say. So few children in their beginnings
understand the meaning of words?with the exception of nouns. If we say
" Fetch me a book," or " Put it on the table," " floor " or " chair," the com-
mand will probably be obeyed quite quickly because the nouns are familiar to the
children. If the same commands were given in connection with unknown nouns
they would not be understood. When the children are given beads to thread it
is possible for some to make good progress by imitation of action alone. Those
who are unable to imitate make none, as they are dependent on the understand-
ing of words. We have found it well to have a set of apparatus to help us to
teach definitely the meaning of words it is necessary to understand before a
simple action can be executed with the knowledge that makes it a step to pro-
gress. We begin with the words " up," " down," " ori," " off "; the little

posts and rings* are very attractive to babies. When a very simple putting on or
off can be done we spread our expressions by doing it in as great a variety of
ways as we can think of. The stand and balls form a starting point for the words
" in, out, under, over, through "; then we put chocolate into the mouths as an
example of things we must not take out! Pockets are a help, and letting the
children climb under and over a table makes a good active illustration of the
words.

Our aim should be to give our children as far as we can what normal infants
take for themselves, and gain power because they want it. We must stir them to
desire by our own activity, and make up to them for their dormant years of baby-
hood.

Before passing on to Stage 2 I want to say that it is impossible to exaggerate
the importance and value of training these children into regular habits of clean-
liness. If we are able to give self-control in this respect during the first educa-
tional period, it means so much to the child throughout life that it is worthy of
our best intelligence to plan methods for overcoming weakness, and bringing
the organs of excretion under the control of the child's will. It can be done,
but it depends on the will of the guardian; it is uphill all the way until the
habit is formed.

We now come to a stage higher. It is probable that the powers and experi-
ence of our pupils may be limited through life. We must therefore bring them
into touch with the limitless as early as possible; we must give them the most
powerful ideals in the world, and teach them to know, love, and serve God
through Jesus Christ, remembering that in the words of Bishop Creightoi^, " All
true education consists in the laying of one soul by the side of another soul." I
have quoted these words before; I hope I may again and again. It is difficult to
lay our own souls by the side of the souls we are dealing with. They are
reserved, closed, as it were, and it takes time to get them to expand enough to
open even a little way?but however difficult, however long, it is worth while
over and over again.

I have in my mind three Mongol boys and one girl between six and nine
years old. They could not walk alone, speak or feed themselves, land had not
even a measure of self-control at the beginning of their training. They are now
correct in their habits, all feed themselves with spoon and fork, and are learning
to use a knife; they have been through their preliminary stages; can put on and
take off their clothes, and are progressing with the much more difficult button-
ing, lacing, and hooking; they know their letters, most ordinary common objects
by name, and pictures of animals; they can obey commands, and have a fine
social spirit?they don't like to be left out of anything. They have got beyond
the stage of separate actions, e.g., bead-threading, and have sustained attention
enough to go on with work unaided, e.g., sewing on cards or canvas.

Their speech is limited to names of people, animals, and objects, but they
* See my book on the subject:?Simple Beginnings.
realise that " me " means themiselves, and also can use ' yes and no
correctly. We are striving for language, but the desite to express much in words
is not developed. We are teaching the uses of all common things trying to get
abstract ideas in connection with pictures of people and things they know, and
they are beginning to read. One member of the little class learns at sight easily
and his memory is good, exceptionally so for his type and grade. His under-
standing of the words is hardly so great as the more silent members, who must
have some hooks to hang their words on before they can remember them. We
have the making of the hooks as we teach; the storehouse of connections is
nearly empty; impressions have not been registered, so that each new thing we
attempt to teach has to be done with the concrete wall before us. Names like
' cat ' and ' boy ' are learned with pleasure and remembered, but words that we
cannot give a concrete example of are much more difficult. We are taking the
as a word that goes before, a pointer?' and ' as a joining word; we have large
coloured separate words, we put ' and ' between two pictures or a toy oat and
dog, and let two children each hold a corner, and stand in line; the word the
is put first, thus to the children a living sentence is formed : ?
" The cat and dog and the boy and girl."

We pass on to the children who can wash and dress themselves, use knives
snd forks, read and write, amd do a little adding and subtracting; they can drill
and dance very fairly ; most of them ask and answer questions in varying degrees
of intelligence. We must steadfastly turn our thoughts to the preparation for life
when childhood is past, and though it is our duty to live in an atmosphere of
hope, judicious selection must be our guide in our choice of subjects. It is im-
portant that children should express themselves in words; we therefore give time
to spelling and composition, and let good handwriting follow when self-expres-
sion, however simple, is mastered. Many people will disagree with this I am
sure, but if the children are to speak intelligently they must be taught to form
thair sentences and write them down. It is quite impossible to choose a method
?f teaching reading, as each child in a small class may need a different one.

Reading books should be chosen with a view to helping the children's knowledge
?f things they come in contact with in everyday life. In teaching number, the
chief aim should be to enable the children to understand money, to give and take
change. Time-telling is very important; abnormal children do not realise how
long it takes to do things, and do not acquire a real knowledge of the passing of
time, unless their attention is constantly directed to it. This is to be accounted
for by their lack of responsibility as time-keepers, which might be made more a
point of with advantage. The days of the week, and date of the month, and the
year should be kept present with the children; it helps progress. Any move-
ment should be made the most of, and dates do not stand still.

We have thought of purposes, and have spoken of teaching children how to
act so as to achieve them. Mercier says: " Children are to te taught to know,
but they must first he taught to do, and it is in doing that knowledge is most
naturally, most easily, and most tenaciously acquired." He quotes a letter of
Sir Clifford Allbutt, who says, " That in action there is a certain pregnancy, that
by action is developed inward rudiments, which left unprovoked would die un-
born, that the limbs in their adventures have a wider compass, awaken wider
responses, lay up in the nervous system, and bring into gear, much beyond the
design of their immediate purpose."

Let me give an example of a child who has been trained to act, and one who
has always been acted for. I was watching two typical low-grade Mongols, one
twelve, just come to school, the other six, in training from three years old. The
elder child has the greater mental power. The six year old took his twelve year
old companion by the hand, dragged him as far as the staircase, placed his hand
on the bannister, then went behind him and gave him a push with both hands;
feeling his responsibility at end, he took himself to another staircase and ran up.
The elder child was quite unresisting, and stood where he was placed, until told
to move.

Reconstruction is much in the thought of everyone at present, and the wel-
fare of the feeble-minded is not left out. I hope the day is not far distant when
a more natural, fuller, freer life will be given them; when people who are true
to the normal will think it a pleasure and privilege to mix with them and help to
draw out and to heal. Perhaps a variety of recreation is needed more than any-
thing else, as there is nothing so quickening as the lightning of laughter."
