Visit To Cairo Asylum
======================

156
Art. XIII.?A 
:Author:  A. B. B. Myebs
Surgeon, Coldstream Guards.

Visitors to Cairo without a " friend at court" have little chance
of observing what progress has been made in the education of
its inhabitants since the accession of the present Viceroy.
Some years ago I was enabled to inspect the three then recently
erected schools which are now filled with Eastern students, male
and female; but in retracing my steps over various public
buildings during my last visit to this city, it was with much
sorrow that I noticed one class of the people still apparently
forgotten?one which, least of all, is able to make itself heard.

After passing through the second dismal portal of a building in
the outskirts, you may see in a small courtyard, squatting as
closely as possible together, at least in the winter, for the sake
of the warmth their single garments cannot alone retain, human
beings who were once mixing in the biisy throng of life, but
who now it could scarcely be believed retained their humanity,
so horrible are they to look upon as they raise their listless eyes
on the approach of a stranger, and utter some diabolical jargon
to him. Still these are only poor harmless lunatics?men who
have mostly destroyed their reason by smoking or eating
" hashish,"* and therefore have a certain amount of freedom
allotted to them ; but turn to the left, and then you will see but
too plainly liovv the light of civilisation has failed to penetrate
within these walls.

On my previous visit in 1863, I remember seeing as if it
were but yesterday, so great was the impression made upon me,
one dark noisome cell in which at the far end was a man, stark
naked, chained to the wall like a dog, but unlike a dog, for he
would probably have had a little straw to lie upon, whereas this
creature had nothing. On my recent visit another dangerous
lunatic was confined in it, but as he was free, I was only allowed
to look at him through a little iron grating in the door, by
which he received his food during his violent paroxysms. On
beholding me his rage was unbounded, and whilst his frenzied
eyes half started out of their sockets, he hissed at me through
the bars, and then crying out " Noosrani!" (Christian !) rushed
frantically to the other end of his cell and cowered in a corner,
as if to conceal himself from my gaze.

Feeling regret at having momentarily added to the tortures
of the poor creature, I at once turned away and was taken to
another cell. This we entered, and found it occupied by a man
who was sitting on a stool with his back turned towards us,
whilst drawing on a wall with chalk the figure of a woman in
Eastern costume. So absorbed was he in his work?one which
possibly was the means of keeping fresh in his enfeebled mind
the memory of one he once held dear?that at first he took no
notice of us, but on hearing the voice of a stranger he instantly
turned round, and seeing me, with one sweep of his arm his
labour was blotted out; and then standing up defiantly before
me, he exclaimed in Arabic, " Christian, what right have you to
come here to see me thus ? "

So even in their very madness they show the instinctive
hatred of the Mahomedan for the Christian.

Passing to the female side of this asylum there is not much
fault to be found with the appearance of the patients who
occupy beds in the large ward, or the manner in which they
are apparently treated. Here I was not allowed to approach
the cells sufficiently near to look through the small gratings in
the doors, and probably I thus escaped a too revolting sight,
judging by the cries that issued from one of these in which
three or more lunatics were confined together.

As we passed this cell, however, I observed that they had
succeeded in forcing slightly open the bottom of the locked
door, and through the chink thus made I saw stretched out
to the utmost extent, their naked withered hands and arms,
with which they clutched at the air as if in appeal foi mercy or
for food. It was a ghastly sight, and I turned from it with a
shudder, feeling sure that the convulsive movement of those
living skeleton fingers would be a picture indelibly impressed
upon my mind. . . .

The average number of male patients m this asylum is
about 125, and of females 65 and the mortality is about one
per month. On my first visit I was told that great improve-
ments were about to be made in the treatment of these
lunatics, and so I am again informed. Let us hope that the
statement on this occasion may be one not altogether devoid of
truth.

February 1877.
