Lunacy in Scotland
==================

301
Art. XI.?
The Nineteenth Annual Eeport of the General Board of Com-
missioners in Lunacy for Scotland, addressed to the Principal
Secretary of State for the Home Department, has been pre-
sented to both Houses of Parliament in due course, and is
now before us. In its general character the Eeport is precisely
similar to those of past years. We have the usual subjects
again discussed, namely, the number and distribution of the
insane, and their proportion to population, etc., indicating, in
the manner of distribution, the changes that have occurred in
the royal and district asylums, private and parochial asylums,
the lunatic wards of poorhouses, the lunatic department of the
Central Prison of Perth, the training schools for imbeciles, and
in private dwellings.
On the 1st of January 1877, it appears that from official
cognisance there were 1,566 insane persons in Scotland, main-
tained from private sources, 7,239 by parochial rates, and 57 at
the expense of the State. As in the report for last year, we
again observe a large number of tables showing the pauper
lunatics chargeable to each county, the number of private and
pauper patients in each establishment in Scotland, and the
counties from which the paupers came, also, the relations of the
population and pauperism to pauper lunacy.
Under the heading "Patients in Establishments," the
number of admissions of patients either voluntary, by transfer,
or otherwise, the discharges of the recovered and unrecovered,
discharges on probation, deaths, escapes, accidents, changes
among attendants, the results of treatment in, and the condition
of, the different establishments, are at length discussed.
In reference to the royal and district asylums, we are glad
to hear that the extension of the Aberdeen Asylum is in pro-
gress, and that the new buildings will be ready for occupation
next spring, since we are informed that in this asylum there is
still considerable overcrowding, especially upon the male side.
A large number of patients have been removed from the
Argyll and Bute district asylums to the new parochial asylums
at Eiccartsbar, near Paisley, and at Woodilee, near Lenzie, and
this' proceeding has not only relieved the overcrowding, but
even afforded vacant accommodation.
The condition of the wards and patients, and the general
management of the Banff District Asylum at Ladybridge, are
noticed very favourably.
302 LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
At the Edinburgh Royal Asylum, a considerable increase in
the number both of male and female patients is reported. The
new wings of the east division are now ready for occupation,
and although the establishment has been destitute of walled
airing-courts, due to extensive structural changes, still there
has been no apparent increase in the number of escapes and
accidents.
It is gratifying to find that not a few unfortunate inmates
of the educated classes who, if not actual paupers, are only
capable of contributing a pauper rate of board, are nevertheless
treated as private patients, and are enabled to hold communion
with those of their own sphere in life. It is sincerely to be
hoped that a larger number may be permitted to enjoy so great
a privilege through the liberality of a charitable public.
We read with satisfaction that the want of a large amuse-
ment-hall and dmmg-hall is dwelt upon in the reports on the
Montrose Royal Asylum, and that regret is expressed concern-
ing the delay in carrying out these improvements, for there
cannot be the slightest doubt of the immense importance of
these accessories m the treatment of many cases of unsound
mind.
In the Stirling District Asylum reference is again made to
the overcrowding. The mortality has been high, and cases of
erysipelas have frequently occurred. The apparent cause of this
appears to be damp, partly due to the soil and climate and
partly to frequent wet scrubbing of the floors. Measures are
in progress for heating the asylum with steam, and suggestions
are made that the corridors should be furnished with linoleum
or matting, the wood on each side being varnished or painted.
It is announced that Dr Skae has resigned his appointment,
having gone as the Government inspector of asylums to New
Zealand; and Dr JIaclaren, for some time assistant to Dr.
Clouston at the Royal Edinburgh Asylum, has been appointed
to the vacant omce.
The reports upon parochial asylums point to an overcrowded
condition of wards m the Abbey Parochial Asylum, and special
attention is drawn to the want of a general dining and recreation
hall. Much credit is given to the Parochial Board and the
Asylum Committee for the excellent arrangements and general
management of the new asylum at Riccartsbar, and the Woodilee
Asylum 01 J3aiony Parochial Asylum near Lenzie is hi^hlv
spoken of. &
In reference to private asylums, the reports are highly
favourable, and in no case is there any complaint of any kind.
The lunatic wards of poorhouses are also said to be in a
highly satisfactory condition. During 1876, nine patients were
LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 303
admitted into the establishments for State or criminal lunatics,
and for the following offences: assault, to serious injury of
person; murder; theft and previous conviction; theft by house-
breaking and previous conviction of theft; rape; assault, with
intent to rob ; and assault, to severe injury of person and danger
of life.
In reference to patients in private dwellings, the words of
the Report are as follows:
" The mortality continues to be low, being 6'0 per cent,
of the average number on our registers for the year 1875, and
5*8 per cent, for the year 1876. "We accept this fact as evidence
that the circumstances in which pauper patients in private
dwellings are placed, are not adverse to health, and that they
include some influences which prove a compensation for the
loss of orderliness, discipline, and better food, which are secured
in establishments.
" The number of private lunatics who were provided
for in private dwellings with the sanction of the Board on
the 1st of January 1877 was 104. Fifty of these were patients
under curatory, and 54 were ordinary private patients. Of the
whole number of private patients in private dwellings, 33 were
in houses which had a special licence. It is obvious, however,
from the large number of private patients removed from asylums
as unrecovered, that these figures represent only a fraction of
those disposed of in private dwellings. Private patients not
kept for profit do not, as a rule, come under our cognisance."
Special attention is drawn by Dr Paterson to the varied
circumstances in which pauper lunatics are found in private
dwellings, and he says it would be both unreasonable and
impossible to judge of their condition by one common standard
applicable to all Scotland. Writing of Aberdeenshire, he says :
" The guardians, as a rule, are faithful and intelligent, and are
often found to devote themselves to the discharge of duties
exceptionally burdensome in a way that is worthy of all com-
mendation." Speaking of Caithness, he says: " There are few
counties in which the improving character of the visitation
reports from year to year bear more unequivocal testimony to
the good done through the intervention of the Board of Lunacy
in raising the condition of patients who were at first reported
on unfavourably."
One or two cases are given illustrating the tendency to
estimate as lunatics persons of merely weak mind, which has
apparently arisen through the operation of the Government
grant towards the maintenance of pauper lunatics; and Dr.
Sibbald, referring to this subject, says that " by the introduction
of a class of patients whose insanity is but slightly marked,
304 LUNACY IN SCOTLAND,
their supervision may be attended with difficulties and risks of
which we have hitherto had little or no experience." This
remark is followed by a case in illustration, that ordinary mental
enfeeblement is more frequently certified as lunacy now than
was formerly done, and " such a case," he adds, " only requires
to be mentioned to prove how great a change has taken place
of late in the views of the community as well as of medical men
in regard to the kind and degree of mental unsoundness that
constitute lunacy."
We cannot refrain from expressing a somewhat contrary
opinion to the above, for we believe that medical men are far
more careful in their estimation of soundness and unsoundness
of mind than was the case in past years; and in reference to
the statement that ordinary mental enfeeblement is more
frequently certified as lunacy now than was formerly done," we
think that the profession are very loth to confine as a lunatic any
person who can by any possibility be allowed to remain at large.
Dr Sibbald's report concludes with some highly interesting-
observations on the efficient training of idiots in private dwell-
ings under the care either of relatives or strangers. He says
as follows : " It should always be borne in mind that the amount
of mental culture or development that can be attained by any
treatment m the lower class of imbeciles is exceedingly small
No amount of education will ever make them self-supportino- ?
no work they can be taught to do will ever be equal in com-
mercial value to the supervision they will require in the doing
of it. Indeed, we obtain almost all that we can hope for, if
they acquire cleanly and orderly habits, so as to be innoxious
to themselves and others; if they become attached to those with
whom they are associated, and if they acquire an interest in the
ordinary events of their daily life. The difference between the
condition of those m whose cases these objects have been fairly
attained, and those in whose cases no efforts for their attainment
have been made, is m many cases all the difference between
happiness and extreme misery. But I incline to believe that
efforts m the direction of higher culture are generally fruitless
and sometimes even hurtful. I therefore strongly recommend
that such patients should, where suitable guardians can be got,
be placed undei private care, as affording the best opportunity
for the development of such faculties as they possess, and the
attainment of such happiness as they can feel. In all cases it
is most important that an effort should be made as early'in life
as possible to tram them, like infants, to cleanly habits. If this
be successfully accomplished, the chief difficulty and discomfort
which threatened their future years will have been overcome.
LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 305
I submit these observations, because it is not sufficiently recog-
nised by some of those interested in the improvement of idiots
how much may, in favourable circumstances, be done for them
without removing them from their natural surroundings."
In connection with this important subject we would refer
our readers to the interesting and instructive pamphlet of Dr.
J. Langdon Down, " On the Education and Training of the Feeble
in Mind."
The expenditure for pauper lunatics in Scotland has been
steadily on the increase, year by year, as we observe by Table
XVII.; and we find that in 1858 the total expenditure was
?80,652, whilst in 1875-76 it amounted to ?165,261 ; the
difference therefore gives ?84,609, or, in fact, more than double
the amount of that of eight years previous; of this increase
?82,002 were devoted to patients in establishments, and ?3,109
to patients in private dwellings.
It is the opinion of the Commissioners that it would be a
public advantage if the friends of the pauper inmates were
called on and obliged to contribute more frequently to their
support, since contributions from such source, even though of
small amount, would lead to a more careful consideration of the
need of continued detention.
We observe that 363 lunatics, under Judicial Factors, are
reported by the accountant of the Court of Session; all these
patients are seen by the Medical Commissioners at least twice a
year, and we are told that, " in some instances, though deprived
of the'management of their property, exhibit an unsoundness of
mind so slight in degree as not to justify the granting of the
medical certificates which are needed for placing them on our
registers as lunatics."
Attention is again called to the necessity of some economical
procedure for administering the property of lunatics when only
of small amounts ; and gratification is expressed concerning the
suggestion of the Scotch Law Commission, that in those cases
where the funds are less than ?1,000, the authority to appoint
a cuTator should be extended to the sheriff.
A similar change of the law has been recommended in the
Eeport on the Criminal and Judicial Statistics of Ireland, for
1875. The Report concludes with a large number of appen-
dices, the chief of these being devoted to the entries of the
Commissioners in the patients' book, and the reports of Drs.
Paterson and Sibbald.
This portion of the Eeport contains the usual details, and
calls for little comment or remark at our hands, but we must
congratulate the compilers of the work upon their excellent and
laborious efforts.
