Sensori-Motor Affections
==========================

78
Art. VI.?
I.?Recherches Cliniques et Therapeutiques sur V Epilepsie et
VHysterie. Par M. Bourneville. 1876.
II.?Contributions a VEtude des Nevroses Extraordinaires.
Par le Dr L. Billet. 1874.
III.?Louise Lateau. Rapport Medical sur la Stigmatisee de
Bois d'Haine, fait a VAcademie de Medecine de
Belgique. Par le Dr Warlomont. 1875.
I. This work may be regarded as naturally divided into three
distinct treatises. Tlie first of these embraces the nominal
subject of the book, the Status Epilepticus. The second is
devoted to a Catalogue Kaisonne of the remedies which have
been employed in epilepsy, whether occurring in solitary or
serial attacks. The third diverges into cases and considerations
illustrative of Hystero-Epilepsy, both as it is connected with
epilepsy and as it may be regarded as a separate and indepen-
dent affection of the Nervous System. Much of the experience,
and all of the examples, of the maladies have been derived from
the practice of M. Charcot in that wide and fertile field for
observation, the wards for Chronic Epileptics in Salpetriere, and
while the author acted as Assistant Physician there, and may be
said to have sat at the feet of a scientific Gamaliel. Uetat de
final epileptique is characterised as consisting of:?1st, Convul-
sions occurring in rapid succession and almost without inter-
mission ; 2nd, of unconsciousness of different degrees of
intensity, passing into absolute coma, without any return of
lucidity; 3rd, of imperfect and transitory hemiplegia; 4th, of
the acceleration of the circulation and respiration; 5tli, of great
elevation in the temperature of the body, which does not fall
either between the attacks or even after they have ceased. The
life-long history of a case is given in which, as in the majority
of those recorded by other writers, the first stage, or petit mal,
is gradually aggravated into the diagnostic fit where the interval
between these well-marked periods presents attacks of stupor,
partial paralysis,contractions of the muscles, and various forms of
constitutional disturbance, the status consisted of 168 con-
vulsions within twenty-four hours, although it continued for
thirty hours, which is generally the duration of such attacks, and
terminated fatally, as happens five out of eight times. The
downward progress was marked by complete insensibility and
SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS.
79
loss of motion ; but, subsequently to the application of six leeches
behind each ear, there occurred a brief remission of certain of
the symptoms, when the patient moved the head, opened the
eyes, uttered cries, and swallowed liquid food administered by the
attendant, whom she seemed to recognise. Dissection revealed
violet marbling of the convolutions where the congestion of the
pia-mater was very intense ; blackening of the same membrane
where it invests the bulb; asymetry of the encephalon in con-
sequence of atrophy of the right hemisphere ; a large cavity in
the occipital lobe, which did not communicate with the centre
of the brain, and contained a dark-coloured serous fluid; thin-
ning of the cortical substance, resembling a cicatrised softening.
The disorganisation of this hemisphere was such that the
ganglia at the base could not be recognised, but on cutting into
it there appeared notable malconformations, such as " circon-
volutions parfaitement formees dans l'epaisseur meme de la
substance," and so forth. In place of detecting in these appear-
ances, as has been the tendency in modern pathology, the
causes of the disease, they may be fairly attributed to the
destructive effects of epileptic seizures occurring during a
period of fifteen years, amounting in one year towards the close
of her life to forty-six prolonged fits and to 749 attacks of ver-
tigo ; and on the other side to arrested development and con-
genital deformity.
In the second section there is a recapitulation of the failure,
or very partial success, even in the hands of M. Charcot, of the
drugs long resorted to in epilepsy, comprehending the ammo-
niacal sulphate of copper, oxide of zinc, &c., and two additions
to such therapeutic agents. These are the bromide of camphor
and the nitrate of arnyl. M. Bourneville modestly attributes
the limited success obtained from the use of the former to
the confirmed character of the disease in the patients on whom
it was tried; but, notwithstanding this obstacle, it would appear
that in three of the nine cases in which it was tried no benefit
was obtained, while in six the frequency of the recurrence of
convulsions was diminished, and that of the vertigenous fits
greatly so. This latter result is matter for congratulation, as,
according to the opinion of most observers, the influence of
vertigo in inducing mental deterioration is more disastrous than
that of the confirmed malady. The power of the nitrate of
amyl in arresting single attacks of epilepsy, especially where
the premonition of an aura affords an opportunity for free
inhalation, seems to be now established by the observations of
Dr Weir Mitchell and of many other practitioners. The most
recent testimony upon this point, and the more important
property of the medicine in suspending the status epilepticus,
80 SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS.
is met with in the " Annual Report of the New York City
Lunatic Asylum," by Dr Macdonald, who says: " Nitrate of
amyl has been employed not only in the status epilepticus, but
in the condition resembling it observed in General Paresis. In
all cases it has shown itself of value in interrupting the status
during its exhibition; and in about two-thirds of the cases in cut-
ting it short entirely." This arrestment of a condition generally
fatal to life seems to have been first recorded by Dr J. Crichton
Browne in the "Wakefield Asylum Reports." He details five cases
in which, notwithstanding the extreme gravity of the symptoms,
the inspiration of the amyl suspended the status, and the sufferers
were restored to their ordinary bodily and mental health. Some-
what similar success attended the exhibition of the remedy in
the hands of Dr.M'Bride (see "Chicago Journal," April 1875) and
others. Its employment in the practice of M. Charcot in such
circumstances was not so encouraging; but that he trusts to a
certain degree of efficacy in the mean, or hopes that such may
yet be demonstrated, is proved by his reliance upon its aid in
hystero-epilepsy. In nine cases taken from his clinic, the agent
is resorted to as supplementing other resources. Not only is the
physiological action of the agent in the coloration of the face,
lips, buccal mucous membrane, the eyes, in elevating the
temperature and circulation, and perhaps in modifying the con-
stitution of the blood carefully noted, but its influence in
mitigating or temporarily postponing convulsion, is declared to
be incontestable, although the progress of the disease may not
be interfered with. The additional resources upon which M.
Charcot and his pupil mainly depend in the treatment of hystero-
epilepsy, are the application of ice, and especially of pressure,
in the region of the ovaries, where there is almost invariably
hvper-anaesthesia,with semi-ansethesia on the opposite side. These
appliances, if resorted to contemporaneously with the aura,
prevent the fit, and if during the attack, they arrest it. Two
very long narratives of typical instances of the affection are
given, occupying, in fact, more than one-third of the whole
volume. But these pages are worthy of perusal, as detailing
the various steps and stages of hystero-epilepsy terminating in
recovery?in one after a course of fifty-three years, in another of
forty-six years. The close of the disease in the latter was abrupt,
almost sudden, and this coincides with the experience of M.
Charcot in such complications. They are further deserving of
consideration, inasmuch as either the neurose described has dis-
appeared from this country with the Leaping Ague and Revival
Excitement, or we are prone to confound with pure Hysteria
what is in fact a complex affection. These histories include
almost a nosology, and present not merely every phase of motor
SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS. 81
and sensory disease, but almost every form of constitutional
ill to which flesh is heir. It would be vain to attempt to catch
and record the proteiform conditions and casualties of these
patients, or even to epitomise the essential characteristics of
each ; but we would direct attention to that singular aspect of
involuntary, or partially voluntary, muscular arrangement in
which the attitude of crucifixion is assumed and maintained for
hours. Of this grotesque position an engraving from a photo-
graph is given. We know of the occurrence of this symptom in
Theomania and Extatics, where volition was slightly, if at all,
impaired; and where it constituted a link between mental de-
rangement and paralysis; and in those accredited sane; but the
prevailing religious opinions in Great Britain do not favour
such imitations nor the emotions in which they originate. Of
the transition of morbid mental impressions into the act of
crucifixion, an illustration will be found in Dr Forbes Winslow's
book on Suicide,* while an equally striking example of the issue
of criminal and religious excitement in the perpetration of the
same form of suicide, in a person regarded as sane, is given in
Dr L. S. Forbes Winslow's recent brochure on Spiritualism.f
II. This is no new and unnamed neurose. It is simply hys-
teria, or,in order to embrace all the phenomena,real or imaginary,
it may be styled hystero-epilepsy viewed under a transcendental
aspect and through a pseudo-scientific medium. The magnify-
ing power by which the author has examined the symptoms
might have disclosed to him much self-deception, if not dis-
simulation, and have impressed him with a clearer conviction
of charlatanism than he appears to have arrived at. We venture
upon this trenchant criticism thus early, although the narrative
be stamped by the sanction of six physicians, three of whom are
encomiaised as distinguished, and although the marvellous facts
recounted are placed under the safeguard of the automatism of
memory and somnambulism, as we feel well assured that the
following exposition will justify this condemnation. Here we
have a sensitive, susceptible, self-willed, and perhaps parentally
indulged girl, subject, in early life, to convulsions which leave
their trail in lameness; who is consigned to a convent, where
she naturally prefers, to duties or devotion, solitude, secret
reading, and reverie, taking little food and less sleep. The
bite of a gnat was followed by erysipelas, and then by tosis of
the left eye and immobility of the same cheek, and subsequently
by progressive paralysis of the right leg and arm. At this
stage the physician of the establishment., having more faith in
religion than in medicine, hands over his patient to the influence
* Anatomy of Suicide, 1840, p. 331. t Spiritualistic Madness, 1877, p. 34,
PART I. VOL. Ill?NEW SERIES. j?
82 SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS.
of the Virgin and the Rosary. "When prevented from composing
verses she is irritated, seized by syncope, which returns daily at
the same hour. This unconsciousness resolved itself into violent
hysteric paroxysms, during which death is anticipated ; but this
painful event seems to have been averted by the occurrence of
the vacation. During a second session at school similar symptoms
reappear, complicated with hsematemesis; after which the fits
cease, and temporary restoration is effected by a return home?
in consequence of her mother's death?and a trip to the south,
which seems invariably to have been crowned with convalescence.
A relapse which happened about this time?ushered in by loss of
consciousness so profound and prolonged that the last offices of
the Church were administered?was subsequently characterised
by the dominion of imagination, melancholia, and abstinence
of two months' duration. A second series of morbid phenomena
exhibited irritability of temper, depression, wild speculations as
to the mystery and object of her life, cerebral congestion, and
fits, which were combated by blisters, leeches, and removing
the patient into purer air, but without benefit. Iron, quinine,
baths seemed to aggravate her condition, while a refusal of
ordinary food ended in the adoption of a diet of plaster and
roses, to which was sometimes added mustard as a condiment.
Upon other occasions her delicacies were vinegar, chalk, salad,
and a sort of tart. Her medical adviser enjoined a daily
record of her thoughts and feelings. Her confessions consist of
a grotesque mixture of delirious and despairing avowals ; specu-
lations on her personal experience, on her desire to bite those
around, and so forth. The protiform and chameleon-like
changes during a single night often included fever, incoherence,
convulsive crisis, unconsciousness; in short, all the characteristics
marking the whole period of her indisposition. What appear to
have been unequivocal epileptiform attacks ended in violent
contractions of the muscles of the right side, erotic movements
were associated with the hysteric paroxysms, and somnambulism
passed into catalepsy, which could be evoked by the touch of
the medical attendant. The external senses of smell, taste, and
touch were suspended, the insensibility of the latter being so
complete that blows were inflicted to the effusion of blood,?as
in the Convulsionaries of St. Medard,?without producing response
or complaint; sleep became so abnormal or imperfect that she
obeyed the commands of her physician, but of no one else, during
its continuance; and the peculiar manifestations of clair-
voyance were developed. The tests or triumphs of this super-
numerary sense or faculty were such as are now familiar in
our public seances. She could divine what was contained in
the pocket of a physician in consultation; she could see the
SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS. 83
hours on a watch placed on the epigastrium, the figure on a
coin or the nature of a liquid touching the same region. But
such experiments were likewise marked by failures. Prediction
during somnambulism was added to this gift, and she announced
the return of convulsions, the time of her cure. During this
state she conversed freely, and obeyed the will or gestures of her
special medical attendant. The muscular contractions, espe-
cially of the thorax or throat, were occasionally so extreme as
to threaten asphyxia; and dysphagia, except when roses were
offered, existed even in the attacks. But a new feature pre-
sented itself, and during the soliloquies of her sleeping
consciousness she revealed her intention to commit suicide,
enumerating the various modes and the objections to them,
from carbonic acid to chloroform, and from precipitation to
asphyxia, to which she had formerly fruitlessly resorted; but
the salutary and opportune remonstrances of her physician,
administered while she was still in trance-coma, effectually
dissuaded her from this purpose. It is curious to note that her
repugnance to death by carbonic acid was, that the features
became hideous, and that she wished " to remain beautiful,"
even after " the last scene of all." On her own authority,
obtained in the same way, magnetic passes relieved headache;
she saw visions, such as her mother's grave ; disclosed halluci-
nations?but whether her detection of the presence of a holy
medal and of its effects was one of these we shall not pretend
to aver?and actually wrote down absurd or unintelligible
philosophical propositions, declaring that, if not dictated by an
internal voice, an unseen hand compelled her to trace the
characters. After episodes of rhythmic and erotic movements,
corresponding to the arterial pulsations, and mimicry of what
was passing around; what is called " transmission of thought"
supervenes. This is defined by the somnambulist as the com-
munication of thought and memory,by the nervous or electric fluid
from the magnetiser to the person magnetised. A more
startling phase marks the progress of this infirmity or inspira-
tion. The hand which guided her in writing, and which she
apostrophises as beautiful, imprints upon her wrist a red and, as
if, a burning mark, which remains visible for a week, and thus
raises her to the rank of a Stigmatic. Eelapses, created by fear
and chequered by the usual concomitants of convulsions, som-
nambulism, choreaic movements, and ultimately cured by mag-
netism, occur; but the concluding scene, like that of other
romances, reveals perfect recovery and marriage, after darkness
and disease continuing for four years, perhaps from infancy.
A second case follows, in which the subject, of the same age,
differed materially from the first in that she did labour under
84 SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS.
amenorrhcea, that she was of goodly stature and strength, neither
hysterical nor unhealthy; but agreed in so far that a slight
nervous irritation inflames and involves the whole system and
is succeeded by the following consequences. Toothache neces-
sitates extraction, which is followed by convulsions and tetanus,
temporarily relieved by the use of chloroform and the applica-
tion of leeches to the thighs. In the course of a few hours
trismus and rigidity of the lower extremities introduces clonic
spasms of extreme violence, which are invariably reproduced by
the touch of a cold finger. Hyperesthesia of touch leads her to
believe that she walks on needles ; but the functions of the senses
of taste and smell are suspended, and when the eyes are shut the
power of co-ordination of the muscles is lost. After a period
anaesthesia becomes the substitute of hyperesthesia, and the
stomach becomes endowed with clairvoyance, so that she can dis-
tinguish the nature of fluids without tasting them. Four severe
attacks of hysteria give place to catalepsy and prediction during
somnambulism of recovery on a certain day. She obeys all injunc-
tions addressed to her by her medical attendant, but awakes insen-
sible to pain. She is restored to sleep by a fixed look, sensation re-
turns, she answers questions, and obeys the volitions of the operator.
Headache and paralysis are induced by his touch, while magnetic
passes remove both. During a relapse, marked by such violent
convulsions and erotic movements that two men were required to
restrain her agitation, palsy is again produced by the will of the
physician, and mutism by touching the patient's tongue, a
result which ensued even when the impression was made by
others. Slight contraction of the right leg, which remained
after all other symptoms had disappeared, gradually passed away,
and the patient recovered, without any other than mesmeric
medication, at the precise period she had prophesied, but was
not, so far as we understand, married.
M. Billet adds a postcript, in which a sketch is given of the
gradual development of the doctrines as to artificial and mag-
netic sleep, animal magnetism, and hypnotism in the works of
Puysegur, Dupotet,and in the Report of the French Academy; but
by English psychologists these theories are either doubted, dis-
believed, or only partially accredited, and nothing more is re-
quired of us than to hint that these cases of hysteria have been
drawn up by one who is a spiritualist, who believes in medicine
much, but in magnetism more.
III. It is the blot and blemish on the present generation that
even those of educated minds recoil from the admission of a super-
natural element in the consideration of human affairs. Such
disinclination is not the offspring of the humility of conscious
SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS. 85
ignorance, but of the arrogant presumption which craves
universal knowledge. The Sceptic sees no limits to human
capabilities; even the enlightened Orthodox?impressed with the
vast extent of discovery?is blind to the facts that of the primary-
origin or ultimate issue of every natural law, and of its appli-
cation in the progress of our race, we are, and must ever remain,
profoundly ignorant. There is a superstition and a recognition
of illogical premises and half truths in unbelief as well as
in belief. Even the scientific doubter will receive a superficial,
a semi-solution, rather than obtain no explanation at all; he
invents theories and remains satisfied; and wherever he fails to
penetrate or comprehend a difficult3,he denounces it as an error,
a mystery, a delusion. It might conduce to the advancement
and precision of knowledge could a line of demarcation be
drawn between the knowable and the unknowable, a region
separating science from faith, a stage or stages beyond which
inquiry should not be prosecuted. Such circumscription would
still leave an almost boundless territory for investigation on
both sides of the limit, and might prevent the vain and abortive
speculations which close in disappointment, and, what is worse,
expend and exhaust energies which might be profitably exerted
in a different direction and on practicable subjects. The
tendency to explain everything, to elect the intellect into a
divining power, and to claim the manifestations of moral con-
victions or of credulity as coming within the positivist category
of what we can touch, taste, handle, may be traced even in that,
land of sanctity and sacerdotalism, Belgium. What has until
very recently been regarded as within sacred precincts, as in thf
very shadow of the Church?the experiences and extasies of
devotees, of many who are already or who may become cano-
nised saints?has been submitted to public, or rather academic,
scrutiny and criticism. It should be confessed that the examina-
tion has been conducted, upon the whole, respectfully and re-
verentially. Of the many medical observers whose opinions are
introduced in the publication before us, one, M. Lefebvre, boldly
contends " II y manque tout, car il y manque Dieu," and the
author M. Warlomont, who attributes the phenomena inves-
tigated to a corporeal orgin, admits that
Toujours un peu de verite
Se mele au plus grossier mensonge.
Of the class of extatics and stigmatics, for such it is, to which
the subject of this memoir belongs, this is the first member
submitted to scientific inspection. One hundred and sixty-four
have been recorded ; of these four are mentioned by Lord Shrews-
86 SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS.
bury, and quoted by Dr Binns,* and seven are cursorily alluded to
by Dr Hammond ;f but of the latter, although all living in modern
and inquisitive times, none of them, except Louise Lateau,
appear to have passed through a medical or analytic ordeal.
All were members of the Church of Home, and this connection
appears necessarily the first step along that path which con-
ducted to the condition, whatever its nature might be, about to
be described; but the allegation that the individuals affected
were chiefly the outcome of Conventual Life, and the Mendicant
Orders of that community, is erroneous. We shall first present
the history, physiological and moral, of the extatic; then the
peculiar, and, as it is asserted, pathological indications which
followed and accompanied her religious impressions; and lastly,
the approximative conclusions arrived at by the reporter, his
collaborateur and correspondents.
A peasant girl, set. 24, lost her father when a few months
old, receiving the contagion of variola from him. Her family
was extremely poor, supported by their own labour; she acting
as nurse, farm servant, and in other capacities by turns, and
was,While a domestic drudge, well nourished. She was affected
with chlorosis, eczema, tumour of axilla, and was wounded by
a cow which she herded, but worked bravely, attended school
for five months, and learned the Catechi'sm. Subsequently she
laboured under hsematemesis and anaemia, and, although she
abstained from food for a month, the catamenia were established.
A rapid improvement in physical health was followed by a
disposition to silence, solitude, religious meditations and
utterances, daily communion and pious observances. At this
stage she was conscious of the appearance of the Virgin and
of Mediaeval Extatics, such as St. Ursula and St. Theresa.
After manifesting a modification of levation, or raising the
body on the points of the fingers and toes, she passed,
periodically, especially during her constitutional change,
into a state of unconsciousness, attitudinisation, or extasy,
previous to and during which appeared stigmata, or wounds
corresponding tj those inflicted under crucifixion, which dis-
charged blood and serum for eighteen hours, but invariably
on Thursday and Friday, healing up during the intervening
week, and leaving no cicatrix nor mark of the supposed solution
of continuity. The wound in the left side was first noticed,
then those on the feet and hands, and lastly the bloody points
representing the injuries inflicted by the crown of thorns.
Notwithstanding these marvellous occurrences L. L. engaged
in her ordinary avocations in the house and garden, and while
* Anatomy of Sleep, p. 160. t Spiritualism and Nervous Derangement, p. 340.
SENSOItl-MOTOR AFFECTIONS. 87
her sisters pursued their occupation as seamstresses. This com-
pressed analysis of what was patent to all around exhausts
what may be called the natural and explicable life of Louise
Lateau. The pathological or supernatural attributes or acts,
as they may be differently viewed, fall now to be enumerated.
It is affirmed that she has swallowed no food for three years
and a half; that the stomach rejected by vomiting all save
the sacred elements when she endeavoured to comply with the
wishes of her friends, the act being attended by retelling and
haematemesis ; that neither the bowels, skin, nor bladder had
acted for years ; that the functions of the uterus were regular;
but that, notwithstanding this protracted unnatural condition,
her body continued robust or plump. A bruit de souffle
was generally heard when the heart was examined; the
pulse was undisturbed?generally about 70?except during the
extatic paroxysm, when it rose to 100 or 120; a rise of tem-
perature and fever invariably preceding and marking the
suspension of consciousness and the discharge from the stigmata.
She never slept; but intervals of absence of mind occurred
during insomnia. She suffered exquisite pain, amounting to
agony, but most intense around the wounds and during her abnor-
mal state, and it was aggravated by the touch of a bystander.
There was, notwithstanding, anaesthesia, tested by electricity;
but while the sense of touch was excited, smell and taste were
abolished, although the tongue continued moist; vision was my-
opic; and hearing unimpaired. The prodromes of the impending
somnambulic excitement?which continued for eighteen hours?
were pain, the appearance of bullae in the site of the surfaces about
to bleed, and the assumption of a peculiar position. \Vh3n fully
established, the fits consisted of three stages : in the first, while
seated in a chair, the movements of the body followed those of
the open but insensible eye; in the second the patient knelt; in
the third she prostrated herself. During all of these, although
unconscious, she obeyed the voice and will of the priest, not
merely in protruding the tongue for the reception of the Host,
but in the performance of common acts; but was not aroused
or awakened by the presence of curious strangers, although
upon one occasion twenty-five crowded into her small apartment.
While flowing from the open surfaces the blood seemed to
consist of the usual constituents coagulated; but, on the ces-
sation of the haemorrhage, no true cicatrice remained, although
the site and size of the breach could be traced, both on the feet
and hands, by a crevice remaining between the bones; while,
when the brown spots were washed from the forehead, nothing
but the pores of the skin could be detected. The sore upon the
shoulder, supposed to shadow forth an abrasion produced by
88 SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS.
the cross, and the opening on the left side, did not engage much
attention. When the anomalous features of the case are kept in
mind almost every vigil, test, theory was, as might have been
expected, dictated by a preconceived notion, or inspired by the
expectation of detecting fraud or fanaticism. The clumsiness,
inapplicability, and inefficacy of many of these experiments
may be judged of from what follows. The reality of the pro-
fessed long protracted abstinence depends for proof on the
averments of L. L. herself, of her friends, on the evidence of
certain men of science, who watched beside her for three days
and two nights; while the disproof hinges upon the robustness,
unvarying weight, and general health of the body while these
were not maintained by any nitrogenous element or by any
increment save the Eucharist and cold water, and while a certain
amount of debility must have resulted from weekly haemorrhages,
from the suspension of those functions upon the equilibrium
of which health depends, and by the pervigliam, the excitement
and perverted sensibility, as to the recurrence of which there could
be but little doubt; but the daring hypothesis of Chabonnier
that nitrogen might be introduced into the system by the
lungs is summarily rejected. The expiration of carbonic acid
was several times unequivocally established. That there was
no hypertrophy, either of the epidermis or the lung tissue, as
advanced by one authority, as explanatory of determination of
blood to those organs, is, we think, very clear. The qualitative
and quantitative elements of the blood were determined, micro-
scopically, to be such as would exist under ansemia. When the
point from which the fluid exuded was examined, red turgescent
papillae of the epidermis were discovered at the bottom of the
wound, resembling fleshy granulations. These were not removable
by washing. But the inquiry arose, did blood actually flow on
Friday, or at any other time, from these spots or orifices. That
either a current or, at all events, clpts of blood did appear on or
in the vicinity of the stigmata on the days specified could not
well be disputed ; but as gloves, which were the first means
adopted in order to frustrate external interference, could not
prevent friction and irritation, the right arm was enclosed in
an ample glass cylinder, attached and sealed to the patient's dress
in such a manner that it could not be removed nor even dis-
turbed, and did not restrain the change of posture. This
apparatus, the contrivance of M. Warlomont, the narrator, was
applied to the arm on Thursday, and allowed to remain for
twenty hours, or two beyond the usual duration of the crisis.
When the arm was exposed there were found to be clots of
blood on or in both wounds of the hand, while a smaller quan-
tity in a state of fluidity had passed into the glass vessel; in fact,
SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS. 89
the appearances resembled those repeatedly noticed when no pre-
cautions had been resorted to. The majority of the phenomena
recorded having been detailed, we proceed to give a few of the
many explanations which have been attempted. M. Chabonnier,
who first excited public and professional attention upon the sub-
ject, conceives that all extatics are diseased, that fasting is a
prodrome or preparation for succeeding stages in the chain of
causation. These are very numerous, but are common to all
other forms of religious mental depression or exaltation, as well
as to extasy and mysticism. He conceives that specimens of
this class are never found in large cities, where the atmosphere
does not contain ozone, rarely in temperate, but frequently in
warm, latitudes. The affection is confined chiefly to females and
adults. Insisting strongly on the influence of waste of tissue and
debility, commenting upon the fallacy of attributing to spiritual
what is due to natural causes, he finds in constitutional disorder,
hallucinations, syncope, and so forth, morbid elements which are
incompatible with life by determining haemorrhages from the
lungs and skin, or with the normal states of the nervous
system. He then details the manifestation of certain latent
faculties roused by the stimulus of necessity, and under certain
abnormal states of the system, such as the instinct of traversing
the desert; the development of such a degree of animal electri-
city as is often emitted from the hair sometimes in the forma-
tion of an aureole ; the escape from drowning during lethargy;
the penetration into the thoughts of others by facial expression;
and associated these with that nervous constitution which
originates illusions and hallucinations. He then delivers the
opinion that pious contemplation, fostered by fastings that the
feelings of compassion, reverence, love, and the disposition to
dwell upon the most perfect example of the moral and religious
character, induce the desire and the effort to imitate and re-
semble the model constantly before the mind; and he then asserts
that these internal impressions, which produce first a san-
guineous, and then a nervous, fluxion towards the skin, and
ultimately, by great concentration, htemorrhage, in other words,
stigmatisation, profound reverie or extasy, with a modification
of volition, are invariably conjoined in this process. The mystic
is a clairvoyant or somnambulist, as if under animal mag-
netism, beholds nothing but the object of her adoration, and
obeys no orders except those given by persons in spiritual
relation to her.
M. Warlomont, the reporter of the views of the Commission
appointed by the Academy, opens the discussion by repeating
the interrogatory which has been addressed by every reflecting
man to himself when contemplating the acts of extatics and
90 SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS.
the vast body of hysterics : " If this be deception, what motive
or object can actuate the impostor ?" He then passes in
review the most interesting and notorious instances of simu-
lation : double-consciousness or automatism; alternate palsy
and perfect muscular control without consciousness or recol-
lection, liynoptism ; somnambulism, spontaneous or induced;
effects of imagination, when directed to particular organs;
by interference with nutrition; by the creation of pain, and
by the inducing ecchymosis and enlargement of capillaries.
But supposing that these analogues to extasy and its concomi-
tants, remote although many of them are, were admitted, it
is difficult to understand in what way they affect the subject
under consideration, or, indeed, approach it; except that the
faculty of attention, or the concentration of the mind upon
one object, seems to be powerfully, if not morbidly, exalted in
all. M. Warlomont is fully alive to this objection; for while
he places fixity of thought and emotion in the first rank
of causes, he seeks support from many subordinate and obscure
mental physiological and pathological laws, or in disobedience
to these, in his solution of the complex problem before him. He
fails, we think, in affording a satisfactory explanation, but
is modest and moderate in propounding substitutes for what he
has sought. It is quite obvious that, in the instance of Louise
Latenu, there is but one concept or class of concepts; that this is
the Mission, Passion, or bodily injuries and sufferings of the
Saviour; that she portrays and personifies these intently and
incessantly in her consciousness, probably transferring them
locally to her own body, and this to the exclusion of every other
impression, idea, and feeling. It is highly probable that this
poor girl had heard from the legends of her Church of stigmata,
and believed in them as marks of Divine favour; it is further
in perfect accordance with the course of introspection, that she
might have connected that which she saw with its repetition in
her own person; but it is expressly asserted in the recital, that
she neither willed, wished, nor anticipated such a sign. What
passed through her mind during the weekly rapture was en-
tirely subjective, except in so far as her confessions could be
trusted. The complications in the muscular and nervous
systems might have been hysterical, although we are told that
she never experienced the epigastric or dorsal pain, or other
characteristics of the disease: but the state of the circulation
set at naught such a supposition. In dealing with the transu-
dation of blood from the surface in different places without
discernible rupture of the skin or capillaries, terminating spon-
taneously, and without leaving any, or very slight, indication of
what had happened, M. Warlomont takes refuge in the inchoate
SEXSOM-MOTOR AFFECTIONS. 91
hypothesis of Diaped&se, which represents, according to M.
Cohnheim, the transmission of the blood corpuscles through the
walls of the extreme capillaries, which consist of flattened cells
of extreme tenuity, and which are connected either by a fusion of
the protoplasm or by an animal cement, the orifice of the tubes
thus constructed being separated from the lymphatic sheaths by
a vacant space, into which may be poured their solid contents,
the blood globules floating in serum, without any destruction of
their integrity or continuity, an escape or error loce, more fre-
quent, it is presumable, during acceleration of the circulation
than at other times. The stomata created by such an irruption
may, it is intelligible, disappear and leave no trace behind. But
our essayist does not abandon altogether the effort to localise the
precise spot in the brain upon which this and similar neuroses
depend. This region, according to what he designates "une
remarquable puissance d'induction " on the part of MM. Demar-
quay and Griraud Teulon, is to be found between the corpora
quadrigemina and the peduncules cerebri, but may comprehend
that part of the bulb which is connected with nervous sleep, and
even the point of the calamus scriptorius, which is supposed to
preside over the duplicate action of the vaso-motor nerves. In
these latter paragraphs there have been embodied the views of
M. Warlomont, in a great measure speculative, of the nature and
relations of the extraordinary conditions which he was called
upon by the Academy to describe and define; and these may be
epitomised still further, as comprehending (1) profound pious
meditation, abstraction, and image-picturing deep; (2) emotion
attended by excitation and cerebral changes in the bulb and sur-
rounding parts, involving unconsciousness, insensibility, and it
may be illusion ; (3) these molecular disturbances provoke a
discharge of surplus nervous energy to certain points in the
extremities idealised by the patient. The vaso-motor nerves
first causing the dilatation and then the contraction of the
arteries and capillaries, educe a determination of blood to the
points previously selected, and a consequent overflow of the con-
tents through epithelial films, which cannot be said to be either
broken down or repaired.
That these ingenious, though barely concatenated, proposi-
tions fully or fairly account for all, or many, of the manifesta-
tions, physical or psychical, in Louise Lateau we cannot admit.
It has been said that when Virchow read the memoir, his
exclamation was, " Either a trick or a miracle." We are not
inclined to embrace either alternative in totality; but we candidly
confess that rather than receive " the internal light, the growth
of thought that is to say, the initial molecular vivification, which
at first slowly, but at length by hyper-activity, is transformed
92 SENSORI-MOTOR AFFECTIONS.
into the ideogenous molecules, which then cohere and constitute
the mechanism of the marvellous faculty attention " (p. 142), or
" the repeated junction of these congeries of molecules, as a
reproductive of sensation or memory" (p. 140), as affording the
faintest or most fanciful solution of the difficulties presented in
extatic stigmatisation, we should prefer to regard the phenomena
as miraculous.
But, although untrustworthy in his premises and philosophical
deductions, we conceive M. Warlomont to be cautious and sound
in his practical conclusions.
I. " The extasies and stigmata of Louise Lateau are real
but we protest against the second division of the sentence, that
" they have been physiologically explained."
If. " That the malady of Louise Lateau (if malady it be)
may be arranged under the class neurose, and named neuropathie
stigmatique."
III. " As Louise Lateau works, gives off heat, as her breath
contains water and carbonic acid, which must be derived from
some external source; as her weight has not diminished while
under observation, and as she loses blood weekly; so, unless her
complete abstinence be better established than it is, she must be
believed to take food."
N.B.?Somewhat in contrast to the portrait of Louise Lateau
is added that of another Belgian extatic. She was a strong,
healthy girl, working and eating like her fellow-labourers, some-
what pale, but neither chlorotic, neuralgic, nor subject to
haemorrhage; at first hilarious, then somewhat depressed, but
at all times inclined to dwell upon the sufferings of our Saviour.
From the age of twenty she daily trod the Via Dolorosa; but not
until nine years afterwards did she experience extasies which
continued for twenty-four hours. During these crises she was
altogether unconscious of what passed around, and took no
nourishment. About two months before her death stigmata
appeared in all the usual places ; that in the side resembling the
wound from a spear, those in the hands and feet seemed to have
been inflicted by a nail; and all discharged blood. The first
discharge took place on Friday, reappeared on the same day
every succeeding week, and was attended by great physical
suffering. Although the blood ceased to flow towards the close
of the paroxysm, the wounds never closed. Hiematemesis preceded
her death, which occurred in 1874, when she was thirty years
of age. Latterly the patient fed sparingly on bread and
legumes, but for the last two months partook of no solid food.
