Insanity in The Middle States of America
=========================================

939
Art. IV.?
:Author:  Edward C. Mann, M.D.
Late Medical Superintendent State Emigrant Asylum, Ward's Island, New York.

Insanity is, in the middle states, as in the other states,
increasing disproportionately to the increase of population ; and
it also seems to be appearing at an earlier age than formerly,
which latter fact is probably due to hereditary influences,
which have gradually become intensified by violation of physical
laws in early life, want of proper training, or too high pressure
in education. Next to hereditary predisposition, which is the
first and great predisposing cause of insanity in the middle
states, as elsewhere, comes the great mental activity and strain
upon the nervous system that appertains to the present age
and state of civilisation. This feverish haste and unrest which
characterise us as a people, the undue predominance of the
nervous temperament, and the want of proper recreation and
sleep tend to a rapid decay of the nervous system and to
insanity, as a necessary sequence. It is much to be deplored
that intemperance is operating more and more, each succeeding
year, as a formidable cause in the production of insanity. It is
not too much to say that twenty-five per cent, of all cases of
insanity admitted into the asylums of our middle states is due
either proximately or remotely to intemperance, which has
produced a permanently diseased state of the brain due to
the interference in the nutrition, growth, and renovation of the
brain tissue. The evil does not stop here; for the offspring
of intemperate parents are growing up in our midst with
weakened, if not actually diseased, nervous systems, and will
inevitably, in time, become insane, diseased, or idiots. The
relative increase in the proportion of the insane to the sane
population is more favourable in the middle states than in some
others. The census returns for 1870 of the United States
show an increase of insanity of fifty-five per cent., while the
increase of the general population has been only twenty-two
per cent. The proportion of insane to sane population has
increased from 1860, when it was shown that the entire popu-
lation of the United States was 31,443,321, with an insane
population of 23,999, or one insane person in every 1,310 of
the whole population; up to 1875, inclusive, when, by bringing
up the calculation at the same rate of increase for both , sane
and insane population as obtained between 1860 and 1870, we
find the former to be 42,115,896, and the latter or insane
population 44,148, or one insane person in every 953 of the
whole population of the United States. It may not be un-
interesting to glance for a moment at the proportion of insane
to sane population in other countries as compared with our
own. In England there is one insane person to every 403 of
the whole population, or more than double the proportionate
number of the United States. In France there is an average
of about one insane person to every 600 of the whole population.
In Scotland there is one insane person to every 336 of the sane
population, while in Ireland there is one insane person in every
302 of the population. In the United States, California ex-
hibits the greatest proportion of insane to sane population,
there being one in every 484. This is due to local causes.

Massachusetts shows the next greatest proportionate number
of insane, while the New England States, as a whole, have a
greater relative increase in the proportion of the insane to the
sane population than is observable in either the middle,
southern, or western states. In the care, the treatment, in
finely appointed institutions, and in scientific investigations
into the causes of insanity, the middle states hold a place of
which they may be very justly proud.

NEW YORK.

In the year 1844, the state of New York erected the first
Insane Asylum at Utica, which has accommodations for 600
patients. In 1867 the Willard Asylum for the chronic insane
was erected at Ovid and provides accommodations for 1,100
patients. The state has three more institutions for the care
and treatment of the insane : one at Poughkeepsie, one at
Middletown, and one at Buffalo. These asylums will famish
for the next few years ample and adequate provisions for the
acute insane, while for the 1,300 or 1,500 of the chronic insane,
now in county institutions, are needed asylums similar to the
one in successful operation at Ovid. King's county and New
York county provide for their insane under special statutes.
The former county provides for 800 or 1,000 insane and the
latter for over 1,700. On Ward's Island is situated the State
Emigrant Insane Asylum, which provides for the insane emi-
grants for the term of five years from the time of their landing
in this country. This asylum furnishes accommodations for
about 200 patients. The annual expense per patient in this
institution is #150. The per capita cost of building, #1,138,
and the total annual cost, #22,500. There are upward of 500
patients in private asylums; so that the insane population of
New York state is probably not far from 7,000 or 8,000 at the
present time. The census of June 30, 1870, enumerated
6,353 insane. The annual expense per patient at the State
Asylum at Utica is $271. The per capita cost of building is
estimated at $1,061, while the total annual cost of the asylum
is $157,939. The state appropriates annually $15,000, and
each county pays $5.42 per week for its own paupers. The
annual expense per patient in the Willard Asylum is $174.
The per capita cost of building, $942, while the total annual
cost of the asylum is $181,542. Each county pays for its
own paupers.

The annual expense per patient in the two New York
county institutions is, in the New York City Asylum for the
insane $92.89, and for the New York Lunatic Asylum on
Blackwell's Island $73.84. The annual expense per patient in
the King's County Lunatic Asylum, situated at Flatbush, L. I.,
is $120. The total annual cost for these three county institu-
tions for the insane is as follows : New York City Asylum for
the insane, Ward's Island, $53,504; New York Lunatic Asylum,
Blackwell's Island, $89,420 ; King's County Lunatic Asylum,
Flatbush, $92,400. The annual expense for the Hudson River
State Hospital for the insane at Poughkeepsie is $50,000 (ap-
propriated by the state) and has capacity of 600 patients. It
is built of brick and has* attached to it 333 acres of land.
There are at present 207 patients occupying it. The Buffalo
State Asylum for the insane is not yet completed. It is built
of red sandstone and brick and has attached to it 200 acres of
land. The State Asylum for insane criminals at Auburn,
N. Y., was erected in 1859 at a cost of $125,000, and has 842
acres of land attached to it. The cost of subsequent additions
has been $52,000, making the total cost of the present building
$177,000. The per capita cost of the building is $1,222.
The number of patients is 118, and the annual expense per
patient is $208. The state appropriates annually $16,000 for
this institution. The total annual cost of the institution is
$24,544. The laws of New Icork relating to the commitment
of the insane provide that no person shall be committed to, or
confined as a patient in any asylum, public or private, except
upon the certificate of two reputable physicians, under oath,
after a personal examination ot the party alleged to be insane,
setting forth the insanity of such person, said certificate to be
approved by a judge or justice ot a court of record of the county
or district in which the alleged lunatic resides. It would be very
desirable that an addition to the laws of New York, and also to
the laws relating to insanity in the other middle states, should
be made, so as to guard, as far as possible, against the unfortu-
nate results which are liable at any time to occur in the trials
of the insane for homicide. It would seem very desirable, in
order to secure society, to protect the legally and morally
innocent, and to ensure the punishment of the legally and
morally guilty, to have some improvement on the method now in
use in criminal trials of the insane. There should be in each
state a hoard of commissioners of lunacy, specially selected to
investigate and testify in regard to these cases. Such a com-
mission, appointed by the governor with the consent of the
senate, and consisting of able and experienced alienists, could
hardly fail to be of great benefit. They should visit the
prisoner before his trial, or still better, the prisoner's counsel
if intending to advance the plea of insanity, should be re-
quired to announce that fact to the district attorney, and the
prisoner should then be committed to the state asylum for the
investigation of his case. Being thus placed under the observa-
tion of such a board of experts, they would be afforded a better
opportunity for forming a correct judgment. They could then,
it such was the case, announce that the prisoner was insane and
unfit for trial, or in the event of a trial they could be called
into court and give their evidence and professional opinion
without being obliged to testify for either the prisoner or the
district attorney. In this way perfect impartiality and fairness
could be secured, and the jury would naturally attach great
weight to such testimony and would be led to an unprejudiced
and thoughtful view of the prisoner's condition, which is of
paramount importance in these cases. The jury would then
with the aid of the commission of experts, decide whether the'
act in question was the offspring or product of mental disease ?
whether he has sufficient mental power to control the sudden
impulses of his disordered mind; whether or no there exists an
inability to control mental action; whether the moral sense
may not have been overborne by the superior force derived from
disease, and other similar questions, the proper answers to which
would do much to make the results of these trials more certain
and satisfactory both to the legal and medical professions and
to the general public.

NEW JERSEY.

The New Jersey State Lunatic Asylum at Trenton, N. J.
was erected in 1848, and has attached to it 170 acres of land'
It has a capacity of 500 patients. The original cost of the
building was ?100,000, and the cost of subsequent additions has
been ?178,000, making a total cost of ?278,000. The per
capita cost of building is estimated to be ?556. There are 710
patients, with an annual expense per patient of ?258, and a
total annual cost of ?183,180. The state of New Jersey appro-
priates annually $8,000 for the asylum. Five-sixths of the
patients are paupers at $4.50 per week, paid by counties, while
one-sixth are pay patients at $6 per week. Among the patients
in this asylum are included the convict insane, numbering twenty-
five, who have been transferred to the institution from the state
prison, by virtue of the twelfth section of the act of the govern-
ment and regulation of the state prison, approved March 26th,
1869. For this class separate provision is urgently needed, so
that they can be separated from the other insane of the state.
Of the 4,806 cases treated since the opening of the institution
in 1848, 3,075 have been discharged improved or recovered, a
state of affairs very creditable to the administration of the
institution.

The new state asylum is situated at Morristown, N. J., and
has been erected at a projected cost of $2,250,000, and is one
of the finest institutions in this country, if not in the world.
The site is admirably selected and covers about 400 acres of
land, which cost $80,000. The asylum has a capacity of 800
patients. The per capita cost of building is estimated at $2,802.
The waterworks cost $20,000, and the water supply is said to be
four times enough to meet the ordinary wants of the institution.
It is expected that the reception of patients will be accomplished
very soon. The building has a frontage of 1,250 feet, and it is
a mile and a quarter around it, outside of the foundation line.
It is a four-storey, semi-gothic structure, built of Syenitic
granite, quarried on the grounds. All the main materials for
the building were also obtained on the ground?the stone, the
clay for bricks, etc. Brick has been made at the rate of 80,000
per day, about 15,000,000 having been used in the construction.
The law relating to the committal of the insane in New Jersey
requires the certificate of one physician, under oath, setting
forth the insanity of the patients, said certificate to be sworn to
before, and approved by, a judge of the state and county where
the person resides.

PENNSYLVANIA.

Pennsylvania has four state hospitals for the insane, each of
which provides accommodations for 500 patients, and it is ex-
pected that another will be erected in Philadelphia. There is
also a Friend's Hospital at Frankford, Pa. Previous to 1845,
there was no provision for the pauper insane who were confined
in county almshouses. Public sentiment has appreciated the
necessity and the wisdom of providing for the pauper insane
the best treatment possible. If I am not mistaken, the city of
Philadelphia is entitled to the credit for making the first regular
INSANITY IN THE MIDDLE STATES OF AMERICA. 237
provision for the insane ever made in America. In the year
1751, the Pennsylvania hospital at Philadelphia was incor-
porated by the provincial assembly, for the purpose of providing
for the indigent sick and for the care and cure of the insan<?
The first patient ever placed for treatment for insanity in an
American institution was admitted to that hospital on February
11, 1752. The second institution for the care of the insane
established in the United States was the asylum at Williams-
burg, Virginia, which was opened for the reception of patients
in 1773. At the present day we have in operation, or nearly
ready for occupancy, in the United States, seventy-six hospitals
for the insane, which will accommodate 29,000 patients. Since
the establishment in 1751 of the Pennsylvania hospital, with
its sound declaration of principles, which even at that time
recognised insanity as a physical disease capable of cure in
1805, when Dr Benjamin Rush delivered lectures on insanity
with clinical instruction in his wards?and down to the present
year, the one hundred and twenty-sixth since the hospital was
founded, and which is at present presided over by one of the
ablest and most distinguished of specialists in this department
of medicine, Dr Thomas S. Kirkbride, Pennsylvania has main-
tained a position in the application of state medicine to the
treatment of insanity of which she may be justly proud.
The law relating to the committal of the insane in Pennsyl-
vania requires the certificate of the patient's insanity from two
physicians of acknowledged respectability who shall have ex-
amined the patient within six days of its date, and this certifi-
cate must be sworn to before some magistrate, or judicial officer
in conformance with the law approved April 20, 1869. The'
annual expense of maintaining of patients in the three asylums
at Harrisburg, Dixmont, and Danville is respectively $250,
$251, and $234. The per capita cost of building was, for the
asylum at Harrisburg, $750, and at Dixmont, $1,375. The
total annual cost of the Harrisburg asylum is estimated at
$104,000, of the Dixmont asylum $129,000, and of the Dan-
ville asylum $57,000. There is a strong necessity for further
accommodation for the insane of Pennsylvania, and it is to be
hoped that another year will see that the bills which were
reported for the appropriation of funds for the completion of
the extension of the hospital at Danville, and for the new insane
hospital at Warren, will become laws, thus providing for the
insane now jn almshouses, jails, or in their own homes, with
their restoration to health indefinitely postponed for lack of
proper treatment. It has been very wisely determined, by the
commission appointed by the legislature to inquire into the
condition of the criminal insane, that a separate institution is
needed for this class, and they have recommended that such an
institution be erected in a central and easily accessible portion
of Pennsylvania. It is estimated that this will costal 50,000, and
that it will accommodate 100 patients. It is estimated that
about one person in 3,986 of the population of Pennsylvania
annually becomes insane. I he increase of the insane population
of 18/3 over that of 1864 was 36*04 per cent., while the increase
of the sane population for the same period was only 18*88 per cent.
The census of the insane in Pennsylvania on June 30, 1870 was
3,895. It is estimated by the Board of Public Charities at
Pennsylvania that, on June 30, 1873, there were 4,318, making
an increase of 423. It is also estimated that, at the present
rate of increase of insanity in Pennsylvania, there will be deve-
loped in ten years from 1873, 10,419 cases of insanity, which,
added to the number remaining insane in 1873 will make an
aggregate of 14,737. Of this number it is estimated that 5,064
will be cured and 3,583 will die, leaving in June 1883 6 093
insane persons living under the present system of treatment.
On the other hand, if, as will be shown in a subsequent part of
this paper, the chronic insane were to be placed in asylums
adapted to their needs, it would leave the hospitals free for the
necessary care and treatment of recent and curable cases who
are now deprived of the early treatment so essential to recovery.

DELAWAEE.

The insane in Delaware are scattered all over the state in
almshouses, jails, etc., and many of them are provided for in the
Pennsylvania hospital. Accurate statistics could not be obtained
respecting the number in the state.

PEO VISION FOE THE CIIEONIC INSANE.

From a thorough and extended examination of the reports
of our insane asylums?and these remarks cover not only the
middle states but apply equally as well to all of the states it
seems to be very evident that we are building large, expensive
institutions, fitted up with all the appurtenances demanded by
modern science for the treatment and cure of insanity, and that
as soon as such institutions are opened for the reception of
patients they become filled up with a class of cases, three-
fourths of whom are chronic and hopelessly insane patients. It
is no less evident that if proper provision is not made for this
class of the insane, each state must build, every few years, a
very expensive institution, for which every city and town must
he heavily taxed. What are we going to do to relieve this
rapidly increasing difficulty? If this class of the chronic
insane are well taken care of, they are going to live in this
hopelessly insane state?from which at the utmost not more
than 10 per cent, will ever recover?for years, costing for their
maintenance not less than $3.50 per week. It is a fact that
every medical superintendent of an institution for the insane
must have noticed that the presence of this incurable class of
patients exercises a very depressing and unfavourable effect upon
the minds of the recent and acute cases. If a patient perceives,
upon admission, that the population is made up principally of
patients who have been inmates for years, and for whom no hope
of cure is entertained by the medical officers, and that few
patients go out restored to health, the moral effect must neces-
sarily be depressing and disastrous upon the mind of such a
patient, and tend to retard his own recovery. At present, many
large, fine institutions, instead of being?as they were originally
intended to be?hospitals for the treatment and cure of the
insane, are merely asylums and receptacles for the retention of
patients at an enormous expenditure of money for architectural
display. The overcrowding of such institutions by the reten-
tion of the chronic insane precludes the possibility of proper
classification or proper ventilation. By transferring this class
of the chronic insane, and leaving the class of recent and curable
insane, we derive many advantages. First and foremost, the
patients understand that they are in a hospital, that they come
to be cured of a physical disease, and that by submitting to the
treatment and discipline of the institution, they will be cured.
Secondly, we have at our disposal ample room for proper classi-
fication, good ventilation, amusements, and recreation. The
present system of asylum management is defective and expen-
sive beyond the ability of the state to meet the demand, and
tends directly to increase the number of the chronic insane, as
ninety per cent, of the capacity of all of our state institutions
is occupied by the chronic insane to the exclusion of recent and
curable cases. This class of cases often become chronic and
incurable cases before they can obtain the proper curative hos-
pital treatment, which, if applied in time, would have resulted
in a speedy cure and restoration to their families, and a saving
of their productive power to the commonwealth. From an exami-
nation of the statistics of the state insane asylums in the United
States in 1875, it is seen that the total cost of 55 of these insti-
tutions is not far from $29,879,258. This makes an average
cost for each of these institutions of $543,259, and an average
per capita cost of $1,074 for each of the asylums in our country.
Now, I maintain that no state can afford to provide for the
chronic insane at such a per capita cost of hospital construction,
when they can be provided for at a per capita cost of construc-
tion of $300, by providing for them plain, substantial buildings.
It would be very easy and practicable to erect such buildings,
accommodating 50 patients, each for $15,000 each, while no
hospital accommodating the number that four such colleges or
buildings would provide for could be built for less than
$200,000.

For the chronic and harmless insane we do not need so
many attendants or such costly accommodations, as for acute
and recent cases. For the chronic insane we need plain but
substantial buildings, which should, I think, be located on a
large farm, so that the patients could all be employed out-of-
doors. In this way these patients could be made producers and
could be supported at comparatively little expense to the state,
and at the same time they would have the benefit accruing
from a good, plain, country style of living, with an abundance
of fresh air, sunlight, and regular and systematic occupation.
By such a course of treatment many would improve in general
health and some would probably recover, who never would have
been benefited if they had been confined in an asylum. Of
the thousand patients admitted to the asylum for the chronic
insane at Tewksbury, Mass., during the eight years of its exist-
ence, about one hundred have recovered or improved from out-
door work, and the experiment is regarded as a decided success.
The expense has averaged, I believe, not far from $100 a year
for each inmate, and it is stated by competent authority that
the patients are as well cared for as they were previous to their
admission. The establishment, in 1869, of the Butler Asylum
for the chronic insane, in Rhode Island, was found to be a very
successful experiment. It is a well managed institution, and the
trustees say regarding it, that " its result is to enlarge the
capacity of the hospital for the treatment of recent cases of
insanity, and thereby to increase its beneficial agency as a
curative institution." Quite a number of patients have re-
covered through the agency of the out-door work, and it is
stated that the patients are better cared for than before coming
to this institution. The annual saving to the state of Ehode
Island is stated to be over $12,000, while the amount saved
annually to the state of Massachusetts, by the establishment of
the Tewksbury Asylum, is stated to be $25,000 or over
$200,000 since its establishment. The Willard Asylum for
the chronic insane at Ovid, in New York, regarded by many as
an experiment of doubtful expediency, to say the least, has
proved, under the skilful management of its able medical super-
intendent, Dr John B. Chapin, to be a highly successful
measure. The trustees say in their last report, " The idea
heretofore promulgated that the chronic insane could not be so
well cared for in a separate asylum, and that it was better
to retain them in a hospital with recent and acute cases,
has proved on trial here to be a fallacy." That other
institutions are beginning to appreciate the difficulties arising
from treating the recent and chronic insane in the same
institution will be seen from the following: In the last annual
report of the medical superintendent of the lunatic asylum at
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, 1 find these remarks :

" Of the sixty-four patients who remain in the asylum at
present, nine-tenths are cases of chronic mania, from twenty-
five years' standing down, and of whose recovery, or even
material improvement, no hope can be entertained." No
remedy, however, is suggested in this report for this state of
affairs. I believe all will agree with me in thinking that the
remaining one-tenth of the inmates, supposing them to be
recent and curable cases, are to be sincerely pitied for their
depressing surroundings. In the last annual report of the
medical superintendent of the asylum at Prestwich in England,
I find the following remarks: " From the returns of the cJerks
to the boards of guardians, it would appear that up to the end
of last year there were 6,000 pauper lunatics in this county,
while the increase for the past three years has been at the rate
of nearly 200 per annum. To deal with this steadily increas-
ing mass of lunacy is a problem which, as time goes on,
becomes by its magnitude more and more difficult of solution.
There can be no doubt that the only way of checking the
growth of lunacy is by treating, in properly organised hospitals,
the recent cases as they occur, and that cannot be effectively
done until our presnt asylums are eased of some of the dead
weight of chronic insanity which fills their wards and hampers
their curative powers." The great objection which has been
urged by those opposed to the separation of the recent chronic
insane has been, that the latter, in institutions designed for
them alone, would be neglected and abused, and that they
would not receive proper medical attention and care. The
results thus far obtained have not confirmed these fears. I
hold that under all circumstances such an institution should be
presided over by a medical superintendent of equal ability and
capacity to those at the head of hospitals for the recent insane,
and that no attempt should be made to put such patients on a
poor, meagre, or insufficient diet, and that they should never be
neglected or abused. By having these asylums located on
large farms, we secure to the patients, as I have previously
remarked, occupation, fresh air and sunlight, and a good
nourishing country style of living, and if there are any possi-
bilities for recovery in any of the patients, such a plan of
treatment will develop them.
