Epidemic Paralysis
===================

166
Art. XVI.?
:Author:  DR. Bockhammer.
(Translated from the Annates Medico-Psychologiques, September 1876.)

Tiie village of Aryannon, situated upon the Tage, in the Spanish
province of Guadelayara, contains about 120 inhabitants, who
are described as generally healthy, but subject to pelagra,
which is endemic. Here originated the singular epidemic which
bears the name of the village, but which has appeared with
great severity in other localities, attacking all ages and both
sexes, but chiefly those of robust constitution. The lower
limbs become first feeble, and then paralysed to such a degree
as to render walking impossible, accompanied by formications,
cramps, tremor, and pain, which in bad cases ascend to the
lumbar region. The paralysis is never complete, but compre-
hends all the muscles from the articulation of the femur with
the pelvis to the foot; the flexors, supplied with nerves from
the sacral plexus, are more affected than the extensors, which
are supplied from the lumbar plexus. The paralysis includes
the sphincter of the bladder, but not that of the rectum.
Muscular co-ordination and contractility, as tested by
electricity, remain intact. The cutaneous sensibility is normal,
but the lumbar vertebrae are painful on pressure, and there is
often a sensation of cold extending even to the sole of the foot.
In certain cases the affection reaches almost to the upper part of
the spinal marrow, and even the arms and tongue are paralysed.
The progress of the disease may be acute or chronic, and
develops itself, it may be in days, it may be in months. The
nature of this disease is still very obscure ; some of the
medical men in Spain who have especially devoted themselves ?

to the subject, conceive that it consists in an alteration in the
anterior columns of the spinal marrow, while others regard it
as similar to the acrodypia which appeared in Paris in 1828 and
1829, in Belgium in 1845, and at Constantinople during the
Crimean War. Neither Pelagra, Trichinosis, Berebere, nor
Ergotism, are present, and the symptoms closely approach epi-
demic chronic cerebro-spinal meningitis. The symptoms and
progress of the two affections are identical up to this point,
that cerebro-spinal meningitis attacks principally the
medulla oblongata and the upper part of the spinal marrow,
while the epidemic of Aryannon is limited, except in a few
rare cases, to the lower part of the spinal marrow, so that
paraplegia is the most characteristic feature. The resistance
of both of these maladies to medical treatment is unfortunately
another point of resemblance. (The author, in the Corres-
pondenz Blatt, fails to supply information as to the mental
condition and pathological appearance in patients affected with
the epidemic.)
