State Medicine in its Relations to Intemperance and the Inebriate
==================================================================

11G
Art. VIII.?*
:Author: Edward C. MANN, H.D.,

Medical Superintendent State Emigrant Insane Asylum, Ward's Island, New York.
During the past few years scientific men have been earnestly
labouring to impress tlie idea upon the public that more
thought and study should be expended in the direction of the
dissemination of the knowledge of sanitary and hygienic laws
among the ignorant masses, in order that the public health
might thereby be improved and disease prevented. This study
of the laws of disease as they affect communities and nations is
of very recent origin. We have now come to realise that pre-
ventive disease exists in a great measure as a result of ignorance
and the violation of physical, moral, and intellectual laws, and a
neglect of sanitary precautions. We have also come to realise
that for the prevention of disease we must remove ignorance by
a sound education of the masses, so that they may both under-
stand and obey sanitary and hygienic laws. Then, and only
then, will the preventible be converted into the prevented. We
check intermittent fever by draining our land properly. We
mitigate the ravages of smallpox by vaccination. We prevent
consumption by avoiding a damp, wet soil for our residence.
We avoid fever by taking care of the sanitary condition of our
dwelling-houses and the purity of our water supply. We pre-
vent the invasion of cholera and yellow fever by proper attention
to sanitary and hygienic laws, and by quarantine; but there is
a disease which tends directly to the destruction of all physical
and mental health of individuals, communities, and nations,
which preventive or State medicine has seemed thus far power-
less to check : that widespread and universal disease?intem-
perance. We need more efficient and wiser legislation upon this
subject; and although the Legislature undoubtedly has the right
to interfere with the personal habits or private business of indi-
viduals, when these are productive of direct evil to the public,
yet I think their wisdom and intelligence should be directed in
the channels of the diffusion among the masses of the know-
ledge of sanitary and hygienic laws and the penalties consequent
upon their violation. The public sentiment must be enlightened
and changed before prohibitory laws and statutes will avail.

When the masses can be made to understand that by intemper-
ance they are destroying not only their own physical, moral, and
intellectual health, but that of their offspring, on whom this
curse is inevitably entailed by the laws of hereditary transmis-
sion, then, and only then, will the disease?for disease it is?
be abated.

In all parts of the civilised world man seeks for some
stimulus, the results of which are more or less disastrous to his
physical, moral, and intellectual health, according as the
liquors employed are strong and fiery, or mild and light.
This tendency or appetite for stimulants varies with varying
climatic law, with race, fashion, and the character of the
stimulant used. The instinct or appetite for stimulants
we cannot annihilate, and our efforts must consequently be
directed towards its regulation, so that it may be properly
restrained by education, reason, and conscience. It has been
determined with comparative accuracy that the prevalence of
intemperance is governed by a cosmic law, which consists
essentially in the fact that the tendency to intemperance in-
creases, and its effects on man become more disastrous, as we
go from the equator, where intemperance is comparatively rare,
towards the northern regions of the globe, where it is both very
prevalent and its effects violent. The stimulating nature of the
climate of northern regions indnces, perhaps, a desire for such
stimulants, while the stimulating nature of our climate on the
Atlantic coast, combined with the extremes of heat and cold,
operates very unfavourably in the production of intemperance,
a tendency to which Ave inherit from our English ancestors.
Before entering upon a discussion of the disastrous effects pro-
duced by intemperance, it will be interesting to note the habits
and tendencies of some of the foreign countries in this respect,
with the effects of indulgence in alcohol upon the physical
characteristics of such nations. In Italy the inhabitants use
light wines and beer; and crime resulting from intemperance
is comparatively rare.* In Greece the people use universally
the light wine of domestic manufacture, and consume annually
about 3,800,000 bottles; yet intemperance is very rare, and in
the published register of deaths in the city of Athens, for nine
* During the last few years, however, dipsomania has been on the increase in
Italy, and there has been a decided increase of diseases of the nervous system and
brain, resulting from the abuse of alcoholic liquors. This I deem to be due to the
fact that the warm, humid temperature, particularly of Rome, relaxes the muscular
and nervous sj'stem ; the blood circulates sluggishly, thus predisposing to disease,
if alcohol be indulged in, by reason of the imperfect oxidation of the tissues.

years, only twenty-six deaths of natives are recorded as the
result of intemperance, and this out of a population of about
50,000 inhabitants. In Germany wine and beer are in un-
limited use, but without apparent detriment to either health or
national prosperity. This is owing to climate, temperament,
and mode of life. In Turkey intemperance is confined to the
Christian population, as the Mohammedans abstain from drink.
As the use of distilled liquors in Turkey has been found to be
very detrimental to both physical and mental health, native and
foreign wines are in use by the Christian population. In Spain
intemperance is rare, although Spaniards drink more or less
wine, Burgundy, and aquaidiente. In Denmark beer and brandy
are much used, and the mental and physical constitution of the
people is injuriously affected by this indulgence. Suicides are
frequent from drink. The better classes use the European wines
in moderation. The effect of the climate and the uniform
good nourishment of the people of Denmark prevent the dis-
astrous effects which would otherwise appear from such a con-
sumption of alcohol. In Ireland the poorer and middle classes
use whisky and porter very freely, and the rich use wines and
brandies. A majority of the diseases and nearly all of the
crime in Ireland is due to intemperance. In England the
liquors principally used are gin, brandy, beer, wine, and cider,
and intemperance is very prevalent. All the competent autho-
rities in England concur that a large proportion of all the
crime, disease, and early mortality is produced directly by
intemperance. In Russia intemperance is very prevalent, the
principal drink of the common people being ? vodka," which
corresponds to our whisky. Wine, brandy, beer, and ale are
also made in Russia, and drunk by the higher classes. In Japan
the people are on the whole decidedly temperate. More or
less " saki," a liquor brewed from rice, is drunk, but it is largely
diluted with water, and drunk in very small glasses. Very
little crime results from intemperance, owing to the division of
the people into castes. The upper class, or the " Samonrai,"
refrain from drink, as they do not wish to endanger their chances
of promotion by the Emperor, who makes his selection from
the wisest or most skilful men of the upper class. Their ambi-
tion for promotion, therefore, keeps this class comparatively very
temperate, while the lower classes refrain from drunkenness from
a fear of offending the upper classes, their lives and property
being at the disposal of the " Samonrai." In Scotland whisky
is universally drunk by the lower classes, and the amount of
intemperance thereby induced operates in the production of
crime, and has a very unfavourable effect on the mortality of
this class. An apparent exception to the law spoken of in
the beginning of this paper, that intemperance is comparatively
rare near the equator, is found in the natives, or aborigines, of
Central Africa, India, West Indies, and the tropical islands of
the Pacific Ocean. It is stated that in these localities the
natives rival any nations of the globe for beastly intoxication
and drunken orgies. The descendants of European colonists
occupying these countries are, however, uniformly temperate.

If we look at the foregoing description of the drinking habits
of different nations, we shall see that the greatest amount of
disease and crime resulting from intemperance occurs in those
countries where the climate and the nervous temperament of
the inhabitants renders the effect of indulgence in alcoholic
stimulants especially hurtful to the brain and nervous system.
This is nowhere more noticeable than in our own country,
especially on the Atlantic coast, where the peculiarly stimulat-
ing nature of the climate induces a peculiar nervous suscepti-
bility which operates in the production of grave diseases of the
nervous system if drinking habits are indulged in.
The evils resulting from intemperance in our own country
can hardly be over-estimated. Inebriety, insanity, epilepsy,
delirium tremens, and chronic alcoholism are among the more
frequent, while the laws of hereditary transmission are inexor-
ably preparing the way for a generation of drunkards. The
amount of pauperism, crime, and disease produced in this way
every year is something fearful to contemplate. In New York
it is estimated that 33^ per cent, of all deaths are due directly
or indirectly to the abuse of alcoholic stimulants, of which it
is supposed that 600,000,000 dols. worth are annually sold in
this country. According to the report of the Special Commis-
sion on the Eevenue, of which Hon. David A. Wells was chair-
man, the amount of distilled spirits used for drinking purposes
in the United States for the year ending June 30th, 1865, was
thirty-nine million gallons. They also estimated the increase
in the consumption of these liquors at the rate of ten per cent,
per annum, which would make the consumption for the year
1870 amount to three hundred and sixty million gallons. If
we add to this the imported wines and the domestic distilled
spirits that are consumed we have a consumption of not far from
four hundred and ten millions of gallons. Now, would the un-
limited introduction of light wines and beer prevent the amount
of intemperance caused by the consumption of this enormous
quantity of distilled liquor? Far from endorsing the idea
that the prevalence of light wines and beer diminishes
intemperance in such a climate as ours, I believe it
directly promotes it; as I think a person, especially one
inheriting a tendency in this direction, after indulging in
wine and beer for some time, feels a growing desire for some
more powerful stimulant, and soon resorts to the habitual use
of distilled liquors, such as brandy or whisky. I doubt very
much whether the introduction of light wines into this country,
free of duty, would induce people to give up the more powerful
stimulants. My own opinion, with all due deference to the
opinion of others, is, that an unlimited abundance of light
wines would result gradually in increased habits of intemper-
ance, and I do not think it would result in diminishing the sale
of distilled liquors. The almost universal use of light wines in
France has not prevented the people from resorting to absinthe
and other strong stimulants. I think in our own country that
intemperance begins almost universally with the use of wine
and beer, which habit lays the foundation or creates a desire for
a stronger stimulant, and that in this way thousands are an-
nually prepared to become victims of inebriety. In the year
1830 a measure was introduced in England, originating, I
believe, with the Duke of Wellington, establishing beerhouses,
hoping that they would promote the cause of temperance and
prevent the consumption of distilled spirits by the masses. In-
stead of exerting this benign influence, it was decided by English
statesmen that it was increasing and intensifying intemperance.
Lord Brougham was so much impressed by this that he intro-
duced into the House of Lords a Bill for the repeal of the Beer
Act, although he was at first very sanguine about the amount of
good it was going to accomplish. The introduction of beer did
not decrease the sale of ardent spirits ; and all the judicial, civil,
and medical authorities united in their testimony of the in-
creased evils arising from this measure. In the year 1872 the
editor of the San Francisco Pacific wrote as follows respecting
the increased use of wines, consequent upon the establishment of
the vineyards of California: " The lowest, slowest, most illiterate,
most unimpressible, most unimprovable, if not most vicious
population outside of the great cities, is found in the oldest
wine districts of this State, and that the use of the products of
vineyards has been the most active cause of this condition of the
population; that the increased production and consumption of
wine on this coast, in the more recent years, has diminished the
use of neither distilled liquors nor lager-beer, but rather in-
creased the demand for both." With our national susceptible
nervous temperament, the artificial habits of living, the intensity
and excitement of life, and the undue predominance of the ner-
vous temperament, which is gradually taking place in successive
generations, would the dangers of intemperance be lessened by
the unlimited supply of light wines and beer ? I think not. I
regard inebriety as a physical disease, and I do not believe that
a man whose nervous system is diseased by indulgence in alco-
holic stimulants will ever voluntarily abandon distilled liquors
for light wines. Such a man feels, when depressed physically
or mentally, an irresistible desire, impulse, or craving to seek
for the relief which he obtains temporarily from the use of
alcoholic stimulants; and this relief he cannot obtain from a
decidedly weaker stimulant than that he is accustomed to use.
The very nature of the disease consists in the gradual develop-
ment and growth of this abnormal appetite or craving, until it
reaches that point where it renders its unhappy possessor blind
to the dictates of reason and judgment, and the slave of this
irresistible, insane impulse, by which he is impelled by a ter-
rible vis-a-tergo, to gratify his morbid propensity. The sooner
this disease theory of inebriety is acknowledged and recognised
by the public, and the proper sanitary, hygienic, and medicinal
remedies are applied to this disease, the sooner will it disappear
and be classed under the head of pi evented diseases.

EFFECTS OF INTEMPERANCE UPON INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITIES.

The effects of intemperance upon the sanitary condition of
individuals and communities is very disastrous. This naturally
results from the pauperism and crime, and the moral and social
degradation of the masses, consequent upon this indulgence in
alcohol, which culminates in the ruin of their ph}7sical, moral,
and intellectual health. This is seen most clearly when
countries are visited by epidemics, when it is observed that tem-
perate communities resist disease far better than intemperate
ones. Intemperance weakens the constitution, so that it can-
not resist the poison of cholera, yellow fever, &c. The desire
for alcoholic stimulants is often the result of an abnormal con-
stitutional organisation. It also appears as the result of ill
health, sunstroke, blows on the head or spine, and severe mental
shock, in the same way as do other nervous diseases. Alcohol
is not either respiratory or accessory food, as it has been
claimed to be. Liebig and others maintained that when alcohol
was taken into the system it united with oxygen, and that com-
bustion or oxidation ensued, by which it was converted into
carbonic acid and water; hence it was termed by him "Respira-
tory Food." This theory of Liebig was destroyed by the re-
searches of Dr Prout, of London, who proved by direct
experiment that the presence of alcohol in the body directly
diminished the amount of carbonic acid gas exhaled from the
lungs. These experiments of Dr Prout were confirmed by
Sandras and Bouchardet, of France, who repeated them with
like results, and also by scientists in our own country. The
chemico-physiologists then maintained that alcohol, being a
hydro-carbon, must necessarily be used for maintaining tem-
perature and respiration, and that its use increased temperature
and strength. Dr Boker, of Germany, then instituted a series
of experiments, proving that the use of alcohol retarded tissue
metamorphosis, and thereby decreased the excretion or elimina-
tion of effete matter, so that from the accumulation of hydro-
carbonaceous material the individual increased in weight. This
latter fact led certain persons to claim that alcohol was an
accessory food?an erroneous idea, which they would have re-
cognised as such, had they observed such individuals carefully ;
for they would have seen that such persons always exhibit a
corresponding decrease in nervous and muscular stamina. It
was proved in 1869 by the experiments of Dr N. S. Davis that,
after taking alcohol, either in a fermented or distilled state, the
temperature began to fall within an hour, and continued to fall
for two or three hours. A few years later, Lallemand, Perin,
and Duroy proved, by a series of experiments, that alcohol was
absorbed and carried with the circulation throughout the whole
body; and also a very important point, that it was eliminated as
alcohol, unchanged, from the lungs, skin, and kidneys. Others
claim that only a part of the alcohol taken is eliminated. We
see, therefore, that alcohol has no claim to be regarded as food,
as it is not used to build up the tissues of the body, or repair or
restore lost nervous or muscular force. It merely diminishes
the nervous sensibility of the individual, so that it lessens his con-
sciousness of impressions, and acts as a sedative by retarding tissue
metamorphosis. The nervous sensibility is diminished by
virtue of a paralysis of the vaso-motor and cerebro-spinal system
of nerves, which the alcohol causes as it circulates through the
body. The use of alcohol, therefore, to recapitulate, diminishes
the temperature, the strength and the power of endurance of
the individual who takes it habitually, and increases his predis-
position to disease. It impresses a peculiarly morbid influence
upon the brain and nervous system, which, if the habit be
indulged in, becomes a permanent pathological impression, and
results in the formation of an irresistible or insane impulse to
seek for the relief obtained from alcoholic stimulants. In this
state of moral insanity, the control which the intellect normally
exercises over the moral senses is overborne by the superior force
derived from disease. This permanently diseased state, or dip-
somania, is markedly hereditary, and, like insanity, appearing
under other forms, it often disappears in the second generation
to break out with renewed intensity in the third. It manifests
itself in predisposition or simple aptitude; in a latent state; or
in the actually developed disease. In the second or latent state,
the germ of the disease, which has been inherited by the indi-
vidual, lies dormant, perhaps, for years, and starts into life in
advanced age ; as the result of ill health or mental shock,
resulting in mental inebriety in a previously healthy and tem-
perate person. This permanently diseased state of the brain is
due probably to the interference in the nutrition, growth, and
renovation of the brain-cells, which, by the use of alcohol, are
unduly stimulated, so that a process of waste and decay is
induced, beyond the powers of reparation and renovation.

Owing to this impression of a pathological state on the brain-
cells, there results a change of healthy function, and disease is in-
duced. The effect of the alcohol is to cause a change in the
chemical composition of the cerebral cells from the standard of
health, which is the foundation and the starting-point for
organic disease. Owing to long-continued use of alcohol, we
have resulting: Cerebral hyperemia, with symptoms of irrita-
tion, due to increased excitability of the nerve filaments and
ganglion-cells of the brain. At a later stage, we have sym-
ptoms of exhaustion, due to lost excitability of the nerve-
filaments and ganglion-cells, owing to a want of the proper
supply of arterial oxygenated blood to them. Alcohol not only
weakens and impairs the functions of the body, but it causes
grave nervous diseases, such as insanity, epilepsy, and chorea,
and also influences the offspring of intemperate parents in the
most unfavourable manner. The offspring of such parents
inherit a predisposition or aptitude for some form of nervous
disease, the particular form being often determined by causes
subsequent to birth. It may be inebriety, insanity, epilepsy,
chorea, or a proclivity to crime. These children, offspring of
intemperate parents, are generally cursed with a defective, ill-
balanced organisation, and a weakened, if not actually diseased,
nervous system ; as a result of which they are predisposed to
seek for the relief obtained from alcohol, when depressed men-
tally or physically. They soon degenerate, become victims to
the irresistible impulse, and die inebriates. Insanity from
intemperance is on the increase, especially in England, where it
shows an alarming increase, judging from the last reports of one
of the largest asylums, the Crichton Royal Institution, where in
the last five years the admissions due to intemperance have
risen from 8 per cent, to 35 per cent. The Medical Superin-
tendent, Dr Gilchrist, remarks, that " doubtless a more minute
analysis would largely increase the proportion of those in which
the excessive use of stimulants, by the patients themselves, or
by their parents, constitutes an important, if not the primary,
factor in the production of mental disturbance." In order to
successfully combat all these manifold evils which we have seen
result from intemperance, we need to educate the public up to the
universal acceptance of and belief in the fact that alcohol, in-
stead of being a tonic and restorative to the system, is a
narcotico-irritant poison; that it has no analogue in the human
system; and that its continued use will inevitably result, not
only in the impairment of the mental and physical health of
the individual himself, but also that of his offspring. When
the public come to take this view of the subject, and come to
believe that mind and body are debilitated, instead of nourished
and renovated, by the habitual use of alcoholic liquors, public
sentiment will then be adequate, without the necessity of pro-
hibitory laws, to the prevention of intemperance.

INEBRIATE ASYLUMS AND CARE OF TIIE INEBRIATE.

We have already spoken of the necessity of wise legislation
tending to the prevention of intemperance ; but what shall we
do with the Inebriate ? It becomes a grave question relating to
the political economy of the commonwealth as to the annual
loss entailed on the State by the loss of the labour of inebriates.
The average longevity of a man at 20 years of age, if temperate,
has been estimated at 44*2 years; while if intemperate, his
average life is reduced to 15*6 years. If an inebriate at 20
years of age is not reformed or cured, the State loses his earn-
ings for the 44*2 years which he would have made if temperate ;
and there is also an expense entailed, for his care, on his family
or the State, for the 15*6 years remaining as his average life.
When we reflect upon the extent of intemperance throughout
the commonwealth, we see what an immense loss is suffered by
the State by such a waste of productive power, and what a grave
financial problem this subject becomes when viewed in this
light. We need, in every State of our country, to establish
State inebriate hospitals, adapted in construction, location, and
surroundings to the special needs of this class of unfortunates,
so as to enable them, with the assistance of wise superintend-
ence, to regain the lost self-control and manhood, and have
their weakened and diseased minds and bodies properly strength-
ened and cured. In this way a great annual expense would
be saved to every State, by materially lessening the number of
paupers, idiots, and criminals, to say nothing of the destitute
children, and that percentage of the insane who have been ren-
dered so by the abuse of alcohol. If one-tenth part of the sum
annually appropriated in each State to almshouses, hospitals,
prisons and asylums, should be appropriated to the reform and
cure of inebriates, the expenses of the above-named institutions
in a short time would be very much lessened, by the decrease in
admissions, which would be the natural result of a decrease in
the causes of pauperism, crime, and disease. If, in addition to
building inebriate hospitals in every State, the Legislature of
such States would pass such laws as would enable the public
guardians to put into active operation remedial restraint, so that
inebriates should be committed in precisely the same manner as
are the insane, and held for treatment until the superintendent
deemed them fit to take their place in society, we should then
soon have accomplished great good in the permanent reforma-
tion and cure of men who are admitted with broken-down
nervous systems and shattered constitutions. To do this, mili-
tary discipline, good hygienic influences, cheerful, tranquil, and
pleasant surroundings, and regular exercise, both bodily and
mental, are among the indispensable indications for treatment,
while the superintendent will be best able to judge of the special
needs of individual cases. There should be no half-way or sen-
timental measures adopted in the confinement and treatment of
inebriates. The public must understand that inebriation is a
type of insanity, and that in all cases prompt and effective
measures will be taken to prevent such individuals from ruining
themselves and injuring society. That in all cases prompt
measures will be taken to confine such persons in an institution
for the cure of inebriates, by law; and that, when there, they
will be under strict discipline, which will require and enforce
both physical and mental labour, as they are a class of patients,
for whom, in my estimation, not less than the insane, physical
and mental labour is absolutely necessary for restoration to
health. An inebriate who is allowed to idle away his time will
never acquire the mental and physical stamina which is re-
quisite for his reformation and cure. He will only degenerate,
and on his discharge will relapse into his former habits. An
inebriate asylum where the patients cannot be detained by law
until cured, loses much of its efficacy. It must be understood
that the inebriate is suffering from a physical disease, and that
he is committed to an inebriate hospital to stay until cured,
whether that cure takes for its completion six weeks or six
years ; and that when in such an institution he is to submit to
the discipline of the house. If the question be raised, How can
you tell whether your patient is cured ? I reply, that when
reasonable hopes are entertained of the cure of a patient,--
when we think that we have given our patient new blood, bone,
muscle, and mind enough to take care of himself, his family,
and his property, then, I would do as I am in the habit of doing
with my insane patients, send them on pass?on trial?still
maintaining a legal control over them, and, when it is clear that
they are going to do well, discharge them. With the insane I
have found this plan to work well; why not with the inebriate
insane, if they are in like manner legally committed upon ad-
mission ? For the successful treatment of inebriety, as with
insanity, it is necessary to send the patient for treatment in the
early and curable stage of the disease. Like insanity, inebriety,
if treated in the early and curable stage, ought to give a much
larger percentage of cures than it now does ; while if the
patients are sent for treatment after years of disease, they pre-
sent small chances for recovery. Yet people do not wish to send
their friends for treatment to such an institution until they
have become confirmed sots, and beyond all hope of reformation
and cure. Such cases should be sent to an asylum, and should
not be allowed to cumber up the wards of an inebriate hospital
where we send patients, not to keep, but to cure and return to
society. Finally, the Legislature should, in dealing with this
question, in addition to legislating in the direction of the dis-
semination of knowledge among the masses, as to the nature
and effects of alcohol, deal with its indiscriminate sale, just
exactly as it does with the sale of arsenic or prussic acid, for it is
just as surely a deadly poison. Arsenic is sometimes used as
food to increase flesh and impart brilliancy to the eye and com-
plexion, but is it not a deadly poison ? Opium and haschish
are also used, for their effects, in the same manner, but is
not their sale restricted, as with all other poisons ? The
Legislature must appreciate the fact that the use of alcohol
is a form of suicide, and must legislate in this direction.
No other form of prohibitory statutes will ever accomplish
the desired result. I have already alluded to the fact that it
becomes at times a very difficult task to convince a man's
family that he is a proper subject for an inebriate asylum. I
deem it a sacred duty that in such cases devolves upon the
governmental authority, to protect society, as in the case of
other insanities, against danger, either existing or being appre-
hended, such as can be avoided by precautionary and preventive
measures, and to protect in his rights of person and property
the individual citizen who, from whatever cause, is unfortunately
so far impaired in his physical, mental, or moral faculties, as to
render his uncontrolled movements alike prejudicial to his own
interests and those of society.
