The Classification of Mental Diseases
======================================

32
Art. III.?
BY W. II. 0. SANKEY, M.D. LOND., F.R.C.P.
Tiiere was a time when a classification of diseases occupied
the attention of physicians in nearly every country. Cullen,
Mason Good, in this country; Linnseus, Boerhaave, Sauvages,
abroad, spent much labour in trying to bring the somewhat for-
midable catalogue of diseases of their day into a system. That
their efforts were futile is not extraordinary, since the knowledge
of diseases was imperfect, and the opinions relative to them
constantly changing.
The aim, however, of these eminent men was to systematise
medicine, and to bring it into the same order as other branches
of natural science. In these days we scarcely aim at doing
more than to make a provisional arrangement. We use classi-
fication merely to facilitate the study of disease, or as a kind of
memorici technica to assist us in obtaining a wider grasp of
facts. Facts accumulate; they must be grouped so as to enable
us to have a general view of the whole in mass, and to be able
afterwards to study the characters which constitute the dif-
ferences between the individuals, and to retain them in our
memory.
There have been numerous proposals for grouping or classi-
fying the various cases of insanity. Fresh systems are constantly
proposed. Some of those most recently brought forward have
met with a much more favourable reception than I should be
disposed to give them, as none of them appear to me to answer
the purpose of bringing into groups the cases according to the
real nosology. Of course, any basis may be selected for dividing
or grouping different objects; but it is quite obvious that the
product will depend very much for its character upon the nature of
the basis that is selected. We may classify plants, for example,
into herbs, trees, and shrubs; our classes, thus formed, would
merely give us the habits of the plants classified, not the kind
of plants. We might arrange all trees into the evergreen and
deciduous; this would only give us a result in the vernation,
and would not convey to us any knowledge of the species, unless
it could be shown that the vernation was always allied with
certain essential characters of the individual plant. We might
with diseases classify them according to the ages and sexes of
the patients; but, of course, this would give no assistance to us
in nosology.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES. 33
It is for similar reasons, I think, that many of the most
newly proposed systems for grouping mental diseases have proved
unsatisfactory. They have not been founded upon the essential
characters of the disease itself.
By the word " disease" I mean the sum of all the phenomena
which are observed in a given case, including the first indica-
tions of deviation from health, the evolution of the symptoms,
their progress, order of succession, and mode of termination.
One recent proposition for a classification of mental diseases
was based upon causes. If it could be shown that all the
phenomena of the disease invariably followed a given course
when resulting from a given cause, and such cause was single
then a classification, based on etiology, would not be objection-
able ; but as this cannot be done, the basis is bad, and the
classification must result in failure, as shown abundantly by Dr.
Crichton Browne in his criticism of Dr. Skae s classification,
which is avowedly based on etiology.
If, however, the relation of a known cause could be shown to
be direct and absolute, I will admit that it would be a mere
quibble to object to an etiological classification, though the real
subject to be classed is the effect and not the cause?the pheno-
mena or symptoms, and not their producer. Such an immediate
cause could only be the actual pathological change in the system;
but this, though at present an object for research, is in no in-
stance an actual achievement, and, therefore, not at present
available. Directly we apply ourselves to a more indirect cause,
or to the remote causes, we have a multitude of secondary
agencies, the operation of each of which would form an impos-
sible problem. , ..
Dr. Skae's so-called classification, however, was really no
classification at all, for it grouped nothing, and was, in fact, a
mere list of supposed operating causes. Dr. Batty . uke classi-
fied Dr. Skae's so-called species of disease; but what is the re-
sult ??a classification of causes, not diseases.
But in the attempt to group what are called mental diseases,
there is another difficulty which meets us on the threshold. the
group itself is not founded on any nosological base. The term
includes not a class of diseases, but rather such sort of medical
cases as are met with in asylum practice. ^ And, indeed, it is
with such that I have in view to deal with in the present paper,
or, in other words, to arrange the cases usually met with in
asylums into groups, according to the nature of the maladies.
It is sufficiently confusing, certainly, for anyone, even a
well-qualified medical man, on first entering a large asylum, to
observe the great diversity of cases, and the variety of mental
symptoms which present themselves. And, indeed, the cases
PART I. VOL. III.?NEW SERIES. C
34 THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES.
vary greatly in many ways, not only in the mental symptoms,
but in the stages of the disease, the ages of the subjects, and
their condition generally. A teacher must, for the purpose
of elucidation, group those various cases, so that a general view
of the whole may be the more readily grasped by the student.
He must not only throw into groups the cases themselves, but he
must do the same for the symptoms. The classification which,
after some twelve years of experience as a teacher, I have found
convenient, is the following. In forming it, I have aimed to
make it as simple and yet as comprehensive as I could, for I
think it is important that the divisions should be as few as may
be compatible with completeness. Little is gained indeed, when
the classes are nearly as numerous as the objects that are to be
grouped. And by making the first divisions sufficiently compre-
hensive, it is easy to subdivide them afterwards.
In taking, therefore, a general survey of all the cases in any
asylum, I think we may readily divide them into two grand
divisions, viz.:?
It will be found that the disease in some is really idiopathic;
in other terms, it is distinct from all other known forms of
disease ; while, on the other hand, in the rest of the cases the
mental symptoms are only a part of some other well-
recognised malady, such as epilepsy, or organic disease of the
brain, and in which there happens to be much disturbance of
the mental faculties. In the former cases the mental aberration
is an attribute; in the latter, an accident in the course of
the disease.
We have thus two grand divisions, viz., Division A, in
which the mental symptoms are primary, or essential, or idio-
pathic ; and B, in which they are secondary, or symptomatic.
This grand division (A), or the purely mental cases, may be
further divided into two subdivisions, viz. (a), in which the
cases depend upon a purely pathological change, or on what is
really disease; and (6), in which the mental symptoms are due
rather to developmental causes.
In the former catagory (a) I can recognise as yet but two
species morbi, viz.:?
I. Ordinary insanity; and
II. General paresis.
In the subdivision (6) there are also two kinds of cases :
(1), in which the developmental anomaly is an original con-
formation, or idiocy; and (2), in which it is due to decay,
or senile imbecility.
This forms, therefore, the classification of all the cases of
primary, or idiopathic, insanity, and which may be clearer in
the form of a table.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES. 35
Class A.?Idiopathic Disease.
Subdivision (a)?Pathological:
1. Insanity proper.
2. General paresis.
Subdivision (b)?Developmental :
1. Idiocy.
2. Senile decay.
The Division B?in which the mental phenomena are only
symptomatic, or accidents in the cases forms, perhaps, a
smaller moiety of the inmates of asylums, and the most fre-
quently occurring kind of cases are the four following :
I. Epileptic insanity.
II. Alcoholismus. . _
III. Spinal disease, extending to the cerebral regions.
IV. Organic disease of brain, as the result of apoplexy,
etc etc
In explanation of these, I will add a few notes.
I. With regard to the epileptic cases, they are met with in
two forms: (1) In which the subject is imbecile, and sent to
the asylum for care. (2) In which the patient is dangerous and
violent. But since either state is not necessarily present in
cases of epilepsy, the mental symptoms are no essential part of
II. With respect to the cases of Alcoholismus, these are to
be found in asylums, also in two forms: (1) In acute stage or
delirium tremens, less frequently sent to asy.ums, than (.)
chronic alcoholic poisoning, which is generally to be met in
most establishments. These cases resemble occasionally general
paresis; but the diagnosis is easily made, and the prognosis
widely different. The alcoholic poison is attended with well-
marked symptoms, and must not be confounded with a tendency
to intemperance which is present in other description of cases.
III. The spinal disease. The term is here employed as a
general name for various cases of motor affections, whether
ataxy or paralysis, and in which the cerebrum is also involved.
In many of such cases there is a degree of mental imbecility, or
mental disturbance, or motor affections of the speech, which
make them resemble more or less closely the idiopathic disease,
general paresis, but yet, with care, may be distinctly dif-
ferentiated; and since in these the duration of the malady is
much greater than in general paresis, the diagnosis is lm-
portant. .
IV. Organic disease of the bram. I he term was employed
by the French Commission appointed to classify mental
diseases, and it signifies those cases which are dependent on
c 2
36 THE CLASSIFICATION OP MENTAL DISEASES.
various organic diseases of the brain, as tumours, softening,
results of apoplexy, etc. etc., in which the patient is imbecile,
irritable, dysphasic, or partially paralysed, and is therefore sent
into the wards of our asylums.
Besides the above, there may, in different asylums, and in
other countries, be few other forms of disease attended with
delirium as a symptom: as leprosy, etc.
My table is therefore as below.
i f Morbid IL Inaanity ProPer-
(A).?Idiopathic '< ' ' ' j 2- General paresis.
2. [ Developmental {4;
(B).?Symptomatic .
5. Epileptic insanity.
6. Alcoholismus.
7. Spinal diseases.
8. Or cranio cases.
And this corresponds very closely to the result arrived at
by the International Committee at Paris.
It will be seen that I admit but two forms or species of
disease. This may need some explanation: firstly, why I limit
them to two; and secondly^ why I consider that those two are
distinct.
The first question has already been forestalled. Bv the
term "a disease" we mean a certain series of changes all
emanating from a given pathological condition, and I believe
all known varieties in the symptoms belong to but two ; and with
regard to the second question, or why I consider ordinary
insanity specifically distinct from general paresis, I would state
my own conclusions.
Without going so far as to say that the difference between
the two kinds of mental disease in species is absolutely demon-
strated, yet I think the evidence is much stronger for such a
conclusion than the opposite; and this is almost generally
admitted in the present day. The symptoms are not only
somewhat different, but undoubtedly they follow a different
course from the commencement to the termination. The
natural history of the two cases seems to me to point to the
following difference in pathology.
In every mental act, or act of cerebration, there are two
chief agencies in operation: 1st, the nerve tissues; 2nd, the
blood supply. A careful consideration of the early symptoms
tends to show that one disease commences through the first of
these agencies, the second through the other. To illustrate
this as briefly as possible, I will point to the well-observed fact
that the acts of cerebration can be distinctly affected through
THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES. 37
the blood, as by the injection of certain substances into the
veins, and by the introduction of substances, as alcohol, into
the system by the stomach; and that while one agent will produce
one effect, another agent causes a different result; and in most
of these, according to the quality of the agent employed, the
effect is more or less transient.
It is equally well known that disturbances of the digestion
produce a depressing effect on the system. Now, the early
stage of ordinary insanity very closely resembles such a con-
dition. 1. In nearly every case well marked symptoms of
impaired digestion are present, and are the first to appear such
as capricious appetite, loaded tongue, flatulence, anxious feeling
located at the prsecordia, constipation, etc., all which point to
an error in the process of blood-making, though, as the mental
symptoms increase, these may be lost sight of by the patient.
2. And the mental symptoms at first closely resemble those of
impaired digestion. The patient is said to be hipped ; he is dull,
fidgetty, or listless, not disposed to exert himself, etc. Like
Hamlet, he loses all his mirth and foregoes all customary exer-
cise. As much as this occurs commonly, and is not infrequently
dissipated by a dose of medicine, there is no distinctive mark
to separate these cases from the onset of ordinaiy insanity in
its first or melancholic stage. Though the spirits are depressed
and the patient is restless or apathetic, he is able to reason or
form as correct a judgment as formerly, if roused to do so; and
in decided cases of melancholia the reasoning acuities, the
memory, and intellect proper remain quite intact or years even,
and become involved only at a very late period, while the rest
of the nerve functions, the functions of sensation, motion, &c. are
not changed beyond a sense of fidgettiness and restlessness or
in the opposite condition, as dulness and want of energy. In
fact, the case seems an exaggerated condition of a very common
kind of dyspepsia. , . . . , . ,
In such a case the change is not in kind but in degree of
ordinary action. The state is often very slight and transient,
removed by easy means; all of which points to a shifting or
transient course; and in considering the nerve element and the
blood condition we must conclude it is to the latter which is
liable to most frequent variation. A still closer examination,
for which I have not space here, corroborates the conclusion
that it is to the blood and blood supply that cases of ordinary
insanity are primarily due.
If, on the other hand, we trace a typical case of general
paresis, we can trace from the commencement, or from a very
early period, symptoms which embrace every artificial division
of nerve force.
38 the classification' of mental diseases.
In very many cases the attack may be traced to a great
nerve shock, a fright, a moral shock, an astounding event, a
great grief, and even a great joy. Certainly, in that very
difficult search for originating causes of the attack, such are
decidedly frequent. A great nerve disturbance seems to be the
origin of the general disturbance. Thus, in looking at the effects,
they point to the entirety of the nerve functions?to intellect,
emotions, volitions, to involuntary and what used to be called
the sympathetic system, or the nerves of organic control; and
at first all is excitement; and then soon all is feebleness.
Briefly, the intellect rambles wildly, the conversation is rapid,
ideas crowd upon the mind?they deal chiefly in immensity.
The actions are violent in the extreme, and without control or
order; the affections are wildly excited; the patient is moved
to mirth, or to sympathy and tears; he is generous: believes
himself omnipotent, etc.; the pupils are irregular; the sexual
passion unrestrained. This having endured awhile, the converse
commences: the intellect becomes imbecile; the movements
feeble ; and enervation commences, and gradually involves every
faculty in increasing palsy. There is evidence here of a nerve
shock ; first of a nerve excitement, and then nerve paresis, which
affects the sensation, the intellect, the self-controlling processes,
the movements as well as the regulating powers presiding over
organic life.
There is, in fine, no similarity between the two descriptions
of the phenomena during life. There are also great differences
in the history, the age and sex liable, the degree of heredity,
as well as in morbid anatomy, and which I have examined in
detail in a paper published in the "Journal of Mental Science,"
vol. ix. p. 467.
In my table, including only two species of actual mental
disease, it will be observed that many of the almost innumer-
able varieties discribed in the textbooks are as' yet quite un-
accounted for?as mania, melancholia, etc. But many of these
so-called diseases are but sj^mptoms, and often but passing
symptoms, in the course of a disease; and many of the phenomena
thus promoted to the position of a distinct disease not only are
transient, but suceed each other in the progress of a single case.
Our specialty is much separated from general medicine, but we
cannot claim to have separate rules of nosology. A disease
does not change its essential characters during its progress; as it
commences so it continues; it may have well-marked stages, but
we cannot suppose that each stage is a distinct species of disease.
We mean, in fact, by the word disease, a certain order of mor-
bid phenomena. The study of medicine consists in observing
the development, the evolution, and natural cause of these
phenomena.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES. 39
It will be found, I think, that many of the so-called varieties
of mental disease owe their title to certain stages through which
a case of ordinary insanity passes : that the names denote the
phenomena of a stage only, and not of separate disease. As
ordinary insanity is much less fatal of the two species, and its
duration, therefore, usually much more extended, it is the stages
of this form which have been most frequently considered fresh
species.
A case of ordinary insanity, at its first outset, commences
by a stage of melancholy, which is at fix*st considered as acute
melancholy. The case has in this stage four modes of termina-
tion?(1) in recovery; (2) in death ; (3) in passing into mania ;
(4) in becoming chronic (chronic melancholia). When, in its
evolution, it becomes mania, it has been falsely called a new
disease. This stage, too, or acute mania, has various modes of
termination?(1) in cure; (2) to death; and (3) to chronicity ;
in the last category it has received various names, as chronic
mania, delusional insanity, incoherence, etc. It often occurs
that when the disease becomes chronic, the violence of the
mania abates, and so after a time do the melancholic
symptoms of chronic melancholia; thus the case becomes one
of chronic insanity, probably with delusions, incoheience, etc.
In this stage both recovery and death are less common, and
death would probably be due to some accidental cause, lather
than the disease itself.
When the case has reached this stage, the depression or
elation of the spirits, and the condition of melancholy and mania,
may alternate periodically; and this, indeed, is found more or less
marked in the majority of the cases; the alternation, too, is
sometimes on alternate days; at times on alternate weeks, months,
or longer; thus we obtain a condition which the French have
called manie a double forme; in certain of the cases, also,
between the mania and the melancholic period, there is a state
of comparative neutrality, etc., or a lucid interval. W e have,
then, what the French have called folie circulaire', but the con-
dition is continuous with the former stages of one disease, and,
therefore, cannot be considered a separate species ; and out of
these symptoms we have no ground for making a fresh disease.
All these cases have a natural tendency towards imbecility and
dementia, which form the last stage. The following diagram
will represent the stages and progress which a case of ordinary
insanity may take:?
40 THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES.
diagram of the evolution of insanity proper.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES. 41
Thus in the natural course or progress of one malady we have
certain variations in the symptoms; and it is quite true that,
at one stage, the same case may present a very different charac-
ter from that found in a different stage: but we cannot leave
out of the consideration the history. Undoubtedly the course
of a single case extends over much time?years often?but no
consideration of the duration if the phenomena are continuous
can make a single case into two. Even though the commence-
ment was in one man's experience and the end in his descendant s,
the natural history of the case must commence with the com-
mencement of the symptoms. In the histories of cases of
insanity, however, this rule has been by no means constantly
followed. In taking up the description of any so-called forms
of insanity in the text-books, it will be observed that the history
has been seldom even alluded to. Each condition is studied
singly, without reference to what has gone^ befoie or what is
likely to follow. Such a mode has greatly impeded the study
and comprehension of the subject.
It is almost impossible to bear in mind the large number
of names that have been thus introduced into the subject, some
derived from one feature and some from another. ^ There are
upwards of forty names in Dr. Skae s list. Guistain wrote of
twenty-eight varieties of mania only, but he acknowledged that
they were assez lourde pour la memoire. ^ _
The use of certain terms is convenient, it is true, to denote
various groups of symptoms, as mania, melancholia, etc. It
is desirable to have terms which are easily understood, as signi-
fying groups of facts, as morbid apprehensions, incoherence,
illusion; but to treat such as separate forms of disease, and to
classify them as if they were distinct or separate diseases, is
unwarrantable.
The stages also of an ordinary case may conveniently be noted
by separate names, as chronic mania, imbecility, folie circulaire;
but it should be well understood that these are meiely general
terms to denote a group of phenomena.
But if the whole sum of mental disease is thus reducible to
two, it will, perhaps, be asked what is the nature of those cases
met with under very familiar terms. Some of the most gene-
rally used are probably the following:
1. Puerperal mania.
2. Phthisical mania.
3. Oino-mania, or dipsomania (mania a potu).
4. Suicidal mania.
5. Homicidal mania.
6. Syphilitic mania.
7. Moral insanity.
42 THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES.
8. Religious melancholy.
9. Suicidal melancholy.
10. Melancholy, with stupor.
11. Melancholia agitans.
12. Nymphomania.
13. Kleptomania.
The first-named appears to be at the present day that which
is considered the most distinct, and to be the most widely
admitted as a separate species; but, judged by the ordinary
rules of nosology, there is nothing in any of these cases which
should constitute them a distinct species morbi. What favours
such a view is simply that the attack occurs during the puerperal
condition?that is, either during pregnancy, at childbirth, or
after parturition; but such coincidence establishes nothing, nor
can it give a reason for making it a separate disease any more
than, if a woman were to fall and break her leg in that state,
the fracture would be classed as a different kind from other
fractures. Certainly the puerperal condition occurs frequently
enough in the sex to make it probable that an attack of insanity
should occur contemporaneously. The puerperal condition is,
besides, a great change in the system of the patient, so that in
a female liable to insanity it is not surprising that this condition
should act as an exciting cause; and since the majority of the
cases occur at or immediately after parturition, there is, besides,
the great strain on the system and large loss of blood, producing
anaemia, which would co-operate. But though we find cases of
insanity common at such times, and more frequently than at
other periods, still the occurrence of a disease at a particular
time is not a sufficient ground for placing such cases in a
different position in nosology, unless it could be shown that
the phenomena?that is, the symptoms and their progress and
termination?were distinct and different. A fracture or a dis-
location is the same whether occasioned by a fall or a blow : an
anaemia is the same whether produced by a bleeding from one
source or another.
I have sought for a distinctive character in these cases of so
styled puerperal insanity, and have never found any. I had
1,000 women under my care at Hanwell. I had many cases
necessarily in which the disease dated from the puerperal con-
dition. I had cases of acute insanity going on to mania. One
such case I published in a series that I gave in the British
Medical Journal. I had cases which were well marked cases
of general paresis ; one which was a case of recurrent insanity.
There were cases which recovered rapidly; others which passed
gradually into imbecility ; others in which the patient became
a chronic lunatic, with fixed delusions; but there was nothing
THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES. 43
that I could discover of a distinctive character in the symptoms,
progress, or termination from other cases.
These puerperal cases are met with also as instances of re-
current insanity. In fact, in those cases of chronic insanity in
which the lucid interval is sufficiently marked, and of sufficient
duration, that the patient is said to have a distinct interval of
perfect sanity, the occurrence of a pregnancy or parturition is a
sufficient disturbing cause to induce a distinct recurrence of
mental disturbance. Many such have a fresh attack of insanity
at each parturition.
This is of sufficient importance in the history of insanity
generally to require mention in all systematic treatises; but
there is not such an uniformity in the symptoms, nor such a
difference from other cases, to constitute these attacks a separate
disease. At the most, the puerperal condition is merely a dis-
turbing element, which must be borne in mind.
With regard to phthisical mania, the same remarks are ap-
plicable. Phthisis is found in insane patients. It may com-
plicate the symptoms. I have lately had several cases of
phthisis in lunatics. One an imbecile for upwards of 20 }rears ;
one a female, with melancholy with stupor; the third, acute
insanity, commencing with the usual melancholic stage, with
suicidal propensity, going on to mania, and then to recovery.
In this case the phthisical symptoms were almost in abeyance
during the mental attack. Another occurred in a gentleman
with chronic insanity with delusions. In these four cases there
was not the least peculiarity in the mental symptoms from
other cases, and they were in different stages of the disease, and
in different state.
Oino-mania, &c.?This symptom is observed in different
cases, and under different circumstances.
Uncontrollable desire for drink is sometimes a vice, some-
times is more allied to imbecility, or idiocy, and sometimes it
is a symptom in recurrent insanity. The term is also used for
the condition produced by alcohol, or alcohol poisoning.
A person whose desire for strong drink is uncontrolled, may
be one whose resolution is feeble, or whose desire is abnormally
strong. Such a condition then is simply a vice.
His control, however, may be destroyed by disease, as is
often the case in the first stage of general paresis. The excess
of drink is then a result, not a cause of disease; and in all of
the above circumstances the symptoms cannot be called the
essential character of the disease, but simply an accident
during its course.
Lastly, in some secondary attacks of recurrent insanity, or
chronic insanity, the outbreak is manifested by an uncontrol-
lable desire to drink.
44 THE CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES.
Homicidal, Suicidal Mania, (See.?The secondary attack,
in some cases, is ushered in by an outbreak of violence, by a
murderous attack on another, by a suicidal attempt, by a desire
to burn, to do an act of violence of some other kind, quite as
frequently as by an uncontrollable desire for strong drink; but
inasmuch as the morbid propensity is simply a phenomenon of
the outbreak, and is by no means always of the same kind in
the same patient in his different attacks, the simple mode of
recurrence cannot separate these cases from the other cases of
recurrent insanity. When the recurrence of the disease has
been shown by drinking, it has been called dipsomania; when it
has been by a murderous attack in another, it has been called
homicidal mania. If the outbreak is an act of immorality, it
has been called by some who indulge in nomenclature, moral
insanity; for similar reasons another case has been styled
nymphomania, or kleptomania, according as the propensity of
the patient is in one or other direction.
But nearly all these, which are merely ordinary symptoms of
disease, occur at times in the course of a primary attack: as the
suicidal propensity, in an attack of acute insanity, in the melan-
cholic stage ; nymphomania also in an early stage; while klepto-
mania is a common symptom in the early stage of general
paresis.
I do not wish to maintain that no other species of insanity may
not yet be eliminated; but at present, as far as my experience
and examination have extended, only two have been actually
proved.
