The Late Dr Bulckens, of Gheel
=================================

Dr Bulckens appears to have been recommended for the
office of Medical Director of the Colony of Gheel by Dr
Gruislain, author of ?Traite sur la Phrenopathie," ? Lecons
0rales," and of various works on the same subject, and one
of the most distinguished Alienists of Belgium. The choice
of this celebrated physician affords a sufficient refutation of the
statement that Guislain was diametrically opposed to this
institution. From the commencement of his duties in 1856
Dr Bulckens applied all his great energies to introduce into the
treatment of the insane that reform which had been less
successfully attempted by his learned predecessor, M. Parigot.
The earliest amelioration initiated was the organisation of a small
infirmary for such patients as required the care of special atten-
dants which constituted the first departure from the early
condition of the colony. The results obtained in this establish
ment secured the approbation of the Government, so that in
18o8 he was authorised to construct an hospital, which formed
a new scientific step towards an asylum in the sense under-
stood by us.

This progress did not stop half way; and its author,
who had very carefully studied the topography and capabilities
of the Commune, winch contains more than 24,000 acres, sug-
gested, m his Report for 1859, the basis of a classification, or
rather distribution of its insane inhabitants, founded less
upon nosological d'stinctions than upon practical utility. He
divided the boarders into, first, the quiet and docile-whether
curable or incurable-inmates of dwellings in the centre of the
viHage; and, second, those who are placed in hamlets at
different distances from the principal village; and the latter
were again subdivided according to their morbid state. In
the first; rural cordon or circle were assembled lunatics in
various forms and stages of mental diseases demanding special
and prolonged care. In a second, imbeciles, idiots, the
dirty, the maimed, the demented, whether excited or paralvtic.
In the third, and where no danger could arise from the
presence of brooks or pools, were domiciled the epileptic, so
that the medical staff might subject the patients to special
observation and treatment; to the fourth, or outermost
circle, were removed the violent, the turbulent, furious, and
all who require special measures of discipline, and where the
cottages are situate on the moors and amidst the copsewoods
which are of great extent, this class were entrusted to selected
guardians, and were placed in this remote and secluded spot,
because their excitement rendered their association with a more
densely peopled part of the community unsuitable or unsafe.
M. Peeters, the successor of Dr Bulckens, to whom was com-
mitted the composition of a biographical notice of the deceased
for the Paris Medico-Psychological Association, writes thus of
these improvements:?

" Since the introduction of these changes, the physiognomy
of Grheel may be said to be entirely modified, so that strangers
might conceive that it contained no lunatics."

Dr Bulckens has recorded that in the midst of the popula-
tion there now reigns a calm, a tranquillity, an order which con-
trast favourably with the confusion and agitation which formerly
prevailed. He further adds that the minor advantages of his
system of classification are, that small farms are erected, giving
shelter to numerous lunatics; that the well-cultivated lands
have rewarded the labours of indefatigable guardians; that the
robustness of the patients has been augmented; and that it may
now be asserted that the reclaimed heath presents one of the
most attractive features of this immense settlement.

This picture differs widely from that drawn by me after
my visit in 1842, although there were even then many in-
teresting features in this example of treatment by air-libre.

Yet, notwithstanding the reforms so far advanced by Dr.
Bulckens, the number of insane residents being doubled within the
last twenty years, there is still wanting a reorganisation of the
medical staff. The officers of the different sections are badly paid,
and can scarcely subsist upon their allowances. Already possess-
ing a corps of upright, religious, and devoted guardians, personally
and hereditarily prepared and trained for the discharge of the
duties confided to them, it is only necessary that a sufficiently
numerous and adequately remunerated medical staff should be
specially and exclusively intrusted with the treatment of the
insane residents, in order to confer upon Belgium the distinction
of possessing a unique asylum, characterised by the freedom of
the patients and the heritage conferred by the noble qualities
of its great reformer, Dr Bulckens.

Dr Brierre de Boismont, in the Annates Medico-Psycholo-
giques, Juillet 1877 :?

" Note. It may be expedient to remind our readers that the
village which was the scene of the labours of Dr Bulckens has
enjoyed a sort of celebrity for the treatment of the insane from
time immemorial; that it is historically known to have attracted
the attention of the guardians of the possessed or demoniacs,
in other words, of the insane, since the 7th century; that the
chief attraction consisted in the supposed miraculous powers
possessed by the relics of St. Dymphna, a British Princess, in
exorcising evil spirits or in restoring reason; although, perhaps,
the remote ard retired position 'of this retreat, which may be
described as a small, fertilised island in the midst of a vast sea
of sand, may have recommended it as a place of seclusion.

Whilst known and utilised locally for the reception of the
insane, Grheel was almost unknown to the scientific world until
visited by M. Esquirol in 1822. He then described the Com-
mune as containing about 400 or 500 lunatics, who were boarded
with the inhabitants, engaged in agricultural labour or lace-
making, according to their sex and age, for the benefit of their
host; or who wandered about the streets and lanes partially re-
strained, there being also a ring attached to the fireplace or bed in
each cottage, to which they could be chained. All or many of
these sufferers were subjected to religious treatment, consisting of
either participation in public worship, or in passing, upon their
knees, beneath the tomb of the Martyr Saint. It did not
appear that any medical means were resorted to. In 1838 the
aspects of the colony were little changed. Subsequently to 1856
a small central asylum was erected, upon the suggestion of
Dr Bulckens, to which recent, curable, and excited cases were
confided, and the domestic accommodation of the remainder
somewhat improved. In 1875 it would appear that the restraint,
formerly obtruded upon public notice, was confined to the
inmates of the hospital properly so called ; but, if the writer of
this memorandum be correctly informed, the medical attendance
is still insufficient."
