Lunacy in Ireland
===================

133
Art. X.?

The Twenty-fifth Keport on the District, Criminal, and Private
Lunatic Asylums in Ireland has been sent to us for notice, and
it contains many interesting particulars relating to the care and
management of the insane in Ireland.

On the 31st of December, 1875, there were 11,777 persons
of unsound mind under the supervision of the Lunacy Board,
making 194 more than last year at the same period.
The following summary of the distribution of the insane is
given:?

In District Asylums
In Central Criminal Asylums
In Lucan Government Asylum
In Private Asylums .
In Poorhouses .
In Gaols
Male Female Total
4,142 3,599 7,741
134 38 172
17 12 29
271 382 653
1,275 1,904 3,179
1 2 3
5,840 5,937 11,777

The Commissioners give a comprehensive summary of the
working of district asylums during the last twelve months.
On the 1st January, 1875, there were located in district asylums
7,585 patients?4,072 males, 3,513 females. We are told that during
the year 2,132 were admitted, namely, 1,095 males and 1,037 females,
of whom 1,777 were new cases?906 males, 871 females ?and 355 cases
previously under treatment, 189 being men, and 166 women. During the
same period 939 were discharged cured?470 males, and 469 females;
and as improved 236?119 and 117 respectively of either sex. Fifty-
six were brought home?41 males and 15 females?not recovered, but
tranquil and amenable; while 3 males effected permanent escapes.

Seven hundred and forty-two patients died?391 males and 351
females, all from natural causes, save 6?2 from accidents, and 4 from
suicide ; on these exceptional deaths coroners' inquests were duly held,
and, though with fully exonerating verdicts, the occurrences are to be
regretted. There appears from the preceding general data that there
was a total of 9,717 lunatics under treatment in the course of the year,
and at its close 7,741, or 156 more than on the 31st December, 1874,
in Irish district asylums ; of which total 4,412 were males and 3,599
females.

The mortality has been greater among females than among
males. The Commissioners report favourably on the general
management of these institutions, and upon the treatment
therein adopted. The percentage of recoveries are nearly the
same as last year, being 43*70 on the admissions, and 11*70 on
the average resident in asylums; whilst the cures and discharges,
amounting to 246, are equal to 53-30 per cent, on admissions,
and to 12*18 on the total resident. The death rate in 1875
is 1 per cent, greater than in 1874. With regard to the pro-
bable cause of the increased mortality, the Commissioners
say:?

On examining into the probable cause o? the increased mortality
above adverted to, we attribute it in part to the number of hopeless,
indeed it might be added, moribund cases transmitted under magisterial
warrants to asylums as being dangerous and violent. So far as our
experience goes, an injudicious exercise of power in committing lunatics
has perceptibly increased, notwithstanding the issue of official circulars
directing the attention of justices of the peace to the specific and in-
telligible clauses of the statute. Last Session, in order to obviate this
objectionable practice, an Act was passed, by which two governors of
any district asylum, in accordance with certain engagements on the
part of the friends or relatives of an insane patient, could authorise an
immediate admission into the district asylum where the party resided.
Though this law has nominally been in operation for over nine months,
little or no advantage has been taken of it.

Notwithstanding the increased mortality from the causes already
given, the sanitary condition of district asylums during the twelve-
month we are dealing with has been satisfactory. They were unvisited
by any epidemic or contagious disease, save at Castlebar, where a low
type of fever, affecting five attendants and over twenty patients, was
rife for a few months. Every precaution was taken against its spread,
the sick being completely isolated all through from the other inmates.
It would not, however, be a fair criterion to calculate the percentage
of deaths in hospitals for the insane on the basis of those which occur
in the community at large, or indeed in other institutions. Taking
the general annual averages in these countries, they may be set down
as 24 in every 1,000, from infancy to old age, in all grades and classes.
That they should considerably more than double that proportion among
the insane, admits of easy explanation, bearing in view that lunacy in
itself is so largely associated with animal or physical debility, and is
more a disease of advanced and enervated life?hence the double re-
action of mind and body on each other, and with consequent multiplied
results of a fatal character.

In our official capacity, while anxious to render public institutions
for the insane beneficial to society in every reasonable manner, we
should regret if an uncalled-for expenditure of money, whether levied
through local rates or granted by the Executive, were to be entailed,
without some commensurate utility. For one lunatic received
into an English asylum, on the ground alone of being dangerous, by
direct magisterial warrant, and not in the ordinary and recognised
mode of application, we apprehend, relatively speaking, that at least
ten are so transferred to our district institutions, in which when once
located, be they from the first quiet, naturally inoffensive imbeciles, or
helpless from age and infirmity, they remain as a rule for life. To
obviate the inconveniences likely to accrue thereon, a clause of the Act
just named empowers the removal of a certain class of inmates from
public asylums to poorhouses, on an understanding being arrived at
between the Local Government Board, the Inspectors, and Union
guardians; but as yet, we may say, no practical arrangements have
been effected. Local guardians, as a rule, are too desirous to get rid
of the insane o? all classes to accept with favour the proposition of
receiving new cases, cognisant at the same time that the Government
rate in aid would diminish taxation ?10. 4s. per annum in favour of
each district asylum resident.

It cannot, then, be a matter of surprise, from the irregular and con-
stant influx of chronic cases of insanity, and also of imbeciles and
epileptics, to asylums, together with the difficulty of procuring their
removal (when no person is held responsible to do so from the mode of
committal), that these institutions get crowded with hopeless inmates,
to the exclusion, unhappily, and not unfrequently, of regular applicants
in the early or acute stages of mental disease, as evidenced by the
fact that of the 7,741 inmates on the 31st December last, the in-
curables numbered 5,243. It has been correctly remarked by a Scotch
physician, Dr Clouston, that the amount of admissions in any one year
affords a much better test of asylum requirements and utility than the
whole number chargeable ; so that, while every facility should be given
to increase the former, patients should be discharged as speedily as
possible, to prevent the accumulation of chionic cases. But though
opposed to a malappropriation or an injudicious use of asylums, in the
special erection of which large monetary outlays have been primarily
incurred, with a current expenditure for their support much beyond
that of others maintained for the poor out of public rates, we are not
the less sensible to the care necessary, as we have stated on a former
occasion, to ensure the relief and comfort of a class that of itself has a
paramount claim on the community at large.

To unite the double object of economy, and the well-being of that
section of the insane who can derive no substantial benefit from a
detention in ordinary district asylums, is a question of progressive
importance. To a certain, but limited extent, for their actual capabilities
are restricted, workhouses, under the authority and with the sanction
of the Local Government Board, have been rendered more fitting recep-
tacles for the demented?tranquil and infirm, as well as epileptics;
still there are drawbacks in them, essentially so as regards want of
space for exercise, day-room accommodation, and suitable sleeping pro-
vision for the parties themselves and those in charge of them. These
deficiencies do not fail to escape our observation; and, while under
existing circumstances they cannot be fully met, we bear a willing
testimony to the considerate attention paid, on our recommendation,
to the requirements of the insane inmates of poorhouses, in regard to
dietary, raiment generally, and cleanliness, on our various visits of
inspection.

The Commissioners draw special attention to the deficiencies
in the supply of furniture in asylums, to the want of amuse-
ments for the inmates, the absence of cheerfulness in the
various rooms, and to the employment provided. On these
particulars we read as follows:?

Convinced, as we are, that the employment of the insane on the
land attached to asylums is at once the healthiest and most remunera-
tive occupation for the patients, and that best suited to their previous
habits of life, the enlargement of the area available for farm opera-
tions has ever been regarded by us as an object, when practicable, of
the greatest importance, and we are happy to be able to report that
useful outdoor employment is now generally provided on a large scale
in the various institutions under our supervision.

The system of school education, originated in one of the hospitals
for the insane of this country, makes favourable progress. This edu-
cation, combined with religious instruction and observances, now
generally recognised in public asylums, cannot but prove, with judicious
control, beneficial; although it may not exercise a directly curative
agency, it must at least prevent many of the insane from constantly
brooding over the delusions with which they are afflicted, and relieve
what otherwise would be the almost unbroken monotony of a listless
existence.

In some of the larger asylums the Resident Medical Superinten-
dents have formed musical bands, whose performances are on the
whole very creditable, notwithstanding the changes which constantly
occur in their composition by reason of the not unfrequent resignation
of attendants, and the discharge of recovered lunatics who had acted
as musicians. The formation and maintenance of bands of this descrip-
tion should, in our opinion, be more liberally encouraged, as we know
of no greater or more certain boon to the insane than that afforded
by the frequent opportunity of listening to, or taking part in, music,
and of no recreation better qualified to produce order and tran-
quillity.

But, perhaps, no more gratifying indication can be afforded of a
progressive and more humanising treatment of the insane, than can be
derived from the fact that the inmates of our public asylums, instead
of being restricted as' lately within the immediate grounds, however
spacious, that are attached to these institutions, now not unfrequently
visit places of amusement, or make excursions into the open country in
parties, under the care of watchful attendants.

Special attention is drawn to the insufficient remuneration
given to those in immediate charge of the insane, who have such
" continuous and irksome duties to perform, and whose temper
and forbearance are so often put to the test by violent or ill-
conditioned patients." There appear to be two unsatisfactory
results derived from insufficient payment: first, that a good class
of applicants is certain not to present itself; and secondly, that
when the attendants have gained their experience, they frequently
seek employment elsewhere.

The Commissioners make the following remarks upon pri-
vate asylums:?

There has been but little variation between the respective number
of patients in private asylums during the past and the year preceding
it. At the close of 1874 an aggregate of 672, between both sexes, was
under treatment?296 males and 376 females. In 1875, 186 were ad-
mitted?88 males and 103 females, making a total of 858 under treat-
ment during the year, of which 165 were discharged; one female
escaped, and 39 died. There consequently remained on the 1st
January 653 of both sexes.

The recoveries exceeded in the year under review those of the
preceding one by five, Avhile the mortality was less by three?both
satisfactory results. It is also gratifying to us to report that no acci-
dent of a serious character occurred. On the management of these
institutions generally we are'enabled to report in satisfactory terms, the
great majority of them being conducted with carefulness and a becom-
ing attention to the well-being of their inmates. So much, however,
depends on the cost of maintenance, and the means of families to meet
it, that a perceptible difference cannot but exist in the interior organ-
isation of private asylums, some of which are replete with domestic
requirements for the higher and more opulent classes of society; while
others, from lesser stipends, do not present a like appearance of comfort.
To make amends as far as lies in our power for the difference, and
particularly, too, as not unfrequently the friends of patients consider
they have fulfilled their duty to afflicted relatives by placing them
under a safe control, without taking further trouble in their regard,
entails no inconsiderable amount of responsibility on the Inspectors.
Our ordinary visits to private asylums are made quarterly, and at
irregular periods; but under certain contingencies, and in furtherance of
the provisions of the statute, they are rendered much more frequent, so
as thereby to secure not alone the liberty of the subject, but to guard
against any irregular procedure either as to the admission or subse-
quent detention of the reputed insane, who possess unrestricted
privileges to communicate with us by letter. It occasionally, but
rarely, occurs that a justifiable cause of complaint on investigation is
brought before us for inquiry. In some few we have had much ground
for hesitation in adjudicating on their merits, and when in the absence
of actual delusions the causes of disease were what come under the
designation of moral, or were distinctly referable to habits of dissipation
or of an unsubdued indulgence in drink. An Inspector in such in-
stances can only exercise a fair discretion, and by temporary means, as
a warning, protect the individual from a repetition of his own culpa-
bilities. Indeed it has happened on three or four occasions in the past
year that persons themselves, feeling the impending chances of a return
of insanity from drunkenness, and to escape an urgent tendency to it,
have not only not objected to being placed under restraint, but volun-
tarily sought it; still, shortly after admission, threatened proceedings
against the proprietors of private asylums for an illegal confinement.
But of all the difficult cases to be dealt with, none are so great as those
of perverted minds, with a considerable amount of intellect, reasoning,
and education, as found in the better classes, but whose acts, when free,
are offensive to others, and highly injurious to their own interest, and who
are unrestrained by any sense of propriety or foresight. Discharged
for a time, and comparatively much improved, they frequently relapse,
and for the most part with more discouraging symptoms.

Taking the large number of private patients in the licensed estab-
lishments of this country, we believe in no instance that has come under
supervision since the date of our last Report has an injustice been
committed through an unduly prolonged detention.

Of the existing private asylums, four being on a charitable founda-
tion continue exempt from the charge for licence : namely, Swift's or
St. Patrick's Hospital; the Friends' Retreat, similar to that in York; the
Richmond Retreat for Ladies, under the superintendence of a religious
community of nuns; and the Lucan Spa Institution. The residents in
these on the 1st January, between males and females, numbered 323.
The new asylum for imbecile children, to be supported by voluntary
contributions, and established through most liberal donations from Dr.
Stewart, is in a very forward state towards completion, and in the coming
spring will be fit for occupation. It is intended to accommodate 200
inmates, with all requisite appurtenances.

The site of the buildings themselves at Palmerston, four miles from
Dublin, in the centre of about forty acres of farm and pleasure grounds,
is highly salubrious.

The large central asylum at Dundrum is reported as being
in a satisfactory state, and on the 1st January, 1875, there
were 123 males and 35 females; the average number resident
during the year was 165. The male convicts admitted during
the year have not manifested dangerous or destructive propen-
sities, and no instance of restraint is reported on, and seclusion is
sparingly resorted to. On the other hand, the female convicts
have been destructive and violent in conduct, inflicting injuries
on their attendants, restraint and seclusion being both resorted to.
The report concludes with a number of most interesting and
instructive statistical tables, most carefully worked out, and of
themselves form valuable records on insanity; and in conclusion
we wish to express our thanks to the Commissioners, Dr Nugent
and Dr Gr. W. Hatchell, for their earnest work in the cause of
Lunacy.
