The Dillwyn Committee
=====================

311
. /
Art. XIV.?.
" Ex niliilo nihil fit." . /
Noxious exhalations become innocuous when mingled freely with
fresh air. The Sun of Truth dissipates every mirage! The
appointment of the Committee to inquire into the operation of
the Lunacy Laws originated in imaginary grievances, morbid
fancies, actual delusions, and in the hostility and antipathies
of those who had been subjected to asylum restraint. These
miasmata invaded a sensitive and susceptible nature, were
manifested in an annual paroxysm of plaints and petitions in
Parliament, and, ultimately, through the long-recognised efficacy
of importunity, through the incessant drop, dropping on the
marble heart of authority, secured, in a soft and yielding
moment, a public recognition from the Secretary of State.
A Committee was appointed, consisting, we think, of fifteen
members, has sat patiently and perseveringly throughout the
past summer, but has at length " died and made no sign "?in
other words, has published no Beport, except in the form of a
bulky testament (582 pages) of dreary lucubrations. Their time
has been wasted, or, at least, might have been more profitably
employed; there have passed before them motley groups of Lunacy
Commissioners and ex-lunatics, of knights and nobodies ; there
have been ventilated every imaginable form and colour of
extravagant theories, crude and cruel accusations, and Utopian
projects. There was no demand for a revision of the law, there
was no cry to go to the country with, except from unhealthy
imaginations; and the whole procedure has been fraught with
evil, in exposing the shortcomings and inefficiency of some of
the high and mighty guardians to whom the supervision of the
insane has been confided, in creating distrust and suspicion in
the public mind, in disturbing and perplexing with fear of
change the already overburdened hearts of those practically
intrusted with the care and custody of this class, and in exciting
vain and visionary and pernicious expectations in the inmates of
asylums, who have lived for months in suspense and anticipa-
tion of a general jail (Coxe) delivery. Yet the inquiry, even
in its incomplete state, has been productive of a modicum
of good. Clouds and mists have been dissipated, and there
stand forth sharp and clear the facts testified by all the
witnesses, except those actuated by personal motives, that the
law as at present administered is substantially equitable and
humane; that sufficient protection is afforded to'those labouring
312 TIIE DILLWYN COMMITTEE.
under mental disease ; that, while errors of judgment and infor-
malities may occur, it is next to impossible that the illegal
admission or detention of lunatics in public or private asylums
can take place ; that, practically, only ten instances of supposed
illegality in which the interference of the Commissioners was
necessary have occurred during the last thirty years; and that
no case is at present known to exist by any of the witnesses.
It has been further proved that the county asylums are most
creditably and beneficially conducted both in respect to the
health, happiness, and restoration of the patients; and that
private establishments have been latterly so improved that,
although all are not worthy of unqualified approbation, tbey are
not open to charges of conspiracy, cruelty, or mismanagement;
and that the attendants in both these kinds of hospital, although
still below the standard desirable, have improved in trustworthi-
ness and character and might be improvable by more liberal
wages and by special training.
It is not our present purpose to deal with these general
propositions, nor with the grave indictment preferred bv the
complainants, or pursuers as they may be called ; and we shall
confine our observations to what maybe fairly denounced a
unplnlosophical, unprofessional, and unfair or rash in tb!
testimony of certain of the official witnesses who are certainl?
not experts. In the first rank of offenders may be arraigned
Dr Eobertson, Lord Chancellor's Visitor. This gentleman, with
a Quixotic craving for mare's nests and windmills has had tw
hardihood to say: ?I think lunatics generally are detained too
long in asylums ; and I think a large n^mber ^f lunatic who
in asylums probably one third, might be out of asylums. I am
speaking of private patients new" (Q. 892); aud again: ?I said
that one-third of the Chancery patients were already out, and I
thought that of he other (private) patients one-third ought to
follow the example of the Ch ^ ^ ^
Under private care, not discharged recovered'" f 1016 and
1046) Were this a speculative haphazard opinion \t might
be treated with forbearance. ?ut what can be th w of f
taste, delicacy, or fraternal courtesy of an inculpation of all the
Lunacy Commissioners ? for, if 0ue.third of'all the rfvate
patients in England although mad, be not mad enough to
require seclusion, but would be better while augmenting the
stipend of a pauper curate, or supplementing the niggard fees
of a country practitioner, what can excuse or justify the Com-
missioners in failing to exercise the power which they un-
doubtedly possess of removing these unfortunate captives to a
more suitable residence ? It is true that this Visitor may claim
a power of penetrating into the condition of such patients that
THE DILLWYN" COMMITTEE. 313
ordinary mortals do not possess; that, as a Spiritualist (7254), he
looks through the diseased mind, and may detect, in that trans-
parent medium, the presence or absence of flaws, fractures,
cracks, crotchets which a mere physician could reach solely
through symptoms and by protracted observation. We are,
however, inclined to conjecture that the inquisitor arrives at his
conclusions by intuition, as he does not seem to have placed
himself even en rapport with these persons, and boldly confesses
that, in visiting private asylums, he limits his inquiries to
Chancery patients ; that he does not see the other patients
except by chance; that he does not see them to speak to or
converse with them ; he makes no inquiry into the manage-
ment of lunatics generally ; he does not make inquiries at these
asylums for his own satisfaction, or to enable him to form a
judgment as to their management, or as to their inmates; nor
does he take any means of ascertaining the nature of the classes
of inmates at the private asylums, besides the Chancery patients,
and he has no means of knowing it. Physiognomy is, moreover,
employed by this visitor in determining what half-mad patients
should be discharged from an asylum, as he affirms that his
estimate as to improper detention is guided (6851), "By my
observation of the demeanour of the patients whom I see in the
asylums, many of whom appear to me to be very harmless
people, who would do very well outside." It is highly probable
that by such a crux was Dr Eobertson guided in regard to the
patients removed from Sussex House, as we cannot conceive
any principle of diagnosis upon which an individual whose
memory was entirely abolished, and whose knowledge had
consequently passed away, could justifiably be held to be im-
proved.
These humiliating confessions amount to this: that, in spite
of avowed ignorance, a judgment is formed of the capability of
thousands of lunatics to derive benefit by removal from that
shelter and treatment which have been selected by their relatives,
sanctioned by their medical advisers, and tacitly acknowledged
to be expedient by the Commissioners.
Dr Bucknill, with that chivalrous temerity which tempted
him to run a tilt against almost the whole body of Alienists in
America,* or with that itch for innovation and the air-libre
system which be seems to have caught in Scotland, pronounces
an enthusiastic encomium upon the reputed absence of
bolts, bars, and locks in the asylum of the county of
Fife; where, it is popularly believed, the whole population
is, in their own patois, " fifish " or demented, and where, if all
* American Journal of Insanity, July 1877, p. 25.
PART II. VOL. III. NEW SERIES. x
314 THE DILLWYN COMMITTEE.
restrictions and the influences of seclusion be withdrawn from
the management of the insane, a portion, and a large portion,
of the means of cure are inaccessible or unavailing. On being
questioned as to the introduction of ladies as& nurses into
hospitals, he says, ' The introduction of ladies as nurses has not
been much done in this country. In Scotland there is only one
large private asylum, and in that the nursing in the ladies'
house is conducted entirely by ladies, and it is made, to an
extent which is surprising, like an ordinary residence. There
are no locked doors in it; there is free egress and ingress for all
the inmates all the day through. That is the adoption of a
plan which was first carried out in the Fife and Kinross
Asylum (Q. 1819).
It is almost cruel to upset this Utopian fabric; but the
work of destruction is not ours, but that of Sir James Cose,
who, on having Dr Bucknill's words read to him, answers, ? I
do not know an pr t ]um ^ ^ d ^
plicable (2 30). - There is no high class of nurses, no volun-
teers, in Scotland (2073). It is quite obvious that Dr Buck-
mil must have been impressed by some potential improvement
which may prove a Chateau en Espao-ne.
The worthy old knight, Sir JamesCoxe, Medical Commissioner
m Lunacy, Scotland, is known to be more of a lawver than a
medicmer, more familiar with ?the law than the prophets " ? but
we were not prepared to find him so antagonistic to physicians,
so sceptical of their powers, experience, and usefulness, and so
much disposed to prefer the moral treatment instituted by an
old turnkey in his model asylum of Banff, to ministrations by
his own profession. He appears to labour under the malady
designated by one of his countrymen "red-tape worm," somi
of the symptoms of which are forgetfulness, formalism, suspicion.
Of these we shall give illustrations.
I. Sir James, although a supporter of the localisation of
groups of lunatics m the village of Kennaway, and of what is
ludicrously called the Scotch system," says : ? I am not much
an advocate for having what they call colonies ; of having them
all concentrated in villages, nor of employing Orkney or one
of the Northern Islands as a separate colony, nor have I ever
heard of such a proposal; I think that would be rather a
miserable existence; nor has it been suggested by any of our
Board - (2141 2142, 2143) Yet it is astLding i discover
m the Appendix (page 221) to a Report (1860) of which the
witness admits he wrote portions, and which he assuredly
signed, " this miserable existence " is actually proposed ??
"But a large number of the so-called harmless lunatics, for
whom a regular asylum is not absolutely necessary, will not be
THE DILLWTN COMMITTEE. 315
satisfactorily provided for till something of the nature of a
local institution exists. It appears to me that this desideratum
would be supplied if the county (which is too poor to erect an
asylum for its pauper lunatics) were renting a whole township;
expending other ?25 on each house; seeking out fit persons as
tenants; and then boarding with them, at fixed rates, those
idiotic or demented paupers whose natural guardians are dead
or too old or infirm to care for them, or such as cannot for any
reason with propriety remain at home. This township should
not be far from Lerwick If cottagers willing to under-
take the duty of guardians could not be found in Shetland, I
am of opinion that by advertisement many would be found
in Scotland ready to go and settle there, especially if, for
some years, they were to sit rent free, or nearly so. And I
would expect such persons to be found chiefly among
the pensioner (old soldier) class." . . . . " The Shetland
cottage or hut is of the rudest description. It is usually
built of undressed stone, with a cement of clay or turf. Over
the rafters is laid a covering of pones, divots or flaas, and above
this again a thatch of straw, bound down with ropes of heather,
weighted at the ends with stones as a protection against the
high winds which are so prevalent. Chimneys and windows
are rarely to be seen. One or more large holes in the roof
permit the escape of the smoke and at the same time admit
light. Open doors, the thatched roof, and loose joinings every-
where insure a certain ventilation, without which the dwellings
would often be more unhealthy than many in the lanes of our
large cities."
II. " The witness asserts that all his colleagues have been
of his opinion as to the boarding-out system" (2161). It is
marvellous that Sir James should have utterly forgotten the
reputed author of '(xheel in the North' (Journal of Mental
Science*) and the consternation which that article was reported
to have produced. But, after a searching, we had almost said
scorching, cross-examination by that most able member of the
Committee, Dr Lush, in which he is compelled to acknowledge
that he was the writer of paragraphs in the Keport of the
Board of Lunacy for 1860, above alluded to, containing sad
exposures of the condition of the pauper lunatics in
1858-59, of which the following may be accepted as
characteristic:?There were "49 cases of misery and neglect,
27 cases of violence and restraint, 36 cases of illegitimacy and
erotic propensities, 19 cases of dangerous wandering lunatics,
and four cases of accidents" (2169)?he is finally squeezed into
* Vol. xl, 1866, p. 278.
x 2
316 THE DILLWYN COMMITTEE.
the statement: " Dr Browne did not share in our views " as to
boarding out. . . "Dr Browne's views were very decided. I have
heard him say that the worst case in an asylum was better than
the best out of an asylum" (2395 and 2401). We do not here
comment upon the good or bad taste of venturing to quote the
opinion of a colleague who could have no opportunity of
defending himself, supposing that Sir James' recollection of
words is as treacherous as his recollection of facts; nor do we
pretend to know what Dr Browne's precise meaning was,
although we can readily imagine it to have been to the
effect that a pauper inmate of a well-constituted hospital under
medical and moral treatment and constant supervision, who is
well lodged, well fed, well clothed, well trained, even well
amused, would be better both in position and prospects than if
placed in the wretched dwellings, resembling those of " the
finest peasantry in the world,'" indifferently protected from the
weather, poorly dressed and nourished, without treatment of
any description, without inspection by officials except at rare
intervals, and what is afforded by intercourse with the unedu-
cated, rough, but, it may be, kind members of the household.
This is not the place, nor is it our province, to criticise the
boarding-out system as pursued in Scotland. It has, of course,
existed there as elsewhere from time immemorial; in fact, since
lunatics required domestic care. But we must protest against
the colony of Kennaway being represented and recommended to
foreigners, as it was to ourselves, as a specimen of this plan.
If not kept for show, this favoured spot has been shown ; it has
been patronised and all statements to the contrary notwith-
standing petted, fostered, and?we are not entitled to affirm
unworthily?fostered by the Board of Lunacy; the cottages,
families, and their insane charges have been selected, and the
whole entourage has been sustained at a high standard by
frequent visitation, and by the general interest and attention
directed to the experiment. But let the inquirer examine this
oasis, and pass to the desert beyond, he will find the accom-
modation and maintenance of the insane members of the
community closely to resemble those of the sane members, whose
homes and habits are not famed for comfort, cleanliness,
refinement, or temperance (Lord Shaftesbury, 11,263).
III. Sir James' obliviousness is further exemplified in his reply
?" I do not remember exactly how it was brought to his know-
ledge "?to the question : " How would the information of such
an informality (that of detaining a patient twelve hours after
the expiration of a certificate of emergency) reach the patient;
by what means would the patient know of a matter which
apparently was between the medical superintendent and your
TIIE DILLWYN COMMITTEE. 317
Board; that there was such a state of things that he could
exact from the medical superintendent who, in good faith, had
received a patient, a fine of ?200 ? " (2376).
It would appear, however, from the evidence of Dr Gilchrist,
Medical Superintendent, Crichton Institution, Dumfries, where
the case referred to occurred, that this information must have
been communicated to the solicitor of the patient in a letter
from the Board of Lunacy, of which Sir James is the principal
member, and that the result was the mulcting of the witness in
the sum of ^150 !! (4194). We have our own opinion as to the
kindness and forbearance of such a course towards a public officer of
long-established reputation, whose act, if mistaken, was humane ;
and we shall leave to higher authorities to determine whether
what appears to be partisan interference by a public Board was
a procedure ultra or contra vires. The victim retaliates in no
other way than by stating to the Committee that the Board so
acting is not " satisfactory" to superintendents &c.; and
that, although it might not have been right in him to make
the statement except with considerable qualifications, " it is, I
think, generally the impression of the medical superintendents
that the Board interfere a little more than they might do in
special matters of details, which should be left to the medical
superintendent, who is supposed to have the skill and experience
necessary to deal with them " (4197 and 4343).
IV. With that idiosyncracy which cuts cloth not according
to what you have, but according to what you ought to have,
and converts an object hoped for into an object realised, Sir James
Coxe rather recklessly assures the Committee that he does not
think it possible that any lunatic in a private dwelling can be
left unvisited for two years together, except in Orkney and
Shetland (2419). The exposure of this inaccuracy is drawn
from two sources: 1. Sir James'colleague estimates that some
of the paupers boarded out are not visited for two years (10,134);
and 2. During 1876 the Deputy Commissioners (Nineteenth
Annual Report of the General Board of Lunacy) visited 1,066
out of 1,400, the actual number of this class; so that 334 were
left for a long period to the tender mercies of the "great
unwashed," to the visitations of a parish doctor, and. of an
inspector without knowledge, who is not required to report to
the Board even when accidents occur, which of course must not
be attributed to harshness, but to the national jperfervidum
ingenium Scotorum.
V. Sir James Coxe manifests throughout the whole of his
evidence a striking distrust of medical officers, a disposition to
dispense with or minimise their services in attendance upon the
insane, and a decided preference for asylums superintended by
318 TIIE DILLWYX COMMITTEE.
laymen. This estrangement culminates in his reply to the ques-
tion (2321), " Are you of opinion that there are any means by
which lunacy may be aggravated or converted into dementia by
the administration of drugs or medicines ?" He says: " I
think there are drugs which would injuriously affect a patient if
he got them frequently ; might convert lunacy into dementia;
there are many cases in hospitals and asylums where chloral is
administered ; I think that has a tendency to produce dementia,
given inadvertently, not to produce dementia, but to soothe the
patient; is injurious if the administration be prolonged;
bromide of potassium is not so injurious; laudanum, or any
other narcotic, administered for a length of time, would have
a prejudicial effect, but chloral especially so."
1 his^ beats Brinvilliers ! Her slow poison extinguished life;
these injurious drugs destroy reason! It is rather a cool insinua-
tion, coming f101^ a person who was never a medical superin-
tendent nor an officer in an asylum, who never had any special
training, who never entered an asylum nor spent an hour
with a lunatic until he became a Commissioner, who has no
means of knowing the practice in such establishments, as,
although able to ascertain the number of patients under medical
treatment in a given asylum;?microscopic though some of his
inquiries are, he has no means of knowing in what that treat-
ment consists, whether in the exhibition of chloroform, chloral,
or castor oil. ^ hen taken in connection with the context,
these phrases are tantamount to the suggestion that all or
many, or some of his professional brethren at the head of
asylums are so ignorant, or so negligent, or so callously cruel as
to prescribe and push remedies which are calculated to destroy
that intelligence which they were supposed to restore, and to
produce one of those diseases?the last and most formidable of a
long series which physicians, hospitals, the whole principles
and practice of medicine were intended to prevent, to remove,
or to mitigate. Of course this libel and the collateral suggestions
introduced by other witnesses?that drugs may be given in order
to excite, intoxicate, or confuse patients when about to be ex-
amined are scornfully repudiated by all the other medical men
examined. It is probable that this grave and groundless
calumny may be dealt with by the profession at large, or by
some of those associations called Psychological; but at present
it is only necessary to record our wonder and sorrow that a
Fellow of the Eoyal College of Physicians, Edinburgh, and a
Commissioner of twenty years' standing, should have uttered
sentiments which implicate the skill and honesty of that large
body of men over whom he may be said to exercise a sort of
parental care.
THE DILLWYN COMMITTEE. 319
Commissioner Mitchell is a man of culture, astuteness,
and versatile genius. He reconciles lectureships on mental
disease and archeology, which, by a curious fancy, he con-
nects with his ordinary pursuits, with his official duties;
he is a writer, as we understand, upon meteorology and
consanguineous marriages, on proverbial sayings and anti-
quities ; and is likewise responsible for the advocacy of educa-
tion as a means of preventing insanity in one of the Blue
Books issued by the Board of which he is a member. But,
unfortunately, like his colleague, he was not in a position
to acquire any special knowledge of the practical aspects of
insanity until he became a Deputy Commissioner, and unless
cursory and almost perfunctory visits to lunatics in private
houses could have imparted this knowledge. He has supplied
us with a most clear and comprehensive vidimus and vindica-
tion of the Lunacy Laws in Scotland, which work well and,
in fact, according to him, go on as " merry as a marriage bell
but it is matter of regret that no medical superintendents were
called from Scotland, except Dr Gilchrist, who, with his cele-
brated Institution, seem to be the betes noires of the Board of
Lunacy, when it is possible that these bells would have rung
out another tune. The popularity of the English, as contrasted
with the Scotch Commissioners, might prove a puzzle to psycho-
logists, had we not the assurance that the latter discharge their
" invidious" duties in a liberal, conciliatory, kindly spirit, while
the latter are devoted to the hard and sharp administration
of the law, to formal and economic details, and, alas,
crotchets.
It is less a protective than a detective force; the inquisitors
of which it is composed unavoidably detecting what, according
to their views, are delinquencies and delinquents, of which the
painful narratives respecting Murthly, Elgin, &c. Asylums, in their
recent Reports, may serve as examples. But the most notorious
of these causes celebres is what is called the Isle of Man case. We
are compelled to recur to this episode, as Dr Mitchell has entered
upon what appears to us an inexplicable explanation of the
facts. Without attempting to analyse his formidable array of
dates, we would quote, first, the dignified words of Dr Gilchrist
upon the principal link in the chain of events, contained in a
printed Statement by him, circulated contemporaneouly, we
believe, with his appearance before the Dillwyn Committee:?
"5th. The writer leaves it to others to judge whether it is
one of the duties of Her Majesty's Commissioners in Lunacy to
use their knowledge and authority for the benefit of one party,
and the possible defeat of another in a pending lawsuit";
secondly, we must express our concurrence in the opinion
320 THE DILLWYN COMMITTEE.
of Dr Lush (10,200) that there was, " I will not say a breach
of privilege, but a sort of a breach of official confidence on the
part of the Board of Lunacy " in communicating the informa-
tion as to the informality respecting the certificate of
emergency in the case of Mr. Wilson to his local agents, and
thus enabling the latter to carry to a successful issue a prosecu-
tion against Dr Gilchrist, who, whatever might be his moral
or legal responsibility in other respects, was detaining a lunatic
for that lunatic s protection, and whose error, if error there was,
was known to the Board under the seal and secrecy of official
confidence: thirdly, we cannot comprehend how the words of
the oath or obligation taken by every Commissioner " before he
acts in the execution of his duty," " I will keep secret all such
matters as shall come to my knowledge in the execution of
my office, except when required to divulge the same by legal
authority, or so far as I shall feel myself called upon to do so
for the better execution of the duty imposed upon me by the
said Act, can be interpreted so as to justify the disclosure of
information to persons who are not under the control of, nor in
any way connected with the Board of Lunacy; nor can we
understand in what way " the better execution of the duties
imposed by the Act" could be promoted by such a revelation
as that gratuitously made. It is highly improbable that a
similar interference with the laws of humanity, under the
pretext of the better execution of the laws of the land, will
be ventured upon, even should Dr Gilchrist repeat his "in-
formality."
Di. Mitchell is necessarily and naturally a champion of the
boarding-out system. But he seems to lay some claim to having
been its disco\erer or originator or foster-father, a claim which
Ave are not disposed to dispute, although we believe the system
to have been coeval with the period when the Nebuchadnezzars
of other days weie sent to g'rass, and found shelter in some
hovel from " the dews of heaven." The Doctor has visited Grheel
and gathered some suggestions from what he saw. We have like-
wise visited this psychological curiosity?for it is little more?
but found all barren. Had his visit taken place forty years ago,
he would have found dirt, picturesque licence, and restraint in the
ascendant; restraint in its domestic and most repulsive aspect,
where iron rings were fixed in every mantelpiece, to which the
insane boarder was constantly or frequently chained. Had his
visit been twenty years later he would have still heard the clank
of chains and bolts in the street, seen the furious fixed in open
oubliettes near the church, the beds of many consisting of
chopped straw and tan, &c. &c. Now, we are convinced that
these pictures could not have been the prototypes of the Scotch
THE DILLWTJV COMMITTEE. 321
system, whatever its defects in respect to supervision and accom-
modation may be. But had this pilgrimage been made within
the last twenty years?that is, subsequently to the advent of
Dr Bulckens?Dr Mitchell would have inspected an arrange-
ment totally differing from Kennaway, and realising a plan long
since proposed and reproduced before the Committee, in which
an asylum forms a centre, around which villages or groups of
cottages are arranged, containing lunatics in different stages of
the disease, under the care of attendants or peasants or farmers,
who are regularly visited by medical officers, and from which they
can be removed to the hospital properly so called, should changes
in the physical or mental condition necessitate such a step.
We have always conceived, that while some portion of the
success really achieved in this curious community might arise
from the hereditary training, and quiet, docile temperament of
the guardians, the influence of the religious element has been
undervalued ; for, assuredly, whether the influence of faith in
the relics of St. Dymphna be attributed to imagination or to a
direct divine inspiration, it was real and beneficial. Whether
? this superstition, or sacred power, has fled before the torch of
science we do not know, but it is melancholy to find that this
means has not eliminated another of the agents by which the
insane population was formerly kept under subjection and in
order; as a witness declares (1403) that, in the central asylum,
physical restraint at present exists " to an amount altogether
unknown in this country, but in other cases I found them very
well and comfortably accommodated, and enjoying a very large
amount of liberty." We are certain that such a mixed state of
good and evil would not be tolerated in Scotland, for we are
assured that the Pauper Lunatics there might be left for years
unvisited, " so trustworthy are their guardians an intimation
Avhich will confirm the hopes of our economists that the office of
Deputy Commissioner may be altogether dispensed with. Yet,
during his novitiate or chrysalis state as Deputy, Commissioner
Mitchell seems to have cherished most sanguine and catholic
views as to the project of which he is a propagandist. We know
that the Mania Transitoria passes away rapidly, but we were
scarcely prepared for the assertion : " I never heard the sug-
gestion that something in the nature of the Gheel establish-
ment might be established in one of the Northern Islands, such
as Shetland" (10,257), seeing that the respondent was un-
doubtedly the author of the scheme mentioned on page 315,
where it is proposed that " a township should be rented near to
Lerwick, where guardians should be induced to emigrate from
Scotland, where the huts are described as nearly as wretched as
wigwams, where the whole country is poverty-stricken, where
322 THE DILLWYN COMMITTEE.
the population is not in a condition capable of affording suitable
attendants," where, to repeat the words of Sir James Coxe, " the
existence would be rather miserable." It is a matter for con-
gratulation that this peat-bog Utopia is now disowned ; but,
from our indistinct recollections of the shielings and " auld
clay biggings " in " the land of the mountain and the flood,"
we are inclined to question whether any of these would corre-
spond with our southern ideas of what Gheel ought to be, or
with
The cottage homes of England!
By thousands on her plains,
They are smiling o'er the silvery brooks,
And round the hamlet fanes.?Hejians.
The extreme poverty of the inventive faculty in devising
means for the reception of the insane is very striking. Of
course this limit is imposed by pecuniary considerations ; but
it is very doubtful whether, first, the construction of a village
for the incurable industrious around an asylum of ordinary
dimensions would prove more expensive than a multiplication
of blocks ; second, whether the addition of farms or convalescent
homes within a certain area, and at a short distance from the
hospital for acute cases, might not prove more economical than
the palatial structures at present provided; or, third, whether
even the addition of large tenements of simple, unornamental
form for chronic cases, within the grounds of the asylum proper
?all these being under the superintendence of the same medical
and other officers might not meet the wants and the wishes
alike ot the curators of the insane, the ratepayers, and the general
public.
There is ever on the lips, and we doubt not in the hearts,
of this and other optimists, the plea that the insane would be
happier if in possession of complete or partial freedom, that is, if
emancipated from the restrictions and regulations of asylum
life. This is an assumption, and founded upon a very narrow
basis. To the melancholic all surroundings are indifferent;
consciousness bears the burden of misery, terror, remorse,
everywhere ; and if the excited maniac, the vain-glorious mono-
maniac, the idiot, the dement, the general paralytic, &c., be de-
ducted from the inmates of an asylum, there will remain but a
small minority who could be affected by such a change.' It is,
however, altogether an error to suppose that seclusion is but
another name for unhappiness, and that complaints and de-
mands for liberation are outpourings against the hardships of
captivity, although they may sometimes be accepted as signs of
returning reason. Perfect contentment and resignation are,
more frequently than reclamation, prognostics of dementia.
THE DILLWYN COMMITTEE. 323
But assuredly there are higher and more important objects than
happiness, according to the estimate of the sane and the free.
These are the re-establishment of self-control, intelligence, use-
fulness ; or, failing complete recovery, the arrestment of pro-
gressive degeneration and the training of partially enfeebled or
perverted powers in such modes of action as are consistent with
the interests of the individual and of society. The real ques-
tion at issue is not whether the chronic insane can be made
happier, but more reasonable in an asylum or out of it.
We now close our remarks upon the speculations of these
Doctrinaires?we cannot call them Doctors, unless it be
doctores dubitantium?and we are cheered on turning to the
testimony of such witnesses as Mr. Percival, Commissioners
Wilkes and Phillips, Chancery Visitor Dr Crichton Browne,
distinguished as it is by sound sense, discrimination, and ex-
perience in the medical and moral requirements of the insane ;
and above all to the mature knowledge, and the practical
wisdom of that veteran philanthropist, Lord Shaftesbury.
He states very distinctly that he knows of no instances
which go to prove the truth of the allegation that lunatics have
been unjustly confined in asylums, and that, although he once
suspected that the duration of seclusion might be. protracted
beyond what was absolutely necessary, he has now altered his
views entirely; and that, in consequence of constant inspection,
of the improvement in the character and position of those en-
trusted with the care of the insane," and of the influence of
public opinion, the tendency now is to discharge prematurely.
Considering the general tendencies of human nature, the
desire for gain may have suggested conspiracies for the purpose
of detaining wealthy patients, but he believes that in ninety-nine
cases out of the hundred such attempts are impossible; and that
the complaints of plots and harsh treatment may generally be
traced to the delusions and mental state of the patient.
He conceives that in every case lunatics even chronic
lunatics?should pass from the asylum to the workhouse, and not
from the workhouse to the asylum; and that the best mode of
disposal for cases which had been subjected to treatment for a
sufficient length of time would be transference from the asylum
proper to a succursal house detached from but connected
therewith; that such a building should form a part of every
county institution, as was originally intended in the Act of
1845 ; and that it might even be adopted, under a modification
of the law, for private patients who could afford to pay some-
what more than what is charged for paupers.
He is of opinion that deaths by suicide and homicide would
be greatly diminished by early confinement in an asylum ; that
324 TIIE DILLWYN COMMITTEE.
medical men alone can arrive at a reliable opinion or prognosis
in those cases where alienation is first disclosed by an overt and
criminal act; and that juries are not, under such circumstances,
reliable, as they are guided to a conclusion exclusively by the
overt act.
He attributes the proportionally small number of discharges
to the unsuitableness of the homes and of the guardians ^to
which partially recovered lunatics must be sent; and in relation
to the correspondence of inmates of asylums with their friends
or other persons m the external world, he conceives that the
present safeguards for the transmission of such communications
are adequate ; discountenances the addition of a postal clerk to
the Board of Lunacy, whose duty it would be to examine all
letters forwarded by superintendents, and to select such as
should be forwarded, and likewise the introduction of Postal
Boxes as in American asylums, through which letters would
pass, without even the knowledge of the officers, to persons
beyond the walls ; but, among many weighty arguments against
innovation, strangely enough omits to mention that the perusal
of letters written by patients affords the most valuable informa-
tion as to the real mental condition of the writers to their
medical advisers.
He admits that houses on the principle of those at Caterham
and Leavesden, even although for chronic cases, are too large-
is an advocate for small asylums, but such advocacy has been
and ever will be constrained by pecuniary considerations
He regards non-restraint as coincident with good treatment,
but admits that it necessitates the employment of a greater
number ot cifctcRclciiits.
He regards the present mode of admission into asylums as
securing personal liberty to a sufficient extent; and is opposed
to the practice in Scotland, where, in addition to medical certi-
ficates, a ju( ge gives, either in his ministerial or judicial
capacity, authority for sequestration.
While entertaining theoretical views opposed to private
asylums, his opinions upon this subject have undergone great
modifications since 1859; he is convinced that licensed houses
must and should exist, that certain classes of society will always
prefer such a mode of disposing of their insane relatives, and,
however much the number of such establishments may be di-
minished, 01 may be affected by the creation of composite or
middle-class institutions, there will always remain a certain pro-
portion of excellent and well-managed retreats of this kind ; he
is not desirous of any increase either in the staff of Commissioners
or in the frequency of inspections, which, he suspects, may be
carried too far, and protests against any amalgamation of the
THE DILLWYN COMMITTEE. 325
Visitors of Chancery Lunatics with the Commissioners in
Lunacy, or any junction of these bodies with that of Local In-
spectors, as threatening the formation of a Parliament in which
there would be much talk and little work.
He holds that licensed houses now vie with Hospitals, and,
" were anyone of my family or myself requiring seclusion, I
would rather by far go into a licensed house than be put under
single care, and in such circumstances I would prefer a medical
man or a clergyman, as when patients are committed to attend-
ants, I cannot conceive anything more thoroughly abominable."
He is opposed to the formation of a corps of Deputy Com-
missioners, or dependence on second-hand evidence, and looks
upon the existing machinery as perfectly satisfactory.
This is, confessedly, an imperfect epitome of Lord Shaftes-
bury's statements, which are so voluminous and valuable, that
no digest could do adequate justice to their importance.
