Religio Psycho-Medici
======================

215
Art. III.?
BY W. A. F. BROWNE, LL.D.
Formerly Medical Commissioner in Lunacy, Scotland.
Part II.
Creeds are slowly built up in the human spirit, and the struc-
ture is scarcely completed when the darkness comes, in which
no man can work. As the daylight fades into night they seem
to shrink in their scope, become short and simple, and resemble
the sacred epigram of the Jewish proselyte: "I believe, help
thou mine unbelief." The same process takes place in the
sane and in the insane; dark and doubtful sayings are avoided ?
sin, and shame,; and sorrow, and weakness, and waywardness are
confessed; there is a cry for help and forgiveness ; and we have
often listened with awe and reverence to the last words of the
dying lunatic as they assumed the form, the infantile but
expressive phrase which had been taught while the child knelt
by a mother's knee. A large proportion of this class are struck
down suddenly, are dazzled by the false glare of their own wild
imaginings, or die in ignorance of an impending change; but
there are others?the calm, the resigned, the reverential who
without any restoration of the light of reason, see, and feel'
and appreciate the warnings of decaying strength,'and from
the depths of an original and kindly heart, pour forth utter-
ances which differ little from those of a sane and sincere
intelligence. "He prayeth best who loveth most." Even
when the lips fail in their office, and imperfectly repeat or
respond to the brief prayer suggested by others; the eye, the
expression, the attitude, may all show forth that "sense of
supplication " which Coleridge esteemed more fitting than the
articulate sounds of cold, uninspired words. It is an impressive
fact that you never meet a lunatic who is an atheist. Scepticism
seems to fall off with the habits, and customs, and convention-
alities of common life. Blasphemies may be heard, but they
are uttered against a Deity whose existence, and some of whose
grandest attributes, are acknowledged in the very defiance and
irreverence of the utterance.
The tenacity with which early religious impressions are
held may depend upon the perpetuity of certain trains of
morbid thought, upon the moral constitution, mental concen-
tration, or, in many instances, upon the support, and strength
and consolation which they afford. That years, sufferings'
hopeless seclusion effect no breach in the sincerity and en-
216 RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI.
durance with which such feelings, if they be not convictions,
exercise influence, let the extatic and melancholic prove!
Martyrs have courted and caressed the very lire by which
they were devoured. Cranmer thrust his offending right hand
into the orthodox flame, and pious fanaticism has sustained and
set at nought every form of pain, deprivation, and discomfort.
It may be that a divine or supernatural insensibility or tolerance
imparted courage or intensified resignation. It may be that
any grand or genuine faith or emotion spreads anaesthesia like
an invulnerable armour over the frame; but the firmness and
fortitude of the lunatic exceeds, or at least equals, all that has
been told of the triumphs of exalted devotion or noble daring,
and this when neither aid from without or from within could
well be predicated. It would scarcely point the moral to cite
the wounds, the injuries, the jubilant self-murders and mutila-
tions of the Convulsionnaires, as they may be claimed by
hagiology; but their sufferings, if suffer they did, cannot
fairly be compared with those of the lunatic, who, in lengthened
misery long drawn out, bears and cherishes a self-inflicted
agony of remorse; who conceals and perishes under some frightful
and loathsome malady; who meditates, and may attempt,
suicide, or what in his conviction may be annihilation or
eternal punishment, daily or hourly; or seeks extinction by
the gradual process of inanition, the very remedy for which,
compulsory feeding, must seem to a perverted and conscience-
stricken imagination to resemble the horrible accompaniments
of violent death.
There are several instances on record where, with a similar
travesty of the circumstances and significance of the grand
typical act, Crucifixion has been chosen as a mode of self-
destruction. One in which the attitude of a hystero-epileptic
imitated the sacred symbol repeatedly, and for several hours.*
A second, where a homicidal maniac, or, in more euphonious
terms, a religious enthusiast, after killing her sister and
wounding herself severely, as " without shedding of blood there
could be no remission," caused herself to be bound and nailed
to the wall, in the attitude of the crucified, by surviving
relatives, and, these sanguinary measures having failed to
produce death, was killed by having the heart transfixed by a
nail.f A third, where a cobbler, a pietistic melancholic, having
been foiled in an attempt to crucify himself in a public street
in Venice, constructed a cross, and binding himself so far as
he could to its surface, ingeniously suspended himself in a net
* Recherchcs sur TEpilepsie et VHysteric, par Bourneville. 1876, p. 142.
+ Dr Pagan, quoted in Spiritualistic Madness, by Dr L. S. Forbes Winslow.
RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI. 217
from his windowbut was saved from death and canonisation,
and transferred to his proper destination, an hospital.*
In such cases these alternatives may be adopted as ex-
piatory of unrepented and unforgiven offences, or in order to
quench the fiery accusations of memory; and acts pregnant
with such intense suffering may fall lightly upon a morbid,
stolid, hebete nervous system; but why should we not conceive
that the same strength and the same spirit which supported
and gave joy to the martyrs at the stake may be extended
to the maniac ; nay, may be poured out in the same or more
abundant measure to the human affliction which, whether the
outcome of individual error, or a heritage from a polluted
ancestry, forms part and parcel of the destiny alike of the
individual and of the race, of the great balance between what
we must bear and what we can bear ? But the sincerity, making
the convictions?even the most absurd delusions?incompatible
with and abhorrent to the heart and understanding of the
very victim, who may look upon them as another self, a shadow,
a spectre, or an invisible persecutor, is more striking than
indifference or even insensibility to the ordinary ills that flesh
is heir to. It is not obstinacy. Pertinaciously such revolting
opinions are clung to in defiance of the evidence of reason, the
external senses, the testimony of others, of the very experience
of the being who is their puppet and plaything.
There may be teaching in this. As we borrow lofty senti-
ments, high resolves, self-abnegation from false faiths, we may
learn moral lessons from the errors and absurdities of our
patients. The martyrs of Juggernaut, the victims of the
Suttee, the obedience of the Assassins, even the indomitable
stoicism of sheer impostors, have given forth an aroma, which,
like the balsams in a mummy case, may somewhat sweeten
the corruption beneath.
Withered flowers are sometimes fragrant. The stem may
be broken, the leaves may be crushed, the golden tints of
summer may have faded, but still some of the Insane create
around them an atmosphere of sweetness. They bend under,
but bear their miseries and misfortunes gently, patiently,
resignedly. They seek to help and to deal with the deeper
and darker sufferings of their companions. They are minis-
trants in the hands of the physician. They hold the community
together, and add usefulness, order, beauty to its products.
Lessons, the seed of thought and conduct, might be gathered
from such deportment. The mirror is not the only surface
which insensibly reflects surrounding forms and movements.
The human mind is?unconsciously it may be?affected by every
* Anatomy of Suicide, by Dr Forbes Winslow. 1840, p. 331.
PART II. VOL. III. NEW SERIES. P
218 RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI.
impression with which it is brought into contact through the
senses. It may not perceive, it may cast off, it may not intelli-
gently retain the doings, the sayings, the thinkings of others,
of those whom it is its province and proud boast to control
and to guide to judgments and sentiments of a certain class;
but it cannot escape from such influences, it is acted upon,
however transiently, for good or for evil, by the most insig-
nificant look or smile; and, what is more important, these
fleeting sensations leave faithful photographs on the plane of
consciousness, which may exert great, and must exert some
potency on the recipient.
A faint corroboration of this supposed infection has been
afforded when the guardians of the insane have broken down
under their responsibilities and shared their fate. But, instead
of numbing or narrowing the judgment and the sentiments, as
oracularly pronounced by a distinguished physician, contact
with those stricken by mental maladies, long companionship in
their daily life, ministration to their wants and infirmities, ex-
pand and elevate the observer beyond and above the dull and level
routine of ordinary Practice. In an asylum all bodily diseases as
well as mental affections demand attention and relief; not merely
the casual visit, but continuous intercourse, mutual friendship
and reliance are unavoidable; not merely the coarse and the con-
tentious, but the most subtle intellects, the noblest genius, the
purest and most delicate hearts have to be dealt with, for have
not Tasso and Cowper and Robert Hall been mad ? There must
be an adaptation of manners, as well as a selection of drugs,
to every individual; there must be solicitude as to every im-
pression addressed to the senses by surroundings, as well as to
what shall be eaten or drunk ; there must be a guidance of the
sorrowful towards hope, of the weak towards strength, of the
incurable towards a second or artificial nature, of the dying
towards a life eternal. The scope of the alienist is as wide as
human science or sympathies can reach. If he does not realise
all or many of these behests, he is a traitor to his trust, a
defaulter in his mission.
It has been narrated that the presence, the look, the folded
hands, and the accents of prayer of a tiny child have softened
and swerved the malice, the murderous intentions of violent
rapacious men; and it has often occurred to me that the im-
ploring glance, the sob, the inarticulate appeal of a stricken
lunatic has changed my purpose, has called into activity a
nobler form of sympathy than mere compassion, has led me
nearer to the source of unselfish, unscientific mercy.
Nor is it only when the emotions are thus highly wrought
and exalted that the ideas, even the delusions, of the patient
RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI. 219
reach and react upon his physician ; but there is every reason
to believe that at all times, and under all circumstances, such a
confluence and communion does take place, often in purifying,
sometimes, alas, in soiling and deteriorating the mental condi-
tions of the insane.
To those of cast-iron mould, to those of foot-rule and figure-
rule benevolence, who would regard an hospital as the
complement of space, air, food, exercise, such reciprocity would
be impossible and unintelligible. To those who approach
insanity as a physical disease and nothing more, which it is
incumbent upon them to remove or relieve, in the same way,
and by somewhat the same means, as it is the duty of a surgeon
to reset a fractured limb, or of an engineer to repair a disabled
locomotive, such intercommunion would appear not merely out
of place, but absurd. But when the education of a medical
man is not confined to the dead-house and dissecting room, and
we are constrained to prefer this profession to that of a
retired butcher or superannuated jailor, which sometimes usurp
its place, when he has received some simple philosophical
culture, such as may grow up in his own nature, or under the
nurture of a happily constituted home, or of specific religious
or moral teachings, or in the schools, he will be able to see
in his patient, not merely a collection of cells, fibres, interstitial
tissue, undergoing fatty, colloid, or amyloid degeneration, but
a spirit composed of hopes and fears, as well as of ideas and im-
pressions, and, from whatever evolution coming, displaying in its
capacities, its aspirations, convictions, in its never-ceasing
growth and inexhaustible resources, that it is intended for a
higher sphere, stretching away far and beyond into the inter-
minable future, mounting demonstrably, because, as predicable
from its constitution, able and designed to mount, into another
higher, more God-like phase of mental existence.
0 joy! that in our embers
Is something that doth live,
Moving about in worlds not realised,
High instincts before which our mortal nature
Did tremble as a guilty thing surprised*
Like the primitive Christians, who had not so much as heard
whether there was a Holy Spirit or not, I have met adventurers,
intrusted with the care of the insane, who had not heard whether
there was so much as a human mind or not, that is to say, in
addition to the ordinary functions of the cerebro-spinal axis.
It is affirmed that when we gaze steadily through a deep
shaft into a well the stars can be seen at noonday. Assuredly,
* Wordsworth's Ode, Intimations of Immortality.
220 RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI.
if we gaze steadily and penetratingly into the depths of the
conscience and consciousness of the insane, we shall see there
reflected rays of light of which we could not have dreamed.
And these rays will be revealed even when the spirit is troubled
and tempest-tossed, when the waters are sullied- These bril-
liant points are not merely the sincerity, the love, the trustful-
ness of which we have spoken, but they may consist of hereditary
tendencies to virtue or genius, stretching far back into the
ages, demonstrating, as clearly as similar tendencies to vice and
dulness, that, however nervous matter or any other sort of
matter may change or degenerate, the psychical element under-
goes no variability by transmission through generations and
centuries, and although in contact and conflicting with disease.
There is, besides, the original type, the personality, which resists
the passage of years, misfortunes, physical decay, even the
revolution in opinions, tastes, habits. There is in all to be traced
the luminous track impressed by the desire for and the belief
in something to obey and worship, something to love and to rest
upon, something to enlighten, to guide, to purify. When the
body is broken down piecemeal by palsy, when portions are
separated from self, when it is divided, halved, there is no parti-
tion, no bisection of the concrete ego. The living half may
drag along its cold, senseless, corpse-companion, now beyond
the influence of will, conscience, almost of animal life, yet the
personality survives- the partial death intact and entire. Nor
does this individualism contract into a mere point: it expands
around in likings and dislikings; upwards in prayer and com-
munion with what is stronger, kinder, better; onwards into
the eternity of an unmutilated, painless life. Professor Lordat
during paralysis preserved all intellectual combinations, but
had lost the power to express them. There is in many that
marvellous educability and tractableness which impart a capacity
for assuming that second or artificial nature which has been
alluded to, that growth under and towards new influences and
towards the acquisition of new dispositions, new ties, and even
new occupations and accomplishments. Under the same category
may be placed aged men of genius, who, notwithstanding brain-
wasting, display, according to Goethe, fresh productiveness, a
second puberty.
The gospel of mildness, mercy, and justice, acting on and by
this quality of teachableness, has in a sense converted both medical
men and those confided to their care to Christianity; not, perhaps,
to a particular creed, dogma, or ritual, but to the worship of the
Unseen, and yet the Omnipotent, of Divinity which acts by
direct operation on the spirit of man. It is true the theory
that alienation was a disease of the body exclusively may have
RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI. 221
led to materialistic views; but the experience that moral means,
which act apparently independently of the body, were even more
effective and curative than those means which act obviously
through it and by it, that the soft answer does turn away wrath,
have dealt a severe blow to scepticism. That lunatics have
been restored to a consciousness of their condition and to reason
by being beaten, as was George III., manacled, lialf-drowned,
etc., cannot be doubted. Very recently, under the sardonic
title of moral treatment, a physician, Leuret, subjected a dozen
patients to long-continued shower baths until, in fact, they
confessed and abandoned their delusions; but the success of all
such experiments or outrages must be explained on the ground
that the subjects of them were frightened into their senses, that
the remedy is not to be sought in the blows or water, but in
the terror which produced the mental revolution. It is worthy
of very serious investigation whether an act of the will, inspired
by fear or any other moral agent, can sweep away delusions,
distempered sentiments, mental disease. That intense voluntary
attention directed to an organ may interfere with its nutrition,
or, when duly nourished, with its function, is generally believed.
Feuchtersleben held that the exercise of will led to an " evolu-
tion of life," to the control of disease, to the restoration of health.*
Goethe affirmed?we must venture to say assumed?that he
could repel, and had actually resisted contagion by acts of voli-
tion. The difficulty here involved is as great where elements of a
different class are dealt with, where the power of music, colour,
beauty, in tranquillising excitement, reanimating hope, in diffus-
ing joy, even in dispelling perversions, is manifested in the re-
establishment of sanity. It matters not whether these influences
or impulses initiate new molecular movements in the brain or
repair the structures upon which these depend; they directly
reach consciousness, they directly overthrow diseased action.
In attributing recovery from infirmity or illness to the inven-
tive faculty, do we approach nearer to a solution of the
difficulties which ever surround causation, whether the suffering
were structural or sensational ? Is it easier or more logical to
believe that a feeling, or a fancy, could pluck it from the flesh,
than the will of God ? The restoration to reason, especially if
sudden, is a miracle, in the working of which the physician can
claim no participation. Is not every vital action, especially
in its point of origin?growth, for example, or repair of struc-
ture, without detectable cause, object, or controlling power?
miraculous ?
Such marvels, such triumphs of the creative and recupera-
tive power are well exemplified in the reciprocity, or rather the
* The Dietetics of the Soul.
222 RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI.
subjugation of physical to psychical functions?in more popular
phraseology, in the influence of imagination?as in the Eostan's
experiments in the Hotel Dieu, where bread served the purpose
of colocynth pills, tepid water acted as an emetic; where the
sight of a few drops of blood from venesection produced syncope,
under the conviction of the patient that the remedies named
had been actually exhibited in the ordinary way and to the
ordinary extent; secondly, in the experiment by Broca and
Velpeau, where twenty-four individuals were thrown into slumber
by a modification of Braid's process, when surgical operations
were performed without causing the slightest pain; and
thirdly, in the somnambulism, the simulations, the credulity,
the delusions?if such they be?willed, or created by the will,
either of the operator or the person operated upon, through the
influence of the legions of mesmerisers, animal magnetisers,
moral conjurors, and charlatans, who have secured the confidence
of so large a portion of educated communities.
The aggrandisement, the increase of stature and strength
of the unhealthy in the exercise of intellect, in the acqui-
sition of new thoughts, new habits, and manual dexterity, as
well as occasionally in restoration to reason, is notably proved
in the religious, moral, musical, mechanical, scholastic tuition
and training introduced into schools for the imbecile and the
insane. In Eichinond Asylum, Dublin, education, as a means
of improvement and cure, has been resorted to for several years,
under the able superintendence of Dr Lalor?whose patients
under culture generally amount to nearly two hundred?with
decided and beneficial results, although both the amount and
rationale have not been fully stated.
Under my charge I have had moping idiots, a deaf and dumb
general paralytic, and gesticulating maniacs, who were from
preoccupation practically deaf and dumb, and who appeared
beyond the reach of sympathy or the plummet of reason; yet this
depth has been fathomed, and what was without form and void
has been fashioned into order and symmetry, and placed in rela-
tion to Grod and man. Even to the deft Chiaromonte, inter-
preter of the uncouth sounds taught to deaf mutes as language,
the converse is awe-inspiring and wonderful. But when a
church is entered where there are hundreds of this class, where
the preacher is one of themselves, where all is silence and
sobriety; but where active, it may be eloquent communion is
going on between the teacher and the taught, on transcendental
topics of the last importance to these isolated beings, we trace
another link between the multiplicity and universality of divine
purposes and human wants and weakness. The transmission of
a visible thought of external forms to the consciousness of the
RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI. 223
deaf mute is intelligible; but, unless we presuppose a receptivity,
a capacity to comprehend an abstract proposition, a special
plasticity in the pupils and the presence of Divine intelligence,
we cannot comprehend how they grasp, obey, and act out a
living faith, a moral law.
When wards for the agitated and excited are visited, we are
less reminded of violent passions than of demoniac possession.
Individuals are tossed to and fro, are cast down, carried out of
themselves, against their inclinations and wishes; they shout,
gesticulate, threaten, as if in mortal combat. Whether it be a
conflict between their sense of propriety and a dominant pro-
pensity or between volition and automatism as in epilepsy, there
ever a struggle. Pascal has said that there were two souls
within us?one that leads to good, one that leads to evil: one
which may be distorted and destroyed and distraught by mad-
ness?one pure, invulnerable, invincible, eternal, the animus
and the anima ; in the equipoise between which health consists.
There are many confirmations of this duality; there is a strong
probability in favour of the opinion that while the mind may
be ruffled and rent and impaired, the soul may continue undis-
turbed, uncontaminated by disease, and constituting the bulwark
against mental death. The separation into two natures may be
traced in double consciousness. This condition invites, but has
hitherto defied, the investigations of the metaphysicians. The
personal identity seems to be lost or impaired. The individual
is separated into two distinct beings. He feels the promptings
of two different natures; he remembers two different trains of
thought and conceives that he is two persons at the same time,
or at different times. Or, which is more rarely the case, all
recollection of the one state is lost when the mind passes into
the other, and the two periods of existence are in no way con-
nected by consciousness or memory. One of these states may
be healthy, characterised by the exercise of sound sense and
generous affections; the other may be diseased, marked by folly
or passion; or both may be diseased, but distinguished from
each other. In both cases there is a contest between two
distinct entities. A. B. conceives that he is himself and
another person at the same time; he acts as if this belief were
sincere, and cannot divest himself of the conviction that in
his own body are two minds or persons, suggesting courses of
conduct widely opposed. He is certain that his original self,
A. B., is a base, abandoned scoundrel, tempting his other, or
new, or better self?to whom, it should be noted, is attached the
emphatic ego?to commit crimes or acts of which he altogether
disapproves. The second person of this duality repels, struggles
with, these abominable solicitations, such as that he should
224 RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI.
commit suicide, and loathes the tempter or first person. This
struggle sometimes becomes real and visible, when the hands,
acting under the will of No. 1, or the virtuous and opposing
impulse, beat and bruise the legs, body, or head, which, it may
be presumed, are supposed to belong to No. 2, the vicious or
tempting impulse. The object of the one is obviously to inflict
pain upon the other. The blows are so severe as to leave marks
for days; and when these are adverted to, the answer is, as if
from No. 2, " Don't justify him, he deserved it."*
The alternate domination of different natures, the whirlwind
of passion, the stagnation and hebetude of despair are strikingly
contrasted in certain modifications of the Folie Circulaire,
where the self-reliance and strength of mania give place to the
suffering and feebleness cf melancholia; or it assumes a more
pleasing aspect where insensate fury subsides into calmness and
lucidity in the temporary lull of an intermission or permanent
recovery, and where the patient passes from the darkness and
moral tempest of seclusion to the cheerfulness and amenities
of a convalescent gallery, and is seen " clothed, seated, and in
his right mind." This well-marked duplicity of condition, if
not of character, has suggested the fancy?yet is it a fancy ??
that the higher, more rational, self-regulating spirit is of us,
but not in us; is an objective influence vouchsafed to guide and
to govern at the very time when help is required; that it is
a guardian angel.
Sir Thomas Brown says : " Therefore, for spirits, I am so far
from denying their existence, that I could easily believe that
not only whole countries, but particular persons have their
tutelary and guardian angels. It is not a new opinion of
the Church of Eome, but an old one of Pythagoras and Plato."f
But others less speculative, though as humble, reposing in that
trust which has sufficed since genuine civilisation commenced,
have recognised in certain of these manifestations a divine
afflatus which may cast out, chastise, or calm'not merely tire
Satanic impulse of which the monomaniac is the sport, but the
legion of foul and ferocious morbid instincts which are the
motive powers in the polymaniac.
The tranquillisation which almost always accompanies the
act of prayer and religious services, in which the force and
fortitude inspired by faith are shadowed forth, countenance
the latter view. The theomaniac who told Esquirol that
angels revealed to him his divinity and whispered their
* For examples of this rare condition, seo Dr Dyer, in Philosophical Trans-
actions ; Ellicott, in Combe's System of Phrenology; Dewar, in Abcrcrombie on the
Intellectual Powers; and Wigan, in his Duality of Mind.
t Religio Medici, p. 87.
RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI, 225
allegiance, and the general paralytic who announced to my-
self, while staggering beside me, that he had literally taken
up his bed, and that his faith had " made him whole," both
believed from an intuition, which, if not a mockery to deceive
and delude us, is in itself God-given, however it may be mis-
directed. It might be profane if Laurent L , the savage
recluse of the forest of Pierrefou, near Hyeres, were compared
with the Ascetics and Eremites of the Thebaid, but how like
are the sorrows, sufferings, self-accusations of the melancholic
to the religious condition of Conviction; how like the depen-
dence, the calm devotion, the perfect confidence of many mono-
maniacs to that of Conversion; how like the inextinguishable
hope, the glorious anticipations of the insane optimist to that of
Assurance ! Of the orthodoxy or catholicity of these dogmata I
profess ignorance, and am contented to know that they have
been held by rational and religious people.
The support which may be afforded by partial truths, im-
perfect revelations, and the foreshadowings which may be cast
even by physical states and changes, may be gathered from the
circumstances attending the transition from a solitary cell or a
padded room to an associated dormitory. In the first may lie
the victim of fear or remorse, calm, cold, sleepless, so mute
and motionless that physical seems to have triumphed over
that moral death entailed by chain-bound suffering. The
soul feeds on itself, communes with the dead and the departed,
or with sins and sorrows that never depart, and may thus per-
petuate a life-long agony, so exquisite and continuous that
sleep is banished for months and years, and the patient becomes
rigid and statuesque as marble through the concentration of
feeling. In the padded room may be an incarnate whirlwind,
bounding, rushing, reeling, shouting, shrieking in fear and defiance
of skeletons, spectres, supernatural or, it may be, more material
foes; or, in utter disregard of cold, pain, even fatigue, casting
off that morbid muscular energy in virtue of which he is enabled
to sustain, and even enjoy, this gladiatorial struggle, and which,
whatever its source, cannot originate in the innate forces of the
poor excited combatant. In the associated dormitory there may
be assembled a group of ten or twelve individuals, who, differing
widely during the day?one being elated by passion, one being
stupidly silent, another being a walking, incoherent logomachy?
are now all placed upon an equality, all prostrated and sad-
dened by that marvellous agent, sleep, which comes not from
themselves nor from any physiological process known to us.
Is this penumbra, this precursor of death, intended to serve as
a moral teacher as well as a physical restorer ? Does this un-
conscious instrument bring us nearer to the world of spirits ?
226 RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI.
Is the communion held in dreams, and which is not regulated
by us, sustained with the past, the future, or the unknown ?
Dream-thought has been the field of discovery ; it incessantly
brings within such mental cognisance as to serve as the base of
memory new combinations of thought, new creations, new im-
pulses and purposes. Discoveries have been made, difficulties
solved in, and fears and fancies embodied forth from dreams ;
and although little under the dominion of the body and less
under that of the will, it might be argued that many delusions
are little more than dreams perpetuated and running along
with the current of waking thought. I have known insanity
occur during dreams and remain a live-long blight. The pro-
found, the tranquil, the refreshing slumber enjoyed by many
lunatics, and the knowledge that their dreams must be unin-
fluenced to a great degree by existing external impressions, as
they are assuredly removed from the power of the will and of
the understanding, led me to make certain inquiries as to their
character and scope. Were the insane mad or as mad during
sleep, were their dreams a mere duplicate of their waking
hallucinations and errors, were they similar to those of the
healthy sane ? Desiring to follow these fervid imaginations
into sleep, and to watch the mental processes compatible with
calmness and repose, and when the spirit is hovering on the
confines of insensibility and immortality, I caused a record to
be regularly kept of all remarkable dreams, phantasies, and
visions which had made so deep an impression as to influence
the conduct of the individual, which had excited some powerful
emotion at the time, or had been afterwards communicated.
Certain patients were selected for observation who were of
marked character, whose habitual trains of thought were well
known, and who spontaneously or willingly described their
feelings; their confidence was sought and secured, and the dis-
closures of every night were carefully preserved. This scheme
was adopted for the purpose of determining how far the night
dream corresponded with the day delusion ; whether the events
of the day exercised a similar power over the insane as they
were believed to do over the sane, and to what extent the mind
was rational during sleep, somnambulism, and those states between
sleeping and waking. The inquiry was new and led to a collec-
tion of most interesting and extraordinary information as to the
laws of association during sleep. It established, so for as it
went, the identity of the dream with the delusion, showed that
the current of morbid thought flowed on uninterruptedly
through the agitation and the vivid impressions of the day and
the quiet and repose of the night. In some instances it ap-
peared that previous acts and feelings entered into, and coloured,
RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI. 227
and directed the dream. Thus, immediately after one of our
festive meetings the vision of one of the party was found to
contain a picture of glittering and gorgeous dresses, and of
another to display a dance performed by the wives of the Goths
and Vandals in St. Paul's Cathedral. Much more frequently the
dream, regarded as a reality, moulded and modified the concep-
tions and delusions of the waking state. Thus, one man was
persuaded that he was destroyed by magnetism, silent combus-
tion, and complained to the authorities that attempts were made
upon his life; a second dreamed that he was possessed of corn,
wine, and oil, and distributed them the next day ; a third that
he saw the books of the nation in the hands of the Lord
Chancellor, and that a long black stroke was drawn across the
national debt, and in the morning he announced that he was
about to pay it. It is as difficult to convey any adequate notion
of the extravagance, the grotesqueness, and sometimes the
splendour of these reveries, as to follow the unsound mind
through all its waywardness and wanderings ; but it is consolatory
to discover that the prevailing characteristics were pleasure and
happiness. Of about seventy dreams detailed with great
minuteness, four either owed their origin or their predominating
features to fear; seventeen to the gratification of some sense, or
the realisation of some hope, wish, or ambition; four sprung
from re-awakened affection or kindness; three were occupied
with political triumphs; three were disturbed by anger; nine
were tinged with the harmless superstitions of early days; five
seemed to be the offspring of vanity; two of pride; seven of
suspicion ; nine of avarice or the desire of aggrandisement;
three were busied with martial pomp and glory; and three
with the more peaceful operations of the farm ; and, of the total
number, whether pure creations of imagination or indistinct
and distorted recollections of past events, not above fifteen
could be regarded as giving pain or suffering, and as calling for
sympathy.
The phenomenon of dreaming and the act of abrupt awaken-
ing resemble the instantaneous recoveries which have been
witnessed by every psychologist. The closed eye, far behind
which fantasies have been careering, opens to light and order.
The darkness and dim chaos which have, perhaps during a
quarter of a century, brooded over the tempest-tossed soul pass
away into oblivion in the twinkling of an eye; and the en-
franchised patient begins life anew, takes up the feelings, affec-
tions, opinions, projects which were left inchoate years ago,
retaining nearly as little memory of the interval as the sleeper
of the creations of the night. It is a resurrection. The physi-
cist stands aghast that a moral consequent should have no
228 RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI.
demonstrable or appreciable antecedent. The statistician is
puzzled by the disturbance of his law of fixed ratios, by an ex-
ception outside his calculations of proportions, an index of a
larger circle than he had conceived possible; while the humble
and religious mind accepts the occurrence merely as the index
of mental change, as a special Providence, or as a manifestation
of Grod's will, as may be in keeping with his convictions. Were
such a crux addressed to a restored patient, it is next to certain
that he would describe the revolution as sudden, as not in
himself or by himself, and as flashing like a gleam of lightning
on his spirit from some supersensuous or supernal source.
The turbid and turbulent maniac is not the only moral
opponent with whom the physician has to contend. The doubt-
ing, dreading,hair-splitting monomaniac is even more formidable.
I have already pointed to the solemn lesson taught as to
the universal and perpetual presence of God in the human
heart, by the bowing down of rebellious spirits and of imagi-
nary deities in the worship of the Omnipotent. I have like-
wise adverted to the indelibility of the idea of personality,
of that Me which must have pre-existed and received the Not
Me?in other terms, all impressions of externality?and which
survives when all other tracings have faded from the tablet of
memory. But there is still another intuition which is rarely
obliterated. This is the sense of responsibility, the feeling of
right and wrong. It is true that conscience must be weakened,
may be warped, by delusions, imaginings, and the turmoil of
passion, and its sensitiveness may have been blunted during the
sane life of the lunatic. But it is so rarely extinct, so invari-
ably accessible, that distinguished authorities have advocated the
punishment of the insane as a means of moral treatment. They
may have been emboldened to do this by the observations of the
consciousness of error, by the appearance of shame, remorse, re-
pentance in the insane, and by the fact that the moral management
of the inmates of asylums consists in great measure of a system of
rewards and penalties, of praise and blame. There is a form of
derangement in which the mind itself, a self-tormentor, acts
as a sort of devil's advocate, accuses itself, detects vice and
delinquency where the bystander sees virtue and uprightness,
and magnifies into crime what is neither culpable nor suspicious.
I have seen a lucid interval converted into a Lenten season of
sorrow and guilty apprehension over the violence, the blasphe-
mous word, or the irreverent thought which had been indulged
during the paroxysm of excitement. " I question much Paley's
watch and watchmaker as an evidence of wise and beneficent
creation," said a patient to me, " but I have a revelation within
my own thought. It is conscience. I did not create it, but it
RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI. 2 '29
created me." Spenser sings, " The soul is form, and doth the
body make." This feeling is the charter of man's superiority to
all other living beings ; it is the link with higher intelligences,
purer moral natures, which he can neither measure nor approach.
It is the prophetic evidence, the foreshadowing of a future court
of judgment, at the bar of which he must appear, when his own
thoughts or acts will become his defenders or his accusers.
The gorilla has muscles in his prehensile foot which confer a
power peculiar to himself. Conscience, he and all other an-
thropoid creatures are denied ; he fears danger and he flies from
it, he feels pain and gibbers, pleasure and chuckles ; but he may
destroy his fellows, filch their food, and do all that assimilates
him to the savage, the satyr ; but neither shame nor sorrow nor
the dread of chastisement enter his rudimentary mind.
There is, as we have said above, and now repeat, a disease of
this moral sense, as well as of the judgment. It may be blotted
out from the map of mind, or it may be submerged under a deluge
of delusions, as cities have disappeared under the encroachments
of the storm-moved ocean. But it is to the prominence, the
exaltation, the excitement of conscientiousness, to which
reference is made here. According to the exaggerated estimate
of the sufferer, or sinner, as he would wish to be termed and
treated, the most commonplace as well as the most exigent duties
have been neglected, imperfectly performed, have originated in
selfish, sordid, sinful motives, have secured gains which should be
denounced as robbery, have been crowned with fame and honour
where blame or shame should have been the reward. Punishment,
disgrace, degradation are claimed, clamoured for, as the just
and inevitable expiation, if such were possible, of such derelic-
tion. Not only in the past, but in each succeeding minute, in
every thought, in every movement, in every act of kindness,
sympathy, and apparent disinterestedness, there appears to the
victim something sinister, unworthy, unholy. The self-analysis
includes the most trivial as well as the most momentous doings
and feelings ; and the perplexed, distracted convict stands ever
at the bar of judgment awaiting condemnation?stands ever on
the brink of a gulf into which he may be precipitated, even by
the wish to escape it. I have often risen from a discussion,
from an effort to convince or console this self-tormentor,
with the feelings of exhaustion which follow a game of chess
with an expert and experienced player, and with the sense of
defeat which generally attends such an intellectual tournament.
But this was the least inglorious sentiment. I often stood
rebuked before the purity and majesty of the motives and aims,
of the sincerity of the contrition, of the elevation of the
standard of this self-accused whom I had presumptuously
230 IlELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI.
essayed to instruct, to refute, to restore. The humiliating
suspicion has pressed upon me that the world could not be
conducted upon principles of such scrupulous optimism, and
that, as at present constituted, society is kept together by
baser, ruder, and less noble bonds. These morbid sentiments,
or rather this hypercritical conscientiousness, may form a
groundwork of religious depression, but the anxiety or prostra-
tion is more frequently the outcome of an ill-balanced moral
nature than of pietism. In whatever combination, the misery
entailed is exquisite.
The usufruct of the ophthalmoscope has been to show the
very passage of the materials of an hallucination from the
inner eye, along the retina, into the very depths and recesses
of those structures where it is supposed to feed and to form
the insane conception. The syphymograph may declare the
heat and the hurry of passion as they disturb the pulse;
and even the pace of the will, as it rushes along its course
to the muscles, its instruments of good or evil; and the
speed of pain, as it warns of danger or injury from without,
may all be measured ; but we have no gauge for that anguish
which interpenetrates every state of consciousness, and clings
to every impulse and sentiment. It may be styled in certain
religious communities as natural penitence; in asylums it may
assume the form of penance; the patient may remain in the
same posture for days and months; compulsory alimentation
may be required for years to preserve lives endangered by
pertinacious fasting; blows and wounds, even self-immolation,
may be resorted to; and all this upon the vain but universal
notion of atonement, of making the body or its senses suffer
for the sins of the soul.
Yicariousness is stamped upon our nature as an intuition,
and not adopted as a principle. The law of compensation to
others, to ourselves, to an abstraction, is an instinct of con-
science, an incentive in conduct. It is often stronger in the
uprooted than in the upright mind. Suicide is thus a sacrifice.
The victim dies, or seeks to die, for his sins, because he is too
abased and abominable to live, to save others?his children,
mankind?from perishing and punishment, or to expiate here-
ditary crimes. Is this conception, deliberate or delirious, given
to familiarise us with the central fact in Christian faith, or is
it a reflection cast from thence, but, if so, reaching and actuating
savage as well as saint and sage ?
That materialism as well as atheism?and its necessary con-
comitant, a belief in, or a hope for annihilation?is rarely a
symptom or an accompaniment of insanity has excited surprise.
The highly educated sceptic, as well as the timid and the vulgar,
RELIGIO PSYCHO-MEDICI. 231
recoils from the ceasing to be. "Non occides," Sir Thomas
Brown says, " is the commandment of Grod, yet scarce observed
by any man; for I perceive every man is his atropos, and lends a
hand to cut the thread of his own days." " Could the devil
work my belief to imagine I could ever die, I would not outlive
that very thought."* . x ,
Even the suicide desires, m many instances, to reach a
future and a happier world, rather than to escape from this.
It may be that, as subjectivity, or dealing with our own
thoughts is the essence of mental disease, whether the com-
plexion of these thoughts be bright or gloomy, the morbid
imagination may forget its earthly tenement, may realise
chiefly or exclusively, the world of ideas with which it is
conversant, and believe more practically or trustingly in a life,
an eternity, without pain, passions, as it will be without end.
TVipssp sad and solemn teachers dispose me to say, without a
sneer, or a condemnation of those who believe differently, an
undevout Psychologist is mad!
* Op. cit., pp. 104 and 177.
