states of Unconsciousness
===========================


THE JOUBNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Akt. I.?
IRRESISTIBLE IMPULSES?EPILEPSY?TREADAWAY.
n
A monograph of the states of unconsciousness has yet to be
written. For years to come this may remain a desideratum,
" a sight to dream of, not to seebut until the birth, bearings,
and boundaries of that condition, which entails a loss or a lack
of the knowledge of our own thoughts and feelings, be exhaus-
tively dealt with, the relations of the human mind and of human
acts to responsibility must be imperfect and uncertain. Habit
and popular experience have reconciled us to very vague notions
on this subject. The total suspension of mentalisation in
coma and syncope has been recognised. The partial interference
with sensibility and mobility, and the consequent limitation of
will in trance, trance-coma, somnambulism,, is known rather as
a physiological curiosity than as an affection which places the
individual in a different mental and legal position. But it is
only necessary to advert to exaggerated, or even to ordinary
examples of abstraction, vacancy, fugacious inattention, or
absence of mind, to the profound concentration in study, sorrow,
suffering, to demonstrate that there is a large unmeasured scale
of gradation and of unconsciousness, and that it is only in the
highly cultivated, exercised mind, and where there is an
equable balance between the subjective and objective faculties,
that periods never recur of impaired consciousness, of those gaps
in the continuity of perception and memory in which the con-
nection of the individual with the thing said, done, or recalled,
is no longer distinct or trustworthy. Even in master minds,
such as that of Sir Robert Peel, such obliviousness may occur.
He is described as sitting plunged in profound, probably in
painful reverie in the House of Commons, after the sitting was
PART II. VOL. III. NEW SERIES. N
186 STATES OF UXCONSCIOUSNESS.
closed, the members, and even his colleagues, departed, and
until roused when the lights were about to be extinguished.*
In whatever these intercurrent spaces of non-existence may-
have originated, whether from the unfettered determination
or the idle wandering imagination, or from the brain-wasting
which follows hard work, intellectual or moral, it is certain
that, occasionally, in different persons, at different ages, and
in different circumstances, they pass beyond the power and
in defiance of the will, and are fairly entitled to be classed
with morbid mental affections, if not with positive alienation.
Our anecdotal literature is replete with illustrations. All
know that the intense contemplation of Sir Isaac Newton
rendered him so entirely oblivious to self and surroundings,
that, in order to relieve himself from the heat of the fire,
he ordered its removal instead of drawing back his chair,
a twilight which foreshadowed deeper darkness. Even this
expedient did not occur to Martini, the poet, whose leg was
burned during his absorption. A clergyman is known to us who
forgets his name, the street in which he lives ; who, on turning in
the street, invariably pursues the wrong direction irrespective of
the object of his journey, and who, on retiring to his bed-room
to prepare for a dinner party, undressed and went to bed.
A similar instance of irreminiscence occurred in the pro-
fessor of Hebrew in a northern college, who, on the day of
his marriage, dressing for the ceremony, retired quietly to bed.
Ludicrous incidents of the same kind are related of Bowles the
poet, who, tying his horse to a stake, retraced his steps, offered
to pay the turnpike which he had already paid, and was as-
tonished to find that he had dismounted; of Matthews and Mrs.
Siddons, the actors ; but all these are outdone by the concatena-
tion of absurdities in the biography of Hookham Frere, the
scholar and man of letters, who, handing the Countess of Errol to
supper, drank the negus he had prepared for her, and altogether
forgot the object of their visit to the dining-room; and who, on
the day of his marriage with the same lady, had no recollection
until the evening that he had promised to accompany his bride
to the country; having occupied the intervening time in reading
his poems to his publishers.
It is obvious that these are specimens of mere forgetfulness
and absence in those who had taxed attention and introspection
to the utmost, and that, in confining the exercise of intellect
and memory within a narrow rang?; they had insured, by disuse
or exclusion, the other, and especially the observant powers.
But concentration on particular subjects, even upon particular
* Disraeli's Life of Lord George BentincJc.
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 187
objects, and those the creations of fancy, produces still graver
evils, even illusions. Buddhists and Fakirs who direct and fix
their devout attention upon a single attribute of Deity, or
a single spot or organ in their own frame, are said to
become monomaniacal; and even in a man of genius, famous
in our own land, continuous application led to serious, though
brief, disturbance in perception. It is narrated of Sir Joshua
Eeynolds that, " when, after being many hours occupied
in painting, he walked out into the street, the lamp-posts
seemed to him to be trees, and the men and women
moving shrubs. His attention had been so long fixed and
enchained to the picture before him, that he could not direct
it to other objects of sensation."* Now these reveriests were,
one and all, of vigorous, acute, perceptive minds, of lofty
intellect, of immaculate character ; but had any of them com-
mitted murder, theft, or delinquency during the partial sus-
pension of consciousness, in what relation would they have
stood to the demands of justice, to public opinion, or to their
own conscience, when restored to complete self-possession ?
They could scarcely be classed with the bloodthirsty or
revengeful, or premeditating ruffian; they would assuredly not
be exonerated on the ground of alienation; and yet they could
not be held, in the words of the law judges, to have a knowledge
of the nature of the act, or whether it was culpable or blameless.
How far seclusion from the world and its ways, the shutting
the windows of the soul against external impressions, the
subjugation, or rather abnegation of human pursuits, passions,
interests, may have contributed to create and establish the visions
of St. Teresa, even the posture and stolidity of St. Simon
Stylites, it might be irreverent to decide ; but it is certain that
to narrow the scope of intellectual exercise, to nullify the
influence of the emotions or to contract the mental forces, ig
calculated to induce unliealth, both by giving disproportioned
prominence to certain faculties, by allowing others to fall into
desuetude and apathy, and, it may be, by inducing undue or
defective nutrition in certain portions of the brain. This has
been demonstrated in a marked manner in the lives of eccentrics,
ascetics, extatics, and above all in the convulsionaries of St.
Medard, where the morbid action of intense devotional feelings
and practices extended temporarily to the enfeeblement of
volition, to the functions of motivity and sensibility, manifested
in violent convulsions and complete anaesthesia. But mono-
ideaism may be involuntary and originally the offspring of dis-
ease. It is not agitated here as to the one-ideaed congenital idiot,
* The Indications of Insanity, by John Conolly, M.D. London, 1830 ; p. 110,
n 2
188 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
who in his psychical solitude is wrapt up in one sensation, it may
be heat, or hunger, or a bright colour, or even of a desire
to assassinate, but of such consequences of bodily or mental
degeneration as, robbing the thinking part of our nature of
its nobler endowments, leave it in the impoverishment of
an appetite, an unvarying set of words, a peculiarity or
a single all-embracing thought. These sequelse are desig-
nated by the French "fixed ideas." This term would imply
that the morbid element consists chiefly in fixedness, in the
inability of the will to substitute another train of reflection or
perception. A more characteristic feature appears to us to be
the unconsciousness of ultroneous sensations and subjective
suggestions, and, consequently, of the moral relations of the
individual, seeing that the will, though feeble and fickle, is not
extinct, as it serves to guide in the direction of the predomi-
nating, if not constantly permanent notion or incentive. The
narrow circle within which such a notion appears to move has
obtained for this defect the name of partial delirium; but this
must not be accepted as synonymous with raving or agitation,
nor must it be conceived that the word " partial" precludes the
extension of this habit of thinking and acting to other mental
powers. In the same category maybearranged the reduced capacity
of the aged and the moribund; the preoccupation of the maniac,
whose disordered imagination can admit of nothing but the
present and ruling impulse; the absorbing and exclusive anguish
of the melancholic ; the shorn and shattered mental remains of
the dement; even the dulled and darkened apprehension in false
judgments, where the absence of the power of comparison and
reasoning excludes a portion of the premises in every induction,
and leaves the mind the sport of imperfect reports of conscious-
ness. When the French grouped all forms of mental excitement
or perversion under the generic terms of feebleness, fatuity,
folly, which might influence human conduct as affected by law,
they virtually admitted that in all of these, and in the multi-
plicity of minor morbid states which they comprehend, there
exists in different degrees a suspension of consciousness; but
in this classification are not included the results of poisoning
by contagion or narcotics, such as cannibis indica, which un-
questionably obscure and obtund, if they do not destroy, in-
tellectual and moral perception. An attempt has been made
to distinguish monomania, whether it presents the outward and
visible sign of homicide, incendiarism, theft, or is nothing more
than a hidden and mastering, though inappreciable, because in-
offensive motive, from instinctive irresistible impulses, but un-
doubtedly without success.
Somnambulism may be placed as an isthmus between morbid
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 189
sentiments or proclivities, which overshadow the moral sense, and
sudden blind irresistible influences, which destroy, or for a short
season suspend every mental operation. In it the senses are
awake, preternaturally alive; the muscles are ruled and regulated
with a power and precision emulating the feats of an acrobat?
from saddling and riding a horse to scaling a cliff, from writing
a theme to running along the roof of a house. There is a
purpose and there is a co-ordination of acts for its accomplishment,
but consciousness is still asleep, and memory retains no record of
the transaction, although that may have gravely affected the
interest of the actor and of others. It is only when breaches of
the peace or violations of law signalise the conduct of a prudent
and peaceful citizen and are tendered in exculpation, that
monomania, properly so called, has been investigated but
psychology justifies the belief that in the performance?even
the habitual performance?of many acts which do not involve
serious consequences, the mind is exactly in the same condition:
is forced to think or feel in a particular way, is forced to instigate
certain deeds in flagrant opposition to its ordinary character and
tendencies, and in utter disregard of the promptings or of the
resistance of other motives and considerations. How nearly
allied such a struggle and such an ultimate triumph of the
propensities over reason, religion, and prudence are to irresistible
impulse will be seen in the sequel. In analysing this obscure
factor of conduct, it is best to separate it from all other morbid
manifestations, to deal with it where no traces of physical or
psychical unhealth can be detected, and where neither sin nor
shame nor sorrow have flowed from its brief domination.
Where impetuous but brief passions and lusts have been resisted,
extinguished, and have left no trace behind, except a self-
accusing remembrance, or the vague glimmer of a danger escaped,
there may be the prodrome, the foreshadowing of disease, as
well as the triumph of virtue and high principle. In advancing
one step further, we meet with instigations not merely incom-
patible with the general bearing of the individual, and absurd and
monstrous in their nature, but recognised as exotic and repre-
hensible, and which are subjugable and eradicable. We were
once consulted by a female, in the prime of life, educated, intel^
ligent, affluent, of spotless reputation, who confessed, with shud-
dering and repugnance, and in great perplexity, that when passing
those large plate glass windows, now so common in shops, she was
tempted, impelled, to break and crash this rather pleasing object;
that when in church, of which she was a regular attendant, she
could scarcely refrain from shrieking and shouting aloud, not in
fear or protest, but from an inexplicable, almost ungovernable
urgency; and that when entrusted, as from her kind and gentle
190 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
nature she frequently was, with babies or young children, she
was horrified to find a craving, an almost insatiable desire to
crush, cast them down, and kill them. All these anormal
incentives coexisted with no discoverable impairment of bodj
or mind; were never yielded to ; were ultimately removed; and
the victim is still alive, an ornament to her circle. The brevity
and inconstancy of such states, as well as their amenability to
control, have been argued as proving that they are not morbid,
but malign; but certain it is, although the paroxysm might be
momentary, the instigation was beyond the control of the will,
and remained or reappeared in antagonism to conscientiousness
and high resolves. We conceive that the introduction of
duration as an element, when weighing the healthy or unhealthy
origin of human motives, is an error. The sanction of the
epigrammatic adage " brevis ira furor est" would fall pointless
were not psychologists brought face to face with instantaneous
madness, with sudden outbursts of mania; where, from calmness
and equanimity, the individual passes, or rather rushes and reels
into wild violence and vindictiveness and other symptoms which
become permanent. Opinions as to the reality of mania transi-
toria are divided ; but even where doubt is cast on those scathing
flashes of moral lightning which sometimes disturb and desolate
families or even communities, as an independent species of
alienation, it has been admitted that such transitions may be
witnessed in conjunction with more familiar aspects of emotive
disease, and especially in the non-convulsive intervals of epilepsy.
A certain connection between irresistible impulse and the
short and sharp outbursts of epileptoid fury may be indicated
by the fact that the former is sometimes preceded by an aura,
as well as the latter. This may consist in general malaise,
insupportable general feelings of weight, distress, anxiety, fear,
or in local sensations often proceeding from the epigastrium,
the chest, and head. These premonitions may even assume the
form of illusions of the external senses, sounds, sights, smells,
or of distinct verbal suggestions, apparitions, or the presence of
particular external objects, such as blood, a knife, or a rope.
How trivial the external cause, how momentous the mental
consequence may be in such exigency is proved when a single
word or a particular colour provokes, or the touch of a com-
panion's finger or the tying a ribbon round the thumb averts,
an outburst of uncontrollable fury. When such adjuncts
accompany the propulsion, it of course becomes more com-
plex ; but it is desirable, as a preliminary step, to treat the
ruling tyrannical idea as simple and uncomplicated with
?other attributes, even when these are anormal. That such
;an idea is uncontrollable does not exhaust the definition of this
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 191
state. Jacobi has wisely declared that it annihilates the Me by-
excluding all the relations which determine personal identity,
the relations of the moral as well as of the intellectual sense;
but in our opinion it engulfs not only all other impressions, but
it becomes, during its continuance, the whole mind, the Me.
The usurpation of such an idea in those who would resist and
expel it has been alluded to ; and the first indication of morbidity
in minds otherwise strong and self-regulating, and where the
instigation provokes laughter rather than condemnation, is
where it outstrips the grasp of will. Of very numerous instances
of this early manifestation of mental impairment a few may be
presented. A literary man engaged in his calm contemplative
pursuits is constrained, from time to time, to throw up the
window and crow like a cock; a lady of good tastes and many
accomplishments is incessantly urged, even while mingling in
society, to pronounce the words " little pig, little pig," which
were without meaning or application; and such manifestations
should be distinguished from the epidemic cat-mewing, cries
of animals, etc., in religious and other communities where
superstition, imperfect nourishment, and irritation might be at
work. In addition to irresistibility, the chaiacteristics of sud-
denness, or rapidity, must be considered. Hie impulse is most
frequently unannounced, momentary, and ceases whenever the
object, whatever that may be, has been attained. J3ut there are
exceptions to this, where hours, even days have elapsed between
the invasion and termination of such dominations, and the con-
comitant unconsciousness, the interval having been signalised
by the perpetration of murders and other foul and frightful
deeds. Inferences have been drawn as to the identity of this
enslavement of the will with other sorts of insanity, from the
fact that many of these deeds are so atrocious and revolting to
humanity, and so inconsistent with the previous history and
known dispositions of the actor, as to be irreconcilable with any
theory of human conduct. There has been blood-thirst and corpse-
hunger; but the presence of premeditation, conspiracy, and
other concomitant circumstances seem to remove such horrors
from the category under discussion, although not from that of
mental perversion or derangement. Unity of purpose was
formerly supposed to swell these definitions, so that the passive
or powerless actor was projected, like a runaway locomotive,
invariably in the same direction, or towards the same goal;
but the necessity for differentiation has recently been advanced.
Two species have been described; in both the patient is a mere
machine, but in one the end is single, in the other it is multiple;
in the former it never changes, in the latter the objects may be
an attitude or a word, suicide or homicide. This automatism
192 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
resembles but is not identical with, in tlie one case, monomania,
in the other mania; but it differs from each, inasmuch as there
is no delirium, no incoherence, the judgment remaining intact,
conscientiousness unclouded, the nature of the impulse under-
stood, repudiated, and reprobated.
The struggle maintained between the deliberative and
directing powers and the blind impulse, between the impotent
healthy wish and the omnipotent morbid will, is well exhibited
in the following case : " C. H. confesses, with the most profound
dejection, that ideas, suggestions, words passed through his
mind so wildly and forcibly that he could not arrest their
progress. Sometimes a frightful thought assumes the form of
an impulse altogether irresistible?a desire to kill my wife, whom
I regard with strong affection. So soon as I am seized with
this singular affection my head seems to turn, my legs tremble,
my self-control ceases. I can no longer move, walk, nor yet
remain in the same place, neither mount nor descend the stairs.
I feel as if I were mad, would injure the whole world. Fear
paralyses me; I dread a knife or a razor; my head is so con-
fused that in an omnibus I dread to look at faces of the
occupants lest I should do them some harm. I weep, and when
the crisis is past my former habits of thought and feeling
return."* These are the words of a sane hypochondriac.
How terrible this contest must be, how sincere the re-
sistance where flight is not resorted to, may be judged of from
the relation by Brierre de Boismont of a hypochondriac who,
in dread that he might yield to a temptation to destroy his
wife, cut off his arm. To those who have adopted the doctrines
of solidarity and the indivisibility of the mental powers, such
antagonism between two spiritual personalities in the same
individual may appear incredible; but, wherever there is a
conquest over tendencies to evil, a conflict of opinions, an
uprooting of cherished convictions, a self-sacrifice?and everyone
must have had such experience?a similar mental operation is
inevitable. To those, again, who regard will as a component
quality of intellect or emotion, it may be difficult to conceive
the existence of disease in the one and not in the other ; but
experience tends to show that volition may be affected while
intelligence and sentiment are not implicated. That the will
is ruled and restrained from free action by a dominant thought
or delusion in lypemania, megalomania, and ambitious insanity
with paralysis, is now well known to alienists; but to Esquirol
is due the merit of having entered upon the study of diseases
* Des Impulsions dans la Folie et de la Folie impulsive, par M. le Dr II.
Dagonet, p. 7.
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 193
of the will as distinct from those of other faculties. To show
how frequent this constraint is, Marc records that, of 200 cases
of instinctive monomania examined during twenty years, all
presented lesions of volition to which the false idea or the act
might be referred. Subsequent psychologists have recognised
overmastering, lethargic, divided, impaired will. While such
special affections of volition unquestionably exist, we must not be
betrayed into the notion that lunatics generally are deprived of
the exercise of free-will, however much that exercise may be
fettered or perverted by distinct morbid conditions. The claim
of irresistible impulse to be classed as a separate and independent
form of insanity is countenanced by the presence of hereditary
taint; by its diagnosis from transitory mania, to which it appears
allied, having a shorter duration, a perfect recollection being
retained of what takes place during the paroxysms, its sudden
incursion without apparent cause; whereas transitory mania
can generally be traced to intemperance, epilepsy, and depends
upon detectable cerebral congestion. That it is connected with
physical changes, however, is probable, by its curability, on the
establishment of puberty, under the influence of occupation and
toil, as well as powerful moral shock. Even Bertrand, the exhu-
mator and violator of the dead, whose bestiality alone disclosed
moral perversion, was restored to reason. However unexpected
an excess of this kind may be, there is sometimes a period of
incubation. The prodromes are exalted sensibility, suffering,
probably neuralgic, epigastric pain, sleeplessness, difficulty in
fixing attention, vague indefinable sensations, and other
indications which have been observed as the precursors of many
other species of the neurosis. Although the propulsion may be
found alone, it is much more frequently the symptom or con-
comitant of other mental diseases: may impart ferocity to
mania, obstinacy to suspicion, iteration to the garrulity of the
dement, and may explain those ebullitions of passion which have
led to so many of the outrages which have rendered the
presence of the insane fraught with terror.
As bearing practically upon this discussion it is interesting to
discover, on an analysis of thereports of judicial inquiries collected
by M. Tardieu, that nineteen out of thirty are, in one aspect or
another, explicative of certain of the propositions considered.
These reports concern inquiries in which alienation, real or
supposed, or pretended, affected the interests, either of society
or of the individual, and in which medical science was appealed
to in order to determine the presence or the degree of mental
disease. These documents embrace a very wide field, refer to
the validity of marriage, of death-bed testaments, of stimulated
folly, and necessarily illustrate not only the intellectual state
194 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
of the moribund, of civil liability during lucid intervals, but
the psychology of a large number of the more obscure and
morbid sources of human action. Of the nineteen alluded to
one is an example of pyromania, or an impulse to incendiarism
in a mind otherwise vacant; two concern moral obliquities
associated with comparative clearness of mind; in eight
the emotion of suspicion was the mainspring of conduct, fed
and fostered, it is true, by delusions of various sorts ; in three
the propulsion to suicide was a prominent feature; in one
maniacal fury shut out all healthy motives and self-control;
in one sudden ebullitions or paroxysms alternated with periods
of intermittence and lucidity; in one there was no vestige of
errors of judgment or conscience, where murder was perpetrated
on the instigation of words audible to the accused only; in one
a calm, gentle, and pious demeanour was supposed to hide im-
morality, where almost a massacre was committed; in one
reasoning madness was combined with the idea of persecution.
In none of the neuroses is the presence of these elements so
conspicuous as in epileptic insanity. In its relation to mental
phenomena, epilepsy and its concomitants must not be viewed
as a single disease, but as a series or train of psycho-physical
disturbances, which less or more affect the soundness of reason.
This series or train is not merely a succession of stages of the
rise, progress, and culmination of a specific malady, but contain
intrinsically and independently of each other, different sources
of impairment, which represent the excitement, the unconscious-
ness, the violence, the enfeeblement, the fixed ideas, the irre-
sistible impulse, which, in various degrees, affect spontaneity,
and which have been separately alluded to in the previous
pages. Before tracing the members of this morbid series in
their effects, it is expedient to deal with them in the concrete,
as these, as a group, are recognised under the general term
epilepsy. It has been contended that epilepsy invariably pre-
cedes insanity, and that insanity never precedes epilepsy. Such
a generalisation must be received with some reserve, as, unques-
tionably, convulsions epileptiform in aspect occur in many forms
of alienation, and we have met with them existing contempo-
raneously and co-ordinately. This matter is, however, insig-
nificant when compared with the inquiry as to the prolificness
of epileptoid seizures in the production of derangement of some
kind. It might be presumptuous to .contravene the pleasing
illusion, if such it be, that such attacks may arise and pass like
a thunderstorm, without inflicting injury, without leaving a
single trace of their fury ; but it is prudent to test the propo-
sition more precisely and circumspectly.
Esquirol has given the following statistics to illustrate the
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 195
comparative frequency of the association of epilepsy with the
different forms of mental disease, whether present as a cause, a
symptom, a consequence, or simply as a complication, for it may
stand in any of these relations. Of 339 female epileptics treated
in Charenton, 12 were monomaniacs, 30 maniacs, 34 furious, 145
demented, 8 idiots, 50 habitually reasonable, but afflicted with
loss of memory; and 60 exhibited no aberration of intelligence ;
one-fifth preserved their reason, but, he significantly says,
" what reason ? " He elsewhere subjoins that, notwithstanding
improvement in mental health, when the fits become infrequent,
he has never seen the entire obliteration of a certain moral and
physical susceptibility. This indelibility has been confirmed
by cases in which infantile convulsions reappeared at the con-
summation of marriage, or on the supervention of some grave
constitutional change, so that the lapse of half a lifetime may
not insure permanent immunity.
" There are a certain number of epileptics," writes Falret,
"who, notwithstanding the intensity and frequency of their
attacks, preserve nevertheless throughout life the integrity of
the intellectual powers, and present only slight perturbations of
character and intelligence, to which we cannot give the name of
insanity." Echeverria, the most recent and copious authority
upon this disputable point, writes, as his experience during
thirteen years, that of more than 700 epileptics examined, 267
laboured under manifest epileptic insanity, the mental state of
the remainder not being recorded. This number, it is probable,
came under his notice as patients in an asylum, but we must
depend upon the evidence of Russell Reynolds for information
as to the proportional affection of certain mental powers in those
u who are sent to asylums," but who may not have been actually
residents. He found that the memory was nominal or affected
only after the fits in 43*85 per cent., and more or less defective
in 56*14 per cent. Apprehension was normal in 62*5 per cent.,
defective in 37*5 per cent. It must be obvious that this acute
observer has failed to supply any of the other indications of
mental disease save those involving two intellectual powers, and
lias omitted the more important aberrations?those, in fact,
which could justify even the contemplation of seclusion, and
that his researches do not support his first and most sweeping
conclusion, " that epilepsy does not necessarily involve any
mental change."
Except, where under very vigilant scrutiny, in an hospital,
the nature and amount of mental deterioration in epileptics will
defy the penetration of statisticians. The attacks may be noc-
turnal and unnoticed. As there remains the exercise of will to
.a limited extent, and in a .small number of epileptics the fits
196 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
may be checked during the day. There may be no convulsive
paroxysms, and these may be supplanted by transitory uncon-
sciousness, "petit mal, or many of the analogues of the fully
developed disease which have been described. As epilepsy has
been simulated, so it has likewise been suppressed. This class
of patients are endowed, perhaps as a symptom of their com-
plaint, with the power of concealing many of those psychical
manifestations which would reveal the breadth, if not the
character of their affliction. Even under favourable circum-
stances it may be impossible to reach the root of the etiology,
or to determine whether the fatuity presented be the fruit
of chorea, epilepsy, or any convulsive seizure, whether it be
original or consecutive. As the proposition here enunciated is
that, in all its phases, the cerebral muscular affection is in
different degrees detrimental to healthy mentalisation, it may
be expedient to expose these seriatim.
I. The premonitory condition or diathesis which announces
a stage of unhealth which is itself an integral part of disease,
and which may precede the pathognomic signs for months or
weeks or days, may be succinctly stated as disorders of mind
and temper, such as sadness, peevishness, irritability, quarrel-
someness, torpidity of conception, failure of memory, obtuseness
of ideas, hebitude, prostration, and, as the climax is approached,
gaiety, exaggeration of moral and physical strength, vertigo,
restlessness and loquacity, passing into passion and fury, and all
these being accompanied by bodily ailments, such as cephalalgia,
neuralgia, vomiting, and various modifications of neuropathic
indisposition. Two inferences may be drawn from these facts?
first, that they demonstrate a constitutional disturbance under
which it is difficult to conceive how the intellect could act calmly
and clearly ; and second, a predisposition or proclivity to morbid
actions of some kind which may eventuate according to the
excitant applied in mania, paralysis, or epilepsy.
II. The actual premonition, or aura, is likewise entitled to
be ranked as a part of the epileptoid paroxysm. It may stand
alone, it may never be followed by convulsion, and may
then be confounded with other anomalous peculiarities, under
the comprehensive but vague designation of nervous affec-
tions, or tics. It may be centric or excentric, a movement or a
sensation, but generally proceeds, as pain, from the surface to
the throat or head. Spasms, or even reflex actions, may serve as
heralds. More frequently heat or cold, a breath, a tingling or
tremor may be felt passing along the arm, or from the epigas-
trium. In place of these modifications of touch, there are
experienced impressions of the other senses, simple tinnitus,
the sounds of music, the roll of thunder or artillery may assail
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 197
the ear, red or rainbow colours may flash upon the eye, sweet
or disgusting odours, or sapors, become warnings, all of which
ultimately become or may become hallucinations, may be re-
ferred to external causes, and though intermittent, are ever
recurrent, assuming large proportions and greater influence.
These next merge into delusions and apparitions, articulate
meanings and menaces, suspicions of poisoning, adulteration of
food and so on, usher in the muscular paroxysm, but may pass
away when it terminates. Even particular states of conscious-
ness become precursors of the subsequent steps of the malady;
and certain thoughts, even continuous process of reasoning,
certain emotions and propensities, fear, fury, but foreshadow the
invasion of greater evils, and often assume a habitual sway over
the regulation of conduct. In their permanence and pro-
minence they must be regarded as "fixed ideas;" in their
dominations over the will as " irresistible impulses."
Falret, while appreciating the precedence of these indica-
tions to the attack, has, we conceive erroneously, designated
them as an intellectual aura, and has failed to distinguish
between conditions of the organs of the external senses and of
the sensorium. The sudden development of sentiments, pas-
sions, instincts, in their nature transitory, is constantly remarked,
while the presence of a prognostic idea, opinion, prejudice is
rare. But whatever the mental phenomenon may be coincident
with the commencement of the disease, it may be fairly
expected to be reproduced in all future attacks.
We have been told by a distinguished physician that he has
been subject to petit mal since puberty; that it formerly oc-
curred during the day, but at present only when retiring to
rest; that it is invariably preceded by a particular train of
thought; that it can be produced when he consciously adverts
to such thoughts, and that it consists of a loss of the feeling
of personal identity followed by panic. In the^ statistics
of 267 cases an aura of some kind or degree was noticed in 86
per cent.; auditory hallucinations were recorded in 62 per cent.;
visual in 53 per cent.; auditory and visual combined in 42 per
cent.; olfactory in 6 per cent.; and lastly, 30 per cent, displayed
disturbance of general sensibility. Neither these facts nor their
bearings upon the rationality or responsibility of the sufferer
have been duly estimated, nor has the aura, peihaps fiom the
shortness of its duration, been esteemed a form of alienation.
III. Cerebral epilepsy, or what is more properly known as
the "petit mal, may be fairly defined as a state of waking
unconsciousness, connected with convulsive seizures. It is not
always so connected, but may constitute the only morbid affec-
tion discernible. Herpin has asserted that in every case of
198 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
absence it is always possible to discover some slight partial
convulsion, but this has not been confirmed by concurrent
observation. The persistence of such a loss of apprehension of
mental and bodily relations may be but momentary, or it may
extend through hours or days. An organist stops while playing
for seconds or minutes, and resumes without omitting a note, and
exactly where he ceased, with no consciousness of the interrup-
tion, nor recollection of the loss of time; and a performer on the
piano has unwittingly played on, while the head was spasmodi-
cally twisted round. A card-player pauses at the moment he
is about to throw a card, gazes steadily on vacancy, and then
plays the right card. An architect, while traversing a plank
in the scaffolding of a building, runs quickly across, pronounces
his own name repeatedly, and knows, from the anxious look of
the workmen, that he has had an attack. In speaking or read-
ing, a sentence or word is abruptly broken off, and while all are
wondering at the hiatus, the lips articulate the word or syllable
necessary to complete the meaning of the speaker. These
brief arrestments of continuous attention are not invariably
followed by convulsion, but they are generally considered as
more portentous and pregnant of injury to the mind than the
grand mal, and occasionally initiate insanity directly. It is
obvious that when unconsciousness is prolonged for any length
of time, events may occur and conduct may be attributed to
the sufferer, which may involve grave consequences to himself
and to society. Wherever such a suspension of present know-
ledge and of memory have been urged as explanatory or excul-
patory of particular acts, the plea has either been rejected or
accepted with grave suspicion, as the evidence of such a ground
of excuse must almost always depend upon the person chiefly
implicated, and as the existence of such a state is doubted or
disbelieved in by all, except psychologists. Dr Ray, one of
the most distinguished of this body, has admitted this difficulty,
when narrating trials in which such a defence was set up, and
in which he took a special interest. There would, accordingly,
be an important principle established, could it be shown that
the petit mal may continue for hours, either apart from or
identified with an epileptical diathesis, and where no catas-
trophe marked its progress, and suggested any motive for
falsification.
In a recent communication from Br. Ray (June 1877), the
following statement is given on his authority and that of
Dr Tyler: " An epileptic gentleman told me that he felt the
premonition of a fit as he was passing out from the entry of the
Tremont Temple, in this city (Boston). In his next conscious
moments he was astonished to find himself at the end of ' Maiden
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 199
Bridge,' walking towards his home (the distance is about two
miles),'his clothing undisturbed and unsoiled, showing that he
could 'not have fallen; and in some way he was able to fix the
time so as to make it clear that he had accomplished the walk
with no considerable delay. ,
Memoranda are in our possession of a gentleman who left
his house without intention or object, threaded many of the
crowded streets cf a large city, crossed a bridge, again traversed
thoroughfares, crossed another bridge, and returned home un-
scathed. This walk extended to eight miles, and was accom-
plished* in somewhat more than two hours. The pedestrian's
recollection was a complete blank: he could not recall his
iourney as a whole, nor any part of it; not one step of the way,
nor street, nor bridge, nor anything seen; not even the ac-
quaintances by whom he had been accosted, and who were the
only witnesses of this extraordinary feat. This person was not
an epileptic or a lunatic. It has been recounted that these
periods of wakening sleep have given birth to new mental illu-
mination, and to intelligent though erratic manifestations, and
we have not only observed greater lucidity after epileptic coma,
but when this increased clearness reached its maximum another
paroxysm ensued, as if the renewed energy had acted as a
stimulus to the morbid tendency. At the same time the general
effect of repeated, though short, incursions of this waking
sleep is as numbing and noxious to the brain as that of the
ordinary aura to the tactile neives.
IV A dull steady gaze and a spasmodic shriek are imme-
diate precursors of the paroxysm. The patient is suddenly
struck down as if by lightning, insensible to the wounds or
injuries which may attend his fall; but occasionally a certain
amount of self-control remains, so that a suitable and safe
position may be assumed. Unconsciousness may precede the
muscular agitation, but they often occur simultaneously. The
suspension may be complete or only partial, so that words have
been heard, or incidents have been observed, during the convul-
sion. The muscles of both the trunk and extremities may be
implicated, or there may be local epilepsy affecting a limb, and
accompanied with very slight mental impairment. Where the
frightful contortions of the body, which present every con-
ceivable combination of muscular action, and are so violent as
sometimes to induce dislocation, and thrv other strictly physical
symptoms afforded by the state of the respiration, circulation,
surface, and so on, are eliminated from the description, a fit may
be defined as coma, involving physical perturbation of various
kinds, present or potential, followed by sleep. Such attacks differ
in intensity and frequency, but are characteristically periodical.
200 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
There may be one or a thousand in the year. There may be
one or many in the day, and so slightly separated in time as to
have acquired the designation of status epilepticus. The life of
an individual so affected is not only darkened but diminished
in duration. He obtains cognisance of mere portions, handfuls
of his years. His experience is composed of shreds, interrupted
series, the lacunoe being either entirely void or occupied with
confused and obscure impressions. When this disease com-
mences in infancy it is aggravated at puberty, and even where
there is no cerebral malformation or degeneration, the longer
its continuance the more damaging are its consequences. But
there may be no palpable convulsion. Its place may be taken
by sadness or dejection, by sullenness, by ebullitions of rage
and ferocity, realising what was known anciently as the mania
furibunda, and signalised by suicide, homicide, and every modi-
fication of blind and destructive impulse. Examples might be
cited where, on the entire cessation of fits, the propensity to
kill became developed. Trousseau has affirmed that wherever
there was a revolting or motiveless crime he suspected the
existence of epilepsy. These atrocities may mark the close of
the petit mat, as well as form analogues or substitutes for the
regular paroxysm. It might be rash to conjecture that these
sanguinary events were premeditated during the antecedent
stages of deterioration, but it is possible that the violent and
vindictive feelings, the tumultuous and unregulated passions,
that the fixed ideas, the intellectual aura, for example, may seek
and find vent and gratification in tragedies which may have been
forecast in imagination. But, according to the opinion of Morel,
wherever the true nature of these analogues is masked, or larvated
for a season, convulsions ultimately supervene, ending fatally.
Not only are certain of the links of the long chain which
constitutes the totality of this neurose sometimes wanting, but
at others all the principal features, or nearly all, may be found in
one person. Dr Eobertson, Lunatic Wards, City Poorhouse,
Glasgow, has recently recorded an instructive example of this con-
catenation. A female patient, set. 53, under his care, who had
suffered under epilepsy for twelve years, presented three forms of
this affection?1. The ordinary convulsive seizure, recurring every
seven weeks, from six to thirty having been counted in one day;
2. Periods of faintness; 3. Automatism, during which she, on
one occasion, laid the cloth, knives, &c. for her companions, the
only error being that she mistook the time. When epilepsy is,
in asylum language, brooding or incubating, patients are believed
to suffer much, and to be relieved by what is called, in the same
vocabulary, a well-formed fit. In many, however, when complete
relaxation of the muscles, the drooping of the head to one side,
STATES OP UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 201
the long-drawn suspiration, and the change of colour announce
the termination of the attack, sheer prostration or recuperation
do not inevitably succeed. The awakening from stupor may
resolve itself into an outburst of derangement, which is supposed
to have a nosological place, and to deserve the specific name of
epileptic^ cesg^t-on Qf coma does not imply the return of
rfect consciousness. The madness now under consideration
differs only in a few particulars from better known forms. It
mav bear the features of melancholia, especially of mania, and
even it has been affirmed, of general paralysis. This latter
opinion must as yet be held as speculative, or as founded upon
an imperfect diagnosis of the convulsions which appear towards
the closing scenes of paresis. The symptoms of epileptic mania
are extreme vehemence, violence, and destructiveness. When
of traumatic origin, the most dangerous, even murderous dispo-
sitions and designs prevail, and somewhat similar aggravations
have been traced back to intemperance and syphilis. Hyper-
esthesia and real or imaginary exaltation of physical force have
been offered in elucidation of the demolition of doors, walls,
windows, as well as of the pugnacious and pugilistic assaults
which have been complained of. Epileptics have declared that
thev obtain relief by such onslaughts, by beating the walls and
similar exercises; and it is at least proved that if not entirely
anaesthetic, many of them suffer less than other persons from even
severe and serious injuries. The instantaneousness of such out-
rages has been assigned as pathognomic, and to emulate, if it be
not identical with, mania transitoria. The alternate dilatation
and contraction of the pupils, lasting for an appreciable time, is
seen in this insanity as well as in the coma by which it was pre-
ceded. Among other diagnostic marks " the echo sign," which
consists of the frequent repetition of the same words in language
or in writing, is greatly insisted on by American writers. Al-
though the paroxysm of excitement may be exceedingly evanescent,
it may be prolonged for weeks; circumstances which, as well as
the uncontrollable instincts alluded to, manifestly vindicate and
demand special structural arrangements and supervision for this
class of lunatics, especially during the night. The intermittence
witnessed in the course of this disease may or may not corre-
spond to the recurrence of the convulsive attacks; but even
should vehemence, incoherence, and other symptoms disappear,
it would be unwise to infer that the disease itself had ceased, or
that more than a lucid interval could be depended upon. Of
532 epileptics, 267 were affected with this mental sequela or
complication.
VI. But this is not the only disturbance of the nervous
PART II. VOL. III. NEW SERIES. 0
202 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
system concomitant with the more marked symptoms. The
storm may subside into calm. The countenance may become
placid and good-humoured in expression, the recollection may
rally to a certain degree and in a certain direction, there may be
the resumption of previous habits and occupations; but the
activity of the exacerbation is not preserved in this temporary
convalescence. There is apathy, lethargy, or gentle dulness,
and many of the indications of progressive fatuity. In this
dementia there may be gradual impoverishment of ideas and
words, inextricable confusion of both, amounting to incoherence,
vague timidity, panic, terrors, absurd, even vile fancies, and
positive hallucinations.* To these Brierre de Boismont has
referred many of the atrocities committed by this class rather
than to outbreaks of fury. When it is borne in mind that
this condition may reach no deeper than the feebleness or
fantastic folly which are tolerated in society, but reveal great
uncertainty and untrustworthiness of purpose, and may be
lighted up to intense excitement by some latent delusion, some
unprovoked irritation, the connection of even these remote
results with the welfare of those around may be seen.
VII. These are positive results, but there is a negative con-
dition, dating from the close of the grand mal, more insidious,
obscure, and perplexing, because it offers a strong resemblance
to healthy mentalisation, and differs only from such by the
presence of complete unconsciousness, which appears to be
compatible with many rational doings. It is closely related to
the petit mal, but is distinguished by these peculiarities, that
the memory recalls events which have happened during previous
stages of the complaint, or even previously; secondly, that it
follows the convulsive attack; and thirdly, that it is more
fraught with evil to those around. It may continue for days,
and the patient appear so much a duplicate, a simulacrum of
his former self, as to deceive even those most familiar with his
deportment and habits, into the belief that he is both compos
mentis and compos sui. He may be compared to a dreamer,
but there is more method, more self-possession, in his cognitions,
while his acts are more nearly allied to those of the somnam-
bulist. Yet journeys are undertaken, marriages contracted,
engagements entered into, persons or places recognised, during
this state of unconsciousness. All of these transactions being
invalid, are utterly blotted out from the knowledge or recollec-
tion of the individual, and only disclosed to him by the conse-
quences which they entail. The revelation is often made by
the commission of a crime or misadventure, by the stern
* Balfour Browne, On Medical Jurisprudence, p. 222.
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 203
interference of the law ; and it may be readily understood how
reatly the difficulty of convincing the unscientific of such a
ground of exemption from penalties is enhanced when such
catastrophes are the only proofs. That recourse may be had to
such profound and imperfectly known deviations from sanity,
with the intention of cloking or concealing crime, or of escaping
from its punishment, is shown in the following extract
"A vine-dresser, in the neighbourhood of Lyons, was
suddenly seized with a fit of shivering. He took up a mattock
and killed three of his children who were near him in the
house. A hundred steps from thence he killed his wife and his
last child. Having accomplished all those murders, he went
and o-ave himself up. This man was not intoxicated, he had
never previously evinced signs of madness, there was no apparent
motive to explain his action. .
" M. Bottex the physician charged with the examination
of the v'ine-dresser, discovered that he had experienced vertigo
and giddiness some days before the arrest. Besides this, he
was sad, melancholy, and appeared to have had some idea of
suicide, 'other testimony established that he was much attached
to his wife and children. _
" The case then appeared most simple, and that transitory
madness ought to be admitted without difficulty. But at this
statre a witness came forward to reveal a strange proposition
which the murderer had held ten months before. He had said
that a man who should kill his wife and family would get off
with a few months' imprisonment, because the physicians would
make him out to be mad. In addition to this he had remarked
since his arrest that one of his children having survived its
mother some hours, became her heir, and that as he himself was
heir to this child, his wife's property ought to come to him.
The result became questionable, and in the report presented to
the magistrates the existence of an access of transitory madness
was only mentioned as a simple probability. The murderer
was condemned to death, but the punishment was commuted to
that of penal servitude for life."*
A few illustrations of the least disastrous effects of this
morbid motive power may be given
An epileptic, whose hands were afterwards soiled with blood,
while employed as a mercantile clerk, was walking along a dock
in New York when a steamer was about to start for Charleston,
went on board, and found himself in that town without funds,
lugo-age, or any acquaintance, and was compelled to pledge his
valuables in order to accomplish his return. This expedition,
* Bail larger, Ann. Med. Psych., Avril 18G1.
o ?,
204 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
undertaken unintentionally and without object, left some traces
in his memory.
In a second case epilepsy following a fall from a ladder was
associated with short periods of suspended consciousness, during
which the patient appeared to be dead, of which he was unaware.
After one of these he took possession of a carriage encountered in
the street, drove to his father's grave, a mile and a half distant,
collected flowers, gave them to his mother, and, contrary to her
directions, deposited the vehicle as his own property in a livery
stable. It does not appear that this larceny was seriously
visited. Of the appropriation and all other circumstances he
was and continued to be altogether ignorant. During another
attack he engaged as a sailor and embarked for London, was
speedily detected to be a landsman, and was spared the danger
of mounting into the rigging. When, a few days after sailing,
he recovered consciousness, he expressed great astonishment
and utter forgetfulness of the circumstances which led to his
position.*
A youth liable to vertiginous seizures, so extreme as to
necessitate him to seize hold upon some object close at hand,
and which returned several times each day?labouring, in short,
under what is called in France the intermediate crisis?attempted
to poison himself, was not excitable, nor had he shown any
tendency to destroy, but was in the habit of leaving his work
abruptly; wandered about the streets without losing his way;
walked to Amiens, 75 miles from Paris, and back, taking no
food for two days ; complained of forgetfulness of his ordinary
work, and even of matters with which he was conversant, and of
being a sleep walker during the night. This unfortunate being
wounded a female in the street, without appreciable reason or
provocation, retained an indistinct remembrance of what hap-
pened before and after the accident, and none of the assault
itself. His abstraction continued during his flight, but in his
deposition he insinuated that the knife had acted of itself.f
In this instance the obscuration of the perceptive and moral
faculties was perhaps transitory, but the following records much
longer stupor, confusion, and irritability :?
An inebriate woman visited a friend, partook of a draught
of beer, and then became epileptic. After recovering from the
fit, intelligence was restored for a brief interval, during which
she lamented her depraved habits, then became somnolent and
slept for eight hours. On awakening, her moral and intellectual
powers were suspended, the face was pale, one pupil contracted,
* Av.ericin Journal of Insanity, vol. xxx. (1873), p. 20.
t Fa'ret, Cbi. x. p. 478, t. xvii., Archiv. Gen. de Med.
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 205
she did not attend to the injunctions of those around, refused food
and medicine, glided about the house, but when obstructed or
thwarted, her force became excessive, almost convulsive, and her
bearing became so threatening as to alarm all around her, and
to show that resistance would have provoked extreme violence.
This condition remained for thirty hours. She then recognised
her friends, but had no conception either of the fit or of what
followed.*
Had this woman wreaked her insensate vengeance upon
supposed opponents she would assuredly have been arraigned,
and, failing the testimony of a judicious medical witness, would
have been condemned.
The conflict indeed between law and medicine on this point
is painfully conspicuous, and there is even a gloomy diversity of
opinion between experts, for one has said what is tantamount to
a suggestion that lunatics, and consequently epileptics, should
be hung; we imagine upon Voltaire's precept " pour encourager
les autres." The great majority of these, actuated not by humanity
alone, but by scientific conviction, advocate leniency and for-
bearance, even the abrogation of capital punishment. The
custom of different nations has likewise betrayed how irrecon-
cilable legislative provisions are upon this question. In Rome
an epileptic was held to be irresponsible for three days subsequent
to an attack; in France the onus of proving the sanity, and
therefore the accountability of an accused during the same
period is thrown upon the prosecution, while, in our own code
there is no provision similar to this, every case being tried on
its own merits, and until very lately neither epilepsy nor the
manifold deviations from right reason by which it is surrounded
have been admitted as exonerative. A distinction has been
essayed in order to attach responsibility to civil and exemption
to criminal delinquency on the part of epileptics ; but the
scheme appears to be unpractical and unphilosophical, and we
cannot accordingly reverence justice or mercy in sparing the
lives of such offenders and then handing them over to life-
long penal servitude. Again, it has been argued that should
the offence be connected with or the result of a prominent or
predicable delusion, a fair ground for pleading exculpation was
established. Attention has been very generally directed to
these subjects by the misadventure which was imminent in the
person of Treadaway, a murderer, who was convicted and con-
demned to death. This culprit, according to evidence adduced
in court and obtained from his consistent narrative, was a hosier,
* British Medical Journal, *$o. 846, March 17, 1877; abridged from a paper
by Dr Holland, p. 324.
206 SPATES OP UXCONSCIOUSNESS.
set. 19, in whose family hereditary tendencies to cerebral
disease had been manifested in varied and numerous forms,
fourteen individuals in three generations having suffered either
from depression, excentricity, insanity, or from epilepsy and
paralysis. Treadaway himself, after indulgence in excessive
intemperance, became affected with permanent headache, and
had sustained during its continuance and for two years
repeated seizures of unconsciousness, which he called " fainting
fits." The attacks took place while otherwise in sound health,
lasted a few minutes, and were marked by a severe shooting and
throbbing pain in the head, vertigo which made him clutch
some support, the sensation of a black cloud coming over him,
and finally entire oblivion of what was passing in himself and
around. The recovery of his senses did not at once dispel the
cephalalgia and mental confusion, but he was able to walk
onward, and felt quite well- in an hour or two. He was likewise
subject to severe pains in face and cardiac region, where a cord
seemed to be tightly pulled round his chest, and to involuntary
micturition during night. Loss of employment induced de-
pression, which was not relieved by the kindness of his family,
and under the pressure of these circumstances he meditated
suicide, first by drowning, then by shooting himself, and
for that purpose bought a revolver. While conversing
with his victim, he experienced the first signs of an ap-
proaching fit, which had been preceded by headache, etc.,
and from the moment when the dark cloud seemed to brood
over him he lost all knowledge and recollection of his doings
or of the discharge of the pistol bought for his own destruc-
tion, until he found himself in the street, and did not fully
realise his position until next morning, although he seems
then to have taken some precautions in order to conceal his
connection with the deed. Most fortunately he became con-
vulsed while in the dock, and was declared to have had a fit of
genuine epilepsy, the last of a series which had occurred during
his examination in the police court. As to the perpetration of
the homicide by the prisoner there was no doubt, and a sentence
of death was passed. More fortunately still, certain misgivings
having arisen, prompted, in all probability, by the healthy com-
ments of the press, as to the verdict, the Secretary of State
directed further examination, confided the duty to the President
of the College of Physicians and to Dr J. Crichton-Browne,
Lord Chancellor's Visitor, who reported in such a manner that
execution was stayed and the epileptic sent, not to Broadmoor,
but to a penitentiary. Had such a commission exercised their
functions previous to the trial, or, what would have been better,
had the law required?as it does in France and in one American
STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS. 207
State ?that the accused in whose favour it was known mental
impairment would be pleaded, should be consigned to observation
in an asylum, such a painful and discreditable dilemma would
have been eschewed. Like some of the parallel lines which run
through the history of greater events, it is curious to find that
in a similar case in America, where a paroxysm took place
during the trial, conviction was followed by a deferred sentence,
a medical inquiry, and ultimate seclusion in an asylum; and
that this was the first occasion on which a plea of epileptic
insanity had been successful.
Now, taking it for granted that the pathological history of
Treadaway has been accurately ascertained, and comparing the
phenomena presented with the description in the cases con-
tained in the foregoing pages, it will be impossible to avoid the
conclusion that he sacrificed his friend while under the influ-
ence of the unconsciousness, or mental weakness, which are the
sequelse of epilepsy, which permits of the predominance of de-
lusions, morbid monoideaism, irresistible impulses, and sangui-
nary instincts, which regulate mechanically or automatically
the volition and action of the individual. Under whatever
category placed, the precursory stage, the aura, the petit mal,
before or after the convulsion, the mania, hallucinations, intel-
lectual irregularity and enfeeblement, which are its results, he
and all those similarly affected may claim to be treated as ir-
responsible or partially responsible.
We do not aver that one, or even a group of such phe-
nomena, should place a man in the same relation as a raving
riotous maniac; but they are of such a character as to render
him less capable of regulating his conduct, less capable to resist
the all but omnipotent urgency of external circumstances;
and, if not involving partial responsibility, certainly demand-
ing consideration and allowance from friends, associates, and
public tribunals.
Notwithstanding the boasted advance in psychological
discrimination, it would be difficult to frame a graduated scale
of responsibility, or to apply such, if the numerous and in-
congruous factors in human conduct be considered when so
framed; but it is encouraging to find that a step has been
taken in this direction by our American fellow-workers, who
now speak of "guilt of the second degree." But, if such a
safeguard cannot yet be created, an alternative remains in the
introduction of the mitigatory plea of extenuating circum-
stances into all convictions where the mental strength and
stability are doubtful, or where the antecedents or bodily
condition of the individual render the presence of morbid but
undiscovered incentives probable. This would be a confession
203 STATES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
of ignorance, a compromise; but it leans to mercy's side, and
might be preparatory to a virtual acknowledgment that respon-
sibility must be judged of by other standards than by impair-
ment of the intellect, of the moral sense, or by the " dark
saying " of non compos mentis. This measure, in conjunction
with a preliminary and prolonged scrutiny in an asylum
wherever alienation was suspected, or was about to be urged in
exculpation, would confer great benefit in putting a stop to the
unseemly antagonism of paid experts during legal proceedings,
and of removing the opprobrium of hanging lunatics as
criminals, and secluding criminals as lunatics, to which our
present system of judicature has been exposed. As some modi-
fication of the Lunacy Law may be expected to flow from the
report of the Parliamentary committee which has just com-
pleted its labours, this appears to be an appropriate and critical
juncture for bringing these important difficulties before the
judgment of the public and the medical profession.
In this article we have endeavoured to utilise, but not to
criticise, the works of Dagonet, Des Impulsions dans la Folie
et de la Folie Impulsive; Tardieu, Etude Medico-Leg ale sur
la Folie; Echeverria's excellent papers on Epilepsy in the
American Journal of Insanity ; and other fugitive pieces.
