Military Lunatics
===================

127
Akt. IX.?
"Whatever may be the causes of the unpopularity of the Army
amongst the lower orders, soldiering cannot be regarded as an
unhealthy calling. The classes from which recruits are ordi-
narily drawn are perhaps amongst the very lowest in the com-
munity, and the authorities, in their efforts to render the
service attractive, have the prejudice of ignorance to contend
with. As a matter of fact, however, the Army should now be
reasonably reckoned in the first class of vocations. The soldier
may not indeed possess the same liberty of action as does the
labourer of civil life, and his weekly wages may not be of equal
amount; but, in return for binding himself to serve for a period
of years, the soldier gains advantages entirely without the reach
of civil workmen, and of a nature too the most highly prized
by the lower orders. Clubs and societies, it is true, exist to
some extent, which give relief to their members in case of
sickness, and unions have been formed which enable the work-
men to drive bargains with their masters ; but in no calling
but the Army is a man equally well paid in sickness as in
health, and in no other is he tended, when he falls ill, with the
same amount of care. Indeed, even from the pecuniary point
of view, it is doubtful whether soldiering does not contrast
favourably with any civil occupation, for very few workmen can
at the end of the week, when they have provided themselves
with the bare necessaries of existence, put aside a sum to invest
in the savings bank ; and a well-conducted soldier, after he has
paid for his clothing and his food (both of which are of the
best), may generally put a shilling or two into the regimental
bank. The civilian, as a rule, has just too little to meet his
requirements, and the soldier has slightly more than enough;
and as the comforts or discomforts of existence may be mea-
sured by the sufficiency or insufficiency of income, the soldier
stands certainly in the better position ; added to this is a
provision for old age, in the shape of a permanent pension of
from ?20 to ?40 a year; so, taking all things into consideration,
the soldier's position is not unenviable, and it is plain that it
can only be the prejudice of the multitude that renders recruit-
getting so difficult, and causes the Government of the day so
much anxiety lest the numbers of the Army should fall below
those voted by Parliament.
If a soldier, however, can congratulate himself upon being
128 MILITARY LUX AT ICS.
sufficiently paid, upon being well fed, lodged, and clothed, and
even amused, lie should be specially grateful for the care that
is taken of his health. Soldiers are, as a rule, healthy, and
perhaps of all diseases, those which are the least prevalent
amongst them are affections of the mind. It may be?indeed
no doubt it is?that the habits of a military life do not en-
gender insanity, and probably those that may be predisposed to
maladies of the nature cannot act more wisely than to enter
the service. Military doctors may not be accepted as ranking
in the highest class of the medical profession ; but they are
generally intelligent, painstaking, and conscientious men, and
fully equal to the performance of the ordinary duties entrusted
to them.
Military lunatics must be divided into two classes?namely,
officers and men. Concerning the officers there is little to be
said. Insanity, unfortunately, is a disease as prevalent in the
superior grades of the service as it is amongst people of a
corresponding social position in civil life. It is attributable to
similar causes, and is subjected to the same treatment. At
one time the War Office had under its immediate patronage
an asylum for the reception of lunatic officers. These officers
were of course entitled to some allowance, either of the nature
of half-pay or pension, and this money was set apart for their
maintenance. Generally, however, an officer becoming insane
had friends anxious to have the care of him, and the War Office
recognising the fact that in maintaining an asylum it was
legislating for a minority, removed, after a time, its military
patients from the institution under its special patronage, and
distributed them in ordinary establishments. The rule, there-
fore, now is, that if an officer becomes a lunatic and possesses
no representatives in whose charge he can be placed, the
Secretary of State for War assumes the position, and uses his
discretion as to the place of the patient's detention. The Indian
Government, however, retains the old system, and maintains
an asylum at Ealing for Indian officers. Here the traditions
of the mess room are in some degree preserved, and the
inmates are consequently less isolated from the class to which
they have belonged than if they had been placed in private
asylums. It would apparently have been easy for the War
Office and India Office to come to some arrangement by which
insane officers belonging to the imperial?that is, the British
?establishment, should have been admitted into the Indian
institution. Whether or not any steps have been taken by
.either office with this view we are unable to state ; but it is
certain that the War Office does not avail itself of any privilege
that the India Office may have been willing to extend to it,
MILITARY LUNATICS. 129
and that officers who have/become insane in Her Majesty's
service are deprived of the advantages which have been very
properly secured for those of the Indian Army. The want of
accord between the two departments is all the more inex-
plicable, for the great majcjrity of cases of insanity in the com-
missioned ranks are sent home from India. A large imperial
army is maintained in that country beyond the local forces,
and the same class of causes?mostly exposure to the sun, or
intemperance?are responsible for the cases that occur. Red
tape, however, is triumphant; and, because the same officials
do not control the destinies of both services, it seems impossible
that there can be any unity f;if action between them.
Although the War Office does not deem it necessary to make
special provision for the officers, it follows a different system in
dealing with the men. When a soldier falls sick, every effort is
made to attribute his illnesjs to another cause than insanity;
and, if possible, the regimental authorities will discharge a
lunatic who may be suffering from some ordinary inability as an
invalid. This desire on iAie part of commanding officers to
shirk responsibility has often resulted in great scandals; and
from time to time the Press 'lias taken up cases in which insane
men have been sent adrift from the barracks to find billets where
best they might. This system was indeed at one time directly
encouraged by the legal authorities at the War Office, who held
that the Government had no responsibility with regard to
lunatics, who should be supported by the parishes of their
domicile. This view was so far upheld that, after a futile
effort to persuade the Parochial Board at Woolwich to accept
into the workhouse several insane soldiers who were natives of
that district, notice was given to the vestry clerk that the
patients would be set at liberty in the High Street of the town at
a certain hour on a given day, and calling upon that functionary
to provide qualified persons to take charge of the men. Although
the vestry clerk or his representatives did not put in an
appearance, the announcement had the effect of collecting a
great crowd to see what would be the result of this extra-
ordinary threat. The masterly policy of inaction, however,
triumphed, and the parish authorities, having ignored the mili-
tary mandate, had the satisfaction of knowing that the escort
had to conduct the patients back to the infirmary, from which
they were in due course, we believe, removed to Grove Hall
Asylum at Bow.
Grove Hall Asylum is specially maintained under official
patronage for the reception of military patients; and here, when
all other resources have been tried and failed, the soldier who
is suffering from mania at length finds shelter. Of the ex-
PART I. VOL. III.?NEW SERIES. I
130 MILITARY LUNATICS.
cellent manner in which the institution has been organised it is
needless to speak. Its superintendents have been in two
generations gentlemen of great discretion and experience, and
the medical staff of the Asylum is composed of professional men
of admitted ability. One of the best proofs of the successful
treatment of the patients is the large percentage discharged
either sufficiently well to be handed over to their friends, or
entirely cured.
Admission to Grove Hall takes place through Net ley Hos-
pital, to which place insane invalics are in the first instance sent.
This arrangement is the result of fhe great majority of military
lunatics being men who have been sent home from India.
Latterly, however, Netley Hospital has been constituted by the
War Office as a general invaliG discharge depot, and con-
sequently, in the ordinary course, all soldiers who become
non-effective through sickness are Torwarded to this institution.
The presence of the Army Medical School at Netley Hospital of
course offered facilities for the fulfilment of the formal steps
which are necessary in depriving r, man of his liberty; and it
was therefore ruled that soldiers becoming insane at home as
well as at foreign stations should be transferred to Netley
Hospital as a preliminary step to their confinement at Bow.
The number of admissions of military patients of the non-
commissioned ranks varies annually; but at no time can it
be held, taking into consideratioL the fact that the imperial
military establishment numbers 150,000 men, to be large. The
average number, however, may not be taken to be much in
excess of sixty cases a year; and no1 doubt official returns would
show in many years the number of admissions to have been below
this estimate. It is a point strongly in favour of the healthi-
ness of a soldier's calling, that insanity has such a limited
existence amongst the rank and file. Much has been written
about the diseases that are contracted from exposure on night
duty, and the dread effects of the moral contamination to
which the soldier is subjected. Drunkenness, unfortunately, is
a crime as common in the Army as in civil life; but in the
military and naval services, and perhaps in the services alone,
an it be held that legislation directed towards sobriety has
been in a measure successful. Soldiers will get drunk, and do,
like other persons, but the indulgence is fraught with more
personal and pecuniary inconvenience than in the case of the
civilian toper. A civilian, so long as he is neither violent nor
incapable, is left much to his own devices: indeed, scarcely does
the law interfere in the incapable phase of inebriety; but a
soldier has only to be ordinarily and harmlessly drunk to be
punished, and to be violently drunk to be made an example of.
MILITARY LUNATICS. 131
As insanity is so often due, especially among men, to excessive
drinking, it may be assumed that military discipline forms no
ineffectual check to inebriety leading to this lamentable result,
and that whatever legal right a civilian may have to drink
himself mad (alas! how often is it exercised), the soldier is
at least controlled and subjected to restraints which no civil
law could impose. It is clear, therefore, that the comparative
immunity of the Army from cases of insanity is due very much
to the moral restraint to which the men are subjected, which
keeps them mentally, as open-air exercise keeps them physically,
in good health.
Grrove Hall is, of course, modelled on the military system.
The patients are treated as soldiers, as indeed they are ; for they
are not discharged from the Army till they quit the Asylum,
and the habit of discipline which is carefully preserved is no
unimportant principle of the treatment followed out at the
institution. When a man has once learned how to obey, he
seldom forgets the lesson; and the generally implicit obedience
to constituted authority is naturally of great assistance to the
medical authorities in exercising a control over the patients.
It is not long ago that an instance occurred in which this
retention of some form of military discipline was shown to be
particularly useful. One of the Lunacy Commissioners?a
highly-respected gentleman of literary celebrity, not long de-
ceased?visited Bow Asylum in the execution of his duty, and
the patients?or at least those that were in a condition to be
so?were mustered in a ward of the building. The Com-
missioner was anxious to send for the men in turn, and speak
to them; but was persuaded by the superintendent to have
them drawn up in line and inspect them a la militaire. The
superintendent gave the word of command, and the men fell in
and " were brought to attention," like the highly-trained old
soldiers they mostly were. The Commissioner then commenced
his interrogations; but refused to allow the superintendent to
accompany him down the ranks. The first and second men
having been disposed of, the Commissioner addressed the third
with a genial " Well, my good friend ! "
"Who are you calling a good friend?" roared the man,
" when you know you are talking to the Emperor of China ? "
and, with a blow straight from the shoulder, he knocked the
Commissioner down.
The unfortunate gentleman was a good deal hurt and
shaken, and admitted the advisability of, on future occasions,
being accompanied by some one whom the patients would
regard as their superior officer. But this was the last visit
of that Commissioner to Bow. He shortly afterwards retired ;
i 2
132 MILITARY LUNATICS.
his retirement, we much regret to say, having been accele-
rated by the unlucky episode of which he was the victim. The
story, however, shows the great value of maintaining the spirit
of military discipline in an institution set apart for soldier
lunatics. As we have said, the average number of men dis-
charged recovered from Bow is much larger proportionately
than that of the cures in County Asylums. And the success
in the treatment of military lunatics must be attributed to
the fact that it is never forgotten that they are soldiers.
The authorities of the War Office are always busily adver-
tising any inducements to enlist that may exist. Although,
amongst the advantages of soldiering the comparative im-
munity from the disease of insanity which the service un-
doubtedly enjoys is unlikely to be considered by sane recruits,
yet, with parents who have children with a predisposition to
maladies of the nature, the fact should weigh. If entering the
Army means, as it often does, that the youth will become both
mentally and physically a strong and healthy man, whereas, if
he pursues one of the vocations in civil life, he will probably
close his career in a lunatic asylum, it behoves all those inte-
rested in the future of young men constitutionally predisposed
to diseases of the brain to use their influence to persuade them
to enlist. Whatever drawbacks the profession of arms may
have urged against it, it cannot be accused of being an un-
healthy calling. Military lunatics may be in themselves a
class so numerically small as scarcely to entitle them to
separate consideration ; but, for the very reason that there are
comparatively so few of them, may the fact of their existence
be advantageously dwelt upon. Insanity is, unfortunately, a
disease which seems to gain strength as the world grows older;
and, therefore, it becomes a satisfaction to point to at least one
calling in which the malady is losing ground. Soldiering
may not be a cure for insane people; but enlistment, no doubt,
often acts as a prevention of the malady?which, according to
the proverb, is more acceptable than the cure itself.
