Diseases of the Nervous System
===============================

93
Akt. VIL?
No. III.?INSANITY.
:Author:  ROBERT BOYD, M.D. Edin., F.R.C.P. Lond.
President Medico-Psychological Association. 1K70; late Physician and Superintendent County
Somerset Lunatic Asylum, formerly Resident Physician St. Marylebone Infirmary, anil
Lecturer on Medicine.

The functional disorders of the Brain, Convulsions, Epilepsy,
and Idiocy, all of which usually prevail before puberty, have
previously been shown to be so closely allied as to justify their
being included in a distinct class or natural order, and sepa-
rated from a second class, including the various forms of
insanity occurring almost exclusively in adults.

The cases of the first class were treated of in former papers.*
The cases of the second class are now to be considered, and
include nearly three-fourths of those that have come under my
observation in the Somerset County Lunatic Asylum. A
synopsis of the first twenty annual reports of that institution
will be given, including a summary of the admissions and the
results.

The general classification and description of the principal
forms of insanity is that adopted bv the Metropolitan Com-
missioners in Lunacy, being the one most likely to be followed
and to be of practical utility.

A preliminary statement of the statutory regulations prior,
to the confinement of a patient tinder certificates is affixed;
also, observations on the diagnosis of insanity, and of feigned
insanity.

In the Lunatic Asylum Act 1853, 16 & 17 Victoria,
c. 97, the mode of sending pauper lunatics to an asylum is
prescribed in clauses 67 and 68, the more important provisions
of which are as follows: ?Under ordinary circumstances lunatics
are sent to the asylum by an order of a Justice; or of the
officiating clergyman of the parish and the relieving officer.
The person who makes the order must see the lunatic and
satisfy himself that he is a proper subject to send to an
asylum, and must also obtain from a legally qualified medical
man a certificate as provided by the Act.

The form of statement given by the Act comprises ques-
tions which must be answered by the relieving officer. Every
medical officer of a union must, within three days, give notice
to the relieving officer of any person deemed to be lunatic;
and thereupon the relieving officer must, within three days,
apply to a Justice, in each case under a penalty of J10 (sec.
70). The Justice must order the person to be brought before
him within three days, or he may act at once on his own
knowledge, without requiring any of these preliminaries. If
the patient cannot conveniently be taken before a Justice, then
the officiating clergyman may examine the patient at his own
abode or elsewhere; but there is no power to bring the patient
before him given in the Act.

Wandering Lunatics are to be sent to an asylum by order
of one Justice; and lunatics not under proper care and
control, and those who are cruelly treated or neglected by any
relative or other person having care or charge of them, by
order of two Justices. In each case the medical certificate is
the same. There are provisions that constables are to take
wandering lunatics into custody, and bring them before a
Justice; and that, upon information, due inquiries shall be
made, either by a Justice, or by a medical practitioner by order
of a Justice, into the cases of persons not under proper care,
or cruelly treated, or neglected; and upon an unfavourable
report, an order shall be made to bring the lunatic before two
Justices.

There are penalties of ?10 for not taking wandering
lunatics into custody, and for not giving information within three
days of persons not under proper care or who are cruelly treated.
Private Patients.?Sec. 74 enacts that no person not a
pauper is to be received into an asylum, except under the pro-
visions of this Act, without an order and two medical certi-
ficates, according to the form and containing the particulars
required in Schedule F annexed to this Act. Each person
certifying shall be a registered medical practitioner, and the
two shall not be in partnership nor one be assistant to the other,
and they shall separately have examined the patient not more
than seven days previously to the reception of such person into
the asylum ; and every person who receives any person, not a
pauper, into any asylum without such order and medical cer-
tificate shall be guilty of a misdemeanour.

It may be as well to add a few remarks on the order,
statement, and medical certificates. The directions on the
printed form must be carefully attended to, or the form will
be returned, to be completed or corrected, by the Commis-
sioners in Lunacy, to whom copies are sent. If not amended
within fourteen days, the Commissioners may make an order
for the patient's discharge. The medical practitioner has to
certify, not only that the person is a lunatic, or idiot, or of
unsound mind, but also that he is a proper subject to be
taken charge of in an asylum ; and he must also give his
reasons for coming to such a conclusion; first, from facts
which he has observed himself; and secondly, from facts
communicated to him by others, stating the name of his
informant. The latter facts are usually those which have led to
the inquiry into the person's sanity. No confusion should be
made between the two classes of facts. The circumstances which
the medical practitioner should state, as having come under
his own observation, must of course be such as to indicate
some amount of unsoundness of mind. They need not be so
complete as to form the entire basis of his opinion, either as
to the existence of insanity or the expediency of sending the
patient to the asylum. In one important class of cases, where
there is danger of suicide, it is extremely unlikely that the
medical man can have facts known to himself which indicate
the extent of the danger. In such cases, relying chiefly upon
hearsay evidence, which of course he will strictly scrutinise,
he will not shrink from the responsibility which is attendant
upon his signing a certificate. When he observes no indica-
tion of insanity, and neither the family history nor the pre-
vious acts and expressions of the patient furnish reasonable
grounds for suspicion, he must refuse to sign the certificate.
Diagnosis of Insanity and Delirium.?The diagnosis of
insanity is often very difficult, both with respect to medical
jurisprudence and in a practical point of view. Prichard
considered monomania to be the most clearly defined of all
the forms of insanity. Persons who labour under illusions are,
for the most part, eccentric in their conduct in general, and
also morally insane. The supervention of some illusory opinion
on a previously existent derangement of the habits and moral
feelings is the general chai-acteristic of monomania.
The existence of moral insanity is more difficult to deter-
mine, as may be inferred from the description of that disorder.
It is defined by Prichard, in his treatise on Insanity, as " a
morbid perversion of the feelings, affections, and active
powers, without illusion or erroneous conviction impressed
upon the understanding." It must be proved before any pro-
ceedings against an alleged lunatic can be taken, and before
he can be declared of unsound mind, not merely that he
labours under a degree of moral insanity, but that his case
is individually such as to render him incapable of managing
his affairs and unfit to be entrusted even with the care of his
own personal safety. The diagnosis of instinctive madness,
or of insane impulse from crime, the object of moral punish-
ment, is a most difficult and at the same time an important
investigation. The diagnosis of mania, or of raving madness
and delirium, is of the utmost importance. A delirious
person should not be moved to an asylum. Such mistakes
have been made, and to a medical practitioner might be
ruinous. Delirium no doubt, when it occurs in fever or
inflammation of the brain, often passes into insanity in persons
hereditarily predisposed. Several writers have divided de-
lirium into the acute and the chronic; the former consisting
of various morbid states of the brain, attended by mental
disturabnce and fever; the latter of mental alienation, un-
attended by fever or active bodily disease. Chronic delirium
therefore comprises the various forms of insanity. Some con-
sider insanity the delirium of chronic disease.

The causes which give origin to delirium are often them-
selves sufficient to distinguish it from insanity. In the ad-
vanced stage of acute, and also in chronic, diseases, when the
powers of life become exhausted, and acute febrile action has
set in, delirium, although considered an accidental, is especially
a characteristic symptom. The insane patient retains his
senses, as well as his digestive, assimilative, and locomotive
powers, but little or not at all impaired. His mental faculties
and intelligence are but partially deranged. There are, how-
ever, some instances of acute raving mania in which, from long
continued and violent agitation, febrile symptoms supervene.
" Maniacs see, hear, and perceive correctly, although they talk
incoherently; their senses are not obscured as are those of a
patient in febrile delirium; and they have not the tremulous agi-
tation and muscular weakness which generally exists in the latter
diseases." There are instances in which perception and the
muscular power are unimpaired in delirium. A case is related
of a patient in the Bristol Infirmary " who once jumped sud-
denly from his bed, being alarmed by a clap of thunder, and
sprang up with astonishing strength and agility over the beds
to a window nearly eighteen feet high. He held himself up on
the outside by the sill of the window, and was taken down from
a great height. He afterwards recovered from his fever without
any sign of mania." An instance occurred of a young female,
in the fever ward of the St. Marylebone Infirmary who sprang
from her bed, leaped through the window on the third story,
fractured her skull, and was killed on the spot. Another case
occurred, in the same institution, of a man in the fever ward
with pneumonia, who, a few hours before his death, got out of
bed suddenly, and commenced shouting and raving; his face
flushed, and pulse rapid and small. Patients in fever often
rave in a way which indicates that they are under illusion as to
where they are, and mistake the persons who surround them.
Fatal surgical operations are sometimes attended with delirium,
and it occasionally appears towards the termination of pneu-
monia, hepatitis, splenitis, and phrenitis. Also in chronic
diseases, such as phthisis, cancer, dropsy; the mind wanders
towards the last. The delirium is generally preceded by pain
and throbbing of the head, heat of the scalp, and flushing. A
case of pulmonary phthisis combined with delirium (547)
occurred in the St. Marylebone Infirmary?No. 159 Edin. Med.
and Surg. Journal. A stableman, aged 25, became delirious
and weak before his death, and so violent that he had to be
removed to a separate ward; in addition to tubercles in the
lungs, liver, &c., a scrofulous tumour was found between the
falx and the right cerebral hemisphere. The mental disorder
gradually increases, and the delirium usually passes into coma.
Occasionally it disappears, especially in chronic diseases, and
leaves the mind clear before death.

The diagnosis of mania and delirium tremens is impor-
tant, and sometimes more difficult than that of madness and
febrile delirium. The history of the case must be taken into
consideration ; but, the same habits of drunkenness leading to
both disorders, this is not always sufficient. Patients in deli-
rium tremens have seldom or never clear and accurate percep-
tions ; their organs of sense are affected by the disorder; they
fancy themselves to be surrounded by fiends or spectres, or
gnawed by rats; their muscular power is greatly impaired;
they are weak and tremulous; while even in the most violent
paroxysms of mania the person affected sees and hears distinctly,
and is strong and active in his limbs.

The various distinguishing marks of delirium have been
thus summed up by Georget:?

1. Acute delirium is not an essential symptom of that
disease in which it occurs, since that disease may exist without
it. Insane delirium is the essential, and often the most pro-
minent, symptom, for there may be little or no disturbance in
the constitution. The voluntary motions may not suffer, and
the patient may be able to walk, and to eat and drink as usual.
2. In acute delirium the intellectual functions appear to be
suspended rather than prevented. The patient can scarcely
utter a few unintelligible and unconnected words, and those, as
well as his actions, are without any relation to the surrounding
objects. The senses, too, perform their functions very imper-
fectly, or not at all, and the natural affections do not exist. In
insane delirium the intellect is seldom totally overpowered,
some of its affections only being affected. It is exce s of action,
deviation, and want of harmony of these faculties, or prepon-
derance of some fixed and assumed idea, that characterises
general or partial insanity. By the partially insane a connected
discourse is often kept up, and they are frequently capable of
maintaining the discussion of an argument. The senses also
perform their functions, perception exists, although it may not
be just, and the mind is awake to objects which are present.
3. In acute delirium the mind is wholly absorbed, as in a
dream, with its own creations, and preserves the power, when
strongly roused to momentary recollection, of directing itself
to its situation. In insane delirium truth and error are mixed
up and not distinguishable by the patient.

4. In acute delirium volition as well as consciousness is
suspended, the patient being for the most part in a state of
stupor; and when he does attempt an intellectual effort, he
appears as if he were in a dream. In insane delirium volition
is often powerfully exerted and influenced by motives in the
action it produces.

5. In the course of acute delirium, circumstances that have
occurred are on recovery but faintly remembered. In insane
delirium a full recollection is frequently retained of all that has
passed.

6. Acute delirium is not hereditary, any more than is the
disease in which it may occur, nor is it announced by signs of
predisposition, nor of imperfection. Insane delirium is very
frequently hereditary. The greater number of the insane, or of
those destined to become so, exhibit traces of it in the general
character of the mind, their manner of life, and of study, &c.
7. Acute delirium being only the symptom of another
disease, its duration is dependent on that of the primary one;
and this does not remain long in such a state of violence as to
keep up the delirium; which therefore may last a few hours or
days, and rarely extends beyond one or two weeks. In insane
delirium the duration is very indeterminate. Not being a
mortal disease, the patient may live a great many years; indeed,
for the most part, he is not restored to reason until some
months, or a year, or even longer time has elapsed.
8. Acute delirium occurs in acute diseases common to
childhood. Insane delirium is scarcely known before the age
of puberty.

9. Acute delirium does not present any directly curative
indications; in particular, we never think of removing it by
moral means, because (intellect being nearly suspended) no
effect could be looked for from them. In insane delirium the
treatment is very much directed to injured function; it being
on this principle that moral means operate.

10. When once the health is established a relapse of acute
delirium is not dreaded. In insane delirium the recovery
is not always permanent, relapses are frequent, and the brain
is easily disturbed by slight causes.

Lastly. The causes of acute delirium are either from
remote diseases, or from different influences which give birth
to cerebral affections, of which this is the symptom. Tlif
causes of insane delirium act directly upon the intellects
functions of the brain.

Simulated Insanity.?" The supposed difficulty," says Dr.
Kay, " of distinguishing between feigned and real insanity
has been the principal cause to bind the legal profession
to the most rigid construction and application of the common
law relative to this disorder. Nothing requires a severer exer-
cise of a physician's knowledge and tact than such a case.
There is a prevalent but unfounded notion that insanity may
be easily imitated." A convalescent patient in the Somerset
Asylum was heard to observe to a " tramp " who came to ask
alms, " What a fool you are to beg! Gro into the town and
knock down the quietest looking and most respectably dressed
gentleman you can find ; you will be taken up, made out mad,
sent here, and be comfortably provided for." The method that
is in madness, the constant recurrence to the predominant
idea, is one of those features in the disease which is generally
overlooked. Greorget does not believe that a person who has
not made insanity his study can deceive a physician well ac-
quainted with the disorder. Haslam declares that " to sustain
the character of a paroxysm of active insanity would require a
continuity of exertion beyond the power of a sane person."
Impostors generally overdo the character they assume, and
present nothing but a clumsy caricature. The representa-
tions of mania put forth in the works of novelists and poets,
with a few such admirable exceptions as the Lear and Hamlet
of Shakespeare, are, of all their attempts to copy nature, the
least like their models. The really mad are, generally
speaking, not readily recognised by a stranger, and they re-
tain so much of the rational as to require an effort to detect
the impairment of their faculties. In feigned cases all this
is very different; the person is determined his derangement
shall not be overlooked for want of numerous and obvious
manifestations of its existence. A maniac has generally no
difficulty in remembering his friends, places, names, dates, and
events, and the occurrences of his life. His replies to ques-
tions, though they may sometimes indicate delusion or
extravagant notions, generally have some relation to the
subject, and show that it has occupied his attention. Now,
a criminal simulating mania, will frequently deny all know-
ledge of men or things with which he has been always
familiar, especially whenever he imagines that such ignorance,
if believed, may be considered as a proof of his innocence.

There is also a certain hesitation and appearance of preme-
ditation in the succession of ideas with which, in real madness,
the train of thought is changed.

In the year 1849, a male prisoner, aged 27, described as
a hawker, who was sentenced to fifteen years' transportation
for highway robbery, was sent to the Somerset County
Asylum from the gaol. He had been a month in the infir-
mary of the prison, on account of his health, which was bad.
He had low fever after his admission, and was for several
weeks in the infirmary of the asylum. He never would
speak to any one, but chattered like a monkey, repeating the
words, " Jack, Jack, fifteen years for nothing." If he saw a
female he would run at her; and he had a dangerous pro-
pensity of climbing and suspending himself by his legs, head
downwards. Six months after his admission he had im-
proved, went out to work, and was very expert in lifting
weights; and from the manner in which he set about such
things he impressed one with the idea that he had been
a sailor. He sometimes spoke in Spanish and in French,
and expressed a great dislike to English and French people.
About this time his conduct changed; he never spoke Eng-
lish to the attendants, and pretended not to understand it,
although, when not observed, he spoke English to one of the
patients. He slept well at night; gesticulated when he
thought he was observed, or when he heard any one approach-
ing, and not at other times; and the general impression was
that he was feigning insanity. On one occasion he came
behind the attendant when opening a cupboard, and snatched
at a carving knife, but did not succeed in getting it, at which
he was greatly enraged. A few hours afterwards he attempted
to strangle the same attendant. An order was subsequently
obtained from the Secretary of State, and he was removed to
the criminal ward of Bethlehem Hospital, where, I was in-
formed, he conducted himself like a rational person. On the
journey to London, although handcuffed, he displayed his
monkeyish tricks, and frightened passengers from the car-
riage, and at Swindon station a remonstrance was made, and a
strong desire expressed that he should be expelled from the train.
The method of detecting insanity in England is left to
individual sagacity. The French arrange their means under
three general divisions : the interrogatory, the continued
observation, and the inquest. The interrogatory embraces
those means of information which are applicable in a personal
interview. The continued observation has usually to be
pursued for some time, and when the person supposes him-
self to be unobserved; he should be led to speak of the
motives of those who are anxious to prove his insanity, or to
write to his friends and prepare statements of his wrongs.
It has been observed that a forgetfulness of words and letters
will be evinced by well-educated maniacs, whose mistakes are
owing to their malady. The inquest consists in collecting-
information respecting the patient's condition before and
after the presumed disorder, and the causes suspected to
have impaired his mind; his writings are consulted, and the
testimony of those who have been about and have conversed
with him. Facts should be preferred to opinions, and it
should be ascertained if madness be hereditary in his family,
and whether any powerful cause, chagrin, severe crosses,
reverse of fortune, or any change in his habits, tastes, or
affections, have preceded the development. His business
transactions, management of his family, and the state of his
health are also subjects for inquiry. If the patient's in-
sanity be not evident, the conclusion ought to be that he is
not a fit subject for legal interference. In the report of the
Metropolitan Commissioners in Lunacy, made previous to
the passing of the Lunacy Acts in 1845, a brief, but distinct,
description is given of principal forms of insanity, which are
classified under the following heads :?

I. Mania ; which is subdivided into^?
1. Acute mania, or raving madness.
2. Ordinary mania or chronic madness of a less
acute form.
3. Periodical, or remittent mania, with compara-
tively lucid intervals.
II. Dementia, or decay and obliteration of the intel-
lectual faculties.
III. Melancholia.
IV. Monomania.
V. Moral Insanity.
The three last-mentioned forms are sometimes compre-
hended under the term partial insanity.
VI. Congenital idiocy.
VII. Congenital imbecility.
VIII. General paralysis of the insane.
IX. Epilepsy.
X. Delirium tremens.

A few brief descriptions of the disorders to which these
terms are appropriated may be deemed requisite by way of
explanation.

I. General Definition of Mania.?Mania.?This term is
used to designate a particular kind of madness, as affecting
all the operations of the mind. Hence the term total or general
insanity is used as synonymous with mania. Maniacs are
incapable of carrying on, in a calm and collected manner, any
process of thought; their disorder for the most part betraying
itself whenever they attempt to enter into conversation. It
likewise affects their conduct, gesture, and behaviour, which
are absurd and irrational; their actions being characterised
by great restlessness, appearing to be the result of momentary
impulses and without obvious motives. Mania is also accom-
panied by hurry and confusion of ideas, and by more or less
excitement and vehemence of feeling and expression. When
these last symptoms exist in an excessive degree, the disorder
is termed aoute mania or raving madness.

1. Acute Mania.?Acute mania or raving madness is the
first stage of the disease, which often becomes gradually
milder in its character, and is then termed chronic mania or
simply mania. In other cases the disposition to high excite-
ment or raving continues throughout the whole course of the
disease, which sometimes becomes fatal through the exhaustion
occasioned by perpetual agitation and want of rest. It is also
generally attended with considerable disturbance of the vital
functions.

2. Chronic Mania.?The chronic form of madness is
attended with less excitement of the passions, less rapidity of
utterance, and less violence of action. In this stage the disorder
of the mind is not always immediately perceptible ; but it soon
becomes apparent that the patient is incapable of continued
rational conversation or self-control, and that his acts are the
result of momentary caprice, and not governed by rational
motives. A great proportion labour under illusions and
hallucinations, or false impressions as to matters of fact; but
in these illusive notions there is no consistency or permanence.
Patients labouring under this chronic form of mania are often
tolerably tranquil and harmless. Many of them are capable
of being employed in agricultural and other active pursuits,
and of amusing themselves by reading, music, and various
entertaining games. A great proportion of the inmates of
lunatic asylums belong to this class. However quiet and
manageable they may appear to be under the authority and
supervision to which they are subjected in an asylum, they are
quite unfit, to be at large and to mix with ordinary society,
3. Intermittent Mania.?Intermittent mania, or madness
attended with lucid intervals, is by no means so frequent as
might be inferred from the writings of authors on medical
jurisprudence. Some medical writers of considerable note
have denied the existence of lucid intervals altogether. The
fact is, that in large asylums there are patients subject to
occasional paroxysms of raving madness, but who have in-
tervals of comparative tranquillity and rest. It generally
happens that after the alternations of raving fits and periods
of tranquillity have occurred for some time, the intervals
become less clearly marked and the mind is found to be
weakened, the temper more irritable, and both the feelings and
the intellectual faculties more and more disordered.
Distinction between Recurrent Insanity and Intermittent
Mania.?Recurrent insanity differs from intermittent mania,
though often confounded with it. In intermittent mania
paroxysms occur either after regular or irregular periods, and
this is the ordinary character of the disease. Recurrent in-
sanity is a name applied to any form of mental disorder,
when the patient recovers perfectly, but suffers from relapses
after considerable periods of time.

II. Dementia.?Chronic and protracted mania is frequently
the prelude to a decay and final obliteration of the mental
faculties, which is termed dementia.

Dementia differs from all other forms of insanity. It
differs from mania, in which the intellectual powers still exist,
though they are exercised in a confused and disordered manner.
It differs from idiocy, in which the powers of mind have
never been developed, while in dementia they have been lost.
Dementia is, in some instances, the primary form of mental
derangement, and its phenomena make their appearance in the
first onset of the disease. Cases of this kind are chiefly from
causes of a depressing nature, such as deep and overwhelming
grief, extreme poverty, destitution, and old age. In those
instances in which dementia is the sequel of protracted mania,
it is not easy to determine the point at which mania ends and
dementia begins. It is sometimes, also, the sequel of epilepsy,
apoplexy, paralysis, and other affections of the brain.
III. Melancholia.?A considerable proportion of the in-
mates of all extensive lunatic asylums are the melancholies,
among whom there are several degrees and varieties. Some
patients display merely lowness of spirits, with a distaste for
the pleasures of life and a total indifference to its concerns.
These have no disorder of the understanding or defect in the
intellectual powers, and, however closely examined, manifest no
delusion or hallucination. This state often alternates with an
opposite condition of the mind, namely, one of buoyancy ot
spirits and morbid activity. It is thus very frequently difficult
to determine in what degree melancholy, when it exists without
delusions, constitutes insanity. A great number of persons
whose disorder is precisely that which is above described, and
who betray no particular error of judgment or hallucination,
are confined in lunatic asylums as a precaution against suicide,
to which they are prone, in many instances, from a disgust
of life.

Another class of melancholies derive their grief and despon-
dency from some unreal misfortune which they imagine to
have befallen them. Many are convinced that they have com-
mitted unpardonable sins, and are doomed to eternal perdition.
Others believe themselves to be accused or suspected of some
heinous crime, of which they are destined to undergo the
punishment; and of this they live in continual dread. Some
fancy that they have sustained great pecuniary losses, and are
utterly and irretrievably ruined. A numerous class of melan-
choly patients live under the impression that they labour under
some terrible bodily disease. Many of them have, in reality,
some complaint of which they magnify the symptoms; they
fancy every trifling sensation of a painful kind to be certain
indications of their incurable distemper, which they often
attribute to some fantastic cause.

IV. Monomania.?Monomania, properly so termed, is a
form of insanity which, from the attention given to it, might
be supposed to be of more frequent occurrence than it really is.
The term is professedly given to cases in which the intellectual
faculties are unimpaired, except with relation to some particular
topics. Instances, indeed, are continually occurring in which
some particular impression of a delusive and insane kind occupies
the attention of the patient, and is uppermost in his mind; but
unless the power of reasoning correctly on subjects unconnected
with the illusion is retained, the disorder is not a case of
monomania or " partial insanity." A frequent illusion of
monomaniacs is that that they hold conversation with super-
natural beings.

In most instances of partial insanity, melancholy connects
itself with the subject of delusion. These cases properly belong
to melancholia.

V. Moral Insanity.?This term was first used by Dr.
Prichard to designate a form of mental disease in which the
affections, sentiments, habits, and, generally speaking, the
moral feelings of the mind, rather than the intellectual facul-
ties, are in an unsound and disordered state. The common
distinctive character of all these cases is of a negative kind;
viz. the faculties of the understanding remain apparently
unimpaired, and no delusive impression can be detected in
the mind of the patient which may account for the perver-
sion of his moral dispositions, affections, and inclinations.
Cases of this description were formerly looked upon as un-
accountable phenomena. They are, however, now recognised
as a distinct' form of mental disorder in nearly all the public
asylums. They are characterised by a total want of self-
control, with an inordinate propensity to excesses of various
kinds, among others habitual intoxication. This is often
followed by an attack of mania, which, however, speedily
subsides when the patient is confined; but is generally re-
produced, by the same exciting cause, soon after he is dis-
charged. Among the female inmates of asylums, there are
many whose disorder principally consists in a moral perversion
connected with hysterical or sexual excitement.
VI. and VII. Congenital Idiocy and Congenital Imbe-
cility.?Congenital idiots are persons whose intellectual facul-
ties have never been developed.

Congenital Imbecility is the result of some original
defect, which renders the mind feeble in all its operations,
though not altogether incapable of exercising them within a
limited sphere. There are many degrees of imbecility, but
the examples chiefly found in lunatic asylums are persons
labouring under this weakness in an extreme degree. It is
evident that more discrimination ought to be used than has
hitherto been practised in selecting from persons of this class
proper objects for confinement.

VIII. General Paralysis of the Insane, and other forms
of Paralysis complicated with Insanity.?Paralysis is not
unfrequently complicated with insanity, and is almost an in-
variable indication that the case is incurable and hopeless,
marking the existence of organic disease of the brain or spinal
cord.

In some instances insanity is the consequence of an attack
of apoplexy or of hemiplegia. This happens more especially
in aged persons. In others apoplexy or paralysis supervenes
on protracted mania or dementia.

The most strongly marked case of the complication of
paralytic symptoms with those of mental disorder is the
disease termed general paralysis of the insane. This is more
properly to be considered as an affection distinct both from
ordinary paralysis and from insanity. The paralytic symp-
toms in this affection are, in some cases, observed to precede
those of mental disturbance, whilst in others they follow.
General paralysis of the insane seldom occurs in females, but
mostly in men, and is the result almost uniformly of a de-
bauched and intemperate life. Its duration is scarcely ever
longer than two, or at most three, years, when it generally
brings its victim to the grave. The onset of the disease is
distinguished by an impediment in the articulation ; an
effort is required in speaking, and the words are uttered with
a sort of mumbling and stammering. At this period there
is no perceptible sign of paralysis, and the mobility of the
limbs is not impaired. In a second stage the patient is ob-
served to have a tottering gait; the limbs are weaker than
in health, especially the lower extremities ; while the func-
tions of the organs of sense are likewise enfeebled. In the
progress of time a third stage appears, during which the
victim of the malady loses not only the power of locomotion,
but can neither feed himself nor answer the calls of nature.
He becomes more and more weak and emaciated, but
generally perishes under some secondary disease, such as
gangrene, sloughing of the surface of the body, or diarrhoea,
unless he be cut off at an earlier period by an apoplectic or
epileptic attack, to which these patients are very liable.
The disorder of the mind is peculiar in this affection. It is
generally a species of monomania, in which the individual
affected fancies himself possessed of vast riches and power.
IX. Epilepsy.?In most of the lunatic asylums there are
some, and in the large asylums many, persons confined among
the insane who are subject to epilepsy; for this disease, un-
fortunately, is often complicated with insanity. There are,
however, some epileptics in these asylums who are not insane,
or in any way disordered in mind during the intervals of
their paroxysms.

Epilepsy is complicated with disorders or defects of the
mind in various ways.

1. Epileptic Idiots.?Persons whose intellectual faculties
have never been developed. They are not materially different
as regards their mental deficiency from idiots not subject to
epilepsy; but they require greater care, on account of the
accidents to which this disease renders them liable.
2. Epileptics who are Imbecile or Demented.?When pa-
roxysms of epilepsy are very frequent and severe, and the
disease is of long duration, it generally impairs the intellectual
faculties. Torpor, weakness, and imbecility come on, which,
if the patient survives under his disease for many years, termi-
nate in fatuity, similar in every respect to the fatuity which
ensues in protracted mania.

3. Epileptic Mania.?Some persons subject to severe
paroxysms of epilepsy without suffering obliteration of their
intellectual faculties, and even without obvious disorder of the
mind during the intervals of their paroxysms, are never-
theless subject to occasional fits of a maniacal character. It
is an observation frequently made by the attendants of asylums
that, when the epileptic fits are coming on, such persons are
irritable, morose, malicious, and sometimes exceedingly dan-
gerous. During these periods epileptics are prone to violence,
and sometimes perpetrate the most atrocious acts. Many
instances are upon record of such persons, at a time when their
disorder had been in abeyance, or even supposed to have
ceased altogether, having been seized with a sudden impulse
to commit homicide, infanticide, suicide, or to set fire to
houses. In other instances, the mental disorder of epileptics;
has the form of acute mania, or rather of raving delirium.
The patient, generally a day or two after the attack of epilepsy,
sometimes immediately after it has ceased, is seized with a
sudden fury, during which he sings, roars, shrieks, or resembles
a man in a violent fit of intoxication. The species of mad-
ness which is complicated with epilepsy is one of the most
mischievous and dangerous forms of the disease. But the
instances of this affection bear a very small proportion to the
cases of epilepsy in general.

Epileptics whose Intellects are Unimpaired. A great
number of instances of epilepsy, however, are well known to
exist without any disorder of the mind. Persons subject to
occasional paroxysms, or those of infrequent occurrence^ only,
are, during the intervals, in a tolerably perfect possession of
their intellectual faculties, and are capable of following their
ordinary pursuits.

Adult persons of this description are scarcely to be found
in lunatic asylums ; but boys and girls, when they have become
a source of anxiety and trouble to their parents, as well as
dangerous to themselves, have sometimes been sent by boards
of guardians to asylums for protection. This, however, is not
a sufficient reason for associating this class of epileptics with
the insane. Where a proper classification exists, the epileptics
are placed in wards by themselves, or are separated from the
insane ; but there are many lunatic asylums where this regula-
tion is entirely neglected.

Delirium Tremens,?Instances of delirium tremens are
occasionally, though not often, seen among inmates of lunatic
asylums. The disorder is well known. It is the result of
intemperance, and frequently supervenes on a fit of intoxica-
tion. It is named from the muscular tremor and agitation
which accompanies it, and the peculiar affection of the mind,
resembling the delirium of fever rather than the phenomena of
insanity. It is not a disease of long duration, but terminates
for the most part in a short period, either in death or in
recovery. Hence there are few cases of this description in
lunatic asylums.

Folie Circulaire (circular insanity), in which there are
alternations of mania and melancholy with lucid intervals, has
no defined place in any classification, nor can it be referred to
any form of insanity under any English system. It includes
the acute varieties of the second natural order or class of the
functional disorders of the brain, as here proposed. There were
two very remarkable instances of these alternations in females,
who had been for many years in the Somerset Asylum. One of
them had a regular annual rotation, from a maniacal state, in
which she was noisy, destructive, and of filthy habits for several
weeks, till gradually she became rational, quiet, obliging, and
industrious for months. Then for months she would be in a
state of the deepest dejection, sitting apart from others, silent,
slovenly, and sometimes requiring to be fed. In the older
female there was less regularity in the periodical alternations,
and the symptoms were more allied to dementia.

With respect to the subject of insanity. In the introduc-
tion to Hermann's Physiology," by Gamgee, 1875, it is stated:
" The means of treating in a scientific manner the phenomena
of mind are completely wanting, inasmuch as these phenomena
cannot be brought into relation with any of our scientific con-
ceptions. Physiology must here, therefore, provisionally limit
herself to the investigation of the organs with which they are
connected."

PAUPER ASYLUMS.
Dr Prichard states that insanity appears to fall in a greater
proportion upon the lowest classes of society, since, in England,
78f per cent, were stated to be paupers. Hence it appears
that mental derangement must be looked upon not merely as an
individual calamity, but as a serious public burden, for such
must be the permanent maintenance of so many paupers re-
quiring more than ordinary care and expense.

On this important subject, Dr M. Lindsay, Superintendent
of the Derby County Asylum, has collected, and recently pub-
lished, some valuable and interesting information for his com-
mittee and the ratepayers in general; the usual question
having arisen at Derby, as elsewhere, of providing additional
accommodation, so as to include the pauper patients of the
borough in the county asylum, and thereby diminish the cost
which a separate establishment would involve. In many
asylums numerous additions have been made from time to time,
and in several counties one or more new asylums have been
built, as in Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, Lancashire, and York-
shire.

County and BoRouan Lunatic Asylums.
Table showing the Cost pek Bed, including Building, Land, Furniture,
Bedding, and Clothing.
Asylums
Original
Number of
Beds
Original
Cost per
Bed
Present
Number of
Beds
Present
Cost per
Bed
Derby .
Leicester (Borough)
Stafford (Lichfield)
South Yorkshire .
Cheshire (Macclesfield)
Warwick
Northampton.
Worcester
Gloucester
Oxford .
Hereford
Devon .
Glamorgan
Northumberland
Cambridge
Bristol (City and County)
Newcastle (Borough)
City of London
Beds (Herts and Hunts]
Wilts
North and East Ridings
East Lancashire
Surrey (Wandsworth)
East Middlesex
Berkshire
Surrey (Brookwood)
Hants .
Carmarthen .
Somerset
300
282
501
450
540
400
323
200
250
200
260
250
505
296
160
456
370
1,258
285
400
212
350
?
327
180
144
203
218
219
190
271
196
200
245
272
220
200
230
193
230
230
235
150
158
148
436
800
640
750
624
499
668
400
?
275
210
150
122
200
170
172
177
1,050
638
165
115

It seems necessary here to explain the difference in the cost
per bed in the Somerset Asylum, and the reason of its having
become so much lower than in any other, in the above table.
The situation on the side of the Mendip Hills was, in the
first place, well chosen; the contractor found excellent building
stone, also lime stone and brick clay, on the spot. 2udly, the
year after opening the Asylum in 1849, a building fund was
formed from the extra charge for patients from other counties,
and from boroughs which had not contributed towards the erec-
tion of the Asylum. ( Vide Fifth Annual Report of the Somer-
set Asylum, 1852.) The Lunacy Acts Amendment Act of 1862,
25 & 26 Vict. c. 3, sec. 6, recognises the establishment of
a " Building and Repair Fund " from the excess of payments
for patients not belonging to the county or borough for which
the Asylum is provided, and directs that a detailed statement
of the manner in which such fund has been expended shall be
annually submitted to the General or Quarter Sessions.
The Chairman of the Somerset Asylum, in his Report for
1862, to tlie Quarter Sessions, in reference to the Act 25 &
26 Vict. c. 3, states: "The Court is aware that such a
fund as this was established when the Asylum was opened,
through the judicious care of Mr. Moody, and that all the money
received on account of the extra charge has been employed to
the enlargement and improvement of the Asylum.

" The Committee, therefore, have thought this the proper
time to append to their Report as full an account of this fund
as can now be rendered, with notes of the chief improvements
from time to time made. In all about ?8,600 has been re-
ceived, and nearly the same sum expended, since the house was
opened in March 1848.

" During the first six years, about ?2,000 was spent in com-
pleting the boundary wall and lodges, in levelling and quarrying,
and getting the ground in order in front of the house, and com-
pleting some of the outbuildings behind. During the next
three years considerable improvements were made in the farm-
yard, and a dormitory then built at an expense of about ?1,000,
and the large dormitories formed in the house by taking down
the wooden partitions. After that the kitchen and workshops
were removed ; the laundry, after the fire, repaired; steam in-
troduced instead of open fires for the boilers, and iron substi-
tuted for wood in the roof; and, lastly, the large dining and
recreation hall built. The house was built for 350 patients, and
cost ?52,000. At the end of 1859 there was room for 440, and
520 can now be accommodated, at an expense of about ?8,000
for the additional 170 patients ; and no charge has been made on
the county rate for repairs and alterations ; and it is right to add
that land has been bought which cost rather more than ?3,000.
" It is satisfactory to add that so large an increase has been
secured at so small a cost, and that much of what has been done
has been conducive to the good of the patients; the masons,
carpenters, &c., who happened to be in the Asylum, being
employed in their proper work, and others made to assist them."
According to the Census, the population of Somersetshire
Was nearly half a million, and did not materially change during
the 20 years. The number of insane paupers was in the be-
ginning 610 ; of these 173 were idiots kept at home, and many
were in workhouses.

During that period there had been 3,284 admissions?1,649
of males and 1,635 of females. The
Discharges
(recoveries) 39*8 per cent, males; 45 per cent, females.
Not recovered 13*7 do. 12-8 do.
Died . . 32*9 do. 24kl do.
Remaining . 13k6 do. 18*1 do.
100 100

These numbers include 181 male and 129 female epileptics,
and 52 male and 34 female idiots, previously treated of in the
" Journals." The relapses are also included?15*3 per cent, in
males and 16 per cent, in females.

The slight excess in males is due to the greater number of
male epileptics and idiots. In the ordinary cases of insanity
included in the second class, the females predominate?1,220
males and 1,237 females.

These have been arranged under three heads in the table,
showing the influence of age in relation to the different forms
of insanity in both sexes, and percentage of results. Under
the first head (Mania) are included cases of mania, puerperal
and intermittent. Under the second head (Partial Insanity)
are included cases of monomania, melancholia, moral insanity,
and delirium tremens. Under the third head (Cases of De-
mentia), general paralysis and fatuity.
At all ages as set down on admission for a period of 20^
years, the percentage of
Recoveries were . 36'5 in males and 38*8 in females.
Not recovered . .12 do. 12*3 do.
Died . . .31*5 do. 22*4 do.
Remaining . . 20 do. 26*5 do.
100 100

Those cerebral disorders which usually prevail before puberty
?convulsions, idiocy, and epilepsy?amounted to above 16 per
cent, of the cases admitted to the Somerset Asylum, the
males being one-third more numerous than the females. It is
now intended to show the influence of age in the second class,
the ordinary cases of insanity which prevail at a later period
of life.

It is stated by a distinguished medical writer that ado-
lescence is one of the most important epochs of human
existence. The practices which both sexes acquire at this period
of life, when the physical and mental powers are in a state of
active development, both the dictates of reason and moral
restraint are required to control. The physical exhaustion and
mental torpor due to indulging in them, the infliction in after
life of many of the diseases which proceed from debility, of
numerous nervous and convulsive disorders, as neuralgia, chorea,
epilepsy, melancholia and mania, &c., are the sad results.
The mental disorders of the second class have been placed
under three heads, in the following table:?

Percentage of the Results in 2,457 Cases of Insanity at Decennial Periods of Life, distinguishing the Sexes and showing
the Numbers of each Sex.
Ago and No. of each Sex
Form of the Disorder
Recovered
Not Recovered
SI.
F.
31.
Remaining
SI.
Total number
SI.
Under 20
39 SI
years?
.; 44 F. . .1
? ?{
?1
?I
?(

From 20 to 30?
204 SI.; 266 F,
From 30 to 40?
288 SI.; 289 F.
From 40 to 50- -
287 M.; 268 F.
From 50 to 60?
186 SI.; 174 F.
From 60 to 70?
132 SI.; 131 F.
From 70 upwards?
84 SI.; 65 F. .
Slania .
Partial Insanity
Dementia
Slania
Partial Insanity
Dementia
Slania . . .
Partial Insanity
Dementia
Slania
Partial Insanity
Dementia .
Slania .
Partial Insanity
Dementia
Slania ,
Partial Insanity
Dementia
Slania
Partial Insanity
Dementia
Totals .
Slania
Partial Insanity
Dementia
93-1
60
0
55*5
36-5
5-5
44-6
51
13-9
36-5
44-7
0
58-3
51-5
0
44-6
47-4
0
38-4
44-4
0
79'3
73
0
54-2
56-6
0
51
48-3
42-3
40
50'7
0
36-6
43-8
0
21
36-3
0
22-3
33-3
0
0
20
0
11*5
17-5
22-2
11*7
8
4'6
9-3
9 5
9-6
5
121
18-7
7-1
12-7
63-2
7-7
0
19
69
0
0
12-8
11-4
43
8-4
3-8
10-8
5-5
9-5
9-4
56
10-5
106
58-4
11-1
0
50
2-3
0
0
11-5
21
44-4
247
17-4
76-9
31
29'5
21-5
24-3
73-1
32-2
34-5
29
38-4
22'2
52
49-6
47-6
3-7
46-4
49-2
7'6
11-2
19-8
10-1
8-5
38-7
23
24
65'7
0
9
0
9-8
8
28-5
15-7
10
43-2
16-2
16-5
90-5
24-2
25
24
36'9
31-8
166
38-9
33-3
43-4
16-8
16-6
393
4-6
20
0
21-5
25
27'9
19
236
4-6
23*2
16-3
1-6
15-2
12-1
8-2
16-1
5-4
7-8
15'5
333
29
18-4
17-2
108
138
18
0
23-2
23
28-5
25'3
33 3
11-6
33
27-3
0
306
218
20
31-6
21-3
25
27-7
33-4
6-6
26-7
25-7
14'4
31
8
0
134
52
18
151
72
65
150
74
63
83
66
37
50
50
32
28
9
47
603
349
268
1,220

Under the age of 20 years there were 83 cases; three-
fourths of them came under the head of Mania, under which
are included intermittent cases of mania ; the numbers of each
sex were nearly equal; the recoveries in mania at this age
amounted to 86 per cent.; there was but one death. Under
the head of Partial Insanity are included those in a state of
melancholia, monomania, and moral insanity, including delirium
tremens. There were 17 cases under 20 years ; the recoveries
66 per cent., and one death. The third head, Dementia, in-
cludes senile fatuity, and that most fatal form, general paralysis,
of which there were altogether 145 cases in males and 27
in females, mostly occurring in persons of from 30 to 55 years;
no case under 20 years.

From 20 to 30 there were 204 males and 266 females?a
great excess of the latter at this particular period; in the cases
of mania an excess of 38, and in partial insanity of 35;
whereas in cases of dementia, including general paralysis, the
number of males exceeded the females by 11, as shown in the
table. The percentage of recoveries in mania in each sex
were nearly equal?55 per cent in males and 54 in females; the
deaths 11^, and nearly 10 per cent, in females. In partial
insanity at this age the recoveries in females were 20 per cent,
greater than in males, and the deaths were very much fewer;
also in the cases of dementia and general paralysis the mortality
was greatly in excess, being 21 as compared with 8 per cent, in
females.

From 30 to 40 years the numbers of each sex were more
nearly equal?288 males and 289 females. There was still a
preponderance of females under the head of Mania. There
were 151 cases of mania in males and 182 in females, at this
age ; the recoveries in males 44*6, and in females 51 per cent. ;
and the mortality 24*7 in males?very much higher than in
females, being in them 15*7 per cent. The cases of partial
insanity were nearly in equal numbers in the sexes; the re-
coveries were 51 per cent, in males and 48*3 per cent, in
females; the mortality 17*4 in males and 10 per cent, in
females. Under the head of Dementia, including general para-
lysis, there was a considerable excess of males?more than
double the number of females, of whom there were only 26, a
large proportion?42 per cent.?of whom recovered; among
the males, 65 in number, not 14 per cent, recovered, whilst the
mortality amounted to nearly 77 per cent, in the males and 43
per cent, in females.

From 40 to 50 the males exceeded the females by 19;
viz. 287 males and 268 females. As in the former period, the
cases of mania in females were in excess of those of males 6.

The recoveries were 36*5 per cent, in males, and 40 per
cent, in females, and the mortality as high as 31 per cent, in
males compared with 16*2 per cent, in females. The second
head (Partial Insanity) included 74 males and 91 females. The
recoveries amounted to 44'7 in males and 50*7 per cent, in
females; the mortality to 29*5 in males and 1 6*5 per cent, in
females. The cases of dementia were three times as numerous
in males, 63, to 21 in females; no recoveries ; mortality, 88*8 in
males, and 90*5 in females.

From 50 to 60 the total numbers were 186 males and 174
females. The cases of mania, 83 males and 85 females. The
recoveries were in these cases considerably greater in the males,
being 58*3 compared with 36'6 in females. The mortality was
lowest in the males, being 21*5 compared with 24*2 per cent, in
females. Of partial insanity the numbers were nearly equal?
66 males and 64 females; the recoveries in males being greater,
51*5 compared with 43-8 per cent, in females; the mortality
24*3 in males and 25 per cent, in females. The cases of dementia,
including general paralysis, were 37 in males, and 25 in females ;
no recoveries; mortality 7 3 per cent, in males, and 24 only in
females.

From 60 to 70 the numbers were 132 males and 131 females.
Cases of mania, 50 males, 54 females ; recoveries, 44'6 males and
21 per cent, females; deaths, 32'2 males and 36'9 per cent,
females ; leaving the large proportion of 31*6 females compared
with 16*1 per cent, males remaining in the Asylum. The cases
of partial insanity numbered 50 males and 44 females; the re-
coveries 47*4 males and 36*3 females; the mortality 34*5 in
males, and 31*8 in females. At this decennial period the cases
of dementia were nearly equal; there was not that predominance
of males as at all previous periods, owing principally to the
cases of general paralysis not occurring so late in life. The
numbers were 38 males and 36 females ; no recoveries; the
mortality 29 per cent, males, and 16*6 per cent, females; remain-
ing, 7*8 males and 25 per cent, females; being three times the
number of females remaining compared with males.

From 70 years upwards the numbers were 84 males and 65
females; under each head the males in excess. The recoveries
in mania 38*4 in males, and 22*3 per cent, in females ; the mor-
tality 38 per cent, in each sex. In partial insanity, recoveries
44*4 in males, and 33*3 per cent, in females; the mortality 22*2
in males, and 33*3 per cent, in females, the same proportion of
each sex remaining in the Asylum. The mortality in cases of
dementia was 52 per cent, in males, and 43*4 per cent, in
females, leaving 29 per cent, males, and only 6*6 per cent,
females, remaining under care in the Asylum.

In the 2,457 cases of mental disorders, of the 2nd class, ad-
mitted to the Somerset County Asylum in 20? years, from
which idiots, epileptics, and recurrent cases or relapses are ex-
cluded, the percentage of admissions were as follows :?
From Mania, Males 24*5 Females 28*7
Partial Insanity, do 14*3 Do 15*7
Dementia 10*9 Do 5*9
49-7 50-3

In the decennial period from 30 to 40, there was in both
sexes the largest number of admissions ; up to that age the
females predominated, after that age the males. Admissions
up to 40 years, 22 per cent, males, 24*8 per cent, females.
After 40 years, 47*7 per cent, males, and 25*5 per cent, females.
From an analysis of these cases at quinquennial periods, it
appears that at the earliest ages, up to 35 years, the females
were more prone to insanity than the males, the numbers being
382 males and 464 females, or nearly four females to three males.
After 35 years of age the males were in excess, but in a minor
degree; from 35 to 60 years of age the numbers were 622 males
and 577 females, and from 60 years upwards 216 males and
196 females.

At the earlier ages, before 35 years, the recoveries were, in
males 188, or 49*2 per cent, on the admissions, and in females
267, or 57*4 per cent., a difference of 8? per cent, in favour of
the latter. From 35 to 60 years the percentage of recoveries
was 38*4 in males and 37*4 in females. After 60 years of age
the percentage of recoveries was in males 19*4 and in females
17*3 per cent.

The mortality at these ages, was: under 35 years, 24*5 in
males and 13*3 only in females, a difference of 11 ? per cent.;
from 35 to 60 years the mortality in males was 40 and in
females 26 per cent.; after 60 years of age the mortality was
in males 57 and in females 55 per cent.
ii 2
