A Unreal Examination of the Jb Lints from Brixham Cavern
============================================================

346 REVIEWS,
?By N. Whitley, C.E., Honorary Secretary of the Royal
Institution of Cornwall. Reprinted from the Journal of the
Victoria Institute, or Philosophical Society of Great Britain.
London: Hardwicke & Bogue, Piccadilly. Edinburgh:
Maclaren & Macniven. Dublin: W. Ridings. Paris:
Galignani & Co., 1877.
Mr. Whitley has done good service to the cause of science,
as well as religion, by his indefatigable researches respecting
the supposed flint implements discovered in the Brixham
Cavern. He is well known as a zealous, accomplished, and
thoroughly practical geologist; his observations are therefore
entitled to all the weight due to a keen, devoted, and conscien-
tious observer.
The question as to the natural or artificial formation of a
few flint flakes may seem, on a prima facie view of the subject,
but an insignificant matter. It is, however, one of the gravest
importance, involving no less a problem than whether man is,
or is not, of bestial origin.
As far back as 1864 Mr. Whitley published a pamphlet on
flint implements. Since that time he has carefully studied the
geology of the Brixham Cavern, and of the Somme Valley, and
in 1874 he read a paper before the Victoria Institute, on " The
Brixham Cavern, and its testimony to the Antiquity of Man.1'
In his last essay, just published, and which is now especially
under our notice, he gives a resume of all his arguments.
The investigation of the contents of the Brixham Cavern,
which has gained so much notoriety, originated with the Royal
and Geological Societies as long ago as 1858. They appointed
a committee, of which Dr Falconer, F.R.S., was president, and
Mr. Prestwich, F.R.S., was treasurer, to superintend the neces-
sary researches. Mr. Pengelly took the most active part in the
exploration, and before the termination of twelve months he
forwarded to the Geological Society all the so-called flint
implements, as well as the remains of animals which have been
found, together with specimens of stalagmite. But it Avas
not until May 16, 1872, that the report of the committee was
published by the Royal Society. Moreover it was only in the
latter part of 1874 that the exhumed flints were deposited for
public inspection at the Christy Museum, London, in accordance
with the stipulation on which ?200 of the royal donation were
given by the society towards the expense of the exploration.
REVIEWS. 347
Commenting on the tardiness of these proceedings, Mr.
Whitley justly observes :?
Thus for fifteen years the relics from the cavern were not acces-
sible to outsiders, and during that long period these rubble pieces of
shattered flint were persistently described as flint knives, relics of man,
and manufactured tools. The haste with which this opinion had been
adopted, and the zeal by which it was propagated, presents a remark-
able contrast to the long delay in the issue of the final report.
On the 9th of September 1858, a preliminary report was sent to
the London Committee, signed by " H. Falconer, M.D., Andrew
Ramsay, and Wm, Pengelly," in which they state that " one result of
great interest has already been brought out, namely the superposition
of undoubted remains of the reindeer above the so-called ^ flint
knives' 5 from which the inference arises that the reindeer continued
to be an inhabitant of Britain after the appearance of man in this
island."
In the same September, at the Leeds meeting of the Biitish
Association, Mr. Pengelly, F.R.S., read a paper on the results which
had been obtained, and stated, " that in the new cavern flint implements
had been found under an unbroken floor of stalagmite, deep in the cave
earth, and mingled with the remains of the ordinary extinct cave
mammals."
Again, in the following year, Sir Charles Lyell brought ^ the
evidence obtained from this cavern before the Meeting of the British
Association at Aberdeen, in reference to its bearing on the high
antiquity of man; and from that early date, down to the issue of the
final report of the Royal Society in 1874, the flints from Brixham
Cavern have been constantly referred to, as furnishing incontestable
evidence of the contemporaneous existence of man with the extinct
mammalia of the Drift period; but let it be observed that during these
fifteen years the flints themselves were never produced, never even
described in detail, or the nature of the evidence of their human manu-
facture made known; and if the exploration of Brixham Cavern
(as it has been said) produced an entire revolution of opinion on the
antiquity of man, such opinion was founded on faith and not on
sight.
Thus far tlie believers in a Palseolithic age appear to have
it all their own way. We will now give Mr. Whitley s account
of his exploration of the Brixham Cavern :
On the 2nd of October 1874, I visited the cavern and found a
glass case within the entrance, in which some relics from the cave were
placed, and shown to visitors by the proprietor; among other things
were some plaster casts of a very perfect and large flint flake 3| inches
long, and well adapted to be used as a knife I was told by the pro-
prietor that these casts were models of one of the " flint knives found
in the cavern, and deposited with the Geological Society of London
The case also contained the cast of a stone axe of a neolithic form I
purchased three of the casts of the knife, and one of the axe. My
suspicions of the genuineness of these things were aroused, and after-
wards confirmed, by comparing the cast of the flake with the description
348 REVIEWS.
of the flints given in the report of the Royal Society. On the 21st of
November 1874, I forwarded one of the casts and the model of the
axe to the Secretaries of the Royal Society, and ventured in a letter
to entreat the Council to put an end to this deception of the public, by
depositing the real flints in the British Museum, as stipulated by the
engagement entered into so far back as 1858. The casts were laid
before the Council, and Professor Huxley was directed to inform me
that the relics had been deposited in the Christy Museum. I lost no
time in going to inspect them, in order to gain a more perfect
knowledge of these famous flints; and having obtained permission to
have a photograph of them taken, I requested Messrs. Mansell & Co.
(who had before produced such perfect photographs of the antiquities
in the British Museum) to do this for me. Three negatives were
taken, one as near as could be to the natural size of the flints, the others
of a size suited to the page ot the journal of this Society, a photograph
from which forms the frontispiece of this paper. A scale of inches
Avas photographed with the flints, in order that they might be accurately
measured ; and with the aid of a lens their most minute features
and fractures can be examined. The flints now speak for them-
selves An impression of the photograph* shows that fully
one-half of the flints are indefinable pieces of broken flint, no larger
than the tip of a nWs finger; they are neither flakes, nor cores, nor
scrapers ; they are without any regularity of form, and show no evi-
dence of design, and are unlike any implements known to have been
made by man. To call these bits of rubble flint implements, ^dis-
tinguishable as they are from the gravel which we tread on in a foot-
path, seems to be an abandonment of common sense; and without anv
confirmatory evidence to rely on, the judgment revolts from the in-
ference that they are manufactured tools.f
Some of the flint flakes found in the cavern were extremely
small, so small that no one unless strongly prejudiced could
have imagined them to be artificial implements ; yet Professor
JSillson giavely suggests that they might, liave been made for
children, to give them an early taste for the use of arms.
Mr. hitley pioceeds to mention the following interesting'
facts to show that mere change of temperature will split flints,
and other silicious minerals, into flakes similar to those so-called
flint implements found in the Brixham Cavern
The black slag from the tin and iron smelting-works of Cornwall
is a coarse kind of obsidian; rejected from the works at a high tem-
perature, it breaks, with a decided conchoidal fracture, in the act of
cooling, into fragments, from which flakes and spear-points may be
selected in every respect resembling the so-called flint implements of
* Affixed to this treatise, of which a full size copy may be inspected at the
rooms of the Victoria Institute, or obtained from Messrs. Mansell & Co , Oxford
Street.
t We have ourselves recently inspected the flint ddbris at the Christy Museum,
and were as much astonished as Mr. Whitley thar, anyone could believe' that they
were fashioned bv human hands.
REVIEWS. 349
the caverns; and the perfection of the fracture and form of the flake is
proportionate to the silicious purity of the slag.
It is mdst convincing to observe the whole process of the forma-
tion of such flakes at Seend, near Devizes. Here the iron is smelted
cut of the native rock in blast-furnaces by intense heat, and the
molten slag is poured into iron caldrons, and tipped from the ^ tram-
waggon to the refuse-heaps; the external surface of the mass is first
cooled by contact with the caldron, and converted^ into a kind of
artificial obsidian ; and, during the further act of cooling, most delicate
semi-transparent films are formed on the surface of the slag, and fall
from its sides or come down in a shower by the slightest touch of a
Avalking-stick; and from these most beautifully tinted and delicate
flakes of knife-like forms and sharp cutting edges may be picked
out.
Flint flakes are abundant in the desert of the Tih, and are
also embedded in the breccias on the shores of the Dead oea.
They also abound on the surface of the desert between Joidan
and the Euphrates, which has been named the "Desert ot
Flints." In reference to these facts Mr. AV liitley observes .
Tradition, history, and the necessities of the case all agree in
their testimony that the rich alluvial valleys of the Euphrates and the
Nile were the cradle in which the human family was nursed in its
infancy ; but on their fertile soils no relics of pala?olithic man hav e
been found. According to modern theories of his origin, he came to
the very verge of fertility, and beheld a Paradise before him rep eto
Avith all the necessaries and luxuries of savage life, and then turne
back into the desert to manufacture flint implements, where t ei e was
no soil to cultivate, and no animal food to sustain life. at t lese
sterile deserts could have supported a population sufficient y a5&e ?
have made the innumerable so-called implements is as a se in ac as
it is wild in theory.
When Mr. Whitley explored the cavern in 1874, he pub-
lished a geological account of it and its surroun mgs, accom
panied with a map:*?
The cavern itself has been naturally formed, along the lines of
the jointed structure of the limestone rock; tus is no on y o vio is
from an inspection of its interior, but it is found by the compass that
the direction of the chambers within the cave correspon . .
course of the joints in the adjoining limestone quarry. These joints
run nearly N. Li S. and E. and W., by the compass the variation being
21? west. These natural divisional planes have been eroded and en-
larged by water to a width of from 4 to 8 feet and in this manner the
chambers o? the eave have been formed, and there is no evidence and
no pretence that man has in any manner excavated or modified any
portion of it so as to render it fit for his habitation.
The deposits in the cave were as follows.
* The Brixham Cavern, ancl its Testimony to the Antiquity of Man. Examined
by N. Whitley, C.E., Honorary Secretary of the Eoyal Institution of Corn-wall.
London : Robert Hardwieke, 192 Piccadilly.
350 REVIEWS.
1st. At the top, a layer of stalagmite, varying in thickness from
one to fifteen inches, which sometimes contained bones, as a rein-
deer's horn, and an entire humerus of the cave bear.
2nd. Next below, loam or bone-earth, of an ochreous-red colour,
from one foot to fifteen feet in thickness.
3rd. At the bottom of all, gravel with many rounded pebbles in it,
probed in many places to the depth of twenty feet, without its
being pierced through, and as it was barren of fossils, left for
the most part unremoved.
The more important bones o? mammalia obtained from the bone-
earth consisted of the mammoth, the woolly rhinoceros, the cave bear,
the cave hyaena, the cave lion, the reindeer, a species of horse, ox, and
several rodents.
Sparingly scattered over the table-land in the neighbourhood
of the cavern is a trail of Drift gravel, composed of quartz, trap,
and haematite iron ore. This renders it highly probable that
the flakes and gravel of the cavern have been derived from
the trail of Drift, especially when we consider that the flakes
are mixed with the same kind of gravel both outside and inside
the cavern.
With regard to two of the so-called implements mentioned
by Mr. Evans, the "rouncl-pointed lanceolate implement,"
and " the remarkably symmetrical scraper," Mr. Whitley
states, as to the first, that it is formed of two pieces of flint dis-
covered apart, and fitting so completely as to show that they
are parts of the same stone. With regard to the other, he
observes: " It has one blot on its evidence as a witness in this
case?it was never found in the cavern ! "
A plaster cast of a flint knife, which Mr. Whitley purchased
in the cavern in 18/4, was said to have been moulded from one
found in the cavern. It is now acknowledged that the flint
from which the cast was taken was not found in the Brixham
Cavern.
The various bones of all kinds found in the cavern were
distributed in different beds. Remains of extinct and recent
animals were mingled in great confusion. The whole group
appeared to have belonged to one period. The remains of the
mammoth, the bear, and the liorse were found both in the
lower gravel bed and on the modern stalagmite.
Mr. Whitley gives the following summary of his argu-
ments :?
I have now shown that the so-called " thirty-six rude flint imple-
ments, of indisputable human workmanship," are, for the greatest part,
small undefinable pieces of rubble flint, mixed with a few imperfect
subsoil flakes.
That the marks of use, on secondary chipping, so strongly asserted
to be found on the edges of the flints, and so clearly shown on the
REVIEWS. 351
woodcut, fig. 410, in Ancient Stone Implements, are not to be found on
the flint itself. . '
That the flint described in Ancient Stone Implements as a remark-
ably symmetrical scraper, and said to be found ^ in the cavern, was not
found there, but in the soil without and above it.
That the cast of a very perfect flint knife exhibited among other
relics in the cavern, and sold to visitors as a cast of a cavern specimen,
is a deception. .
That the portion of a cylindrical pin or rod of ivory, said to be
found in the cave, was not found by the committee of exploration, is
not now with the flints in the museum, and that there i3 no evidence
to show that it is a cavern specimen.
That the " charcoal bed" contains no charcoal. That slate has
been mistaken for flint, and flint for bone; and that the description
given of the "whole hind-leg of a cave bear," the most famous
specimen of the cavern, has been found to be so loaded wUh erroneous
facts and false conclusions, that its evidence has been withdrawn an
abandoned. . .
The carefully prepared report of the Royal Society does, in eec,
correct many of the mistakes which had been made; and we aie in-
debted to Mr. Pengelly for further corrections and admissions, by t ie
publication of his original report, drawn up in 1862 for the Cavern
Committee, with some recent additions. But these statements, buried
in the Transactions of learned societies, are not accessible to the great
mass of people, who receive their information from popular lectui es and
cheap publications; and thus Brixham Cavern is still referred to as
furnishing the best evidence of the high antiquity of man.
In spite of the strong evidence which has been adduced
against the extreme antiquity of- man, we find it still lias its
advocates, though they speak in a less confident tone t an
formerly. We would ask Sir John Lubbock to tell us how l
happens that the work on The Antiquity of Man, w ie 1 ie
proposed to publish last year in the " Internationa cien i c
Series," has been withdrawn ? We presume tha e consi eis
discretion the better part of valour.
It must be understood that Mr. "W hitley doe^ no 1SP\1 ?
the authenticity of the neolithic or latei rvision o m
implements, but that of the earlier or palaeolithic age.
Sir Charles Lyell, in his Antiquity of Man, advanced a
speculative opinion, which he held in common wi ie c assica
writers of Greece and Rome, that men < crept forth from the
newly formed earth a dumb and filthy herd; they fought for
acorns and lurking places with their nails an ss, tTc. i i
reference to this preposterous notion, Mr. Whitley has, m a
former treatise,* the following eloquent passage ?
The elephant was created a noble brute with magnificent curved
tusks for ornament and defence, long s?ft s ao?y air o proec mil
from the cold, and with an instinct so perfect, that it ministered to all
* Flint Implements from Drift not authentic. Longmans & Co., London, 18G5.
352 REVIEWS.
his wants and enjoyments, and almost bordered on reason, but to him
far better than reason?" What can choose can err." He walked the
earth the monarch of all he surveyed; and with his cool aristocratic
eye, must have looked down with ineffable contempt on the " dumb
and filthy herd" of men by whom he was surrounded.
But can it be believed that when every beast .was created
peifeet in its kind, man alone was left to grope his way through
successive ages of darkness? Until much stronger evidence
can be brought forwaid than has yet appeared, we shall continue
to hold the cherished belief that man was created only a little
lower than the angels, and that palaeolithic man is nothing more
than an ingenious myth.
