Lunacy In England
==================

295
Art. X.?
We have just received the Thirty-first Report of the Commis-
sioners in Lunacy. Every year we see an increase in the number
of lunatics on the official books of the Commissioners. On the
1st of January this year there were 66,636 persons of unsound
mind in England and Wales, being an increase of 1,720 upon
that of the previous year; this number is exclusive of 252
Chancery patients residing with committees. The following is
the summary of the classification and distribution of persons of
unsound mind :?
Where maintained
Private
M. F. T
Pauper
Total
31. F.
M.
In county and borough asylums
In registered hospitals
In licensed houses
In naval and military hospl
tals and Koyal India Asylum
In State Criminal Asylum
Private single patients .
In workhouses .
Out-door paupers
Total
196
1,370
1,807
343
196
175
242
1,267
1,650
15
53
283
438
2,637
3,457
358
249
458
16,066
50
471
6,836
2,461
19,019
44
794
9,202
3,851
35,085
94
1,265
16,038
6,312
16,262
1,420
2,278
343
390
175
6,836
2,461
19,261
1,311
2,444
15
104
283
9,202
3,851
35,523
2,731
4,722
358
494
458
16,038
6,312
3,510
7,597
32,961
59,039 30,165
36,471
66,636
The average increase of the last ten years has been 1,755.
Of the stated number of lunatics 7,597 are private patients and
59,039 paupers. By this we see that the number of the former
class of patients has'increased by 88, and of the latter by 1,632.
As compared with the previous year, the Report contains some
valuable statistical tables, and we wish to draw especial atten-
tion to Tables 14 and 15 ; these refer especially to the various
causes of insanity, as obtained by the Commissioners from
certain data obtained from the superintendents of the various
asylums. On this important subject we read as follows :?
We have long been desirous, concurrently with the publication of
details as to the number, classification, and distribution of the insane
of setting forth some statistics as to the causes of insanity. Consider-
296 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
able difficulties, however, have always stood in our way, The only
sources of information in our possession were the statements of " sup-
posed causes" annexed to the Statutory Orders of reception, signed
either by the friends of private patients, or by the relieving officer in
the case of paupers. These, as our experience shows, are too conjec-
tural to be depended upon for statistical purposes. On consideration
there appeared little hope of procuring trustworthy returns as to the
prevalent causes of insanity without the co-operation of the medical
superintendents of the County and Borough Asylums, many of whom,
in their annual reports to their committees of visitors, had already
been accustomed to give a table of causes of insanity verified by their
own inquiries, though differing in form and detail in each institution.
Hence, though naturally reluctant to add to the labour of these
gentlemen, we determined, early last year, to ask, not only the medical
superintendents of asylums, but also the medical officers of all other
institutions (except workhouses) receiving insane patients, to keep (for
one year only, and as an experiment) a special register on a certain
prescribed uniform plan, to be forwarded to our office at the end of the
year for examination and tabulation. The help thus requested was,
with one exception, at once promised, and in the solitary instance
where it was at first refused, it was subsequently given, so that the returns
ultimately became so far complete as to include particulars relative to
all the admissions of 1876 into County and Borough and State Asylums,
Registered Hospitals, and Licensed Houses in England and Wales. We
desire here to offer our best thanks to all those who have thus so wil-
lingly and ably assisted us. The keeping of our register demanded, in
every case, patient inquiry and observation, and in the larger asylums
must doubtless have involved the expenditure of considerable time and
trouble.
Of the chief causes enumerated may be mentioned intem-
perance, with a large percentage both as an exciting as well as
a predisposing cause of insanity. Of 3,141 patients admitted
into private asylums during the past year, 453 are stated to
have become insane from intemperance; the second in rotation
being mental anxiety and worry, the number here being 311.
Of the various causes for insanity occurring in county hospitals
and borough asylums, out of 11,011 patients 1,661 are stated
to have been driven mad from drink. It is appalling to see
the great ravages made by intemperance on our fellow creatures,
and yet we have no power to restrain the victims from con-
tinuing their excesses. The tables referred to are a most
valuable addition to the study of psychological research, and
are most carefully drawn up and arranged for easy reference.
There is one very valuable table to which we wish to draw
especial attention, and the first of this kind we have as yet
seen. We refer to that in which the professions and occupations
are given as bearing directly on the various assigned causes of
insanity. After carefully considering the various causes of
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 297
insanity, the Report gives the occupations and professions and
orders of those admitted in the asylums during the past year.
The Commissioners draw attention again to the defective
watching of epileptic cases during the night in several asylums,
and particularly in county and borough asylums. The Report
contains accounts of various suicides which have occurred in
asylums during the past year, and some instances appear to us
to have been caused by neglect. The death by violence of a
patient in the Durham County Asylum having given rise to
much correspondence by the Commissioners, we append par-
ticulars of the case.
The death of a patient named T. D. in this asylum, on the 4th of
January, gave rise to much correspondence between ourselves, the
Secretary of State, and the Visitors of the asylum, and led eventually
to a special inquiry by two members of the Board.
The facts of the case, as stated at the inquest, which was im-
mediately held, were shortly these:
The patient, who was suffering from general paralysis, was in a
restless and unsettled state of mind, and was therefore placed in No. 4,
the refractory ward. On the evening of the 2nd of January it was
alleged that he attempted to pull another patient, M. M., from his chair,
but that the patient seized him by the legs, threw him violently on the
floor, and then jumped upon him. The attendant in charge, named
Gunner, who was at the other end of the room, immediately ran across,
but was not in time to stop the assault. Shortly afterwards T. D. mo-
lested another patient, had another fall, and Avas kicked by the person with
whom he interfered. The next morning the attention of the assistant
medical officer was called to T. D. on account of a cut at the back of
his head having been noticed ; but this was not of a severe character,
nor Avere any serious consequences apprehended until the evening of
the same day, when the patient appeared to be very unwell, and after
careful examination it was discovered that there were extensive frac-
tures of the ribs and other injuries, from which he died on the morning
of the 4th. The jury found that death was caused by M. M. jumping
upon the deceased's chest, and they did not ascribe any blame to any
of the officers or attendants. Upon the evidence so given it appeared
to us that there was no ground for further proceedings. At the same
time we considered that the attendant Gunner was much to be cen-
sured for not having immediately reported the assault. In consequence,
however, of communications addressed to the Home Office by the
guardians of the union to which T. D. belonged, the Secretary of
State requested us to make a special inquiry into the matter.
Accordingly, two members of our Board held the inquiry at the
Asylum on the 24th February, in the course of which a patient, J. W.,
gave evidence that, subsequently to the time of the alleged assault by
M. M., he had witnessed an assault by two of the attendants (of whom
Gunner was one) and a patient on T. D., the alleged cause of which
he stated to be the unruly conduct and bad language of T. D. towards
the attendants and other patients. Our colleagues were of opinion that
PAET II. VOL. III. NEW SERIES. U
298 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
the fatal injuries had been received at this time, and not at the time
spoken to by Gunner. They considered, however, that the mental
condition of J. W. was such that, though before them he was able to
give his evidence satisfactorily, he would probably be incapacitated by
excitement from repeating that testimony in the witness box. They
could not, therefore, recommend that proceedings should be taken
against Gunner and the other attendants (Gunner resigned his situation
on the day after the inquest), but in communicating their report to the
Visitors of the asylum, they urged that a careful watch should be kept
on the other attendant, who remained in their employment. This has
been done, and reports have been subsequently furnished to us, in which
the Visitors state their thorough confidence in him.
We see that many of the county asylums have been enlarged,
and that plans have been submitted to the Commissioners for
further alterations in structure. These have taken place in the
Cambridge, Essex Glamorgan, Kent, Northampton, Somerset,
Surrey, Warwick, Wiltshire, and York Asylums. The cost of
patients per head, including clothing, care, and medicine,
averaged 9a. lOJd, and in borough asylums Us. lid., making
an average together of lOg. Igd. The cost of patents in thesi
asylums is greater than last year, and this is chiefly in conse-
quence of the high price of provisions. The patients in the
registeied hospitals on the 1st of January amounted to 2 731
and the admissions during the year were 450 males and 488
females; the discharges were 819, of whom 322 were discharged
as recovered. The deaths were 184. The recoveries that hive
taken place in the hospitals have been at the rate of 40-7 ner
cent, as compared with the admissions of the year The mor
tality upon the average number daily resident during the year
in the 16 hospitals is 6-6 per cent.
In the provincial and metropolitan asylums, amounting in
all to 100 in number, there were 2,278 males and 2,444 females
on the 1st of January 1877.
There were 16,038 persons of unsound mind detained in work-
houses on the 1st of January. During the year the Commissioners
have visited 309 of these workhouses. We contend that this is
not a proper place for a person of unsound mind to he placed,
and sufficient accommodation should be furnished in our asylums
for these inmates. W e append a case of suicide occurring at
one of these workhouses:? ?
A suicide at Market Ilarborough Workhouse, in August last,
further demonstrates the danger of dealing with recent cases by re-
moval to a workhouse. A relieving officer was, it seems, told that a
young man m his district was "not quite right"; he called in the
medical officer of the Union to see him ; that gentleman was unwilling
to certify for the man s removal to an asylum, but the person with
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 299
whom the man lodged would not allow him to remain in her house any
longer, therefore the man was brought to the workhouse under an
order, it seems, of the guardians. According to the evidence given
at the coroner's inquest by the woman with whom the young man
lodged, he had wished to get out of the window, and he had threatened
to drown himself. The master of the workhouse denied any knowledge
that the man had shown any disposition to destroy himself. At 3 p.jik
next day, the lunatic cut his throat in the workhouse, with a razor
abstracted by him from a cupboard in a room the door of which was
not kept locked. We may add that this occurred in a workhouse, the
master of which, subsequently writing on this case to the Commis-
sioners, took considerable credit to himself for having taken extra pre-
caution on account of a previous report by one of the members of this
Board, which had attracted his notice.
The Report contains an account of prosecution of various
attendants for ill-treatment and neglect of patients. A fine of
?20 and imprisonment in some of these cases has been inflicted.
One case is cited in which a prosecution by the Visitors was
made in consequence of a patient receiving a blow from an
attendant and causing a fracture of one of his ribs in conse-
quence. He was fined ?15, but, in default, he was sentenced to
two months' imprisonment.
The Commissioners draw attention to improvements which
have taken place in some of the private licensed houses, and to
the transfer of licences.
On the 1st of January there were 458 persons of unsound mind
taken care of as single patients. We are much opposed to
patients remaining under certificate in private houses, if it is
possible to treat the cases in asylums. We give the following
case of the death of a lady,' who, though decidedly suicidal, was
removed from an asylum and placed as a single patient in a
medical man's house. Some people have a certain prejudice to
asylums; but it is far more preferable to place lunatics in well*-
managed institutions than to allow them to be detained under
the supervision ot two attendants in a private house. It is an
obvious fact that such a case is unsuitable to be treated as a
private patient.
A lady, formerly a patient in Brooke House, was transferred on the
13th of December 1875, at the request of her brother, as a single
patient to the care of Dr. Dawson, of Brighton, and two days after-
wards she destroyed herself by throwing herself out of her bedroom
window on the second floor, fracturing her thigh and skull. Previous
to sanctioning the transfer of this lady, we received, in reply to our usual
letter, a statement from Mr. Adams, of Brooke House, dated 27th No-
vember, that she was suffering from melancholia, was in good bodily
health, and a proper person to be transferred to single charge. Upon
u 2
300 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
subsequent inquiry, however, it transpired that the patient, who on ad-
mission laboured under suicidal melancholia, had put her head through
a pane of glass a few days before she was removed to Brighton, and tried
to get possession of a piece of the glass; and the day after she went
into a cutler's shop with her nurse and secreted a knife, with which, on
her return, she tried to cut her throat. We considered that these facts
should have been at once communicated to us, when no doubt we
should have declined to sanction the removal of this lady to single
care, and we expressed to Mr. Adams our great surprise that he should
have omitted doing this. In reply, he stated that he detailed fully those
occurrences to the friends of the patient, and explained to them the
risk there would be m removing her, and also to Dr. Dawson he com-
municated his opinion that she ought to have two nurses, should be
watched at night should not be allowed the use of sharp knives or
scissors, and should be kept under special supervision. Two nurses
were indeed engaged specia ly to attend upon the patient, but only one
was m the room when she threw herself out of the window, which she
was powerless to prevent That the most ordinary precaution of
placing stops on the window, so as to prevent the sashes from being
opened more than a few inches, showed great want of care on the part
of Dr. Dawson in dealing with a patient so disposed to destroy herself.
The Report contains a complete list of all public and.private
asylums and the full entries made by the Commissioners in the
books of the various county asylums and large hospitals Our
space will not permit us to discuss these at length; but, from a
careful perusal of the Commissioners' entries, we are of opinion
that the care of the insane is considered in everyway in the
public asylums of England. The Commissioners' Report, taken
as a whole, is a faithful account of the condition of lunacy in
England and W ales, and is the result of the combined efforts of
gentlemen who devote their energy and skill to protect this
unhappy class of human beings. The contents of the Report is
a wonderful contrast to the extraordinary fallacies and untruths
stated by many witnesses before the Lunacy Committee, a
consideration of which we propose in our next issue to discuss
in detail.
