The Care and Cure of the Insane
================================

331
REVIEWS.

By J. Mortimer Granville,
M.D., F.S.S. London: Hardvvicke & Bogue, Piccadilly.
The volumes before us are the result of a commission
appointed by the Lancet to examine and report on the con-
dition of asylums. As far as the appointment of this commission
by the Lancet is concerned, we feel that we are only expressing
the opinion of asylum proprietors and superintendents by
stating that it was quite uncalled for. We have our Board of
Commissioners, who sufficiently inspect our asylums and publish
their reports thereon, and we are decidedly opposed to personal
interference, even by a commission appointed by the Lancet.
Notwithstanding this, we nevertheless welcome a most interest-
ing and valuable work by Dr Mortimer Granville, on the Care
and Cure of the Insane, founded as the result of this com-
mission.
The presumed institution of the inquiry appears to be as
follows:?
1st. To ascertain the general character and efficiency of the
provisions made for the insane in asylums, and the condition of
their daily life.
2nd. To discover the measures, and, as far as may be possible,
to formulate the system of treatment adopted for the cure of
remediable or recent cases, and the relief of incurable or
chronic cases.
3rd. To collect and collate statistics of cases occurring
"within the last ten years at the asylums visited, with a view to
estimate the results.
The first volume contains a list of the asylums visited, com-
prising Brookwood, Hanwell, Colney Hatch, W andsworth, City
of London, Caterham, Leavesden, Bethlehem, and St. Luke s.
Dr Granville judiciously divides his report on each asylum
as follows:?
1st. House and arrangements.
2nd. Treatment.
3rd. Eesults.
4th. Digest of official papers, reports, and general retrospect.
It is not our intention to go fully into the description of
each of these individual asylums, for it must be carefully
perused to be properly understood. The account is a most
complete one and carefully drawn up.
The new County Asylum at Brookwood is very highly
spoken of. We read " The visitor to Brookwood will be strongly
impressed by its simple and homely characteristics. There is
v 2
332 REVIEWS.
nothing prison-like or poor-law stricken in the exterior. No
high walls, massive casements, gloomy iron bars, or other tokens
of restraint, inspire repugnance."
Again, " The surrounding objects divert, as far as possible,
the mind of the patient from that self-consciousness which con-
stitutes one of the most formidable obstacles to recovery in
curable cases, and is the severest sorrow of the confirmed lunatic's
dreary existence." Some of the older asylums referred to, we are
told, resemble gaols. We thus read of Hanwell: " The Middlesex
County Asylum, at Hanwell, offers a marked contrast to the
edifice described in our last report in referring to Brookwood.
It is a vast straggling building, in which the characteristics of
a prison, a self-advertising charitable institution, and some am-
bitious piece of pooi-law architecture, struggle for prominence."
Of course, asylums, like everything else, will improve as
civilisation advances, and it is not to be supposed that an edifice
that has existed for many years can compete in construction
with one but lately erected. Stress is, however, laid upon one
point connected with Hanwell?the uniform of the attendants.
We agree with the opinion of the author that this should be
changed simply for appearance sake. At present it resembles
that of a warder of a gaoj. We read, "The Committee of
Visitors are doing much to improve the conditions of life at
Hanwell. It seems strange that so startling an error as the
persistent use of this warder-like uniform has not long ago been
remedied. e trust the Justices will take the matter into their
serious consideration. It is one of grave moment regarded from
a medical and cuiative, and not less from an economic, point of
view. A suitable uniform might surely be devised which would
be sufficiently distinctive and creditable, without reproducing
the sombie coloui and buttoned-up appearance of the conven-
tional prison warder."
The treatment afforded to the patients mentioned in con-
nection with the large asylums on the whole may be pronounced
as admirable. They are all under the superintendence of men
who have devoted a lifetime to the study and treatment of the
insane; and when we mention such names as Dr Edgar Shep-
pard, Dr Rayner, Dr Claye Shaw, Dr Rhys Williams, and
Dr Brushfield, we can rest satisfied that the management of
our public hospitals is in the hands of those who will use a
judicious and skilful treatment over the unhappy inmates en-
trusted to their care.
The second volume contains some valuable facts and data.
The asylums especially mentioned are the metropolitan licensed
houses receiving paupers. Amongst these we may mention
Camberwell House, Bethnal House, Peckham House, Hoxton
House, and Grove House, Bow. The same descriptive arrange-
REVIEWS. 333
ments are followed out as in that of the larger hospitals in the
first volume. These houses receiving paupers are really private
establishments undertaking work by contract for the State.
They contain on an average from 400 to 500 inmates, and are
subject to the same visitation as ordinary private houses. The
charges are very moderate in these institutions, and the patients
receive every care and treatment. From personal knowledge
we can speak very highly of Camberwell House and Peckliam
House, having frequently visited them. The latter asylum is
under the able management of Dr Stocker and Mr. Brown, and
the arrangements in both are excellent. Peckham House we
have often visited ; the patients are ably treated, and the comfort
of the inmates is considered in every respect. Several of the
lecturers belonging to our London hospitals are allowed to bring
their classes to these institutions to study mental disorder. We
see no mention is made of this by Dr Orranville, though he
specially refers to it when describing the larger hospitals^ as
follows: " Hospitals of all descriptions are improved by being
used as schools of medicine; and, under proper restrictions
for example, the obvious one of prohibiting students from
entering the wards, or showing themselves to the patients,
except when accompanied by one of the medical superintendents
??-the attendance of pupils at any asylum for lunatics is certain
to elevate and improve it. The obligations of clinical research,
and the emulation of success it implies, must go far to redeem
asylums from the character of mere retreats and strongholds for
the subjects of madness to drag out hopeless and unhelped lives,
and finally die in." We heartily coincide with these excellent
remarks, and if this were generally the practice, and students
availed themselves of the opportunity, mental disorder would be
far better understood at the present day than it is by the
majority of practitioners. .
Dr Granville having fully described these institutions, passes
on to consider the medical treatment of insanity generally,
classification, and all pertaining to the care and cure of the
insane. We cannot speak too highly of these two most excellent
volumes, which are replete with valuable statistical and other
information bearing on the subject at issue. _V\e canno , lc|w-
ever, endorse the opinion as expressed by Dr Crianville, t latthe
whole system of asylum treatment should be revised. It is
rather a sweeping assertion, and, from a careful peiusal of his
book, we must beg to differ from him. Nevertheless we are of
opinion that the two volumes will form a most valuable addition
to psychological medicine, and we heartily recommend it to our
readers. It has been published, moreover, at a most opportune
time, when the subject of lunacy legislation has caused so much
discussion.
