Effects of Alcohol on the Offspring
====================================

209
Aet. II.?
BY NATHAN ALLEN, M.D.
Lowell, Massachusetts, Commissioner in Lunacy to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
It is positively certain that by the fixed laws of hereditary
descent the iniquities of the parents are visited upon the
children unto the second, third, and fourth generations. The
term " iniquity," as here used, has a broad signification, in-
cluding the penalties or effects of violated laws, whether those
laws be expressed in the revealed command of Grod, or stamped
by the same almighty power upon the human constitution.
It is proposed in the present article to notice not only one
of the ways in which the law of Grod is violated, but to point
out some of the consequences resulting from this violation. It
is assumed that man was created a free moral agent, and placed
under certain laws, physical and mental, which, in order to
secure the highest objects of his existence, must be observed.
As one agent having a powerful influence upon these laws, what
relations does alcohol sustain to the human system, and what
are some of its effects ?
First, then, what is alcohol ? By this term it is intended
to include the property in all drinks that intoxicate, whether
found in brandy, gin, wine, whisky, or even in beer or cider;
for it is the intoxicating property that gives these drinks their
significance and makes them attractive.
Alcohol is an artificial product, obtained by fermentation,
and is never found in a simple state. It is a poison, both in its
nature and effects; is pronounced as such by the highest
authorities, and proved to be such by the tests of chemistry, as
well as physiology. Alcohol, unadulterated, is a pure poison,
and though taken into the system in a diluted state without at
first, apparently, any injurious effects, it is still a poison, and
does the work of a poisonous agent.
All standard books on poisons?of which Christison's is,
perhaps, the highest authority?represent alcohol as a poison.
Says Christison : " It constitutes a powerful narcotic poison."
Carpenter, author of the best work on physiology extant, says
that alcohol " is a dangerous poison." All standard works upon
chemistry classify it among poisons. The best writers on
materia medica describe alcohol as a poison. Pereira, perhaps
the most distinguished among these writers, calls it both " an
irritant and fatal poison." The French, and the British, and
210 EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL ON THE OFFSPRING.
the American Pharmacopoeias?high authorities everywhere in
such matters?describe alcohol as a " powerful irritant poison,
rapidly causing intoxication and, in large quantities, death."
Medical dictionaries say the same thing; in fact, all standard
writers on the subject agree in this description. But, to be
more direct and practical, what are the effects of alcohol upon
the human system ? Is it a genuine poison by this test ?
This law of hereditary descent is one of the most important
laws imposed upon our race, or that has been developed in its
history, though, unfortunately, it is not generally understood.
The most profound physiologists in all ages have maintained
that in some sense there was such a connection between the
parent and child, as to show a likeness or resemblance, and the
best judgment or good sense of the common mind has generally
admitted the same fact. Says Dr. James Copland, one of the
highest authorities in all physiological or medical matters in
Great Britain : " It is generally observed that the constitution,
the temperament and diathesis of the offspring closely resemble
the parent; and that whatever disposition to disorder, whether
of structure or function, the latter may have possessed, it is
liable to evince itself in the former. The writings of Owen,
Huxley, and Darwin?perhaps the three most distinguished
men in science at the present day?corroborate fully these
statements.
Let us now make an application of this law of hereditary
descent in cases of alcoholic poison ; and first, what is the tes-
timony of competent witnesses upon the subject ? Says Aris-
totle : " Drunken women bring forth children like unto them-
selves "; and Plutarch writes that " one drunkard begets
another."
Dr. Caldwell, once the most distinguished writer on phy-
siological subjects in this country, says: "By habits of in-
temperance parents not only degrade and ruin themselves, but
transmit the elements of like degradation and ruin to their
posterity." In a " Report to the Massachusetts Legislature, on
Idiocy," Dr. S. Gr. Howe says: " The habits of the parents of
three hundred of the idiots were learned, and one hundred and
forty-five, or nearly one-half, were reported as known to be
habitual drunkards." Dr. Browne, a well-known English
writer on insanity, says : " The drunkard not only enfeebles and
weakens his own nervous system, but entails mental disease
upon his family."
The author of an elaborate article in the eighth volume of
the Psychological Journal of Medicine, in describing a class
of persons fond of intoxicating drinks, says : " They are the
offspring of persons who have indulged in stimulants, or who
have weakened the cerebral organisation b}7, vicious habits."
effects of alcohol on the OFFSFPJNG. 211
Mr. Darwin says: "It is remarkable that all the diseases
arising from drinking spirituous or fermented liquors are liable
to become hereditary, even to the third generation, increasing,
if the cause be continued, till the family becomes extinct."
As the laws of inheritance are yet imperfectly understood, it
is not easy to describe exactly all the minute points, how or
wherein the effects of vicious habits or practices are transmitted.
It is a fact, we believe, that intemperance in parents impairs
the quality or texture of the brain of offspring, and thereby
depreciates the general tone of charactei and cast of mind. It
is thought that alcohol stimulates the selfish propensities more
than the moral sentiments and the intellect, and thus, by ren-
dering parents more gross and animal, it depreciates their
offspring. No two things can so injure or drag down the
character of a young person as a poor quality or texture of brain,
and a relative preponderance of animal development over the
intellectual and moral.
It is maintained by high authority that this alcoholic poison
is transmitted in the blood?that in this way it permeates the
whole system, causing not only a want of vitality and strength
generally, but rendering particular organs more especially liable
to certain diseases.
Again, it is found sometimes that this predisposition to
drink^does not show itself till the person arrives at a certain
period in life, and then that the craving for drink is almost
irresistible. In fact, all constitutional or hereditary predis-
positions are always far more difficult to arrest and change than
acquired habits. Thus it has been found very hard, and in
some cases almost impossible, to reform inebriates who have
inherited such predisposition.
First, then, the use of alcohol irritates and inflames the
mucous membrane of the stomach to such an extent that it
gradually becomes thickened and corrugated?sometimes
scirrhous and cancerated, or softened and disorganised. It
vitiates the gastric juice, or destroys the glands secreting it,
thereby preventing the healthy digestion of food. Thus, by
changing the structure and proper action of the stomach, not
only the natural appetite is supplanted or rendered morbid,
but the blood itself, the great supporter of life, is impoverished,
and becomes tainted or impregnated with qualities very
unwholesome and injurious. As a consequence of this change
in the blood, both the structure and functions of other organs
in the body become changed or deranged in action. The liver
is enlarged or shrivelled up?is pale, fatty, scirrhous, cancerous,
etc., so that the bile, its natural secretion, is changed, which
prevents the proper assimilation of food, and interferes also
212 EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL ON THE OFFSPRING.
with the healthy action of the bowels. The kidneys, at times,
become affected, resulting in serious derangement or disease of
those organs.
But the brain, the most important part of the body, is more
unfavourably affected by alcohol than any other organ, and
that, too, in a variety of ways. It tends directly to produce an
unnatural stimulus of the brain, as well as an abnormal
state of mind, which, together with impoverished nutrition,
serves to weaken or derange it. As the brain is a complex
organ, composed of a variety of parts, performing distinct
functions, the effects of alcohol are very much diversified. In
persons possessing a predominance of the nervous temperament
it produces an unnatural excitement, a peculiar irritability,
and sometimes moroseness of disposition; but where there is a
deficient intellectual development, the individual is frequently
silly, boisterous, and passionate, without any occasion or good
reason.
There are a few great general facts, established by experi-
ence, observation, and actual statistics, showing the effects of
alcohol upon the human system :?
1. It is well known that this poison is productive of
certain diseases, and that there is always much more sickness
among those accustomed to its use; and neither skilful treat-
ment, nor good nursing, nor hygienic influences relieve such
persons as they do the sick who are not in the habit of using
it.
2. The rate of mortality has been ascertained, both in
Europe and in our own country, to be greater with this class,
so much so that insurance companies will not receive applications
for life insurance from such persons on as favourable terms as
from other parties.
3. It is also established by statistics that about one-
quarter of all the insanity existing is caused, either directly or
indirectly, by alcoholic drinks.
4. More than three-fourths?to say the least?of all the
inmates in criminal, reformatory, and pauper institutions have
had their systems, physical and mental, injured more or less by
this poison, and to this source, more than to any other or all
others combined, may be attributed their relegation to these
places of confinement, dependence, and degradation.
Now, if alcohol, as these facts indicate, has such a powerful
influence over human organisation and destiny, what agency
does it have or perform in respect to the propagation of the
species ? A correct and complete answer to this inquiry is, we
need not say, one of great importance. What, then, is the law
of human increase, and how or in what way does this poison
EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL ON THE OFFSPRING. 213
violate it ? This law of increase is one of the greatest funda-
mental laws or first principles incorporated into the very nature
of man at his creation. When he came from the hands of his
Maker?with a perfect organisation which was pronounced
" very good "?he was commanded to " be fruitful, and multiply,
and replenish the earth." And notwithstanding, by a course of
disobedience and rebellion, he lost the moral image and likeness
of his Creator, as well as that harmony and perfection of physi-
cal organisation with which he was created, that law of increase
still remains, and is based upon the same great physiological
standard.
But this inherent fondness for liquor is not the only evil
transmitted. The whole physical system is more or less in-
volved. The blood itself is tainted. There is not that sound-
ness, vitality, and strength in such an organisation that there
would be but for this poison. Such a constitution will not bear
exposure so well, is more liable to certain diseases, will yield
more readily to inflammation, and, when diseased, is not so
easily relieved or cured by medical treatment. Whatever,
therefore, may be the peculiar feature of this transmission, one
thing is certain?the whole tendency is downward, physically,
mentally, and morally, not only by injuring the constitution
itself, but by increasing the power and influence of the animal
propensities at the expense of the reason, the conscience, and
the will.
It may be said that the sketch here given of the effects of
alcohol applies only to the worst cases of drunkenness, but that
moderate drinking is safe and leads to no such results. But
who can limit or graduate safely the effects of a poison ? A
small dose may injure one person far more than a much larger
quantity another individual. Then, who can tell but that the
least quantity taken may expend all its force in this very direc-
tion of offspring ? Besides, is moderate drinking itself safe ?
Does not all experience prove that such a habit is very liable to
grow worse, and in time become ungovernable ?
Connected with this law of heredity, a very important ques-
tion arises: What is man's free agency and accountability in
the matter? According to the theory of Malthus and some
other writers on population, man is considered rather a passive
agent, exercising but little power or influence, physiologically,
over the disposition, talent, and character of offspring. But
modern science is teaching us every day that there is a most
intimate, direct, and legitimate connection between the parent
and the child.
It behoves every man, then, above all things, to understand
correctly the nature of this connection, and to take into account
214 EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL OX THE OFFSPRING.
fully his own responsibility in the matter; for by his own
nature he is created a free moral agent, and should, in the most
important acts of his life, be guided certainly by the highest
possible intelligence, as well as by the purest motives; since,
by the laws of hereditary descent, he has, in a great measure,
the character and destiny of his offspring, either for " weal or
woe," under his control. If neither his own intelligence nor
conscience will guide him, nor the moral sense of the public aid
him, an enlightened posterity will yet hold him to a strict
account. It could not have been the design of the Almighty
that man should always remain ignorant of the most important
law in the universe, as it respects human progress and welfare.
As the laws of physiology become better understood, the
terrible effects of intemperance upon the human system will be
more clearly and definitely seen as resulting from violated laws,
and that these terrible effects in an intensified form may be
transmitted to offspring, even to the second, third, and fourth
generations.
