Asylum Supervision
===================

189
y
Art. II.?.*
By NATHAN ALLEN, M.D., LL.D.
Lowell, Massachusetts, Commissioner in Lunacy to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
One of the most important questions in respect to public insti-
tutions is the proper supervision of Lunatic Hospitals. Boards
of State Charities are especially interested in this subject. The
members of these boards appointed from the different profes-
sions, and from all classes of business men, have the best means
of knowing what is the present management of these hospitals,
and whether there is need of better supervision. The greater
the knowledge possessed on the subject, and the more thoroughly
the matter is investigated, the stronger will be the conviction,
we believe, that there is need of change or improvement in this
direction.
It is proposed to inquire briefly?First, what is the present
management of such hospitals ; and secondly, what constitutes
a proper supervision of them. As nearly all these institutions
are built by appropriations from State treasuries, there is
great similarity in their appointments and government. There
are a few hospitals or asylums for the insane established by
municipal authorities and private corporations; these are
managed by officers or trustees appointed by very different
bodies from those called State institutions. There is still ano-
ther class of asylums or establishments for the insane, which
are generally small, and in one sense strictly private, as they
are owned and managed by individuals.
It is the large hospitals owned by the State, and for the
management of which the public are for this reason respon-
sible, that come especially under our present inquiry. What,
then, is the management of these institutions? The primary
power is lodged with the Governor and Council. They appoint
five or more trustees to each hospital, who choose a superin-
tendent. The assistants and attendants are generally appointed
by the superintendent, or nominated by him, subject to the
approval of the trustees. All rules and regulations for the
management of the officers and inmates of the institution are
prepared by the superintendent and trustees, though in some
instances they must be approved by the Governor and Council
? Read before the National Conference of Charities at Cleveland, Ohio,
July 2, 1880.
190 ASYLUM SUPERVISION.
Thus the whole responsibility and power of government is placed
directly in the hands of the superintendent and trustees. It
is true there are powers lodged in other bodies, and provisions
made for some oversight of these institutions, but they are so
constituted that they are not often exercised or made avail-
able for purposes of improvement and reform. The law pro-
vides in most States that the Governor and Council should
have a general oversight of public institutions, making regular
or occasional visits. The Legislatures in all the States not only
enact laws for the support of, and management of these
establishments, but appoint committees from time to time
to visit them. But the oversight and visitation of both these
bodies are rather formal and ceremonious. Their visits are
generally made at set times, in a body, with previous notice,
and not unfrequently in a hurried manner. It is impossible
for them to make a thorough examination into all the internal
affairs of an institution, or into all the details concerning the
condition and treatment of its inmates. Unless some charges
of abuse or complaints have been made, these bodies never
make special examinations, nor interfere with the government
and management of hospitals. No great improvements or real
reform can be expected from such oversight. There is another
agency established in several States, intended to exercise some
care and oversight of these institutions, viz. Boards of Chari-
ties. The original design in the establishment of these boards
was a most wise and beneficent one. It was found by large
experience and wise counsel that something was wanting in the
management of institutions; that there was need of far greater
watchfulness and more definite information and statistics,
whereby comparisons could be made, extravagance checked,
abuse prevented, and improvements of various kinds started.
These boards have already done immense good, and with some
modifications their usefulness may become more permanent and
widely extended. But, as the organisation of these boards
confine their duties wholly to visitation and report, with very
limited powers, th^y cannot exercise that supervision over
lunatic hospitals for improvement and reform which is abso-
lutely necessary. The labours and reports of these boards have
brought before the public such information, facts, and statistics,
concerning these hospitals, as to show the great need of some
changes or improvements for which legislation as yet has made
no adequate provision.
What, then, is the kind or character of the supervision
required ? It may be very properly designated a Lunacy
Commission. It should consist of three or more persons,
according to the number of institutions or extent of the field.
ASYLUM SUPERVISION. 391
Its members should be compensated according to services ren-
dered. They should be appointed for a series of years by the
executive of each State, without regard to political party or
personal favouritism. This appointment should be based solely
on their qualifications, or fitness, or interest in such work.
They should hold at the time no connection with any local
institution. Their powers and duties should be co-extensive.
They should have a general supervision, with full power, over
everything concerning not only the management and govern-
ment of the institution, but also the care and treatment of its
inmates.
A commission thus constituted might justly be held respon-
sible to the public and to the higher powers of appointment.
Its recommendation to legislatures, with respect to appropria-
tions and the enactment of laws, would be valuable. Its
reports would serve to enlighten the public in such matters,
creating everywhere greater interest and confidence in such
institutions. The question may be asked why lunatic hos-
pitals require different or more supervision than other institu-
tions ? The following may be given as some of the answers.
The appropriations for this class are greater than for any other,
and the expense upon each individual is larger. The insane
are more dependent and helpless, and require different treat-
ment. It is not the body, mainly to be provided and cared
for, but mental disorder, which involves interests of a far
higher nature, and more important in results. The rights of
the insane in respect to personal liberty, family relations, and
property are taken away under circumstances where there is
danger of injustice and wrong doing; besides, they are brought
together in large numbers, and confined in close quarters;
placed under attendants where there is liability to abuse of
various kinds. The difficulties and responsibilities attending
the proper treatment of the insane are so great that they
require constant watchfulness, and the most careful oversight.
Experience proves this. Cases of improper committal and
detention, of wrong treatment and abuse, are often brought to
public notice, showing the need of constant vigilance, and the
most careful oversight.
The need and importance of such oversight is very clearly
stated by the Eev. Dr. Bellows, of New York. Says Dr. B.,
" Insanity and Insane Asylums require far more inspection,
study, and attention?far more publicity in all that touches
their management?than they now receive in this State or
county. The public is profoundly interested in being reassured
by persons whose testimony is beyond suspicion, that this help-
less and wretched class, the insane, are not neglected, abused
192 ASYLUM SUPERVISION.
and made worse instead of better, by our public institutions.
They need and demand to know that persons of the highest
character and enough of them to guarantee sound judgment,
are incessantly busy, looking into the state, studying the com-
plaints and protecting the rights of those who are incarcerated
in public asylums. It is in the nature of things that abuses
from pressure of call, from induration of sensibility, from force
of routine, from pride of authority, from limited experience,
from the inertia, of custom, should creep into asylums for the
insane. Eternal vigilance from the representatives of the
public anxiety, who have no interest except that of humanity,
can alone keep either prisoners or asylums from degenerating,
or from becoming stereotyped in effete prejudices of manage-
ment." That we may have a better and clearer view of the
subject, let us take different points of observation. There are
four great interests or parties that require such supervision :
1. The institutions themselves. In all large establishments
evils and abuses of some kind will spring up. The fault may
not be directly on the part of the managers, but more with the
sub-officers and attendants. The most effectual way to discover
and correct these evils has been found by authorities outside,
charged with such duties. Correction or reform seldom come
from local officers. Besides, such is the peculiar relation of
lunatic hospitals to the public that prejudices and distrust will
prevail more or less in the community in respect to them unless
provision is made for proper supervision. This distrust is not
only exceedingly annoying to the officers of the hospital, but
causes great injury to the public and the best interests of the
insane. It frequently prevents persons in the first stage of
insanity from being sent to the hospital, where they might be
cured. It impairs the confidence of the insane in the physician
and his treatment.
Again: There is always room for some improvement in every
institution. This is far less likely to come from persons con-
stantly occupying the same point of view, and following day
after day the same routine of duties, than from those looking
from different and distant points of view, who can compare one
institution with another, and make careful observations over a
large field. Hence, the necessity in such management of more
diversified experience, more general knowledge and larger obser-
vation than local officers usually have, whose labours and interest
are almost wholly identified with one single establishment. In
no other institutions or corporations in the country, are indi-
viduals charged with duties and responsibilities of such
magnitude as the officers of lunatic hospitals, and nowhere else
are counsel, skill and wisdom of the highest order, so much
ASYLUM SUPERVISION; 193
needed as here. The lunatic hospitals of Great Britain are
provided with these advantages in a Commission of Lunacy.
Superintendents, trustees and commissions all work har-
moniously together for the best interests of the insane. The
Lunacy Commission has been in operation in England over
thirty years, and that in Scotland over twenty years. It is
admitted on all sides that the most beneficial results have been
brought about by the agency of these commissions in the im-
proved management of hospitals and the better treatment of
the insane.
2. But the class that need such supervision most, are the
inmates of these hospitals, the unfortunate insane, the most
helpless and dependent of all human beings. They are forcibly
removed from home and friends. The law takes away from
them their rights in respect to personal liberty and the use of
their own property; it unsettles them in all business relations
and in the duties they owe to their families ; it destroys the
confidence which the public once reposed in them, and cuts
them off in a great measure from intercourse and communica-
tion with their friends, as well as exposes them to personal
abuse from attendants and others. Where such personal and
fundamental rights are taken away or very much abridged,
should not legislation make better provision for protection,
defence and appeal than generally exist ? No proper provision is
made by the courts that is available to them. They certainly
cannot look to the Governor and Council at a great distance,
nor to a Legislative Committee meeting once in a year or two,
and making occasionally a formal visit to these hospitals. It
should be a provision available and ready at hand, one in which
they have confidence.
It may be said the insane have always the superintendents
and trustees for counsel and protection. This may be true to
some extent, but, then, how frequently are the insane brought
to hospitals by deception, cherishing strong prejudices against
these establishments as prisons, conscious that they are deprived
of their rights, and look upon the hospital officials as their
oppressors. Besides, such is frequently the type or nature of
insanity, that it leads the insane to distrust those immediately
about them, and to look elsewhere for aid and counsel. That
the insane may recei re the full benefit of treatment, whatever
the means may be, whether by medicine or other appliances,
how important it is that they have confidence in these means,
and in those having a constant oversight of them ! In the
treatment of other diseases, this confidence is regarded as indis-
pensable, and great pains are taken to secure it by counsel and
in many other ways. In diseases of the mind, it is still more
important.
194 ASYLUM SUPERVISION.
But tlie distrust cherished by the insane of hospital officials
does not arise wholly from prejudice, or a diseased mind, but,
from this fact, they find by experience and a variety of circum-
stances that everything affecting their interests is virtually
placed in the hands of one body or one man. It is true there
are local trustees, having care and oversight of the hospital and
its officers, but as a general thing they know very little about
insanity or the treatment of individual patients, making short
and formal visits, depending almost wholly upon the superin-
tendent for information. He is moreover appointed by the
trustees, and is their executive officer. The interests, business
and reputation of both parties are so closely identified that they
constitute really one governing body. Such is the interpreta-
tion placed upon it, not only by the insane but by large numbers
outside of the hospitals. Though a wide difference may be
found in different hospitals as to the relations and doings
existing between these two parties, the impression prevails very
generally, that the power, in its controlling influence, is virtually
exercised by the executive officer. It is needless to dwell here
upon the objections to a one man power.
Two years since, an English gentleman, who had been a
Government Inspector over twenty years in Great Britain, and
whose constant business was to visit hospitals and workhouses,
came to the United States to obtain certain information about
our public institutions. After inspecting carefully several
lunatic hospitals, he remarked that he was struck with the
different appearance and conduct of the insane in hospitals here
and that in England; that among the insane he saw here
there was a constant restlessness, a complaining spirit, seeking
protection and counsel of every one passing, as though there
was something wrong or wanting; whereas, in the British
hospitals, there was a quiet contentment, every intelligent
insane person feeling and knowing that their rights were pro-
tected by Government, and wrongs and abuses could not exist
without being exposed and corrected. This was proved to them
by frequent visits of the Commissioners in Lunacy, hearing their
complaints and settling difficulties. Cannot a Republican
Government make some similar provision for the most unfortu-
nate of all its subjects, suffering more or less daily for the want
of it ? There are other points wherein the insane need
this outside supervision, such as personal liberty, mechanical
restraint, seclusion, correspondence, detention, ill-treatment of
any kind, real or imaginary, etc. In case, even, were there no
wrongs or abuses, what a relief would it bring to their mind in
a suspicious and disturbed state to know and be assured that
their individual cases are all looked after, and that no real harm
can befall them ?
ASYLUM SUPERVISION. 195
The English gentleman referred to before, after inquiring
into the management or provisions made for the government of
our hospitals, remarked that it was very different in Great
Britain, that the rights and interests of the insane there were
more carefully guarded, that every insane person knew he had
influence and power at headquarters, and that the Government
was his friend.
In a Government made "by the people and for the people,"
cannot the rights of its feeblest and most needy subjects be
protected ? Can neither democracy nor republicanism do it ?
Most assuredly, it can and will as soon as the means and ways
are understood. No intelligent or thoughtful community will
always rest easy in such a state of things, or be satisfied with
present legislation on this subject.
3. The third party demanding this supervision, is very
numerous, including the friends of the insane and the public at
large. These hospitals sustain a most intimate and important
relation to the community, different from any other institution.
Every member of society, every man and woman, must feel an
interest in them. Who is not liable to be insane or have a
friend thus affected ? Every voter and taxpayer should feel an
interest in them, inasmuch as the money for building them
comes directly from taxes, and was appropriated by legislatures
representing individual voters. Besides, the moneys constantly
used for defraying the expenses of running these hospitals and
paying the salaries of the officers in charge of them, come
mainly from taxpayers, however small these taxes may be.
While superintendents and trustees have the immediate
charge and control of these institutions, they do not own them,
neither were they built or are they run for their emolument.
In one sense they are masters, but in another, from a higher
and broader view, they are servants. While they have their
rights, and their opinions are to be respected, there are parties
inside and outside of hospitals who also have rights therein,
and whose opinions are entitled to consideration. The claims
and interests of the latter parties are vastly greater and more
important than those of the former. In fact, the. real interests
of those in charge of these hospitals are trifling and insignificant
compared with those of the insane and their friends. On the
side of the latter not only far greater numbers are concerned,
but the healths and lives of multitudes are more or less involved
in the issue. Under these circumstances, it would seem that
the insane should have the wisest and best supervision that can
possibly be provided?that the principles of humanity, of justice
and common sense, demand it. Such supervision has been
found in the Lunacy Commissions of Great Britain and Scotland.
196 ASYLUM SUPERVISION.
The most beneficial results have followed the labours and
reports of these Commissions, which may be best described in
the language of one who was superintendent for a long time of
the largest lunatic hospital of New England, and who has visited
those abroad.
This gentleman, Dr. M. Bemis, of Worcester, from his own
large experience and personal knowledge, is abundantly capable
of forming opinions and making comparisons. In answer to the in-
quiry what improvements have been made in the lunatic hospitals
of Great Britain, and what relation does the Lunacy Commission
hold to these institutions, makes this statement: " The improve-
ments are many. They have supplemented and modified this system
to such an extent, that while it bears some resemblance to the
past, the present is studded all over with new features. The
improvements for ventilation, cleanliness, classification, for
freedom, both outside and inside, are most noteworthy. Their
advances, in the direction of labour among the patients, in the
immunity from physical restraint and seclusion, in the granting
of innocent indulgence to trustworthy patients, are far beyond
what is now practised in any American hospital. The Lunacy
Commission has done much, and its continued operation is of
incalculable benefit, not only to the insane, but also to the
officers of the institutions. They have improved the condition
of the insane in many ways, and have rendered a residence in a
lunatic asylum less irksome and hopeless to those who are
obliged to submit to the restraint and treatment in a public
institution. They have removed the hard and forbidding cruel
fixtures for restraint and seclusion. They have well nigh
emancipated the insane from the use of mechanical restraint;
have quite abolished every kind of punishment and task ; have
raised and improved the quality of food and clothing. They
have opened the apartments of the furious and filthy to the sun
and air, and opened the doors, that all may enjoy, in some
degree, the freedom of the several establishments. More than
this, they constantly act as guardians for the insane, and then
strongly support and strengthen those who conduct faithfully
the affairs of the asylums. They have a systematic corre-
spondence with every institution, and by reports of officers of each,
they know, not so much the economies of each, but what is better,
they have an understanding of the commitments to such an
extent that they can easily tell the justice and propriety of any
questionable case. They are made to know of all cases of
restraint and seclusion, and they interest themselves in every
case of hardship, and thus lighten the burdens of the insane,
without in any way increasing the cares of the officers. From
their frequent inspection of the several institutions, and from
ASYLUM SUPERVISION. 197
the mass of facts gathered by their correspondence, they publish
every year a valuable report of their labours, with plans,
suggestions, and histories of cases of hardship, abuse and
suffering." When the great advantages, as here described,
arising from a Lunacy Commission, are considered, it would not
seem possible that the superintendent of any hospital would or
could oppose such a supervision. The insane are not the only
parties benefited, but the hands of the trustees and superin-
tendents are supported ; much of the prejudice existing against
these institutions and their managers would disappear; less
complaints would be heard from the insane and their friends,
and far greater confidence would be placed in these hospitals by
all classes in the community. But what is the attitude in
which superintendents place themselves in respect to such
supervision ? Some years since, as a body, they passed a resolu-
tion affirming that " the appointment of Lunacy Commissioners
with a view to official visits or any supervision of State institu-
tions for the insane, is to be deprecated, as not only wholly un-
necessary, but injurious, and subversive of the present efficient
system of control by trustees appointed by the State executive."
It may be said that this resolution was adopted by a convention
of superintendents years ago, and that the sentiment is not
generally endorsed by them at the present day. It is gratifying
to know that here and there a superintendent is taking a more
charitable, a more liberal and enlightened view of things: but,
at the same time, the adoption of a Lunacy Commission has
been bitterly opposed for years, and that, too, in a variety of
ways, by hospital officials; in fact, the chief opposition comes
from this particular quarter. In confirmation of this statement
we might recite some facts and circumstances which occurred this
very year in New York and Massachusetts.
When it is considered that a Lunacy Commission, properly
conducted, is calculated above all other agencies not only to
inspire public confidence in these hospitals, and improve the
condition and treatment of their inmates, but also to stay up
the hands of superintendents and strengthen their administra-
tion, it is surprising that they should ever oppose it. In fact,
they should be the last to oppose it and the first to welcome it.
But great advances have been made within a few years in
public opinion on this subject. It is being found out that
people have rights, and, when more generally understood, will
maintain them. The world moves?the progress of science is
always forward. Reform is only the work of time.
Again, in these large establishments questions frequently
arise, the settlement of which need just the advice and counsel
which such a commission can give. Differences of opinion
198 ASYLUM SUPERVISION'.
sometimes occur between the friends of a patient and the
superintendent as to treatment, or how long the person must
remain in the hospital, or when he can return safely to his
home; also, differences arise between the overseers of the poor
of cities and towns and the hospital officials as to the removal
of pauper insane persons to almshouses or other places of sap-
port. In such cases the intervention of a third party is very
necessary.
Then the question of a more complete classification of the
insane, both on the score of humanity and economy, should
receive far greater attention than it has hitherto. Instead of
building palatial residences at immense cost, and herding toge-
ther such large numbers of the insane, let the chronic class, com-
prising fully two-thirds or three-fourths of the patients in hospi-
tals, be provided for at less expense in asylums or other estab-
lishments or homes, furnishing advantages better adapted to
these persons than large and costly hospitals. In every point
of view this question is one of vast importance, and requires all the
consideration and wisdom that any kind of Board or Commission
could give to it.
Another question closely connected with the above, is the
great increase of expense for the insane. This class is increasing
relatively; not only faster than population, but also faster than
either of the other dependent classes. The support of the
insane is becoming really burdensome in every State, and is
likely to become more and more so every year. A careful
review of the provisions made for the insane shows that much of
this expenditure has been needless and extravagant, particu-
larly in the construction of buildings. The opinion, moreover,
seems to be pretty well established that the present manage-
ment of our lunatic hospitals and the treatment of the insane,
are in many respects far behind those in Grreat Britain. This
is the testimony of foreign alienists who have visited our insti-
tutions, and are capable of making comparisons. It is very
evident that some improvements or reforms are greatly needed
among us. Are these likely to come from experts in one thing,
from head officers of our institution or from members of legis-
latures constantly changing ? Do we not need men of large and
diversified experience, of special fitness and qualifications for
such business; men who can devote time, labour, and thought
to the work ; in other words, a good Lunacy Commission ?
Again, it is obvious after all that the advantages growing
out of such a commission must depend almost wholly upon the
character of the persons placed upon it. It must be composed
of men thoroughly posted in these matters, men heartily inte-
rested in the work, men who have the confidence of the public,
ASYLUM SUPERVISION. 199
and especially of the advocates of reform. The community, as
well as the cause itself, demand something more than the mere
name of a Board or Commission of Lunacy.
Such is the interest and intelligence accumulating on this
subject that no well-informed people will always rest satisfied
with the present order of things, nor remain content unless
executive and legislative bodies take some advanced steps for
improvement in this direction. How much better is it for the
hospitals and all parties concerned that this interest and intelli-
gence should be wisely directed, and result in some permanent
good, rather than that it should be wasted in excitement, in
sensational reports, in exposures and attacks on our hospitals ?
Superintendents and trustees, in their reports and through
other channels, complain that this fault-finding and prejudice
against them and the hospitals, are very annoying, and when
the complaints become somewhat bitter and personal, they feel
as though they were abused and insulted. Bat who is to blame?
Are there no causes or reasons for it ? When it is considered
that a large number of persons are deprived of their rights
without adequate means of protection, are confined in close
quarters, not accessible to their friends, where it is understood
abuses and wrongs are sometimes perpetrated?so reported by
the press and individuals that have experienced them?is it
strange that the friends of the insane should express uneasiness
and anxiety, and that the community should join with them in
sympathy and complaint ? One of the special duties of the
English Lunacy Commission is to exercise a careful oversight of
the hospitals with reference to abuses, wrongs, accidents, &c., pre-
venting and correcting them as far as possible, and making reports
upon them whenever they occur. This course satisfies the demands
of the public and creates confidence in these establishments.
The fourth party interested is the future or humanity
itself, aspiring to a broader and higher civilisation. Its aim is
equal rights. Its practical application is the ' golden rule.'
Its design -is to do the largest amount of good?to enlist the
best possible agencies. We have here a great evil, insanity,
constantly increasing, occasioning immense expense and an
untold amount of suffering. This evil is the result of violated
law, physical and mental; it is abnormal, no part of a tiue,
healthy civilisation. To check the evil, its causes must be
better understood, the public must be instructed and en-
lightened on the subject. As prevention is better than cure, it
is our duty to do something in this direction. It is not wise to
build great establishments and make large appropriations for
carrying them on, without doing something to remove the
causes which necessitate such measures.
200 ASYLUM SUPERVISION.
Within a few years great advances have been made in a better
understanding of the causes of disease and the laws of health.
Special pains have been taken by means of boards of health,
books, journals, lectures, &c., to diffuse a knowledge of hygiene
and sanitary agencies. The fact is fully established that, by a
proper application of these means, one-third of the sickness and
premature mortality may be prevented. But how is it with
insanity ? What have hospitals and legislatures done to pre-
vent it ? If a very small portion of the means now employed
in the construction of buildings and the support of the insane
were expended in different ways to prevent insanity?in cutting
off the supplies?what a vast difference it would make in the
expense ! It should be the settled policy of all legislative
bodies and the executive officers of every State to carry on some
systematic measures of this kind, and unless such provision is
made by legislative action, the work will certainly not be done
at present. While there is need of improvements in the
management of hospitals and in the better treatment of the
insane, something should be done at the same time to prevent
the increase of this great evil. The claims of humanity and
economy demand it. And in no other way, and by no other
means can these objects be so well secured as by the establish-
ment of a good Lunacy Commission.
