The Curability Of Insanity, Psychological Shadows
==================================================

Art. III.?.
BY W. A. F. BROWNE, LL.D., formerly Medical Commissioner in Lunacy, Scotland.
" The earth hath bubbles, as the "water has,
And these are of them."
When visiting a country hospital a few years ago, I encountered
several individuals in the avenue who bore on their features traces
and tinges of disease of some kind. It was the day of dismissal.
Each of these discharged patients had in his hand a ticket in-
scribed with his name, the nature of his malady, the result, and so
on. One of these persons, aged 45, but looking- older, allowed
me to inspect his manumission, on which were written the words,
among others, " Bronchitis, recovered." The card of another was
marked " Intermittent fever, recovered." That of a third, who
hobbled along on an artificial leg, or, rather, on what was then
called a tree-leg, signified that he had laboured under strumous
degeneration of the knee-joint. I put no questions to the
exeunts, but was content with the sad, though perplexing
history which the MS. of each disclosed. The word " recovered "
was modest, and expressed in one sense the bare truth ; for I
could not doubt for a moment that the seclusion of the sufferers
in the hospital, the prudent diet and regimen and management
there accessible, and the remedies and resources of art which
had been resorted to, had, in different ways, promoted the
recuperation of these patients, and enabled them to return to
freedom, fresh air, their homes, and, under certain restrictions,
their former occupations. But in what a vague, even contradic-
tory, acceptation must the word " recovered " be received ! Here
is an elderly man, years having been subtracted from his allotted
span, saved from his suffocating cough, saved from all cardiac
and pulmonary changes which might have followed, by blisters,
ipecacuanha, &c.; or, as the factors in such processes are multiple,
by the mild and equable atmosphere by which he had been
surrounded, and by protection from the low temperatures, the
irregular habits, the want, perhaps the wickedness, which had
provoked his affliction, and which will inevitably inflict a
relapse should he expose himself to such causes or to his wallow-
ing in the mire; and yet he was legitimately, according to
prevailing opinions, discharged cured. Here is a second, who,
having traversed the Fens of Lincolnshire, brought with him
THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY. 77
tlie poison, as well as the local experience, which his Anglo-
Saxon forefathers must have borne innocuously. This lad had
already been prostrated by several attacks of ague, but he had
now been so lavishly saturated with quinine that his shivers and
sweats had disappeared, that he felt active and athletic, that
he dreaded no lagoon nor variation in the heat, moisture, or
other qualities of the air?which, however, if braved recklessly
in his native county, would inevitably send him to hospital
with intermittent fever; and yet he was discharged cured. The
cripple was in all probability admitted to the surgical ward
when emaciated, feverish, and worn out by excruciating pain or
discharges from his diseased member, and when the necessaries,
even the loving kindness, of his humble home had been ex-
hausted. It is certain that judicious care and kindness had
soothed his sufferings, and that amputation had saved his life.
He seemed to cherish some notion of this kind as he hobbled
exultingly and, so far as his walking-stick permitted, jauntily
along. But this man must from henceforth be nearly or
altogether incapable of resuming his toil as a labourer, must be
cast upon parochial relief; and yet, indigent, maimed, muti-
lated, the remaining portion of the man was discharged cured.
There is every reason to feel confident that the treatment of
these unfortunate^ had been judicious and successful; that the
infirmary, its staff and their manipulations, were outcomes
of benevolence, and merited all the gratitude and all the praise
which those who benefited by such ministrations, as well as the
Christian hearts which supplied the resources, could expect or
desire. The episode is introduced not to condemn, but to
award unqualified approbation, except in one particular?the
total absence of any scientific basis, rule, or even the faintest
attempt to classify the recoveries which could fairly be boasted
of. Here is a victim to bronchitis, with some alteration of
tissue or function which imparts a tendency to new, repeated,
and, finally, fatal attacks of the same disease ; here is a restored
lad bearing in his system, in some inscrutable manner, a poison
which needs but a breath of air to destroy health and to generate
formidable or permanent maladies; and here is a sufferer whose
life has been prolonged by deprivation of a limb, which renders
him, if nothing more, a useless and helpless member of the
community,?all being placed in the same category.
In considering the difficulty, perhaps the impossibility, of
reducing such elements to a classification which would render
them available for statistical or medical purposes, it occurred to
me that the results in the department with which I have been
connected for a lifetime were recorded in a still more loose,
imprecise, and even conjectural mode than that now sketched :
78 THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY.
indeed, the system pursued in asylums is still more emphatically
to be repudiated; for while from hospitals the nature of the
physical circumstances under which a patient is discharged is
determined and declared by the medical attendant, who is alone
entitled to pronounce such a verdict, this is not by any means
the rule in all asylums. In one respect the decisions in both
cases are open to the same objection?that there takes place
an aggregation or slumping of diseases utterly discrepant in
origin, form, and issue. Thus, while the cessation of ague and
the loss of a limb are comprehended under the same designa-
tion, so are the terminations of mania, in all its varieties, of
melancholia and dipsomania. It is quite obvious that, even
when the mental condition, the fate, the future disposal of a
lunatic are judged of by a medical expert, even by that expert
who has guided and guarded his now sane charge through all
the difficulties and dangers of a protracted paroxysm, there
must be a thousand sources of fallacy, and that the conclusion
as to the amount, or even the reality, of the convalescence may
differ widely?nay, in many instances must differ widely?from
that of other qualified experts. The first sources of fallacy may
lurk in the medical judge's own mental and physical condition.
He may be full of hope, he may be despondent, he may be
ambitious or emulative of the success of others, he may be
suffering from physical, hepatic or renal disease, and his estimate
of the qualities and bearing of those around, whether sane or
insane, may and do not merely take a colouring, but are intrin-
sically influenced?it may be vitiated?by his bodily affliction
or idiosyncrasy. The view taken of the progress and prospects
of a patient will likewise depend in great measure upon the
standard of health, trustworthiness, or usefulness assumed by
whosoever may determine the complete or partial removal of
alienation. According to the confessions of certain well-trained
and acute physicians, great embarrassment may be encountered
in forming a judgment from the peculiar habits of thought and
the modes of expression of the individual undergoing examina-
tion. This obstacle is greatly magnified when the patient
employs the local and unfamiliar language or the rude (almost
barbaric) dialects used in certain districts ; and becomes almost
insurmountable when the inquiry is directed to members of the
Celtic population?when the inquisitor and the inmate think
and speak in different tongues, and can become intelligible to
each other only through the medium of an interpreter, whose testi-
mony is perhaps as confused and perplexing as that of the lunatic.
I have known a well-disposed medical superintendent, who enter-
tained a great horror for the violence, restlessness, destructive
tendencies, and loquacity of those under his charge, accept the
THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY. 79
cessation of these manifestations of morbid activity as symptoms
of incipient convalescence, if not of cure, and rest tranquilly upon
the biblical picture, " Seated, clothed, and in his right mind."
When to this self-satisfaction is added the vague and often rash
expectancy that the amelioration initiated under treatment, or
at all events during seclusion, may be promoted and secured
under modified liberty, new and home influences, premature
discharge may be explained if not justified. Upon such a
theory, for it is little more, is founded the system of liberation
on probation. In the opinion of many psychologists, such proba-
tion should be persevered in under the shelter and guidance and
guardianship of a hospital; in fact, the entire duration of the
residence of an individual in an institution for mental diseases
is, subsequent to the more acute stages of disease, purely proba-
tionary, or tentative, or experimental. To those of timid, even
to those of sensitive or sentimental character, the presence and
co-mixture of persons only partially recovered from some form
of mental derangement is alarming or repugnant, and excites
somewhat of the same feeling which arises on the approach of a
ticket-of-leave man. I have heard even those who were so far
responsible for the legislative enactment under which this
scheme was introduced confess grave doubts as to the expediency,
even the legality, of such a procedure, and advocate the creation
of succursal or convalescent establishments. In Scotland, where
probationers chiefly abound, it would appear from the last report
of the Commissioners in Lunacy that the experiment is not
attended with triumphant results, as of 2,011 persons sent home
on probation since 1862, 337 were again immured, within three
months after liberation, in the asylum in- which they had been
originally confined; while the remainder?those who did not
return, of whom nothing was afterwards heard, but who may
have died, been transplanted into another hospital, or may have
deteriorated into fatuity, or some of the more tractable forms of
derangement?are blazoned forth in the catalogue of recoveries.
But my interest is chiefly awakened as to the fate of that large
number who were not officially registered as relapsed, and cannot
be fully allayed until it be demonstrated whether they were
restored to reason, were incarcerated at a subsequent period, or
died, or remained demented but inoffensive and tractable, and,
as it often happens, useful members of society. In any of these
supposed cases the objects aimed at in any speculation as to the
curability of mental diseases are utterly stultified. It seems that
this means of relieving plethoric asylums has not, even north
of the Tweed, reached that degree of popularity which was
imagined, as the Commissioners, in the report and at the page
quoted, mention only four asylums in which it is frequently re-
sorted to, while in the remainder " it is seldom or never adopted."
80 THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY.
Sucli vaticinations, for they are little else than hopeful con-
jectures, are sometimes founded upon accurate prognosis, often
upon genuine benevolence, and may eventuate in that restoration
which must be classed with the evidence of things not seen. But
the step may be resolved upon under an erroneous interpretation
of the mental condition of the subject. It may be dictated by
a philosophical creed, by the notion that, if the intellect be clear
and unclouded by delusions ; or, on the other hand, even should
errors of judgment persist, if the emotions, the sentiments, the
will, are apparently sound and self-regulating ; or, on another
hand, even should there be observable less wisdom, less gentle-
ness or self-control, should the passions or appetites have failed
to dominate, or irresistibly to impel,?the portals of the prison-
house are opened. Many judicious physicians, who have never
analysed, even studied, the human mind in health, fail to grasp
departures from its normal vigour and capacity, especially
when the infirmity is, although significant, trivial and tran-
sitory, and confine their views to what is palpable and present,
and, it may be, to indications afforded exclusively by the bodily
condition. It is certain that, in many cases of general paralysis,
recovery has been predicated and liberty granted in the lull
which often succeeds the stage of excitement?when sufficient
reticence can be exercised to effect the concealment of any
glaring and incredible Utopian visions, and when there is an
obvious deposit of flesh and fat, and other deceptive symptoms
of recuperation?the sufferer inevitably returning to pass
through the subsequent stages of his fatal malady; but there
is a more frequent and fertile source of error arising from
that simulation of recovery presented during lucid intervals.
This aspect of amendment is partly the result of genuine health,
partly of that self-command possessed by many who are conscious
of the conditions upon which their emancipation depends.
There can be no doubt that the dismissal of individuals so
affected is conceded in perfectly good faith, and may even
become obligatory in consequence of their general deportment
and the probability of future improvement. But when this
issue is viewed broadly, and when thousands of individuals may
be involved, the vitiation of all calculation as to the pro-
portion of recoveries in the cloistered insane becomes painfully
obvious. Every superintendent must see in his registers cases
which have been removed once or twice, or oftener, during
the year; and I can recall one upright and distinguished
member of our specialty who was found deploring the death
of M. M. on the plea that for years her cure had- been
effected ten or a dozen times annually and thus enormously
swelled the percentages. This course was pursued in all candour
THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY. 81
and honesty not merely as that generally, if not universally,
prevalent, but because the cure was perfect, if not permanent,
and because the law required it. But, when we examine the
annals of another couutry, where different customs and opinions
have regulated the practice of physicians, we find that one
person is recorded as having recovered 59 times in twenty-two
years, that another became sane 33 times, a third 22 times, a
fourth 10 times, 94 five times, and that 87 persons contributed
274 recoveries?an average of a fraction more than three to each
person. We are somewhat staggered by the complexity and
futility of any calculations based upon such premises. It should
be noted that the difficulties thus created are so far explicable
by the practice of treating such proportions as estimates on the
number of cases and not of persons enumerated. But there are
other and prolific means by which such scientific, though
unintentional, exaggerations are committed. In one estab-
lishment it is stated that " the whole number of cases, of
less than twelve months' duration, admitted since the open-
ing of the institution was 1,061. Of these cases, 697, or
sixty-five and sixty-nine hundredths per cent, recovered.
Of these 1,061 cases, 187 were readmissions : hence, the
number of persons admitted was 874. Eighty-seven of these
persons recovered 274 times, or 187 times more than the
number of persons. These were duplicate or multiplicate
recoveries. Subtracting these (187) from the total (697)
recoveries, the remainder is 510 recoveries, and these are the
recoveries of persons." It is clear that when the absence of a
lunatic from his school of training, the asylum, is brief?a
mere vacation?as well as when his sanitary state is precarious
and uncertain, such half recoveries, or quarter recoveries, should
be relegated to that vague and meaningless limbo of removals
under the term " improved " which figures so largely in certain
statistical tables. But this subject presents other aspects. It
has often happened that those who have laboured under delirium
tremens and pseudo-dipsomania have, on the elimination of the
alcoholic poisoning, been associated with those who have re-
covered from insanity. This is not so infinitesimal an element
in such an investigation as might be imagined ; for in Scotland,
where, in anticipation of the provisions of the Habitual
Drunkards Act, individuals were entitled, under what is called
a voluntary clause in an Act of Parliament, to consign them-
selves to an asylum, and again to discharge themselves whenso
inclined, considerable numbers took advantage of this privilege.
It may be charitably conceded that many such acts of self-denial
were resorted to from a sincere anxiety to eradicate the morbid
impulse and to avoid the temptations presented for its indul-
PART I. VOL. VI. NEW SERIES. Q
Q'l THE CURABILI1Y OF INSANITY.
gence; but it is known that many of these inebriates adopted
seclusion as the readiest refuge from bodily indisposition, or the
social consequences of their errors, so that, when the malaise
and the repentance had evaporated, they at once returned to the
world and to their wallowing in the mire, but not until they
had been honoured by a certificate of recovery. It has been
averred that so numerous were the demands for admission
under this clause, originally intended to facilitate the entrance
of those trembling on the verge of madness and to avoid the
painful ordeal of legal sanction, that medical superintendents,
discovering the total inadequacy of such an arrangement to
subdue an inveterate, if not an incurable, propensity, and
recognising that the presence of even the most amiable of
drunkards was a corrupting and contaminating element in the
management of otherpatients, have, for some time, discouraged or
discontinued the reception of such cases. It would be profitless
to discuss, at this point, whether such affections can be legiti-
mately classed with the neuroses or to question the validity of
the opinion entertained b}r certain physicians as to the propriety
of regarding relief from the miseries after a debauch with the
rebound and exhilaration which sometimes mark the disappear-
ance of gloom and melancholia ; but it is germane to our pur-
pose that there may be latent considerations, undetected even
by those who act under their influence, which countenance the
undue multiplication and unintentional exaggeration of the
beneficial effects of treatment. A temptation may arise to resort
to early liberation in order to relieve the pressure from within
or from without, where an asylum is crowded to excess and, as
often occurs, by inoffensive dements, or where large numbers of
recent clamant and dangerous cases require immediate admis-
sion ; and, should the superintendent be of a timid, irresolute,
and sanguine disposition, he may yield to what cannot be other-
wise stigmatised than as a compromise between two conflicting
motives or duties. There may arise likewise a compulsion,
exercised conscientiously, but tyrannically, by consultants,
officials, or nondescript interlopers, to whose assumed penetra-
tion and advice the judgment is yielded, although an expert
may be able to trace the germs of disease and even to predict a
speedy relapse in the individual thus discharged cured. There
is likewise a snare created by the pretended self-command of
the patient under observation, by the assumption of external
rationality, which in reality he possesses not, and by the con-
cealment of prominent hallucinations and obnoxious qualities,
in such a measure as to deceive alike medical and legal
discrimination, and to lull to rest the suspicions of all around.
But a more formidable source of error is incessantly presented
THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY. 83
by the conviction on the part of relatives and other responsible
parties that their friend has been restored to health ; by their in-
cessant importunities (even threats,) and by their assurances that
their care and custody will accelerate amelioration?as it has
done upon previous occasions?and another imperfectly restored
lunatic is in this way added to the general community. But
amongst these latent motives for the rapid and hazardous libera-
tion of lunatics under treatment is the natural and most legiti-
mate ambition of Superintendents to demonstrate to their fellow-
labourers and in the annals of science the success of some par-
ticular mode of treatment?medical, moral, or material; to secure
a reputation?personal and for a particular hospital; or to support
and corroborate theories as to the curability of insanity. It is
fortunate that such feelings of emulation stimulate the efforts
of the high-minded and self-sacrificing class entrusted with
the charge of the insane, but the effect may be easily shown to
be disastrous in over-estimating the remedial efficacy of
medicine, and the influence of drugs, detention, and hygiene.
History affords testimony that between 1684 and 1703 there
were 1,294 patients admitted into Bethlehem, of whom 890
recovered, being a proportion of almost 69 per cent.; and
further, that from 1784 to 1794, the proportion was 84 per
cent.* It is to be specially noted that neither paralytics nor
epileptics were received into this establishment during these
periods, and that, making all due allowance for any conjectural
change in the type or inveteracy of alienation in different stages
of our civilisation, the recoveries were what at present are
achieved and what may possibly be a normal ratio. But in 1820
there is a sudden augmentation in the number of recoveries,
for a physician of high repute affirms that the cures of persons
in his asylum reached the unprecedented amount of 91 percent,
of recent cases, 35 of chronic cases, and 81 of all classes, even
including the idiotic, the epileptic, and the fatuous. About
the same time a popular writer of travels returned from a
distant land with the somewhat startling intelligence that he had
obtained irrefragable proof that 91 and three-tenths per cent, of
cures had been effected under an experienced physician. Housed
from passiveness or apathy to vaulting ambition, every English-
speaking psychologist exerted his skill and?we must use the
phrase?his ingenuity, in producing tables displaying what were
conceived to be the triumphs of his art. Insanity became, in
the eyes of the philanthropist, the most curable of formidable
diseases, and, if taken during its earlier state and subjected to
suitable remedies, must be cured, either by the efforts of
* Burrow's Commentaries.
g 2
84 THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY.
medicine, or, as therapeutic agents were not then more potent
or infallible than now, must cure itself. It became a race, a
struggle, a strife for distinction, and statistics exhibited a sudden
rush upwards from the modest success of Tyson to the astound-
ing maximum of 100, even 110, per cent. In the present day,
when these gigantic proportions have shrunk to a more moderate
size, it is almost inexplicable, in passing the eye over the long
lines of figures and percentages, to conjecture how such conclu-
sions could be arrived at. A superintendent, whose subsequent
eminence is said to have entitled him to the title of Pinel
Secundus, announced that he had restored to reason lunatics at
the rate of 100 per cent. It should be carefully noted that
this success applied to 13 patients only, one of whom died.
Another expert reached the number quoted by Burrows,
and even the calm and cautious Tuke, of the Retreat, averred
that, according to his observation, there were curable, of
recent cases 91 per cent., of old cases 35 per cent., of
all cases 81 per cent. From other records we find that
while, one superintendent can still boast of 100 per cent., a
second falls to 99, a third oscillates between 82 and 94,
a fourth has a variable rate from 82 to 93, a fifth reached 91, a
sixth gives 80 to 90, while a seventh, a most honest and eminent
historian of his own practice, inserts in his earlier chapters 80
per cent., but as the narrative proceeds, his success, or rather
the mode upon which that success was computed, undergoes a
signal alteration. It is incumbent here to protest that there is
not the faintest insinuation as to the motives or the faithfulness
under which such results are supposed to be arrived at. The
explanation of the discrepancy which exists between past and
present experience upon this point is to be sought for in the
vicious or erroneous principles upon which these supposed facts
are founded. In the first place, recoveries were estimated in
reference to acute or recent cases only, such words signifying
very different things and periods according to the convictions
of the recorder. Instead of limiting recovery of acute cases
to three months previous to admission, it might represent
one year, and was, under all circumstances, indefinite and
arbitrary. In the second place, the number of recoveries
was calculated on the number of discharges. In the third
place, all chronic and incurable, all epileptic, paralytic,
idiotic cases, and even all deaths, were deducted from the
gross numbers which were or had been under treatment, before
the recoveries were dealt with; and these might then be
compared with the admissions, the discharges, or even with the
residuum still remaining in the asylum. It would be an insult
to our existing convictions and to the principles, which may be
THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY. 85
now pronounced catholic, regulating the estimates of the results
of treatment in nervous diseases to point out how utterly
fallacious, deceptive, and Utopian were such practices ; but it
is essential to our object to stigmatise them as subversive, on the
one hand, of all correct notions as to prognosis in mental disease,
and, upon the other, of the remedial powers which can be exercised
for its removal or amelioration. In instituting any comparison
between the results in different establishments, and in endeavour-
ing to reconcile the palpable disparity between these which is
conspicuous, various factors of restoration, as well as impediments
to such an issue, must be embraced, as they intimately affect
the general inquiry as to the duration and removal of alienation.
Allusion has already been made to the influence of peculiarly
constituted minds upon conclusions as to the present or potential
benefit to the insane derived from medical interference ; but the
actual benefits differ independently altogether from the opinions
of the expert in different countries and classes, in relation to the
profession or trade of the patient, to the average amount of
intelligence and education prevailing in the district, to the
immorality or intemperance or irreligion of which each indi-
vidual may have been a victim, and to his original capacity and
subsequent development. It is well known that where imbeciles?
and there are communities of imbeciles?are attacked by delirium
or excitement, that, in the rare instances of transitory mania?
and we use the word advisedly and without any intention of
entering on a qucestio vexata?and where mutual disturbance
originates in poisons, not alcoholic, but generated in the system,
such as in the urine, bile, &c., the continuance of the nervous
ailment is brief, its removal of easy accomplishment, and the
apparent rate of recovery is thus augmented. Where mental
or moral epidemics occur this remark is especially applicable,
and there is good reason for believing that not only do
the seasons materially influence the cessation or promote the
chronicity of the neurosis, but that these affections are more
amenable to the resources of art at one time?for example,
in one century?than in another. The experience of Tyson
has already been quoted, showing that between 1684 and 1703
of 1,294 patients admitted into Bethlehem, 890 recovered,
while in the same institution, where still only recent, curable,
or non-paralytic cases are received, between 1846 and 1855 of
2,729 patients admitted, 1,479 recovered (Hood). Making all due
allowance for a change in the type of disease, the discrepant
opinions of medical superintendents, and the revolution insen-
sibly taking place in the views of the medical profession gene-
rally, a more striking illustration is afforded by the following
86 THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY.
contrast. The period embraced was from September 30, 1868,
to October 1, 1875. In 1871 Dr. X resigned. Dr. W suc-
ceeded him in the superintendentship of the game asylum. The
last three entire official years of the administration of Dr. X
embraced the period from September 30, 1868, to October 1,
1871, and the first three of Dr. W, the period from September 30,
1872, to October 1, 1875. The statistics of these periods show
that, during the first period, of 1,191 admissions 516 recovered,
or 43*32 per cent., and that, during the second, of 1,169
admitted 269 recovered, or 22*16 per cent. Thus, although
the number of admissions in the second period was but twenty-
two less than in the first, the number of recoveries was but one
more than half as great. We are not permitted even to suspect
that any other feeling than legitimate professional rivalry could
have actuated these labourers in the same field. Nor is even
this conjecture admissible, as a marked declension in the fruits
of the cultivation during the last harvest described is discern-
ible. This comparative view is taken from the records of a
public asylum, and in such alone is competition intelligible.
Upon this ground it is desirable that the effects of treatment in
private asylums under the management of trained and trust-
worthy medical experts?and there are many such?could be
ascertained, as the very ungenerous argument that this class
have a vested pecuniary interest in the detention of the persons
consigned to their care must operate in preventing premature
discharges, and many of the evils which may flow from a strain
after public notoriety and the creation of an artificial reputation
for the skill and success of the medical authorities. As next in
reliability, may be ranged the recoveries in our public asylums,
where the determination of the fact is arrived at by an educated
responsible officer, who, although perhaps less or more influenced
by disturbing, though unconscious, sources of fallacy and error,
acts according to the dictates of a deliberate judgment, and
under the criticism of a vast jury composed of associates and
fellow labourers. Such deliverances almost invariably vindicate
the foregoing remarks as to the absence of uniformity in the
effects of treatment; whether the disparity displayed be in the
product of a difference in the standard employed, or in the per-
spicacity or imagination of the observer employing it, is not now
discussed. For example, taking the annual reports of five
large British public asylums for 1879, it appears that the per-
centage of cures ranges through 25, 33,40,41, 47 per cent. But
it is highly probable that, at the present time, as when Thur-
nam wrote, " In round numbers, of ten persons attacked by
insanity five recover and five die, sooner or later, during the
attack. Of the five who recover, not more than two remain
A
TIIE CURABILITY OF INSANITY. 87
well during the rest of their lives. The other three sustain
subsequent attacks, during which at least two of them die."
Such estimates are unavoidably formed at the moment of
the discharge of the patient and based upon the most trust-
worthy evidence accessible. These, although in one sense
oracular, and the mere opinion of one person, must be accepted
as data of great authority, seeing that the opinion thus emitted
represents the prolonged observation and criticism of a scien-
tific and conscientious expert, who, while he may be deceived
by theories or hopes, cannot be suspected of deceiving others.
But when it is known that in many institutions the emphatic
declaration of discharged cured, and all its concomitant and
consequent relations to psychological inquiry, is pronounced by
a board of county gentlemen, who may, or may not, be guided
by the convictions of their subordinates in the management of
the house, it is natural to recoil from the perplexing confusion
which may thus arise as to the absolute reality and degrees of
the curability of the insane. It is well known that in many
asylums, before the removal of an inmate to his house, there
must be an appearance before the directors, so that the report
of the superintendent, as well as the health, capacity, self-con-
trol of the postulant, may be tested, and, as is generally the case,
confirmed by the bureaucracy. This practice may prove a
guide and a guarantee to the public, but is neither complimen-
tary to medical discrimination or honesty, nor conducive to
accuracy in speculation on the progress and termination of
disease. The board supposed to be thus engaged generally
consists of men of high birth, ample education, unimpeachable
integrity, and unselfish feelings, so that their deliberations and
verdict are entitled to perfect respect, although they cannot be
hailed as truths of Holy Writ or as scientific conclusions. But
when such a body is composed of parish guardians, or, what is
equivalent in Scotland, the parochial board, and when the
members, whose honesty of purpose we do not here call in ques-
tion, may be the butcher, baker, undertaker, &c. of the village,
borough, or union?who, unless inspired, cannot possess any of
the qualities which enable the observer to judge of the mental
condition, either in health or in disease, of any individual; and
who, whatever may be their humanity and sympathy, and their
independence of spirit, cannot fail to be influenced by the
selfish, or they may be honourably designated, the social and
patriotic interests of their constituents?it is difficult to avoid a
smile, or a shudder, over the havoc which may accrue to medical
statistics, and the injuries which may be reflected upon families
and communities as well as the individual under examination.
But such fiat may depend upon the impressions of a single
88 THE CURABILITY OF INSANITY.
observer?the relieving officer in one country, the inspector of
poor in another?who are constrained to act in accordance with
their brief, or their own very partial information. When libe-
ration is effected by a family council, or by the decision of
friends, who have no opportunity of watching the peculiarities
of their cloistered relatives, and who are animated by a natural
and justifiable anxiety to promote the well-being of the person
in whom they are interested, and to secure the supposed advan-
tages of freedom, home, and original pursuits and pleasures, the
risks of such interference are greatly multiplied, and to this
source may be attributed the majority of the relapses which
crowd the columns of the register of every public institution.
But the inmates of such establishments, particularly where they
belong to the affluent ranks, may be removed from treatment in
a number of other ways. They may be dismissed by the autho-
rity of medical, legal, or official assessors, of high national or
public functionaries, acting with or without advice, with or
without any explanation of the grounds on which action has
been taken, of the objects proposed, and, it has happened, in
direct opposition to the experience and warnings of those who
have cared for and scrutinised the symptoms, and have arrived
at well-digested opinions ds to the probabilities of perfect and
permanent restoration to health. But into the possible mistakes
or misdoings of these possessors of power I hesitate at present
to enter.
From this vidimus, which is, unfortunately, far from ex-
haustive, I have endeavoured to exclude all considerations of
self-interest and pecuniary gain, because I believe that such
unworthy incentives are of rare occurrence, and cannot mate-
rially affect speculations as to the ultimate issues of mental
diseases. In compliance with what is almost the universal
custom of those who have been engaged in exposing abuses,
errors, and the miscarriages of philosophy and philanthropy, I
would very humbly venture to suggest, as a means of preventing
or lessening the evil complained of, the creation of a corps of
experts, as has been proposed for other purposes, and which
might be incorporated with the Board of Commissioners, or
who might be constituted from properly qualified medical men,
upon whose judgment and decision alone, in conjunction with
those of the ordinary hospital superintendent, should depend
the liberation of every patient.
It is incumbent to acknowledge my indebtedness to a
pamphlet on " The Curability of Insanity," by Dr. Pliny Earle,
Northampton, Massachusetts, for many facts in this article.
