The Binet-Simon Scale AjSid the psychologist
==============================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1912, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. V, No. 8. January 15, 1912.
j

By Clara Harrison Town, Ph.D.,
Director of the Laboratory of Clinical Psychology, Lincoln State
School and Colony.
The great publicity which has been given the Binet Scale has
laid upon psychologists a serious and perhaps unexpecte r.e^
sibility. A peculiar situation has developed. A psyc o oeis
devised a method by which the intelligence of a c 1 ^
accurately estimated; he has offered the metho to is co '
describing it with much detail, much commentary flrma-
analysis. The method has the virtue of simp icity a
ratus required beyond a few pictures, some bits o wo ,
little money, being a mind well trained in psyc^ o osic ^
and methods. The educational public has been given a g
version of the tests without much commentary. a . ,
nized the value of such a method for pedagogy, an a so e
its simplicity. Accustomed to the complicate ?^a.ra sgary
chological laboratory, the laity were pleased to n 1 ^
and overlooked entirely the fact that the psychologist hims
1,01 "Sed that this very thing would happen and tried ,
guard against it in the following paragraphs. is ,
of appearances, an automatic method, compara e o ? j t
when one stands up on it, throws out a ticket on which one s weig
is printed. It is Lot a mcchauical method and we P f f f ^
busy physician who wishes to apply it in hospitals, that.tow
meet lifh disappointments. The results of our examinations are
Of no value if hey arc separated from all common ary an into
pretation is necessary. We are aware that.* ?
Slty we apparently open the door to t e ar 1 examination
method of all precision, but this is on y app ? p^oniinations
will always hi much superior to the ordinary rding
because it has several advantages over them,
240 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to an invariable plan, it takes the age into express account, and
it notes the answers and compares them with a norm which is a
true mean. If, in spite of all this precision, we recognize that it
is necessary to use the Scale with intelligence we do not consider
its value diminished by this reservation. The microscope and the
graphic method are admirable methods of precision, but what intel-
ligence, circumspection, erudition, and art are essential to the prac-
tice of these methods! Imagine the value of observations made
with the microscope by an ignoramus scarcely better than an
imbecile. We have seen examples which caused a shudder.
"The idea that a method of examination can be made precise
enough to be trusted to everyone must be abandoned; all scientific
procedure is but an instrument which requires the direction of
an intelligent hand. We have explored with this new tool, which
we have forged, more than three hundred subjects, and at each
new examination our attention has been awakened, surprised,
charmed, by the observations which we were able to glean from
the manner of response, the manner of comprehension, the malice
of some, the obtuseness of others, and the thousand particulars
which show themselves when we have before us the fascinating
spectacle of an intelligence in activity. A few persons to whom,
very rarely, however, we accorded the favor of witnessing our
examination, appreciated this also, and told us spontaneously
what a comprehensive impression they had received, and what an
adequate idea they had formed of the intelligence of each child.
.... It is this comprehensive impression which it is necessary
to secure, to interpret, and to estimate at its true value. The
system of marking, which we present, should be used only as an
aid to the memory and to facilitate the grouping of the elements,
the synthesis of which exists only in our own minds.
"It is with the privilege of these reservations that we explain
the following system of marking: . .
Unfortunately the American public has not read these
paragraphs, and the result which is threatening is a wholesale use
of the Scale in an unscientific manner, which will do nothing but
postpone the time of its real usefulness?that time when it will
be applied by experts along the four practical lines indicated by
Binet himself?the grading of normal and backward children in
the schools, the diagnosis and classification of abnormal children,
the arrangement of school curricula, and in the courts of law.
The Scale has suddenly become very popular. It is at the
same time being subjected to much adverse criticism, and many
BINET SCALE AND THE PSYCHOLOGIST. 241
men are engaged in improving it. M. Binet also predicted this.
He says: "These tests are not the first of which we thought, we
have decided on these after long trial; they seem to us both good
and practical. But we are far from assuming that they are the
best. Those who repeat the work will find better; they will cer-
tainly eliminate more of the tests dependent upon instruction."
In April of this year he partially fulfilled his own prediction,
publishing a revised series of tests in which he himself eliminated
all the tests involving reading and writing which occurred earlier
in the series than the twelve-year group.
Dr. Ayres, in his critique of the Scale in the November num-
ber of The Psychological Clinic, groups the tests in several
categories corresponding to the several abilities which he considers
they test. It is interesting to compare with this analysis the
analysis offered by Binet himself, and it seems only fair that
the readers of the Clinic, having read one, should read the other.
We, therefore, quote the following from his 1908 article: "We do
not measure the intelligence considered apart from concrete cir-
cumstances. . . . That which we measure is much more complex
?the result depends upon, (1) intelligence, pure and simple;
(2) school knowledge which may be acquired earlier than the usual
age; (3) school knowledge which cannot be acquired before the
usual age; (4) knowledge involving language and vocabulary,
belonging under both (2) and (3) ; and depending partly upon
the school and partly upon the general surroundings." The
arrangement of weights, definitions superior to usage, definitions
of abstract terms, and interpretation of pictures throw light upon
number (1) ; the naming of colors, the naming of the days of the
"Week and the months of the year upon number (2) ; counting from
20 to 0, recalling the essentials of a paragraph immediately after
reading the same, constructing a sentence containing three given
words, and responding to the second series of questions involving
reason, upon numbers (3) and (4). "Does our Scale do justice
to the child who possesses an intelligence beyond the ordinary, but
who has had no school training, or to one whose school training is
much inferior to his intelligence? We think that it does. The
gifted show their superiority in the repetition of numbers and
phrases, the correct drawing of the figure produced by cutting the
folded square of paper, the arrangement of weights and the inter-
pretation of pictures. It is interesting that these tests enable one,
when the need arises, to distinguish between the ability to learn at
school and a good native intelligence.
242 THE PSYCHOLO GIGAL CLINIC.
"It remains to make a distinction between two kinds of intel-
ligence . . . the maturity of intelligence and the accuracy of
intelligence. An intelligence which is not ripe is an infantile
intelligence; an intelligence ripe before its time is called pre-
cocious. Maturity consists in part in a development of the abil-
ities of comprehension and judgment, at least that is possible,?
a child comprehends less and judges with less penetration than an
adult; it consists also in the increase of the bulk of acquisitions
of all sorts?the child has less experience, it knows less than the
adult. ... We believe that maturity of intelligence is brought
out by three or four tests. . . . These tests are definitions, descrip-
tion of pictures, construction of a sentence containing three given
words, and perhaps also the arrangement of weights. . . . It is
easy to see in what the infantile turn of thought consists?in
definitions it is the utilitarian point of view, the idea of the self
is not lost and the objects are imagined in their relations to the
person; in description of pictures it is in enumeration, instead of
a recognition of the relations of things; in the construction of sen-
tences it is in the production of three different ideas, in the lack
of synthesis; in the comparison of two weights it is the contrast
between the difficulty of comprehending that a comparison is
desired and the ease with which the difference in weight is noticed;
in the arrangement of weights it is somewhat analogous, the con-
trast between the difficulty of comprehending and retaining the
idea that the blocks are to be arranged in the order of weight and
the facility of comparing one with another. These are some of
the traits of infantile intelligence. That the maturity of intel-
ligence is entirely distinct from its accuracy is proved by clear
examples of an intelligence, mature but not accurate. A subject
twelve years old constructed a sentence containing the given words,
but the sentence did not make sense?there was maturity without
accuracy. Another, a man of twenty-four, a veritable fool accord-
ing to his friends, gave an interpretation of a picture, but a
remarkably false one. The interpretation shows maturity, the
making of gross errors shows lack of accuracy."
The object of this paper is fulfilled now that I have given
in his own words, though not in full, M. Binet's estimate and inter-
pretation of his Scale. Dr. Ayres' article, however, suggests a few
further observations. The first is that his wholo critique is based
upon the 1908 series of tests, which has since been rovised and
greatly altered by Binet himself. Some of the tests criticised by
Dr. Ayres for their difficulty have been transferred from the thir-
teen year group to a new adult group.
BINET SCALE AND THE PSYCHOLOGIST. 243
The second is that Dr. Ayres' method of estimating the
emphasis laid upon any one ability by the number of tests devoted
to it is hardly in accordance with the character of the Scale. For
instance he states that 1/7 of the tests deal with the repetition of
words and numbers. The fact is that Binet desired to test the
immediate memory for both unrelated and intimately associated
auditory stimuli; for this purpose he selected two tests?the repe-
tition of numbers and the repetition of phrases. His results showed
that these abilties increase with age in a regular manner, and he
was able to assign exact degrees of maturity of the abilities to
various ages. In testing a child we find his limit in repeating
numbers, his limit in repeating phrases, practically using two tests
though the score card shows more. The score shows more because
the series is a hierarchy designed to show the level of development
of a given intelligence. The tests are admirably arranged to show
this clearly in the mental age indicated by the responses, but they
are not adapted to any numerical evaluation based upon a given
value for each test, because in such case credit is given for the same
ability several times.
Next there is a word to be said for the test which requires the
child to count backward from twenty. It is one of those tests
which depend jointly upon acquired knowledge and intellectual
ability. Quite a degree of concentration is necessary for success
if the child has never before attempted to count in this manner.
The degree of success achieved indicates the amount of mental con-
trol and also whether the child has simply memorised a series of
sounds which can only be produced in a certain order or has learned
numbers as such. Quite apart from its value as a test there may
be even some pedagogical value in training children to count back-
ward. Many teachers, especially teachers of backward children,
find that addition is a much simpler process for the child than sub-
traction. As an experiment children have been taught to count
backward as well as forward, with the idea of leading to subtrac-
tion by easy steps. The results justified the effort, and indicate
that the process of subtraction was in this way much simplified.
Finally the tests as described by Dr. Ayres are not in every
instance the tests as given by Binet. One test is described by r.
Ayres as follows: "It uses for material a visiting card cut along
the diagonal and asks the child to describe the resulting shape if
?ne of the triangles were turned about and placed so that its short,
]eg was on the other liypothenuse and its right angle at the smaller
of the two acute angles. So far the writer has failed to find any
244 THE PSYCHOLO OICAL CLINIC.
one able to describe the resulting shape." In the original the sub-
ject is not asked to describe the shape; the directions for making
the tests are as follows: "Place the two pieces of card on a sheet
of paper in the original position. Say to the subject?Look well
at the lower piece. Suppose that I turn it around and place this
edge (tracing the edge a-c with the finger) on the edge a-b of the
upper piece. Suppose further that the point c is placed just on
the point b. Now, I take away the piece; turn it around in your
imagination and draw its outline as if it were in place. Com-
mence by following the outlines of the first piece." In the thir-
teen-year tests Dr. Ayres quotes as one pair of abstract terms?
pleasure and honor. The original is pleasure and happiness; the
point is lost entirely when honor is substituted. In the 1911 ver-
sion of the Scale this pair of terms is omitted and laziness and
idleness substituted?the whole test being transferred to the adult
group.
The Scale is published in compact form in the Bulletin de la
Societc Libre pour I'Etude Psycliologique de I'Enfant, April,
1911. The last paragraph of this final article of Binet's is signifi-
cant: "A last word to those persons who desire to employ the
method. Any one can use it for his personal satisfaction or to
obtain an approximate evaluation of the intelligence of a child;
but for the result of this method to have a scientific value, it is
absolutely necessary that the individual who uses it should have
had an apprenticeship in a laboratory of pedagogy or possess a
thorough practical knowledge of psychological experimentation."
Our hope is that those who are interested in the tests will go to
the original for their information.
