The Way with the Nerves.
=========================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By Joseph Collins, M.D. New York: G. P.
Putnam's Sons, 1911, pp. 313.
Dr Joseph Collins is a distinguished neurologist, and the wide experience he has necessarily had during twenty-five years' practice in the
treatment of nervous diseases makes anything he may have to say on
the subject particularly valuable. Dr Collins's book, however, is written
more for the layman than for the physician, as much for the healthy
as for the sick, and most of all, perhaps, for the student of human
nature. It is written in the form of letters, intimate, self-revealing
letters from the patient, and very understanding, sane, frank and helpful replies from the physician. The ailments treated include sick headache, neurasthenia, psychasthenia, epilepsy, depression, hysteria, dipsomania, dual personality, and mental retardation in children. Those
who have strong convictions on the moderate or immoderate use of
alcohol will be especially interested in the letters treating of this subject.
Dr Collin's ability to put himself in the patient's place and sympathize with his point of view is as unusual as it is interesting, and in
none of the letters is this more noticeable than in the first one in the
volume, written apparently by a sufferer from migraine, who has had
many physicians, experiences and disappointments, but who, through
it all, has retained her sense of humor.
That the author is also keenly alive to certain flaws, foibles, and
mannerisms on the part of his own profession, is amusingly shown in
the letters on the "Bedside Manner."
The letters dealing with the ill effects upon the human being of
idleness and riches gives emphasis to what we all know in a vague way
but which we are apt to smooth over and forget. Dr Collins gives an
instance of the idle rich woman suffering from ennui, and the idle rich
young man who becomes a victim to alcoholism.
If the average reader has been lucky enough to escape any or all
of the nervous and mental diseases described in this book, he is sure
to have a relative or friend who has been less fortunate. As Dr Collins
says in his preface, "The ordinary individual has an intense interest
in all that concerns his health," and he might add, "or the health of his
friends and family." There is nothing which so arouses mutual interest
and sympathy as a similarity of symptoms or remedies. I remember a
sudden and enthusiastic intimacy which sprang up between two women
whose tasts and beliefs were as opposite as the poles?merely because
they had both been put on a strict diet. The discussion of those two
diets, where they differed and where they agreed, meant more to these
two women at that time than pictures and poetry and the music of the
(26)
NEWS AND COMMENT. 27
spheres. Even without the other excellent qualities of the work, this
extremely human appeal is bound to obtain for Dx1. Collins's book a
wide and deserved popularity.
E. E. W.
