Exercise and Health
====================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By Woods Hutchinson, M.D. New York: Out-
ing Publishing Company, 1911, pp. 156.
That exercise and health are two words for the same state of being
in the human animal, is the theme of Dr. Hutchinson's discourse. Exer-
cise brings health, health brings a desire and a relish for exercise. Most
of us underestimate the amount of exercise we can profitably take every
day. Dr. Hutchinson says we need not less than two hours, prefer-
ably four. "The 'business,' so to speak, of exercise for the brain
worker or indoor man or woman is to pump the blood through the tired
brain and little-used muscles, wash out their fatigue poisons, burn up
clean the wastes of the food necessary to supply working power, and
get rid of all these through the lungs, the skin, and the kidneys. This
process takes hours every day instead of minutes, and you can 110 more
accomplish it in two or three ten-minute periods than you can keep
up your working power 011 three tablespoonfuls of patent, pre-digested
humbug in place of three square meals. Moreover, the only place to
get rid of these waste poisons adequately from lungs and skin is in the
open air."
With regard to much that is popular under the name of "physical
culture," Dr. Hutchinson says, "The most dangerous feature of fads
in physical culture is that by their narrowness and in judiciousness they
prevent you from getting enough of it!" This is not the only current
superstition in the domain of physiology which Dr. Hutchinson attacks.
He explains just how weak hearts are strengthened by steady exercise,
and how weak lungs are built up in the same way, and how both heart
and lungs can be injured by too much rest. "Our real breathing," he
says, "is done by the blood, not the lungs. Air in the lungs is like
food in the stomach, of no use to the body until it is absorbed... .The
muscles that best develop the chest are those of the legs, because they
are the largest masses which can be most vigorously and protractedly
exercised." Further on he says, "An easy, swinging, elastic walk, or
a bounding, springing run are a positive rest compared with prolonged
standing at a desk, or even sitting in the rigid position often required
for indoor work, with little opportunity to swing the limbs, or bend
the back." And here Dr. Hutchinson strikes a blow at another super-
stition which is just beginning to lose its hold on the layman's mind,
the popular belief as to the cause and cure of flat-foot. "We stand
supported," he says, "upon two curving arches of bone, each reaching
from the ball of the foot to the heel; and the curve of each arch is
supported, not by bony or stony blocks of keystone shape, but by the
incessant and elastic pull of muscle. Standing still tires out these
muscles that support the arch far worse than walking does, and flat-
foot, or the breaking of the arch, is one of the most painful and crip-
(59)
60 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
pling lesser defects to which the human body is subject. It is produced
by standing and so-called sedentary occupations upon hard floors, at
least ten times as often as it is by outdoor work. .. .Permanent cure
can be produced only by systematic massage and vigorous exercise of
the muscles of the calf and the front of the leg, so as to give them
strength to resume their natural support of the arch."
In a delightfully robust chapter called "Muscle Maketh Man," Dr.
Hutchinson tells us how to "train for life," as he puts it. His pro-
gramme covers the entire day, from morning bath to nine hours of
sleep in an airy room and the next morning's bath, with breakfast in
bed on Sundays and holidays. "Live like this," he adds, "and you
will never know that you are old until one day you are suddenly dead."
Ilis advice as to eating is only too easy to follow; indeed it is the one
part of his system which is already in full force among middle-class
Americans. Dr. Hutchinson is not of those who believe that we
are prone to eat too much. He says, "No nation has ever yet been
known to get too much protein into its dietary. .. .The man who would
put beef twice a day upon the table of every working man in the coun-
try would be the greatest benefactor that the world has ever known,"
but in reading this we must remember that it is the opinion of a physi-
cian who believes that play is quite as essential to human welfare as
is beef after play.
In a chapter on "The Heal Danger of Athletics," we learn that the
danger comes in stopping. "The building of man is never finished until
he is dead....when we stop playing, we stop growing." In the next
chapter Dr. Hutchinson discusses the kind of "Exercise that Rests,"
and deplores the fact that by Americans "Idleness has come to be
regarded not merely as a negative fault, but as a positive crime....
Play must always be apologized for." He explains the scientific atti-
tude toward work and fatigue, and shows "why, within certain limits,
change of activity rests us." But sleep is sometimes even better than
exercise. "Many a fatigued and exhausted business man or over-
worked housemother or teacher would be much more benefited by an
hour's rest or sleep in a well-ventilated room?if possible in the open
than by a brisk two-mile walk. The best possible short vacation
is often to sleep late, take one's breakfast in bed, and loaf industriously
all the afternoon."
Dr. Hutchinson is an acknowledged master of the art of speaking
lxis mind, and it is a great charm of his book that it is so easy to
quote, so easy to discuss with friends. One more passage must serve to
conclude the present tasting, "Any method of life which will carry a
man happily and efficiently until sixty-five or seventy can drop him
in the lap of Mother Earth as speedily and as suddenly as it likes after
that. Indeed, the more suddenly the better, for a full life and a sudden
death are the greatest favors granted by the gods."
A. T.
