A Year's Work in a "Superior" Class
====================================

By Flora TJneich,
Eleventh District School, Cincinnati, 0.
In September, 1910, a class for superior, that is, exceptionally bright, or supernormal children was organized in the Eleventh
District School, primarily for the purpose^ of permitting each
member to pursue his own course (under guidance) regardless o
the speed or progress made by his fellow workers, thus ena
him by the removal of the check rein to complete, if possi e, more
than the one year's course made to fit the so-called average or
middle-stratum child. ,
The selection of material for this class was based upon the
judgment of the previous teacher (which in three cases prove
erroneous) and upon a physical examination to w ic eac pupi
thus selected was subjected. # .,
There were enrolled during the year thirty two pup ?
sisting approximately of seventeen pupils prepare ^ or
Grade, nine for Fourth Grade, and the remainder
and unclassified, several of whom were foreigners, una
speak or comprehend the English language.
Now, we had segregated here a number of Pup1'3', ,
whom was a genius, hut merely a boy or girl who had shown dw
ing the previous year a plus-interest (if I may so era or_
worlt and an ability to forge ahead of his mates 1 S1? ' , ^
tunity to follow natural tendeneies and work independently
not in chain-gang fashion. , ., ,
Next, the mode of procedure was to be decided upo . ^ ^
of all, I must have a knowledge (so far as this is P? f ^
short a time) of the mental equipments an c arac eri ^
individuals, and accordingly a card index was resor e
should reveal to me the strength and wea messes o ra(liate
sort of inventory was to serve as a focus rom w ic . t^e
all our activities, the child and not the wor ' us ^
center. The results proved interesting, but too lengthy
discussed. Suffice it to say that three pupils were smgledont a^
really superior or intellectual. Othe^ showed a marked degree ot
intelligence with a desire to do, and it was my P^?^ to C?^
this mere desire, which I knew would not be a
to carry the pupil through the year's struggles, into a will power
(245)
246 THE PSYCHOLO GICAL CLINIC.
or force, which would not only work for the good of the child
during the year, but leave a lasting impress upon his character.
Remarkable to me, among the facts above gleaned, was the lack
of sustained effort; the desire to be ever shifting and the almost
complete lack of the power of self-abstraction.
Secondly, I must satisfy myself as to qualities most desirable
to be developed,?naturally those which would prove of greatest
benefit to the child in his life to come; those which would fit him
best to fill in an intelligent way, whatever station in life he might
be called upon to fill. Now, I believe, the foremost of these qualities are (1) self-control, (2) self-helpfulness (adaptability), and
(3) concentration and continuity. To secure these ends nothing
was done for the child which he could do for himself, thus developing all his powers through exorcise and a resourcefulness which
would make him self-helpful; nothing was done in a desultory
fashion or left in an unfinished condition, thus developing
accuracy, thoroughness and continuity; and innumerable opportunities were given to prepare work apart from others, and while
other recitations were going on, to train him in the power of concentration. To my mind, a pupil with the power to concentrate,
regardless of surroundings, the power to select (form judgments),
the power of self-examination and last, but not least, the will to
carry through that which he has begun, is fairly well equipped
not only to outstrip his comrades, but to take his place in the world
when necessary and meet in a manly, independent manner the
emergencies that are sure to confront him.
The next question was how to reach these pupils most
effectively. The three methods of approach which naturally presented themselves were the class, the group, and the individual*
according to the subject to be taught and the receptive attitude
of the pupil's mind toward any one particular phase of any subject. The first method was used only in reading or general discussions, the latter two being used almost exclusively in other subjects. It was found, for instance, that for some tho completion
of an assigned task was a mere trifle, and for these there must be
always additional material waiting, difficult enough not only to
enlist their deeper interests, but to call forth their greatest efforts,
and it would, perhaps, surprise many to know how persistently
some of these pupils clung to the successful performance of such
duties, and very frequentiy, when asked if an explanation would
not bo desirable, they would reply that they would rather try a
little longer themselves. Such efforts on tho part of a few at fir^
A "SUPERIOR" CLASS. 247
soon stimulated others to make similar efforts until, like a co
tagion, it spread, resulting in a condition which might e summe
up in the words of one of my pupils when writing an ng is
exercise on "A Year at School," in which she said, Every one
is so ambitious to learn and get ahead of every one else, t at on
has to work pretty lively to maintain a high standaid.
The groups, it must be understood, were only a temporary
arrangement which was to work to the advantage of all. s S??^
as it was seen that one or more pupils had mastered a tas , sue
pupils were placed in a group to work out theii own sa vation 1
the performance of tasks along the same line of wor , on y
somewhat more difficult nature J the latter tending towar
prevention or elimination of any conceit or superci lousness a
might perhaps arise in the pupil from the feeling o too rapi o
easy acquisition of knowledge or attainment of resu ts, a so
the development along right lines of those suPer1^
which might otherwise work destructively rat er an
ively; also avoiding for them the dull monotony o repe 1 .
the possibility of contracting habits of indolence, !a mo^
to result from an enforced idleness or a hal - ear e , .ct
Other pupils, less apt and quick to grasp the one pa ic . '
are reached according to that particular need wi ou a<ocwardthem or creating a feeling of class distinction, since anotjier>
ness in this one thing may be ofFset by grea aci 1 y sauare
For example, while he may master deMmals wi ^ gre ^ d;^cult;eg)
or cubic measure might to his mind pre ^ g fpelino- of
not so easily comprehended; and, therefore, it is wi ?.
shame or mental inferiority, that a pupil voluntanly p a es bnn
self in a second gronp, direetly under the teacher's supems.on,
where his immediate need is met and his wea ess, . guper.
otherwise assume such magnitude as to cause ? . , j ^jme
structure to totter and fall, is reinforced. By
to a small group only, the pupils herein are so aide y ^
vidual help, as to be able in a few days to contin
mates. Thus the group becomes an everc anging ^
As to the subject matter taught: nothing essential haste^
omitted; on the contrary, a maximum 1J 0 merelv by
in the course of study has been accomplished and tis. merelyJ>y
avoiding all mechanical teaching, aPPea mS ? . studying
judgment of the pupils, reducing a drill to a n'e Hndr J
carefully in advance the entire year's course, a?d ^^ble ^
facts and subjects. This makes much correlation possible,
248 THE PSYCHOLO GICAL CLINIC.
prevents dissipation and sidetracking of pupils' energies, presenting sucli material when it could be most effectively assimilated. It
encourages absolutely free and independent expression, and makes
unusual demands ujjon tlie pupils' power of initiative, placing a
premium upon a careful and critical self-censorsliip and conscientious effort, rousing their pride and letting them feel that a confidence
reposed in them must be met in only one way. It dispenses with
repressive measures and substitutes expressive ones, the pupils' inactivity giving way to activity and a spirit of hard work developing
which can best be illustrated by the fact that the boys wait for my
advent in the morning (in spite of the fact that I reach school from
thirty to forty minutes before time of convening school) so that
they may begin work. Another concrete illustration of the above
occurred during a circus parade recently which passed the school
and which all pupils were allowed to witness. The parade did not
start as promptly as was expected and one pupil (a boy) immediately retired to his seat to continue an interrupted task, stating
that he would return as soon as the parade started. Others soon
followed his example.
Now as to results achieved: the most evident and material
gain is, of course, the gain of a complete year to twenty-five pupils,
accomplished on the teacher's part by a greater individualization
in the instruction imparted and by an adjustment of the work to
the individual need, and on the part of the pupil, by enthusiasm
and conscientiousness, and close application to the performance of
assigned tasks.
However, this gain of a year is, in my opinion, the least of
the benefits derived by the pupils in this class. It has served to
promote a mental development, such as would have been impossible
in regular class work, where the class and not the individual must
necessarily be the unit. The thoroughness and accuracy in the
compliance with demands and performance of duties not always
exactly to the pupil's liking, have developed for him that voluntary attention which alone can contribute to the training of mental
activity. The effort required in concentrating this attention upon
the mastery of these duties and the inhibition of personal desires
which in many instances had a tendency toward a more entertain"
ing history lesson or geographical discussion going on elsewhere
in the same room, have equipped him with qualifications which
are not only a necessary adjunct to every scholar's equipment, but
a requisite to every man or woman in the business world where
competitive influences make it possible for only those of stability*
quick judgment and power to act, to reach tho pinnacle, in other
words, to become leaders.
A "SUPERIOR" CLASS. 249
Of particular value aud interest is the converting of certain
well developed energies into less developed or more neglected
channels. For example: a pupil of general intelligence and an
over-abundance of energy, who gave promise of being very trou e
some in his regular surroundings, was given an opportunity ^ o
make good in this class. He had, to begin with, a strong esire
to appear always in the limelight and was, therefoie, always wi
to take the floor. With this selected as his strongest point, 1 took
occasion, first of all, to assign work which required researc an
preparation on his part and which I then permitted him to recoun
to the class. I next encouraged a carefully written account o
such work, insisting upon critical self-examination o resu s.
This worked very well in history, geography, and language, an
when I felt that he was pretty strongly intrenched m these subjects, I prepared for my attack on his weakest point, is ari me ic.
Coupled with this weakness was a feeling that he never cou
learn arithmetic,?a statement which at the time seeme exa00er
ated. Beginning with problems which I knew to e wi 111
province, I showed him clearly that most of his mista -es
to carelessness in fundamental processes, an , y ?.
his vanity, his common sense and the practical va^ue o -se
in after life, prevailed upon him to learn his ta es an ^ ^
greater care in the simple processes. He seeme o ^
faith all that I said, and I suggested that whenever he had a little
spare time, he might attempt certain examp ,ed him
and bring them to me for inspection. This g ?? J Jay
and he set ahont the task with a will, until he came tomeonWay
and said, "I am now beginning to understan an m? , . a
really d^ing good work, not as good as m ^erj^h^a
beginning which bids fair to be crowned _ labored with
not be thought that this was the work of a w , -homeless
the boy for seven months, often feeling that the taslk was hopeles,
but not desiring to give up and confess to myse my
accomplish this self-assigned task. .. - wnrV to
Constant employment, a sense of respons.bd.ty for work to
he accomplished, stimulated hy his own ambition an
imitate others, Overcoming apparently insurmountable
regard for rights of others, willingness to assist each otter
Wholesome respect for honest though not always Bucces ful effort,
and the removal of all artificial stimulants have ai<Wi^top
mg the whole personality and in laying e oun ^ indivi(jllai
character and an ethical culture, which, af '
250 THE PSYCHOLOOICAL CLINIC.
must create for himself from within, not from without, from a
positive, rather than a negative discipline, the importance of which
can scarcely be exaggerated.
Lastly, it must not be supposed that any undue pressure has
been brought to bear upon the child in accomplishing the work.
There was no overburdening, as may be clearly seen in the fact
that there have been only two cases of illness throughout the year,
both cases of tonsilitis, requiring an absence of a week in each
instance. Other absence (and it was very little) was due to attendance upon sick members of family, to holidays, or was enforced
by contagious disease in the home.
In short, out of the thirty-two pupils enrolled, twenty-five
have completed two years' work, three were returned to their
respective rooms as too weak for the work, three were lost through
removal, and one, a Greek, just arrived from his native country
and not knowing a word of English, has progressed by points, i.e.
he is now reading and spelling in the third reader and has completed Fourth Grade arithmetic.
The year, I am sure, though filled with hard work, has beeu
one of pleasure to the pupils as well as to their teacher.
