Moral Instruction and Training in Schools
==========================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

Report of an International
Inquiry. Edited on behalf of the Committee, by M. E. Sadler, Professor of the History and Administration of Education in the University of Manchester. Two volumes: Vol. I, The United Kingdom,
pp. 538; Vol. II, Foreign and Colonial, pp. 378. London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1909.
Few subjects connected with the study and education of children
arouse as great a general interest, or as great a diversity of opinion,
as does the moral training of children. The reasons why the school-men
should feel impelled to make a most careful study of this important
subject, have their genesis in the gradual change in the attitude the
home has taken in such matters, and the change in the interrelationships
of the home, the school, and the church.
Not many decades ago, it was considered that the schools had one
obvious duty to perform,?to give the children in their charge a working knowledge of the three R's. The home and the church combined
to look after the moral side of education, and, generally speaking, did
so with fairly good success. In fact, the home-life and the church-life
were closely connected, the more theoretical work of the church being
supported by the more practical work of the home. In recent times has
come an upheaval of ideas which has deeply affected the religious life
and thought of people in general, causing a loosening of the bond that
held the church and home together, and a consequent falling-off in the
Quality as well as the quantity, of the religious and moral instruction
given to children. The church in general has felt this to be true, and
Hence we have the modern growth of the Sunday-school, by means of
which the church endeavors to make up for the lack of religious an
moral training at home. But thus far the Sunday-school seems to have,
to some extent, at least, failed to do the work expected of it. Its teaching has been rather inadequately done, despite the enthusiasm and goo
will of the volunteer teachers, and its influence has not made up or
the lack of home moral training.
Coincident with this change in relationship between the home an
the church has come the great advance of the public school, not only in
size and power, but in the intelligence and character of those responsible
for its administration and progress. Little by little the school has e t
Jt necessary to take into its hands matters that once solely concerne
the home. At the present time the school concerns itself not only
with the three R's, but also with the health and habits of the children.
The parents, finding that the school handles these matters with increasing
success, are more and more inclined to hand over to the school ot cr
(265)
266 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
matters which were even more intimately the former concern of the
home. So it is that, because the home is no longer a strong factor in
the moral instruction and training of its children, and because the
church also has been unable to compensate for the home neglect and
failure, the school has of late been feeling a greater and greater stimulus
to try its hand where the home and church have weakened. The subject
of moral training and instruction in schools has become a very great
and important one indeed, one to which all far-seeing educators and
those interested in education, are giving careful attention.
Naturally, in so short a time, no universally practical or approved
method of moral training and instruction has been developed. On the
other hand, there are almost as many systems as educators. This is
true, chiefly in the English-speaking countries. On the Continent and
notably in Japan, general polioies are more common and well developed.
At such a time as this the book which is the topic of this paper comes
to fill a very definite need, and does so with no little ability and benefit.
It is the result of a careful inquiry into methods and ideas concerning
the moral instruction of children, primarily in the United Kingdom,
and also in the British Colonies, in France, Belgium, Denmark, Norway,
Switzerland, Germany, the United States, and Japan. In this series
the one inadequate and hardly representative report is that from the
United States, which consists merely of a paper by Mr. Percival Chubb,
on the Ethical Culture Schools of New York City, one on moral training
in the State Normal School, of Hyannis, Mass, by the principal of the
school, and, finally a paper entitled "Democracy in American School
Government," by Dr. Jesse D. Burke, principal of the Teachers' Training School, Albany, N. Y. In the second paper are some rather good
ideas, largely obscured by an excessive use of the capital "I". The
third paper presents an illuminating view of unfortunate political conditions in the United States and a brief outline of the government of
the George Junior Republic. The first alone presents helpful ideas concerning the main topic of the investigation, and this one concerns a
movement which as yet holds only a small place among the educational
systems of this country.
Fortunately the reports from the other countries are far broader
and more complete, making the two volumes interesting as well as profitable reading, for each of these countries seems to have tried out some
particular idea, with results that may go far toward establishing final
criteria.
The first volume, which takes up the results of the inquiry in the
United Kingdom, proves that the conditions there are about the same
as they are with us, that there is no generally approved system of moral
training and instruction, that many differing ideas are being used
experimentally, and that the leading educators have very different views
upon the subject. A summary of all these various systems and ideas
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 267
seems to show that in the United Kingdom there is little direct moral
training or instruction, that, as far as the schools are concerned, what
moral training and instruction there is is left to the personal influence
of teachers, to school sermons, to school scripture lessons, and, in a
very few instances to manual work. One interesting section contains
the very favorable reports as to the results of co-education in several
schools in which this important subject is carefully and successfully
taught.
In France and in Germany, unlike as their systems are in many
ways, there seems to be a more general method in use, in which moral
instruction is the great end in view. It seems, however, to be all didactic
instruction, and little or no training. In France, for instance, the boys
receive through their school years innumerable "talks" and read many
stories tending to develop moral ideas; and yet the French schoolboy is
kept under the most painstaking and complete supervision, almost every
minute of his time, until he goes to college. The license of the colleges
is the logical answer to the detective and repressive work of the lycees.
In the schools, pictures are supposed to play an important part in the
moral instruction of a child, and yet there is no "restraint over the
unbridled license of the pornographic press?which pours its obscenities into every hamlet of the land." In France, as well as Germany,
moral instruction is given much attention, but of actual moral training there seems to be very little. This seems generally to be the case
with most of the other European countries, a bright spot being found
in Denmark, where there has been begun not only moral instruction
of a bold and unusual type, but a very practical kind of moral training.
Strange as it may seem, according to the information put forth in
these two excellent volumes, we must go to Japan for the best example
?f a successful system of combined moral instruction and training. To
be sure, the ideals and ends of the Japanese are very different from
those native to people of European stock, but such as they are, it is
certain that the methods used in the schools are effective in giving the
children these same ideals, and an amount of training which aids
greatly in living up to them. No brief resume could begin to give
justice to the excellence of most of the reports, which must be read in
^11 to be understood and appreciated.
C. K T.
