The World of Dreams
====================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By Havelock Ellis. New York: Houghton,

Mifflin & Co., 1911. Pp. 281.
This contribution to the psychology of dreaming belongs mainly
to the introspective group of dream studies and is based on notes taken
during twenty years, chiefly of the author's own dream experiences,
though occasionally those of immediate friends are included.
There are apparently as many well known authorities who believe
that deep sleep is dreamless as there are those who contend that we
dream during the whole period of sleep, only we fail to remember.
There are even people, who, as far as they know, never dream at all,
Lessing being a famous example of this type.
Mr. Ellis points out some facts about dreams, which we have all
noticed, for instance, their kaleidoscopic character, the constant change
and shifting of the dream image, the lack of voluntary attention,
though all the characters of spontaneous attention are present, the
absence in general of color and the confusion of imagery.
In the chapter on the logic of dreams Mr. Ellis reminds us that
in dreams we are always reasoning, forever trying to construct a
coherent whole out of the most incongruous elements. According to
the author, "the phenomena of dreaming furnishes a delightful illustration of the fact that reasoning in its rough form is only the crudest
and most elementary form of intellectual operation, and that the finer
forms of thinking involve much more than logic."
The various stimuli to dreams are interestingly set forth, the different images evoked by sounds, touch or odors, heat or cold sensations
and those arising from internal organic sensations.
Mr. Ellis believes the fundamental source of our dream life to
be emotion; that the motor activities being mostly inhibited, the actions
suggested by sensory excitation cannot be carried out and therefore
the ensuing struggle is transmitted to the brain as a wave of emotion,
with the result that in our dreams we weave theories to account for
the unknown origin of these waves. That this unknown origin proves
very often to be a source as humble as the stomach will be a shock to
those who have exalted conceptions of the function of dreaming.
Mr. Ellis differs with those writers who consider the facility and
prevalence of murder and other crimes in dreams as proof of the innate
wickedness of human nature made manifest in the unconstraint of
sleep. He explains it as "the inevitable result of the mental dissociation which prevents many important groups of mental representations
from finding their way into consciousness, and at the same time brings
all our mental possessions on to the same plane, so that the things
we have merely thought or heard of have the same visual reality as
(293)
294 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
our own experiences." It is interesting to hear that the real criminal
tends to be peaceful and dreamless in his sleep and that such dreams
as he has are usually of a simple and innocent sort. This seems eminently just and tends to afford a pleasing and harmless variety in the
lives of the virtuous and the vicious, whereby the peaceful God-fearing
citizen may experience the joy of murder without paying its penalty,
while the unhappy murderer may find in dreams the peace and innocence
he has lost. Inasmuch as Mr. Ellis holds that the most potent cause
of dream criminality is a disturbed* or distended stomach, it would
appear that criminals as a class are blessed with sound digestions.
In the well-known dreams of flying and falling Mr. Ellis points
out that the respiratory element is the chief factor, though it is combined with another important element, cutaneous ansesthesia, or disappearance of the tactile sense. Often in those about to die the last
sensation to which expression is given, is one of flying or moving
upward. Thus, "out of dreams and dream-like waking states one of
the most permanent of human spiritual conceptions has been evoked."
The chapter on symbolism in dreams is one of the most interesting
parts of the book. To many it will come as a surprise that oneiromancy,
the ancient art of interpreting dreams has a modern scientific exponent
in Professor Sigmund Ereud of Vienna. This eminent psychologist
contends that behind the symbolism of dreams, there lies always a
wish, which tends to be really more or less of a sexual character, and
that all dreams are purposive and significant. On the other hand Mr.
Ellis does not believe that a single formula can cover all the manifold
varieties of sleeping consciousness, and he presents his side in a very
convincing manner.
The splitting up of a dreamer's personality in order to construct
other personalities is a well-recognized fact in dreams, and this resembles the process of dissociation so often found in hysteria. Sollier
is quoted as saying that "hysteria is a condition allied to sleep, a condition of vigilambulism in which the patients are often unable to obtain
normal sleep simply because they are all the time in a state of abnormal
sleep." The possible affinity between dreams and insanity is only
touched upon as it offers a study by itself.
To every reader the chapter on dreams of the dead will have a
certain poignant interest. Have we not all experienced the intense
happiness of dreaming that our dead are alive? These dreams, Mr.
Ellis points out, are due to a conflict of images, one, which comes from
older and richer sources representing the friend as alive, while the
other image, picturing the friend as dead is more poignant but being
more recent is therefore more easily displaced or exhausted. It is
not to be wondered at that such dreams had a marked influence on
the primitive beliefs of men in a spirit world. As Mr. Ellis says "the
repercussion of this kind of dream through unmeasured ages cannot
fail to have told at last on the traditions of the race."
NEWS AND COMMENT. 295
One of the commonest of human failings is to be intensely interested in one's own dreams, and extremely desirous of retailing them
while the memory is still fresh and vivid, but it is equally and depressingly common to find one's audience on such occasions concealing their
boredom under the most perfunctory air of interest. Mr. Ellis tells us
that once when a boy he gave pain by saying that it was foolish to tell
one's dreams, and that he has done penance for that remark ever since.
The preceptors of my youth not only made this apparently regrettable
statement in an even more forceful manner, but as far as I know
never experienced any subsequent pangs of remorse. Hence, one of
the pleasures Mr. Ellis's book has bestowed is to give me back some
trace of my old childish belief in the importance and interest of my
dreams.
"The World of Dreams" is a book which should appeal to many minds,
for its interest is based on experiences which we all share, and the
manner of its telling is neither so simplified as to displease the scientists nor so technical as to discourage the laymen.
E. E. W.
