3R. Dawson's Inductive Study of School
Children.
========================================


The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1912, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol.. VI, No.
May 15, 1912.

By Arthur Deerin Call,
District Superintendent Henry Barnard District, Hartford, Conn.
Dr George E. Dawson, professor of psychology at the Ilarttord School of Religious Pedagogy, is doing a pioneer work of
importance for all who are interested in the problems of public
education. At least for us who have watched his quiet, scientific
work with children of the Henry Barnard School for the last three
years two things are manifest?first, that the inductive study of
the mental facts of childhood is possible; secondly, that such an
inductive study is essential to accuracy and definiteness of educational theory or practice.
The study to which I refer began with a few children who,
early in November, 1908, were found in our school to be backward in their studies. The object of the undertaking was to
determine, as far as possible, the cause or causes of a pupil's
failure to profit by the work of the public school. The study has
been individual in character, the concern being not primarily for
statistics derived from a large number of cases, but rather for an
explanation, through careful intensive analysis, of why a given
pupil fails, with the practical purpose of helping him if possible.
Its significance, therefore, will be found not so much in the
statistics that have been accumulated, as in the light that has been
shed upon the specific difficulties of individual boys and girls, and
in the suggestions that, it is hoped, have been offered towards
their relief.
The work has centered mainly in two groups of facts: (1) the
mental constitution of the children, as revealing the immediate
cause of their failures; and (2) the condition of their special
senses, their nervous and muscular qualities, their general vitality,
and their specific organic defects, if any, as revealing contributory
or ultimate causes of such failures.
(01)
G2 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Name    Age    Nationality.
School Grade  Room  Scholarship
Height Weight Width of chest (calipers) Depth of chest Width of hips
C Volume (spirometer) Width of shoulders
Vitality J Lung capacity J Heart action (phonendoscope)
( Expansibility (tape-line)
Strength (dynamometer) Endurance (ergograph) Nutritive condition
Use of drugs
Organic f Crippled limbs Spinal curvature
Defects -J Natural deformities Adenoids (rhinoscope)
( Enlarged tonsils Condition of teeth
Nervous ( Chorea Fidgetiness
Defects -j Neuro-muscular incoordination Stammering
[ Over-action of facial muscles
Motor ( Walking Tapping Throwing
Control \ Drawing a straight line Threading a needle
Special f Sight (standard type, astigmatic chart, colored worsteds). Hearing (watch, whispering and acoumeter).
Senses \ Muscle sense (loaded-shells and kinesthetic board) Touch (aesthesiometer)
Emotional f Pain-reaction (algometer) Cheerful or depressed Affectionate or indifferent
Constitution \ Impulsive Stubborn Timid
Intellectual f Attention (Sanford's vernier chronoscope) Recall-memory (Jastrow's memory apparatus)
Constitution ] Association-memory (word tests) Mental responsiveness (picture puzzle)
f Age of father Age of mother Health of father Health of mother
Parentage j Number of children in family living Number dead Health of children
[ Occupation of father Wages of father Father's habits
f Location of home (street)
Number of rooms in house Sanitary condition
Occupation of child at home
Opportunities for play and amusement
Ethnological f Circumference of head Length of head Breadth of head
Traits -j Color and texture of hair Color of eyes Shape of nose
I Character of mouth
INDUCTIVE STUDY OF CHILDREN. 63
Standard anthropoinetrical and psychological apparatus lias
l)pcn used, and exact quantitative measurements have been relied
upon throughout in the conclusions drawn from the study. The
following pieces of apparatus have been supplied by the school and
are now being used in the various tests: (1) a Sanford's vernier
clironoscope, for testing the attention and mental responsiveness
of the pupils; (2) a Jastrow's memory apparatus, for testing their
perception, mental imagery and memory; (3) a puzzle-test, for
determining the power of reasoning and application; (4) an
sesthesiometer, for testing the sense of touch; (5) a kinesthetic
board, for testing the muscular sense, and judgment of form; (G) a
set of visual charts, for testing sight; (7) a speed and precision
apparatus, for testing the speed and accuracy of hand-movements;
(8) a galvanometer, for testing the conductivity of the nervous
system; (9) an algometer, for testing reactions to pain; (10) a
spirometer, for testing lung capacity; (11) a dynamometer, for
SANFORD'R VERNIER OHRONOSCOPE.
DR. DAWSON MEASURING MENTAL KESIONSIVENESS BY MEANS OF THE CHKONOSCOPE. THE MEASUREMENTS ARE MADE IN HUNDREDTHS OF A SECOND AND SHOW
HOW QUICKLY A CHILD CAN REACT TO A STIMULUS OF HEARING, SIGHT, OR TOUCH.
TIIE RECORD IS AN AVERAGE OF FIVE TESTS.
04 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
testing strength and endurance; (12) calipers, for making head and
chest measurements; (13) anthropoinetrical scales, for measuring
height and weight; (11) an aeon meter, for testing acuity of
hearing; (15) Holmgren's colored worsteds, for testing color blindness; (10) hand steadiness apparatus for testing nervous condition; (1.7J a set of verbal association tests for testing range of
mental associations.
Forty-eight children have been carefully tested with this
apparatus, as well as in other ways, as occasion has made advisable,
an average of from four to five hours being given to each pupil.
The card used by Dr Dawson is shown on page 02.
While, as has already been stated, the value of this investigation primarily consists in the diagnosis of individual difficulties and
in suggestions for their relief, certain facts are beginning to
emerge which are not without significance for the further direction
of our study, as well as for the solution of the larger problems to
which it is related. These are summarized in tables I and II.
In addition to the above group of pupils thus studied in detail,
the DeSanctis and Binet-Simon tests for defective children were
applied to some forty pupils, too young or too undeveloped to meet
the conditions of the more elaborate experiments. These tests were
made, for the most part, under Dr Dawson's direction by Miss
Annie Fisher. The children averaged approximately six years of
age. Their failures ranged from none to 50 per cent, with an
average of 19 per cent. These tests were intended to push the
problem of differentiating the defective child back into the very
beginning's of school life. Accepting as the criterion of mental
deficiency the failure to pass in one-tliird of these tests, 25 per
cent of these pupils were found to be defective and of at least
doubtful fitness for entering upon a public school course of study.
With a view to establishing norms of tactile and muscular
sensibility, and of neuromuscular control among school children
within the age limits of our study, Miss Fanny Kollock has tested
normal children during one year. She has thus far completed the
records of fifty boys and girls, with the following results:
Twenty-four boys, with an average age of about twelve years,
required, on an average, 0.3 minutes to fit the blocks into the holes
of the kinesthetic board; while twenty-six girls, with an average of
thirteen years, required 7.0 minutes. The girls thus required 1.3
minutes longer than the boys, indicating a somewhat duller muscular sensibility. In sensitiveness to touch, the same groups of children averaged 1.0 millimeters and 2 millimeters respectively, tb
boys, again, having a slight advantage. In neuromuscular control,
INDUCTIVE STUDY OF CHILDREN. G5
Table I.
Defects
Boys
(Av. age
12 yrs.)
Number
defective
Girls
(Av. age Totals
13 yrs.) ?
Number Number Number Per cent
defective tested defective ! defective
I. In intellectual capacities:
Attention and responsiveness  10 7
Perception and memory for
words and numbers  10 12
Perception and memory for
objects  10 5
Reasoning powers  18 9
One defect  11 0
Two defects  10 5
Three "   5 3
?18 23 48
2S 00
15 32
27 00
17 35
15 31
8 17
All four "   4 4 I . . 8 17
One or more "   30
II. In special, senses:
Sight  13 7
Hearing  7 3
Touch  14 !)
Muscle sense  8
One defect  13
Two defects  0
Three "   4
All four "   2
One or more "   25
III. In motor ability  21
IV. Physical defects:
Spinal curvature  15
Enlarged tonsils j 7
Adenoids  0
Neglected teeth  15
One defect
Two defects
Three "
All four "
One or more
In vitality:
Lack of lung capacity..
Poor nutrition
Lack of strength
Lack of endurance
Defective heart action.
One defect
Two defects
Three "
Four "
All five "
One or more
24
4
14
0
12
10
5
7
6
2
0
20
48 48
48 20 44
10 21
23 48
13 27
4 17 35
4 ! 10 21
1 j 5 11
1 i 3 0
10
35 73
48 | 31
48
48
23 48
13 27
8 ! 17
19 : 39
17 | 35
10 21
7 j 15
1 1
73
8 17
19 39
11 23
20 42
13 27
7 15
10 21
10 21
3 6
0 0
48 30 03
GG THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the average number of errors made in three tests was tliirty-five
for the boys and thirty-six for the girls. Here again the boys have
a slight advantage. It is hoped to continue another year this
experimental study of norms in the directions here indicated, and
likewise in other directions where investigations among school
children have not yet established standards.
While the statistical material of this study of backward school
children does not warrant any very definite conclusions, the individual character of the investigation has gradually shaped in our
minds certain convictions which may here he set down, tentatively
at least:
1. Among the children who fail in their public school work,
there is an appreciable number who ought not to be in a public
school at all. They are so defective mentally that they cannot
profit by the ordinary course of study. The time of the teacher,
usually all too full of urgent duties, should not be wasted upon
KIXAESTIIKTIC BOAItl).
FOR MEASURING THE TIM 10 REQUIRED TO I'lIT EIGHTEEN BLOCKS OI'" DIFFERENT
SIZE AM) SHAPE INTO CORRESPONDING HOLES. THE ItOAKD CONTAINS LARGE AND
SMALL TRIANGLES, SQUARES AND CIRCLES. THE RECORD IS AN AVERAGE OF THREE
TESTS.
INDUCTIVE STUDY OF CHILDREN. 67
such pupils. Moreover, normal children should not be hampered
in their progress by the burden of dull, and often disorderly,
children in their midst. Such children need special, individual
instruction, and should be in a school adapted for their needs.
Usually they are not sufficiently defective to be consigned to state
institutions for the idiotic and imbecile. They should be educated
in their home communities, with the co-operation of their parents,
and every city should have at least one special school fitted to do
this kind of work.
L2. Among children who fail in their public school work,
there is a relatively large number who are misfits in the ordinary
course of study. They are of a type of mind that can get knowledge through symbols only with great difficulty. They can learn
through objects and through manual activities, and would, if
properly trained, become educated in the best sense of that term.
These children are not properly backward children at all. They
/
*- r-'<
5
TEST INC KI'ISKl > ANI) PRECISION.
WITH A TAPPING HOARD, PENCIL AND ELECTRIC CONNMOTIONS, M EASURING THE
NUMItER or TIMKX THE C1IILD CAN TAP IN ONE MINUTE WITH THE METAL PENCIL
UPON A METAL DISK % INCH IN DIAMETEIt, AND THE NUMBER OF MISSES IN THE
SAME INTERVAL. THE RECORD IS AN AVERAGE OF THREE TESTS.
G8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
are merely children for whom our schools as vet make scant provision. If the public school must remain as it is, largely an institution for training in the symbols of knowledge, then these objectminded boys and girls ought to have schools of their own. An
object school would solve the problem, and parents of children who
are misfits in the ordinary school curriculum have a right and a
duty to demand that the object school be provided for their
children.
3. More important than any of these conclusions, as intimated
at the outset, is the revelation that the inductive study of school
children, 011 a much larger scale than perhaps heretofore dreamed
of, is not only possible but mandatory if we are to accomplish with
our instruments of public education what in the nature of the case
should be accomplished.
4. So strong is our belief in the importance of this service
that Dr Dawson is now regularly engaged by our Committee as
"Director of Child Study," giving to the work two days each week.
Table II.
Boys
I (Av. age
Causes of backwardness j 12 yrs.)
j Number
1 defective
Primary mental defects  5 G 48
Mental defects induced by physical defects
Mental defects induced by low
vitality
Mental defects induced by sense
defects
Mental defects induced by immoral habits  2 0
Primary moral defects  3 0
School work not suited to ap-!
titudes    7 4
Girls
(Av. age
13 yrs.)
Number Number
defective tested
Totals
Number | Per cent
defective i defective
11
4
13
4
23
27
8
Backwardness from all causes.. I 30 18
48
2 <1
3 , 0
11 | 23
48 ! 1(H)
