Elimination and Vocational Training
====================================

By G. W. Gayleii,
Superintendent of Schools, Canton, Illinois.
The American people have committed themselves irrevocably
to the doctrine of a universal education. They have created a
system of public school education so extensive in plan that it leads
by successive steps from the first grade of the elementary school
to graduation from the senior year of a university course. Taxes
have been levied, buildings have been erected, and teachers
employed. This splendid system of education was created and i*
maintained to-day that :ill the children of all the people may
receive the benefits of an education which will make them more
efficient workers in their social and industrial world.
Reports from practically every section of the United States,
as given by Ay res in "Laggards in Our Schools," by Straver in
Bulletin IsTo. 5, 1911, of the United States Bureau of Education,
and other investigators, show that a very small per cent of the
whole number of children pass through the entire system and
receive the full benefits of it. The records of our public schools
to-day show that fewer than one-half of the children who start in
the first grade get farther than the sixth grade.
In a small city in central Illinois last year there were enrolled
2010 children. Of this number 1575, or 78 per cent of all children, were in the first six grades, while 444, or 22 per cent, were
in the last six grades. In this school 1803 children were in the
eight lower grades, and 200 in the high school. A city in northern
Illinois shows a total enrolment of 2043 in the eight grades, 1802
being in the first six grades and 241 in the seventh and eighth
grades. A city of south central Illinois which has a grade enrolment of 1538 has 1230 in the first six grades and 200 in the
seventh and eighth grades. A city of western Illinois has a total
enrolment of 3732. Of this number 417 are in the hish school
c
and 3315 in the grades. In the first six grades the enrolment
was 2724. In the last six grades it was 1008. These conditions
I take to be fairly representative of conditions throughout this
state, and show that the public schools in a very large measure
are turning out a sixth grade product.
. These facts bring us face to face with the biggest problem
before the educational public to-day?the problem of universal
(09)
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
education ill the sense that all the children of all the people are
not receiving the preparation for life which the public school is
in duty bound to give. It is more important than any question
of school theory, or school method, and more important than any
question of mere school management. The public school is not
realizing the eud for which it was created. It is not giving that
universal education which is necessary in a democracy where all
have a voice in the management of the social institutions. A
short time ago Dr Draper, in an address before the National
Educational Association, said: "When but one-third of the children remain to the end of the elementary course in a country where
education is a universal passion, there is something the matter
with the public schools."
Why do these children drop out of school ? So far as statistical information bearing on this point is concerned, little is
available, and that little is neither very reliable nor very helpful.
Some of the reasons given are,?to go to work, to help at home,
visiting, sickness, lack of ability, removal from city. These do
not go far enough in explaining conditions. The causes seem to
lie deeper than is generally believed.
Whenever personal investigations have been made, many
parents of eliminated children state either directly or indirectly
that the earnings of the children are needed. This is especially
true of mining and manufacturing districts.
At the beginning of the present school year a woman called
at the office of the writer to secure an "age and school certificate"
for a boy who had just reached the age of fourteen. She stated
that for five or six years she had been doing two washings a day
for six days in the week, by this means earning enough money to
support the family and send the children to school. When I talked
to her of the advisability of keeping the boy in school, how this
would help him in after life, and how he would be handicapped
later if taken out now, she answered by stating that she had been
looking forward to the time when her burden could be somewhat
lightened by his help, but said further that she thought she could
manage a little longer if necessary.
I his is only one of the manv cases which illustrate the
necessity of children dropping out to help parents earn a living.
It is not my purpose here to discuss the social conditions which
require this sacrifice of young manhood and voung womanhood.
1 he only purpose is to show that it is oue of the causes for the
large number of eliminated children at the age of fourteen.
ELIMINATION AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING. 71
A second cause, one receiving much more attention now than
it did a few years ago, is the ill health of children. Sickness or
chronic ill health often keeps the child out of school for days and
weeks, or causes such irregular attendance that it is impossible to
make the percentages necessary for going on with the class. This
retardation means often doing work with smaller children. A\ hen
these retarded pupils reach that period of life when rapid changes
take place, when they cease to be children, they wish to associate
with companions of their own age, they feel humiliated among the
smaller children and seek to get out of school at the earliest
possible moment. These retarded boys and girls are the ones who
keep our truant officers busy rounding them up and placing them
in school. After the age limit is reached they leave school.
Closely allied with the preceding group are the defectives,
who because of their defects drop behind from year to year and
finally because of ill-health drop out of school entirely. Within
(Ik1 last year or so many cases have been called to my attention
where children have not made progress in school work 011 account
of defective eyes, defective cars, adenoids, 01* some other cause
which hampers them in their movement through the grades, and
finally results in elimination. A proper medical examination with
suggestion to parents will help to lessen the cases of elimination
due to this cause.
But we have some children not in ill health and with no
recognizable physical defects, who from some cause are unable to
do the school work and who drop out as soon as they arrive at the
age when the law permits them to go to work. Some of these fail
to adjust themselves to the school, and although in everyday affairs
out of school they seem as intelligent as the ordinary child, in
school they fail to make progress. They are humiliated, they lose
confidence, they are convinced that they are failures. These children are usually the ones who are 'born short' in some particular
kind of ability, most often in literary work, for which they see
little use in the practical affairs of life. As Mr. Ayres says: "We
know them in the schools as the children who arr always behind
a little physically, a little behind intellectually, and a little behind
in the power to do. Such a child is the one who is always 'It' in
the competitive panics of childhood. TTe cannot jump so far as
the other boys, he takes a step more in getting across the street
from curb to curb when the boys are seeing in how few steps they
can do it. He always fnll* below; he falls down?be knows he is
<roin<r to fall."
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
There is a pretty widespread criticism made by tlie best
friends of the schools that they are trying to do too much and that
standards are too high; that these standards are such that only
the children of the best intellectual ability can do the work, that
the average or the dull child has but little show to do it. When
we consider that over 57 per cent of our children are behind the
normal grade, as many as 30 per cent being behind two or more
years, it looks as if there were some ground for the criticism.
In an eighth grade in one of our city schools last year 49
pupils out of a class of 110 failed in grammar. The students, as
far as I have been able to find out, were average boys and girls
of fair to good intellectual ability. They made fair grades in other
subjects, but on account of the high standards in the subject of
grammar almost 50 per cent of them failed. At the beginning of
the present year when the roll was called only a small fraction
of the 40 failures reported. Of the 50 who did not fail in the
grammar work a much larger percentage appeared and are continning the work in the high school. High standards, strict
grading, without taking into consideration the amount of effort
the children put forth, together with the fact that many times
there is a lack of real inspirational work on the part of the teacher,
may account for a larger percentage of our eliminated pupils than
we are ready to acknowledge.
There is a pretty well defined opinion on the part of many
parents that the schools are not giving the greatest possible service
to their children, and that what they get in school is of little value
in the preparation for the life that they must live outside of school.
The farmers say that there is not much in the school that prepares
the farmer lad for living a better life than his father lived. The
day laborer and the mechanic make the same criticism, and say
that there are very few things in the public schools that prepare
their children for service in manual and industrial work. Ninetvsix per cent of the world's work is manual or industrial, and 4 per
cent is professional. Tn other words, 00 per cent of the workers
are engaged in manual and industrial pursuits and 4 per cent are
largely now, as they have been in the past, facing toward the
university, with courses of study looking toward a professional
more often than toward an industrial career.
This idea that aside from the rudiments of the three Tl's
there is nothing worth while in the schools for the children who
will do manual and industrial work in after life, has a great deal
to do with child rt n dropping out of school. Anv shul v of elimrnaELIMINATION AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING. 73
tion and retardation must sooner or later confront us with the
necessity of changing our course of study so that it will face
toward the actual life of the majority of children after they leave
school rather than toward the college or university. The school
must take account of the life around it as well as differences in
tastes and abilities of pupils. The time has come when, beginning
about the sixth and seventh grades, our curriculum must be modified
to suit child life. It must take on more industrial and vocational
work and look less to literary and professional work if the school
is to achieve the thing it was created to do,?educate all the
children of all the people. "The ideal of education in a democracy
will be realized when it is possible for each child to work to the
maximum of his capacity and to secure during those years devoted
to school activity that training which will best fit him for his
life's work."
