A New Method for Determining Rate of Progress in a Small School System
========================================================================

By Nokman Cameron, Ph.D.,
West Chester, Pa.
(Concluded.)
Acceleration.
In all the discussion on the subject of retardation scarcely
any consideration has been given to the neutralizing force of
acceleration or double promotions. There may be much of it in
larger school units as stated by Thorndike (4), Greenwood (5)
and Wagner (6), but in the smaller ones its effect in offsetting
failures is insignificant.
In the Elkton schools, of the total number of units (2221)
made by 295 pupils, 19 were units of plus progress; and of 3938
units of all kinds made by 1051 pupils, 26 were units of plus
progress. In either case they represent less than 1 per cent of
the whole number of units. Special inquiry, moreover, reveals
the fact that more than one-half of these double promotions were
the result of work done in the summer under private tutors.
Double promotions made under such conditions are merely evi-
dence of ambition and ability on the part of the pupils making
them, as testified by the fact that approximately 80 per cent of
such pupils reached the high school. That there is not in many
schools more promotion during the year on account of special
fitness, is largely due to the fact that there is no person who will
assume the authority to put pupils up on trial. There is too little
of this sort of necessary supervision in our schools, especially in
the grades where it is most needed.
Rate of Progress through the Grades.
By the rate of progress is meant the rate at which the average
pupil passes through the grades. It is evident that for the indi-
vidual this rate varies, being dependent upon the ratio of failures
to promotions.
If a pupil completed five grades of work in five years, or
eight grades in eight years, i.e. a grade for each year in school,
we would classify him as normalif he did the same amount of
work in less than that time, as supernormal; and if in more than
(279)
280 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
tliat time, as subnormal. Of the 295 pupils under consideration,
according to this classification, 2 would be supernormal, 23 normal,
and 270 subnormal. It will be seen that a very small per cent
of pupils pass through the grades at a normal rate of speed. Per-
haps it would be well to classify all who reach the high school with
only one failure as normal, for it is doubtless true that the
majority of such pupils have failed once. From this point of
view, the requirements of the course of study might even be
considered supernormal.
Table 1A* gives the average of each kind of units and the
average total for each year. For example, the pupils in the
eighth year of school have completed 4.79 grades, whereas they
should have completed seven grades. In the eleventh year those
still in school have completed 7.74 grades instead of ten. At the
same rate it would require the pupils in the eighth year approx-
imately 14.6 years to complete ten grades, and those in the
eleventh year 13 years to complete the same number of grades.
It is clear that the greatly retarded ones in the eighth year have
dropped out before the eleventh year, as is evidenced by the dif-
ferences in time necessary to complete the ten grades.
Taken altogether the 295 pupils made 1513 units of normal
and plus progress in 2202 units of time, or an average of 1.45
years for a grade. At this rate it would require the average
pupil 14.5 years to finish ten grades. Pupils moving at this rate
through the grades do not graduate. Those in school in 1908-09
have completed 1254 units of normal and plus progress in 1627
units (years) of time, which is equivalent to an average of 10
grades in 13 years. This is probably too low a rate of progress
for the system over a period of time, 14.5 years being more
nearly correct. Due weight is given to the fact that the pupils
in school in 1908-09 have not been in this system from the time
they first began school. Consequently, many of the units of minus
progress made in the early grades are not included in calculating
the rate of progress for those pupils.
Ayres shows (8) that "the average child in the average city
school system progresses through the grades at tho rate of eight
grades in ten years." On the same average such a child would
complete ten grades in approximately 12.5 years, or two years less
than the average child in the Elkton system. There can be no
question that the rate of progress will vary with the system.
According to the Ayres method it would require 11.2 years for
? See Tub Psychological Clinic for January 15, 1012, p. 2C5.
RATE OF PROGRESS. 281
Aurora, 111., and for Erie, Pa., 16.6 years, for the completion
of ten grades.
Leaving School.
Pupils leaving school come under three heads,?graduates,
those leaving to enter another school, and those dropping out
finally before graduation from the schools.
The graduates of a system represent its finished product; and
the larger the number of these, other things being equal, the more
efficient is the system. That this finished product is very small
in proportion to the raw material is generally known. Out of
our 295 beginners, only 8.5 per cent graduated, that is, approx-
imately 17 out of every 200 finished the course.
In order to estimate roughly the per cent of graduates for
eleven years, a number equal to one-eleventh of the whole number
of beginners has been taken as a basis. The reason for this is
that the number of beginners is about equal to one-half the num-
ber of enrolments in the first grade for the eleven years. The
number of beginners is 555, one-eleventh of which is 50.5. The
number of graduates during this time is 172, an average of 15.6
per year, or 31 per cent completing the course. If the rate of
progress is as we have shown it to be, it is evident that this per
cent is too high. The explanation is to be found in the fact
that 44 per cent of the students in the high school have entered
it directly from other schools, and that a fair percentage of these
remain to graduate. It is probably more nearly correct to say
that the percentage of graduates from the high school under
normal conditions is about eight.
Of the 1514 pupils in school during eleven years, 360 left
TABLE IV.?NUMBER AND PER CENT ELIMINATED BY THE END OF EACH GRADE.
(Graduates not included.)
Grades
a f
| S J
u N (
Pupils
Per cents.
a ~
f Pupils (1-11
of number
for 11 yrs.).
Per cents...
Elementary School
1.55
33
12
4
.55
4
42
14
5.2
14
86
29
6.6
27
122
41
6.4
40
6
167
56
6.7
53
196
66
4.5
62
High School
1
I
241
815
12.3
86
261
6.7
100
269
91
4.5
109
270
o92
1.36
112
(a) 8.5 % graduated.
282 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
TABLE V.?PER CENT ELIMINATED BY THE END OF EACH TEAR OP AGE.
(Graduates not included.)
Ages
295 Group...
1514 Group b
10
11
10
10
12
16
19
13
37
35
14
61
55
15
77
80
16
87
97
17
90
108
18
91
110
19
a92
112
20
112
(a) 8.5 % graduated.
(b) Calculated as in Table IV.
to enter other schools. Thirteen per cent of the 360 transferred
from the high school and 87 per cent from the elementary
school. On the other hand, 44 per cent of the students coming
from other schools enroll in the high school. The great disparity
in percentages of pupils leaving and entering the high school, is
to be accounted for by the fact that most of the pupils leaving
the high school are compelled to give up their public school edu-
cation altogether.
The discussion of the vast number of pupils who actually
quit the grades and leave unfinished the education which the state
provides, will centre around two questions: (1) In what grades
and at what ages do the pupils leave school? (2) What are the
causes for this dropping out?
The percentages in table IV answer the first of these ques-
tions. It will be seen that with both groups of pupils, 295 and
1514, the eliminating process begins early in the grades, being
heaviest in the fourth, fifth and sixth grades, and in the first
year of the high school. In the last grade mentioned there is an
elimination of 24 per cent in the large group. The same pecul-
iarity is manifested in table V, which gives the elimination by
ages, where 25 per cent drop out at fifteen, and 17 per cent at
sixteen. This large amount of elimination in the first year of
the high school and at the ages of fifteen and sixteen is due to
the large number (44 per cent) of pupils entering the high
school from the outside. Up to the last grammar grade the per-
centages of elimination for the two groups are approximately the
same for the different ages and grades.
Ayres (9) and Thorndike (10) express contradictory
opinions on a fundamental fact concerning elimination in the
early grades. The former contends that "there is abundant evi-
dence that the general tendency of our schools is to hold practically
all of the pupils to the sixth grade," while the latter believes
that "pupils leave in considerable numbers from almost the begin-
ning of the elementary school course." No doubt there are sys-
RATE OF PROGRESS. 283
tems which will furnish evidence for each opinion. In the
Elkton schools the figures corroborate the fact that many pupils
leave in the early grades, and it is probably true that this is
the general tendency throughout the schools of Maryland, outside
of Baltimore. In the former there is no compulsory attendance
law to hold them to a specified age. Consequently, many leave
who would continue longer in the grades of systems where such
a law is enforced. If the failures are very heavy in the first
six grades, elimination may be concealed by the seeming equality
of these grades; but the natural inference that there is little or
no dropping out there would be unjustified. Thorndike shows an
elimination of GO per cent by the last grammar grade, Ayres 49
per cent, while in Elkton approximately 66 per cent have
dropped out before the high school is reached. The larger per-
centages of elimination in the earlier grades in these schools, as
compared with other studies, may be partly chargeable to the
absence of a compulsory attendance law and partly to the large
number of failures in these grades.
In calculating the number of pupils retained to the several
grades both Ayres and Thorndike have used as a basis a number
of beginners variously estimated. Applied to the Elkton statis-
tics the Ayres' method gives a number of beginners too small by
10 per cent, while the number obtained by the first of Thorn-
dike's methods is too large by 42 per cent, and by his second,
by about 8 per cent. The latter investigator does not state which
method would be applicable to small systems. If the first of the
two were used the inferences based on the results would have
little or no value. Ayres' method of calculating the beginners
gives a number not far from the true one in systems where the
migratory movement of the population is not large. If, however,
unusual conditions of change prevail in a school population, it
will be difficult to determine the true retention and elimination
in the grades except by having exact data as the basis for such
calculation.
Summary on Leaving School.
Approximately eight out of every hundred beginners remain
to graduate.
Eighty-seven out of every hundred transfers are from the
elementary schools.
About three and one-half times as many pupils enter the
Elkton high school from the outside as leave it to go elsewhere.
284 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Elimination forces are operative in all the elementary
grades, being strongest in the fourth, fifth and sixth grades.
Approximately 66 per cent of the pupils have left school
before the first high school year is reached.
Causes of Elimination.
This brings us to the second question, What are the causes
for this dropping out process?
Retardation is both an effect and a cause. Irregular atten-
dance, incapacity, late entrance, etc., produce it, and in turn
it is the most potent cause of elimination. Whenever the work
of the grade must be repeated, indifference is often engendered,
a dislike for work follows, and the pupil leaves. It is, indeed,
rare that a pupil will remain to complete the high school course
who has failed more than twice. If we assume that he enters
at the age of six and fails twice, he will be almost twenty years
of age when he graduates. Boys, in particular, have no inclina-
tion to remain in the secondary school until twenty-one. By
applying the age-grade method to the 622 pupils leaving finally
in eleven years, it is found that 60 per cent are retarded as
compared with 31 per cent for the whole number in school for
the same time. Again, of these same pupils the average number
of units of minus progress for those leaving is 1.14 and for the
whole number in school .89. Here is evidence, then, that retarda-
tion brought about through failure to make promotion, is an
important cause of leaving school.
A second important cause of elimination is age. Of the 270
pupils leaving school the largest proportion, 21 per cent, drop
out in the eighth year. This brings the child to the age of
fourteen or fifteen, the age at which the largest per cent of
pupils leave school. Pupils will remain in school during their
early years, despite failures to accomplish the work, but when they
reach their thirteenth, fourteenth or fifteenth year and find them-
selves in the lower grade, they see the hopelessness of their attempt
to finish the course, and if most of their companions have left
school, or are in the higher grades, they leave to take up some
occupation in which they can do something. In schools where
an effective compulsory attendance law precludes leaving school
until fourteen, large numbers drop out of the elementary school
at this age. Retention to this age, however, has an effect of tiding
over the critical period for many boy and girls, with the result
that they remain to complete the course. This fine influence is
lost to the schools where the statute books contain no such act.
RATE OF PROGRESS. 285
There are many other conditions which indirectly are the
cause of pupils leaving school. Many of these, such as ill health,
needed at home, sickness of others, etc., are merely the last straw.
Forces have long been at work impelling to this final day in
school. So long as the centripetal forces towards the school are
stronger in the aggregate than the centrifugal forces away from
it, the child remains. But once the balance begins to swing tne
other way, it moves rapidly and is hard to check in its course.
That this ultimate elimination in nine out of ten cases is not
the result of any one impelling cause, admits of no doubt. An
accumulation of gathering forces, as the pupil wends his way
along the school course, is the real cause of leaving. The home
and school and society in general are all more or less responsible
for the final outcome, leaving school.
Measuring the Efficiency of a School System.
Many methods have been adopted for comparing the relative
merits of different school systems; oftentimes a method is advo-
cated merely because of the favorable showing it makes for the
system interested. As soon as it fails to do this it falls into
disuse. Frequently a system boasts of the large number of mem-
bers in its graduating class, or the number of the first year of
the high school who reach the last year, or the per cent the
number in the last year of the high school is of the whole number
in the school. All these provide means of comparing some feature
of one system with the same feature of another, but they do not
accurately determine what the real efficiency of the system is.
Ayres (11) has proposed a method for estimating the effi-
ciency of a system which seems at first glance to offer a fair basis
for comparison. Two factors are considered: first, the per cent
of output on the basis of one thousand beginners, which gives
efficiency from the point of view of product; and secondly, the
per cent the ideal number of pupils is of the actual number
necessary to produce the output, which gives the efficiency from
the point of view of plant economy. The first of these multiplied
by the second expresses the index of efficiency of the system.
That is, if a school has in its eighth grade, or last year of the
elementary school, for every one thousand beginners, four hun-
dred pupils, the first factor of efficiency would be represented by
40 per cent. If instead of eight thousand pupils in the eight
grades, there are nine thousand, then the efficiency from the
second point of view would be 88.8 per cent. The product of
280 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
these two gives 35.5 per cent as the index of efficiency for
the school.
Granting then that Mr. Ayres' methods of obtaining the
number of beginners and the number reaching the last grade of
the elementary school would give approximately the correct results
for a school system where no pupils entered from the outside and
none left to enter other schools, a just comparison of the efficiency
of different systems could be made.
But do all the children who begin in a school system remain
in it until they leave finally? Is the number that enters the
schools of any community, borough, or township, from other
schools of any considerable magnitude ? The answer to the first
question must be in the negative; not only do they not remain in
the system, but a very large percentage of them leave to enter other
schools. Of the 1514 different pupils who were in the Elkton
schools during eleven years, 3G0, or 24 per cent, left to enter
other schools; 46, or 3 per cent of these were high school pupils,
and 314, or 21 per cent, were from the elementary grades. It
must be borne in mind here that of these 1514 pupils 3GO of
them were still in school in September of 1900, so that the basis
on which these percentages are estimated is too large. If they
were calculated on a basis of 1514 minus 3G0, or 1154, the results
would be 4 and 27 per cent respectively. Here, then, it is evident
that many pupils leave one system to enter another, and that
most of the transferring is among the elementary grades.
Now for the second question: Is the number that enters from
other schools of any considerable magnitude? Out of the 1514
pupils just referred to, 501 or 30 per cent, came from outside
schools. Of this last number 330, or 22 per cent, entered the
elementary grades, and 2G1, or 17 per cent, entered the high
school.
This estimate does not allow for the fact that 367 of the
522 pupils in the school in 1808-00 were there beforo that year.
If this number bo deducted from the 1514, and the difference,
1147 be taken as a basis, the pupils entering from other schools
will be 20 and 23 per cent respectively.
If the conditions shown to bo true in the Elkton schools
prevail in other systems, and there is every reason to believo they
do, for this is a community in which the population makes no
more than the average change from year to year, then the question
arises: What system does Ayres* index of efficiency measure?
If 30 per cent of the pupils in the school aro from other systems,
RATE OF PROGRESS. 287
his method gives a value which is made up of the elements good
and bad of numerous systems. From what systems these pupils
came, and how many from each, are questions that a lack of
data prevents our answering. It is probable that many of the
pupils who enter a highly organized system, suffer more in the
system from which they come than they would during the same
period in the one they enter. This being the case, does the index
of efficiency determined by the method described justly estimate a
system's worth ? It seems evident that such a procedure would
place responsibility on the wrong shoulders.
Some plan is necessary that will show what the system
has done and is doing for the pupils for the length of time they
have been under its influence. What would be better than all
else from the point of view of the public school system in general,
would be to have a complete record of each individual pupil in
order that the effect of the whole educational process on the child
might be known. This, in our present condition of school records,
is beyond our power to measure, but something can be done in
the way of determining the effect of the different factors of a
system on the pupils within it.
It has been shown in previous sections on retardation and
leaving school, that failure of promotion produces retardation,
and that elimination is due to a high degree of retardation, or
frequent failures, or in other words, that the larger the number
of units of minus progress as compared with that of normal and
plus progress combined, the older the pupils become in the lower
grades, and the greater will be the per cent of elimination in
these grades.
Moreover, the more pupils drop out in the lower grades the
fewer there will be in the first and subsequent years of the
high school. Since there is this definite relation between the
numbers of these different kinds of units of progress, the efficiency
of a system may well be measured by a per cent obtained by
dividing the combined number of units of normal and plus
progress by the sum of the units of normal and minus progress.
For example, the 1514 different pupils who were in the Elkton
schools during the eleven years made 3001 units of normal and
plus progress and 3912 units of normal and minus progress.
The former divided by the latter gives 11 as the index of efficiency
for the system during eleven years. While this illustrates well
enough the method of obtaining the per cent, it would be imprac-
ticable to apply it to so long a period of time. What every
288 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
superintendent of schools should be able to do in any given year,
is to report upon what his system has done for the pupils who
have been under its influence.
A study of the records of those pupils who are in school
at the beginning of 1908-9 and who have been in the present
system during previous years reveals the fact that the total number
of units of normal and plus progress is 1254 as compared with
1627 units of normal and minus progress. This gives as the
index of efficiency 77, or practically the same as that for the
eleven years.
Still another way of showing the efficiency of a system is
to find the relation between the same factors named above for
all the pupils in the school for the year. This might be termed
the yearly efficiency of the school system, as distinguished from
the period efficiency which represents the relation of the total
number of units of normal and pins progress to the number of
units of normal and minus progress for the period of years chosen.
As an example of the application of this method to determine
yearly efficiency, the total number of units of normal and plus
progress combined and of normal and minus progress are for
the year 1908-9, 333 and 436, respectively. By dividing the
former number by the latter the index of efficiency is found to
be 76.4.
Of the three ways of applying this method, the last is the
most practicable, for it is the most economical from the point
of view of time and labor. Moreover, it offers a facile means,
not only of comparing one system with another, but also of com-
paring the efficiency of the same system from year to year.
Summary.
In the present state of school records the efficiency of a
school system cannot be measured by a ratio between the number
of beginners and the number of pupils reaching tho last grade
of the elementary or high school, because of the largo percentage
of pupils entering tho system from tho outside, and leaving to
enter schools elsewhere.
The ratio of tho number of units of normal and plus progress
to the number of units of normal and minus progress will give
an adequate method for measuring efficiency.
Either yearly or period efficiency of tho system may bo
measured.
The efficiency of the Elkton school system is approxi-
mately .77.
RATE OF PROGRESS. 289
Suggestions to Superintendents.
In the gathering and study of the statistics in this investi-
gation a few facts have stood out so impressively that it seems
worth while to present them for the benefit of those engaged in
the organization of schools.
First, the necessity of some other method of promotion than
that used in many of our large school systems to-day seems im-
perative. It is still the custom in practically all the smaller towns
and in a large number of cities to make promotions only at the
end of the year. That this is a serious factor in producing
retardation there can be no doubt.
If late entrance or early leaving is not due to actual absence
from school, but merely to a transfer from one school to another,
it is not so likely to result in failure of promotion. But if children
are out of school on account of sickness or because of being needed
at home in the fall or spring, they will fail to make the next
higher grade at the end of the year. Of the 701 failures made
by 295 pupils, 134 were made by pupils who entered late or left
early. Of these 134 failures, 37 were related to late entrance, and
97 to leaving early. Investigation reveals the fact that 111 of the
134 enrolments entering late or leaving early were present either
for the first half or for the last half of the year. Previously, it
has been shown that 85 per cent of those making 90 per cent
of attendance are promoted. Therefore, if we take 85 per cent
of 111 we have 94 pupils who would have been promoted if the
year's work had been divided into two separate units, one to be
completed during the first half and the other during the last
half of the school year. In all there were made by these 295
pupils 701 units of minus progress. Promotions made as
described above would have decreased this number 94, or 13
per cent. The system that has double promotions does more than
make a saving of 13 per cent of the number of units of
minus progress among those pupils that make 90 per cent of
attendance for a half a year. There are some pupils who make
as low as 80, 70, and 60 per cent of attendance and yet are
promoted. A part of these too would be rescued from the school
failures by the system of double promotions.
In this connection it may be suggested that a special class
should be formed in every school to give additional instruction to
pupils behind their grades. Many failures would never be made
if each school system provided such a means of assisting the pupils
at the time when they most need it. Many a child has received
290 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the first start toward elimination when upon returning to school
after an unavoidable detention at home he has been held respon-
sible for previous work without any assistance from the teachers
or others. The special class or special teacher would have removed
this cause for future failures and consequent early leaving of
school.
A second matter which needs attention is examinations. In
some few schools examinations have been done away with because
of the feeling that they are unnecessary. To the writer they
seem to have one significant implication; that the average teacher
is incapable for one reason or other of judging whether or not
a child is fitted to pass to the next higher grade.
In order to throw some light upon this question a special
study has been made of 1514 pupils. It appears that 509 includ-
ing the first and second grades (239 without them), did not
attend up until the time of final examinations and yet were found
in school the next year, either in the grade of the previous year
or in a higher one; 171 of these including the first and second
grades (80 without them), were promoted. That is, omitting
pupils of the first and second grades, 17 per cent of those not
attending up until the time of examinations were promoted to
the next higher grades. It may bo assumed that a few of these
did take the examinations at the beginning of the following
year, but this was not a usual custom. Since no system of exemp-
tions is in vogue in the Elkton schools, hero is evidence that
many pupils are promoted either on trial, or in some manner
make their way into the next higher grade without having to take
the examinations that are considered all important.
The third and perhaps most important fact that has been
brought out in this study is the utter lack of data necessary f?r
a proper study of school problems. A need for a uniform record
card has long been recognized by those connected with educational
matters, and many such cards have been proposed. In this inves-
tigation the writer has personally gathered and collated the sta-
tistics which are hero set forth in tabular form, and ho has had
abundant opportunity to learn what a record card should contain.
During this whole study note has been made of what facts ehoul
be recorded on such a card, and it is believed that the cards
here proposed give all the practical information necessary to
determine at any time exactly what a system is doing for tho
pupils in it, and what it has done for them in tho past, so that tho
index of efficiency may be accurately determined, and valid com
parisons made with tho results of other systems.
RATE OF PROGRESS. 291
The transfer card suggested here seems to indicate all the
information that one system should send to and immediately
receive from another. The numbers on this card should provide
a means of obtaining any additional facts that might be neces-
sary to a complete history of the child's school life.
(Front)
Record card of. School
(Address)
Pupil's name Pupil's number (in this system)
(Last name) (First name)
Preceding schools with pupil's numbers (in order from first)
Dates: Beginning school Leaving school
(yr. mo. da.) (yr. mo.) (yr. mo.)
0 '"d '"d ?> !> M M l"dhd O O Causes of absence Causes of non-prom.
||||||t|5-l||fll|ip ffgs?
UHt Will
2 5. S ra oo p b in a P ? a cu_. ^ g
P p S DM o <Q q a t* CO _ _ S- CT5
^ ? i:? eL? Zz. 2 5 2, 2. S- m p ? cr o p
2 S" D mO m cL o P 2. 2. n n tJ" O < K O 2
| If U - ?1" tl B gs tgrf
? !l Is B I ? ? i 8*5- '8
g.
(Back)
Mental record Physical record
L_jjq >_I wjO>k_|C^C ^ (0 S3 ?
Efp>o,SSS-to2.Bo?.p3- tds-tr1 foptr1^ s- o 3 2 a
O a^o n faofBS 2. g 3. era ^ 2. sr
2- ? ^ m c ^ m 3 a P co o a P
^ 2-B?.J5.Qr, or5,2.1"(MUH ^ H g " o
2 o re ?? -? ? ?T B B ate
S ? g. 3" ? ^ g
P I a ^
C g re
g a g
g 2
292 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The cards proposed here are the result of educational experi-
ence covering many years of school work.* If they prove to be
of use in bettering the manner of keeping our school records, the
writer will feel repaid for the amount of time and thought he has
given to the task.
Transfer card of School
(Address)
Pupil's number in system just left..... Name
(Last name) (First name)
Preceding schools with pupil's numbers (in order from first)
Dates: Birth Beginning school Leaving school
(yr. mo. da.) (yr. mo.) (yr. mo.)
Grade Present standing Physical history of abnormalities
S? &*? EH V re C 3. re ~-g re ^ ^^re^trc^rePO
g-S'x-S *2 ^ ^ 3 ?? S-rSrS 2-5s.' tdpt-|^S-c3h|rec3
g ? ~ g- i 2.<g ^ |.|-
i i g o- ?? g pi?T. re.cr BP
^ g " | a. ?
?" ? &
B
Fill out, detach, and send to School.
Pupil's number (in system just left) Name
(Address)
(Last name) (First name)
Pupil's new number in system just entering
Grade entered When
(yr. mo. da.)
Principal.
REFERENCES.
1 Ayres, L. P. Laggards in Our Schools. N. Y. Charities Pub. Com., 1909,
p. 146.
2 Lurton, Freeman E. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. V, p. 17.
3 Ayres, L. P. Laggardsa p. 45.
4 Thorndike, E. L. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, p. 238.
5 Greenwood, J. M. Education, Vol. XXIX, p. 280.
G Wagner, A. E. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, p. 1G9.
7 Reports of the State Board of Education for Maryland, 1889 to 1910.
8 Ayres, L. P. Laggards, p. 87.
9 Ayres, L. P. Laggards, p. 70.
10 Thorndike, E. L. Elimination of Pupils from School. Bulletin of U. S.
Bureau of Education, 1907, p. 14.
11 Ayres, L. P. Laggards, p. 175.
? The writer is indebted to Charles A. Wagner, West Chester State Normal
School, for many valuable suggestions and criticisms in the preparation of these
cards.
