Administration of School Luncheons
====================================

By Alice C. Bougiitojn",
Philadelphia, Pa.
There are approximately 170,000 children in the primary
schools of Philadelphia. Over one-tliird of this number come
from homes below the poverty line; one-third more are just above
it; the remaining one-third are comfortably situated.
The work in school feeding, which has been done here for
the past few years under the Home and School League, has been
largely among the first two groups of children?those near the
poverty line. Despite this fact, the amount spent by each child
in the schools where lunches are served, is $1 a year, and this
is by 110 means all the money that the child has to spend. It is
then a simple matter to calculate that the money spent by the
children in the public schools of our city is about $170,000 a
year. This is a very large sum of money and worthy of con-
sideration on the part of the Board of Education, as to the possi-
bility of making this expenditure a strong factor in the scheme
of public education.
Penny Lunches. There are nine schools where penny lunches
are served at the 10:30 recess, The luncheon consists of milk,
one hot dish each day (the portion being one-sixtli of a quart),
crackers and fresh or cooked fruit. The kindergarten and first
grade children do not have recess with the others, but they can
buy a graham cracker and a cup of milk for a cent. This luncheon
grew out of the demand of the children for something to eat at
10:30 and has been the means, in all the schools where it is
served, of driving the push-cart man away from the door. It is
very popular and is used by from 40 per cent to 75 per cent of
the children in attendance at the school.
Three-cent Dinners. Three of these schools have, in addi-
tion to the penny lunch at 10:30, a dinner at noon. The dinner
consists of a hot dish,?soup, stew or fish, or a meat substitute,?
bread and fruit, or a cooky. The charge is three cents. There
is only one hot dish for the day, but the children are told what
they are going to have when they buy their tickets in the morn-
ing, and the few who do not like the dish for the day are easily
satisfied by having, in its place a large bowl of milk, or a cup
of cocoa.
(44)
ADMINISTRATION OF SCHOOL LUNCHEONS.
1
,
M
A SPECIAL CLASS PROLONGING THE JOYS OF BEAN SOUP FOR THE PICTURE.
A SPECIAL CLASS PROLONGING THE JOYS OF BEAN SOUP FOR THE PICTURE.
46 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Experiment with Five-Cent Dinners. The service so far
considered is confined to primary schools. In two grammar schools
with enrolments of 800 and 1G00, an experiment is now being
conducted to see whether or not the luncheon can be made entirely
self-supporting if a charge of five cents is made for practically the
same dinner as is served in the elementary school for three cents,
the difference being that the older children receive a little larger
quantity of the hot dish and a roll instead of the bread. The aim
is to make a profit of a cent per meal over the cost of the food.
Penny Extras. In connection with both dinners, there is a
table arranged like the penny luncheon counter where there are
always milk, cocoa, crackers and fruit, and sometimes a simple
dessert for one cent, so that the children who have brought their
lunch from homo may supplement it by getting something hot,
or those children who do not have the necessary three or five cents
may get a small amount of nutritious food for a penny at this
time.
Number of Children served. In all the schools served there
are about G000 children who have the opportunity to buy the
lunch or dinner and of that number fully 3000 patronize them
daily. So far, the problem of providing food for the children too
poor to buy the food has not been satisfactorily solved. Under
the system of the Home and School League no child receives a
luncheon who does not pay for it and there are some undernour-
ished children in each school who have not even the necessary
penny. To find a practical solution of this problem is one of the
next steps to be taken.
Equipment and Plant. The equipment is very simple. The
serving dishes,?cups, bowls, pitchers, and large trays,?are all
of white enamel. White enamel ware is more expensive than
agate but well worth the difference in cost. It not only adds
greatly to the attractiveness of the food, but .also has a positive
educational value through training the children to appreciate and
desire neatness and cleanliness about them. Another point not
to be overlooked is the effect upon the worker. ? The glistening
whiteness of the cups and bowls when kept in good condition well
repays her for the labor involved in their thorough washing and
daily sterilization. Needless to say the work of the superin-
tendent is hereby lightened. The saleswomen are very human,?
they respond to attractive surroundings immediately, nnd the
standard of work in a light cheery kitchen is always higher than
can be obtained in a dark, airless basement. The small trays for
ADMINISTRATION OF SCHOOL LUNCHEONS. 47
tlic dinner are of black lacquer. The cooking utensils are agate
or block tin and consist for the most part of one or more large
sized double boilers and a sauce pan in which to cook fruit, in
addition to the necessary measuring cups, spoons, etc. Dinner
tables are covered with white oilcloth. Tables for cooking and
serving purposes can sometimes be found at the schools, but in
case they have to be provided they generally consist of adjustable
tops and trestles of different heights, according to the size and age
of the children. In a school ranging from the kindergarten
through the grammar grades the tables are of different sizes and
so are the benches which go with them. The four schools where
the dinners are served and a couple of the schools having penny
lunches alone, have tables and benches. The counter consists of
a table top on trestles.
Accommodations. Because the school luncheon is not yet a
recognized part of the school, and is not provided for in the archi-
tectural plans, accommodations are of necessity makeshifts,
though not always unsatisfactory. In one school the cooking is
done in the teachers' dressing roon and the serving in the fire
tower; in another the cooking is done in the teachers' dressing
room and the serving in the hall; in another the cooking is'done
in the teachers' dressing room, third floor front and the serving
in an unused class room, second floor back. In yet another school
the cooking and serving arc both done in an unused second story
class room, etc. In one school only is there anything resembling
a kitchen. This room is in the basement and the luncheon is
served in the play room across the hall. If this good kitchen and
the sunny second story class room shown in the picture on page
49 were together, it would be the beginning of an admirable school
luncheon plant, but so far accommodations have been remnants of
space not needed for any other purpose.
Cost. Supervision, service and equipment are provided by
the Committee on school lunches of the Home and School League.
The Board of Education gives overhead charges, gas and water.
The food must pay for itself.
Supervision. The luncheons are under the supervision of
a graduate dietitian who buys the food materials, pmpares
dietaries, recipes and menus, visits the schools frequently, and
acts as treasurer for the Committee.
Service. There is a woman in charge of the actual work at
each school who prepares and serves the food and receives the
monev from the children. The money with an itemized weekly
48 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
account on a regular record card (p. 50), is turned in weekly
to the superintendent. A monthly account of the receipts and
expenditures for each school is kept by the superintendent. As
a reward of merit, some of the older boys and girls are permitted
to help in the serving, and for this their meal is given to them.
At the penny lunch they help serve and at the dinner they keep
the children in line and see that each one takes the necessary tray,
napkin, and spoon and turns in his dinner ticket. They also see
that 110 child leaves the lunch rooms without putting his soiled
dishes and spoons in the pail of water, kept near the door. The
dishes soak until the attendant is ready to wash and boil them.
Administration. In Philadelphia with its limited number
of schools served, a very simple system of administration has
worked well, but as the number increases it becomes more and
more difficult to maintain in every school a high standard of
serving and cooking. No one person can visit the schools as fre-
quently as they should be visited to maintain such a standard.
Type of Saleswomen. The saleswomen for the most part are
middle aged women who are glad to add to the family income by
doing part time work and who would be unable to give a full day.
They receive from $5 to $8 a week and are on duty from 8 :30
a. m. until 1 to 4 p. m. according to the needs of the school. They
are extremely interested in their work, are fond of the children
and do all in their power to make the luncheons a success, but
they should not. be called upon to meet emergencies nor decide
important questions as they must do if they cannot consult fre-
quently with the superintendent. There are, of course, points in
favor of this system. The saleswoman, doing the work in the
school each day becomes part of the school and the children come
to regard her in very much the same fashion as they regard their
teachers and are guided by her judgment in the matter of food.
This is particularly important in dealing with foreign children
Xo matter how good the equipment or how careful the service, the
luncheon will fall flat if the children do not have a friendly atti-
tude toward it and this is especially true when an outside organ-
ization attempts to do any kind of work in the public schools. It
does not have back of it the moral support of the Board of Public
Education.
In Boston for the past fifteen years food has been very suc-
cessfully distributed from the New England Kitchen to high
schools, all over the city. Up to the present in the elementary
schools where the movement has been an experiment rather than
ADMINISTRATION OF SCHOOL LUNCHEONS. 49
.
? ~ *
.
I
L ^rU 141
1 0
EVEN THE LITTLEST CHILDREN CAN SIT DOWN ON THE FLOOR WITHOUT SPILLING A DROP FROM THEIR CUPS. THIS ROOM IS USED ONLY
AT LUNCH AND THE FLOOR IS ALWAYS CLEAN.
EVEN THE LITTLEST CHILDREN CAN SIT DOWN ON THE FLOOR WITHOUT SPILLING A DROP FROM THEIR CUPS. THIS ROOM IS USED ONLY
AT LUNCH AND THE FLOOR IS ALWAYS CLEAN.
50 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC..
RECORD KEPT DAILY BY SALESWOMAN AT SCHOOL, SHOWING MENUS, NUMBER OF LUNCHES SERVED, AND RECEIPTS. THE CARD
SHOWN IS FOR A GRAMMAR SCHOOL, WITH NO KINDERGARTEN, AND THE DINNERS COST 5 CENTS.
Northwest School Saleswoman M.A.B.
SCHOOL LUNCHES.
March, 1912
Mon. 25
Tues. i 2G
Wed. 27
Thurs. | 28
Fri. 29
Menu for Day
Penny lunch:?Milk; cocoa; crackers; fruit.
Dinner:?Baked beans; roll
Penny lunch:?Milk; cocoa; crackers; fruit.
Dinner:?Vegetable soup; roll
Penny lunch:?Milk; rice pudding, etc
Dinner:?Creamed dried beef on toast; roll
Penny lunch:?Milk; cocoa, etc.
Dinner:?Corn chowder; roll...
Penny lunch:?Milk; cocoa; baked apples, etc.
Dinner:?Creamed salmon; roll
Totals.
Kinder-
garten
Aids
Teachers
(10c.)
lunch ^ Dinners
10
644
493
535
578
559
50
34
29
41
37
2809 191
Receipts
9.04
6.63
6.90
7.83
7.44
37.84
ADMINISTRATION OF SCHOOL LUNCHEONS. 51
an accepted institution, little along the line of centralization lias
been done. In Europe where elementary school feeding is now
accepted and where the boards of education have taken over the
work, the luncheon is very generally forwarded to the school from
a center. It would seem as if this were the logical line along
which to develop. By having a center a standard of cooking and
serving can be maintained, for the amount of work done would
warrant putting in charge of each center a graduate of domestic
science who would control the local situation, supervise the prep-
aration of the food in her center and the serving of the food in
her schools. The food cost would be considerably lessened by
buying in large quantities and delivering to one place instead of
ten or more. Whether the increased service cost would be
balanced by the lessened food cost cannot be known until this
scheme has been tried.
In Philadelphia the city is divided by the Board of Educa-
tion into ten districts with a District Superintendent in charge
of each. The number of children attending the schools in these
districts varies from 14,000 to 20,000. The school districts
correspond fairly well with the national localities so that one dis-
trict includes most of the Italian children, another the bulk of
the Jewish children and so on. By having an Italian Center or a
Russian Jewish Center, special attention might be given to race
tastes and race prejudices, at the same time that the effort is being
made to teach the children to use and like the distinctively Ameri-
can foodstuffs and cooking.
Each day the movement for school feeding is increasing in
power and every superintendent of school luncheons is receiving
frequent inquiries from all parts of the country.?inquiries not
as to the history or present status of school feeding, but a definite
request for detailed information which will throw light on the
practical side of the work. It is becoming increasingly difficult
to answer these questions because, while considerable work is
being done, up to the present there has been no correlation of ex-
periments in different cities, and the only means that new cities
have to get this information is by the long and tedious method of
writing to every city doing the work and asking for a detailed
plan. This is an unnecessarily wearisome method of procedure
and it is time to have the heterogeneous mass of material on this
subject collected and edited so that the different cities need not
repeat each other's experiments nor duplicate each other's
mistakes.
