Some Results of Standard Tests
===============================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1912, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VI. No. 1. March 15, 1912.

By D. C. Bliss,
Superintendent of Schools, Elmira, N. Y.
The keynote of successful business to-day is accurate knowledge of detail applied in such a manner as to eliminate needless
waste. The margin between profit and loss is determined by the
skill of the manager in effecting small savings. Science applied
to the meat packing industry showed that a very good profit could
be made by utilizing what had formerly been considered useless.
In the business world nothing is left to chance, no important action
is based upon vague opinion or untested theory. Exact knowledge
must first be obtained. Seven out of ten business failures are due
to the lack of this knowledge and there is no reason to suppose
that a different ratio exists in education.
The business man, judging education by his own standards,
has expressed his growing dissatisfaction with the products of the
schools. The insistence of his demands for a balance sheet has
finally brought about an increasing conviction among school men
that in some degree, at least, it is possible to measure the results
of teaching. Here and there experimental work is in progress designed to fix standards and to evolve some common measure of
accomplishment.
In 1902-1904, Dr. J. M. Rice, published in The Forum the
results of his extensive examination of several thousand children
in arithmetic, spelling and composition. His conclusions were
startling, to say the least. It was a shock to champions of mechanical drill to find that there was no connection whatever
between the number of minutes given to spelling every week and
the ability of the child to spell common words correctly. He found
that classes to whom spelling was taught incidentally were just
as efficient as those having forty minutes of daily drill. Equally
clear was the fact that extra time given to arithmetic and composition did not necessarily mean added efficiency. Quality of
teaching appeared to be the determining factor. The conclusion
is inevitable that it is the business of the superintendent to find
out what classrooms are failing to produce the results expected
(1)
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of them. This means the application of the business principle of
checking results to determine at what points waste is going on,
and then its elimination. The chief difficulty has been the absence
of a common measure. Teachers have rated work as excellent,
good, or poor, but these terms meant little, for they depended
entirely upon the standard in the teacher's mind. What was good
in the estimation of one teacher might be poor in the estimation
of another. Progress is being made, however, in determining this
common measure. At the present time a large number of superintendents and principals are co-operating with Mr. S. A. Courtis
of the Home and Day School in Detroit, in determining standard
scores in arithmetic. That there is need of such standards is evident from the fact that in a single grade he has found "all levels
of ability from those of the primary grades to that of the senior
class in the high school department."
One of the most significant pieces of work thus far accomplished is that of Dr. Thorndike in establishing a scale for measuring handwriting. It is a question if a coarser scale than his,
which is graded from 1 to 20, would not accomplish just as satisfactory results and at the same time be easier of application. The
practical scale must be one so simple that the busy superintendent
or principal can use it without spending more time than he can
afford.
Dr. Thorndike published in The Journal of Educational
Psychology for September, 1911, his article dealing with a scale
of merit in English writing. Other articles have appeared in the
educational magazines from time to time discussing the possibility
of establishing standards of school work and suggesting methods
for determining them. Thus far these investigations have been
conducted for the purpose of determining standards of measurement, but no attempt has been made to apply the standards to the
actual work of the school. Superintendents and principals are
now asking themselves the question: Is it feasible to make use
of standard tests in my school in such a manner as to determine
relative classroom efficiency ?
For some years the writer has used the reproduction story as
a means of determining the efficiency of classroom instruction and
drill in English composition. Since the records of the test have
been carefully kept and it has been employed in three separate
school systems with results closely similar, he feels that he is in a
position to know something of the effect of attempting to apply
the standard test in actual school practice. In general the plan is
to give a reproduction story test soon after the opening of school
RESULTS OF STANDARD TESTS. 3
in September, and to follow this by a similar test just before the
same pupils are promoted. The latter would be given in February under the half year promotion plan, or in May if the promotion is yearly. A comparison of the two class averages, then,
will determine the progress of the class. The examinations are
not for the purpose of finding out how much the individual knows.
They are not even intended to ascertain how high a mark the class
collectively can reach. The only point of interest is how much
progress the class as a whole has made. Our testing must be
removed as far as possible from the stereotyped examination which
has been responsible for so much cramming and mechanical drill.
The test must be framed in such a manner that these are of no
avail. It must be based wholly upon power to do and not upon
ability to tell. Three stories of varying degree of difficulty serve
for the test, one for the third and fourth grades, one for the fifth
and sixth grades and one for the seventh and eighth grades. While
one story serves for two grades, a higher standard is naturally
expected of the more advanced class.
Some difficulty is experienced in finding suitable stories.
They must be interesting, neither too long nor too short, and with
two or more well defined points closely enough related to be remembered easily. The story should never be read to the class by the
teacher. In a small school system the reading should be done by
the superintendent himself. If the number of classrooms does
not allow this, then the principals of the various buildings must
do it under specific directions from the office.
These are the usual directions:
To the Principal:
Will you read the enclosed story to the third and fourth
grades in your building next observing these directions:
(a) Read the story but once and answer no questions.
(b) Let the class take as much time as they need, but allow
no needless delay.
(c) Remain in the room until the writing is completed.
(d) Say nothing to make the class think the test is of any
unusual character.
(e) Mark the set of papers with the name of the teacher,
school, and grade, and send to the office at once.
? Superintendent.
Under this method the personal influence of the teacher in
no degree affects the excellence of the composition. The resulting
papers represent what the class is able to do unaided.
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The stories used for the two successive tests must be as nearly
of the same degree of difficulty as is possible. Some of the stories
used for the third and fourth grades are: The Dog and his
Shadow, The Two Goats, Dick and his Cat, The Grasshopper and
the Ant, The Cat and the Monkey. For the fifth and sixth grades:
Two Men and the Bear, The Wolf and his Two Dinners, Cornelia's
Jewels. For the seventh and eighth grades: The School of
Stanz, The Story of Valentine.
The papers are taken directly from the classroom to the
office of the superintendent where they are read and rated. It
would be an endless task to do this by marking each paper in
per cents, but it is comparatively^ easy if the same plan is followed
that was used by Dr. Rice. Five standard papers are selected and
numbered from one to five in the order of their excellence. Number one is lowest in the scale and number five the highest. These
numbers are separated by equal intervals. To read a set of papers,
placing each in the pile representing the proper standard, is a
comparatively simple matter. Dr. Rice's system of estimating
rests on the fact that any written composition makes a definite
impression, judged as a whole. Of a picture we say instinctively
that it is good, or passable, or bad, without stopping to analyze
it as to proportion, perspective, choice and application of color,
or other details. Until one has actually tried the experiment with
thousands of papers, it is difficult to believe that English work
may be treated in the same way?judged by the swift impression
made by the paper as a whole. In fact, it is sometimes unnecessary to read the entire paper. Experience shows that the majority
of papers fall without question into their proper class. A few are
on the border line between two classes, but even these make little
trouble in determining class averages. By the law of probabilities
there is an equal chance of a paper's being placed in the higher
or the lower group. As a result the class average remains constant in spite of these doubtful papers. The truth of this assumption has been established by having a set of papers rated by two
or even three readers. As a rule the results vary by a small fraction, the maximum variation found thus far being only one point.
Years of trial, and comparison of the rating given the same seta
of themes by different readers, show that the personal equation,
which on the surface would seem to be a largely determining factor, does not enter into the matter. It is this established fact that
a theme may be judged as a whole, which renders unnecessary
detailed scrutiny or the use of any pencil marks, whether of corRESULTS OF STANDARD TESTS. 5
rection or as an aid in averaging results, and so effects the great
saving of time. Because of this time-saving it is possible to
carry on extensive tests, the result of which is exact knowledge of
the work being done in every room in the city.
Incidentally it may be mentioned that these papers, representing the work of the children entirely free from the teacher's influence, throw many side-lights on methods and discipline. Several times it has been proved that a reader who has seen neither
class nor teacher can state from one glance through a set of papers,
exactly the conditions which one who frequently visits that room
knows to exist there. The papers disclose whether the class has
formed habits of attention, obedience to directions (once given),
clear thought and individuality of expression, and the use of the
right method of penmanship outside of the period allotted to that
study, or whether it has been allowed to go on in haphazard
fashion, doing work that is "nearly right" in content and untidy in
appearance, restricting the use of the knowledge gained in each
lesson to the time when that subject is the main topic of consideration, and perhaps has been trained to one accurate, but uninteresting and unvarying form of expression. The test at the end of
the year, contrasted with the one at the beginning, makes evident
the teacher's ability and willingness to accept suggestions and
incorporate them into her teaching, or her inclination to go on in
the old way because her mental capacity is limited or improvement would involve too much exertion.
It is, of course, necessary if the number of papers necessitates two readers that they should have worked together long
enough to insure a thorough harmony of understanding of the
standards used. The possibility of variation in the results obtained by different readers is, however, wholly immaterial. The
important consideration is that the standard once established shall
be kept constant and this can usually be done by having one person do all the reading. The chief value of this plan of testing is
the opportunity it affords for making comparison of grade with
grade within the same system; hence the necessity of a constant
standard.
In rating the papers several factors are taken into consideration. Spelling, capitalization, punctuation, and good sentence
structure are essential characteristics. Originality receives due
credit, often outweighing an exact verbal reproduction, which
receives a low rating.
If a paper is to be placed in grade five it must be mechanically
perfect, and possess a distinctive style. It must show that the
6 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
pupil is able to express ideas in his own language, to do it without
mistakes, and to impress it with his own individuality. Grade
five represents a quality of English which may not be reached
by more than one child in five hundred. Number one group
includes all papers unintelligible either from lack of ability to
express ideas or ignorance of the tools of expression, or if not
absolutely unintelligible yet so poor as to show that the child has
not grasped even the rudiments of English composition. Papers
in this group are often referred to as "impossible" or "not
passable".
The scheme of rating is best illustrated by giving two original
stories and a representative paper in each of the five groups.
Grades Three and Eour.
THE CAT AND THE MONKEY.
(Original)
A cat and a monkey saw some nuts roasting in the fire. The
monkey told the cat to pull them out with her paw. She got one
out, but the fire hurt her.
The monkey told her how clever she was, so she kept on trying
till all the nuts were pulled out. Then she turned around to show
the monkey how her paw was burned, and found him eating the
last nut.
Standard Eive,
A cat and a monkey were sitting in front of a fire-place where
some nuts were roasting. "Put your paw in and pull some of
those nuts out," said the monkey. Without thinking of anything
but the nut, the cat did so and then cried out as the fire burned
her. "Oh never mind a little pain," said the monkey. "You are
very clever. Try another." So the cat kept on pulling out one
after another till she had them all. Then she turned around to
show the monkey her poor bumed paw and found the greedy
animal eating the last nut.
Standard Eour
A cat and a monkey saw some nuts roasting in the ashes. The
monkey said, "Put your paw in and pull them out," The cat did
so, and got one out. The monkey told her how clever she was.
She got them all out, and turned around to show the monkey how
she had burned her paw. She saw the monkey eating the last nut.
Standard Three
Once there was a cat and a monkey, and they saw some nuts
roasting in a fire. The monkey said", if you will put your paw
RESULTS OF STANDARD TESTS. 1
in the fire we will have some nuts, to eat. So the cat did so,
when the cat was getting the last nut, the monkey had eat all the
nuts up. And told her how clever she was.
Standard Two.
One day a cat and a monkey saw some nuts roasting in the
fire. So he said to the cat. She sould pout in her parw and take
out the nuts. So she pout in her parw and took out one nut. And
she bran her parw. The monkey said she was doing well. So she
went on and on until she got all the nuts out. And then she show
him her parw how bran her.
Standard One.
The cat was geting nut out of over was roasting. The cat
was clever and was geting nut of over and the cat pas got brun.
And he care get nut of the over. At at he got the last one the
cat shone the monkey his brun pass.
THE OWL AND THE GRASSHOPPER.
(Original)
A great white owl was sitting one day on her perch in a hollow
tree. She was trying to get her afternoon nap. But a noisy grasshopper sang his song over and over again. The owl could not
sleep. Finally the owl said, "Won't you keep quiet or else go
away ? I want to take a nap." But the grasshopper said, "I have
as much right to sing as you have to sleep. Besides, you have
never done anything for me."
Soon the owl called out to the grasshopper, "Well, you have
really a beautiful voice. Now that I am awake I don't wonder
that you love to sing. Won't you let me offer you some of the
delicious honey that I have here ?" The silly grasshopper at once
jumped up into the tree. The owl caught him in her sharp claws
and then finished her nap in peace.
Standard Five.
One day a big white owl sat on her perch in a hollow tree,
trying to take a nap. She could not, for a naughty little grasshopper kept singing his song over and over. The owl got so tired
of hearing the song over so many times that she said, "Mr. Grasshopper, won't you keep still? I want to get a nap." "Well,"
said Mr. Grasshopper, "I have just as much right to sing as you
have to sleep." Se he kept on singing. Mrs. Owl said to herself,
"I will fix him." So she said, "Now that I am awake you may
sing all you wish. Oh, say Mr. Grasshopper," she added, "I have
some fine honey up here. Won't you come up and help me eat it ?"
8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The foolish grasshopper hopped up into the tree and the owl
pounced upon him, and that was the end of the grasshopper.
Standard Four.
A great owl was just going to take her nap, when a noisy
grasshopper came up. He sang his song over and over again. At
last the owl said, "Won't you stop singing till I have had my
nap ?" The grashopper answered, "I have just as much right to
sing as you have to sleep. Besides you have done nothing for me."
The pwl said, "You can sing as long as I am awake. Won't you
come up and have some of my delicious honey ?" The silly grasshopper jumped up in the tree. The owl snatched him with her
sharp claws and had her nap in peace.
Standard Three.
One day an great owl was sitting in a hole in a tree. She
was trying to take her afternoon nap?But a grasshopper singing.
He kept singing the same song over and over again. The owl got
tired of listing to the same thing over and she said, "why don't
you stop that song" "how do you expect any one to sleep." The
grasshopper said, "I guess I got just musch right to sing as you
have to sleep." So the owl said, "come here and I will give you
some honey." The grasshopper the silly little thing went up and
the owl got him and toke him in his claws and the owl toke his
nap.
Standard Two.
Once upon a time a owl was trying to sleep in a tree but a
nosye grasshopper would not let him. So the owl said, "You
naugty thing why don't you ceep stiyl" Then said the grasshopper,
"I have as much right to sing as you have too sleep." So the
owl thought a while and them said, "Mr. grasshopper what a
sweet voice you have. Woun't you let me offer you some of my
honey. So the grasshopper junped up im to the tree but the owl
snached him up and toch his nap im picae.
Standard One.
Once a owl and a Grasshopper was chirping on a tree. The
grasshopper was singing. Will you not sing. I want to take a
nap. Afterwill the grasshopper jumped up in the tree.
Each of the five standards is given an arbitrary value:
Standard I? 0
" II? 25 points
" III? 50 "
" IV? 75 "
" Y?100 "
RESULTS OF STANDARD TESTS. 9
When the papers from a fourth, grade, for instance, have all
been read and thrown into various piles representing the different
standards, it is easy to reckon the average rank for the class. If,
of the papers written by thirty-six children ten fall into the worthless class, twelve into that representing standard two, seven into
standard three, and seven into standard four, the corresponding
figures will be 300+3504-525=1175, and this, divided by thirtysix, the number in the class, gives 32.6 as the rank attained. This
is a satisfactory rank, and this fact shows perhaps more clearly
than anything else could, how far removed the system is from the
old one of marking each paper in per cents, for in that case a
class might reasonably be required to reach 75 or 80 per cent, and
indeed under the old laborious method of marking the class here
used as an illustration would have done so.
When the papers from each classroom have been rated on this
basis a standard for each grade in the system is then fixed. There
is nothing unfair to a teacher of the fourth grade, for instance,
in fixing as the standard for her grade the average of all fourth
grades in the city. As has been said before, the exact figure of
this standard rating is immaterial. If the individual papers have
been judged leniently the standard will be higher than will be the
case with a more illiberal rating. Justice to all is secured by keeping this standard constant. Great care must be exercised at this
point or the comparisons of the first rating with that of a later
date will be valueless. A difference of conditions in the several
classrooms will cause a considerable difference in the ratings the
first time they are made, but this low initial rating has nothing
to do with the progress of the class as shown by the subsequent
rating. It often happens that the class with the lowest record in
September will show the highest record in June. This means a
high teaching efficiency. Experience has shown that drill on
reproduction does not result in a high final record. The best
records are made by those teachers who employ the greatest variety
and adaptability in their methods of teaching. To show progress
they must teach for efficiency. The reproduction is simply a
measure of the capacity of the class to use language effectively,
and in the last analysis this is the sole object of English teaching.
The real test of the practical value of such a plan as this is
its success in actual operation. Unless it will actually work it is
useless. In a Massachusetts school system, with thirty-three third
grade teachers the initial test showed a city average of 8.5 points,
with twenty-three classes below the requirement and eight classes
above. One year later the city average was 19.2 points with
10 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
thirteen classes below the requirement and nineteen classes above.
This represented an increase of 12 G per cent in the level of
efficiency in the third grade. With thirty fourth grades the first
city average was 21 points, with thirteen teachers below the requirement and sixteen teachers above. The final test gave a city
average for the fourth grade of 27.5 points with nine classes below
and twenty-one above the standard. Here again is an increase in
the level of efficiency of 30 per cent. But we are not obliged to
depend upon a single system to demonstrate the value of the plan.
The same test given in exactly the same manner was used in a New
York school system with eighteen third grade classrooms. The
average initial standing was 3.8 points. Fifteen rooms were below
the standard and one above it. A year later the average had risen
to 14.7 points, seven classes were below the standard and ten above.
Here the efficiency level had risen 287 per cent. The fourth grade
record was similar. The city average increased from eleven to
thirty-one points, or 181 per cent. No exact figures are available
from New Jersey where the same system was employed, but the
general effect was the same.
In each of these school systems not only were teachers told
the standards attained by their classes but the chief defects of the
papers were pointed out and specific suggestions made for the
improvement of the work. This was done on the theory that tests
given for the information of the superintendent only and resulting
in no change for the better in the classrooms are not worth the
time they take. The following are typical excerpts from the
criticisms and suggestions made to a number of third and fourth
grade teachers. It should be kept in mind that the criticism is
adapted in each case to the superintendent's knowledge of conditions under which the teacher works, so that a faithful teacher,
heavily handicapped by an ill-prepared or dull class, is not discouraged by feeling herself required to achieve the impossible,
but, on the other hand, a lazy or indifferent teacher is stimulated
to increased effort.
"The mistakes in grammar are largely those which can best
be corrected by careful attention to the language in the oral story
telling and all other oral recitations. There should be much oral
work for the half of the class which is below grade. This same
section is inaccurate in the use of idioms."
"The lower section needs much work in spelling and the forms
of words. If this section did considerable written work at the
board the individual mistakes could be seen and corrected?a few
at a time in order not to discourage and confuse the child."
RESULTS OF STANDARD TESTS. 11
"The children show considerable dramatic power in their
ability to visualize the story, but fail in their written English."
(Here follow specific suggestions regarding the remedy for errors
in punctuation, spelling, and formation of letters.)
"This class shows the effect of careful teaching. The children
have grasped the story. They have been taught to make clear,
brief statements, to use periods and capitals, and as a whole to
spell well. It is a pleasure to look over a set of papers showing
so clearly that the class, as well as the teacher, takes pride in doing
good work."
"The general impression given by the papers is that of carelessness and lack of clear thinking. There are several instances of
repetition or of the omission of words necessary to the sense. The
sentence division and construction are faulty. Correct these errors
by careful attention to the oral story-telling. As a whole it is
evident that the class needs hard, definite drill to fix the various
things it has been taught."
"The children should not have written reproduction at present. They need work in copying and in studied and unstudied
dictation. They should write at the board where their mistakes
can be seen and corrected at once. Whatever they do, insist on
accuracy. It is best for them to learn a few things well. Use
oral reproduction until the children have enough power to write
English correctly. Train them to correct oral expression and it
will help the other work. They show dramatic power."
"The papers from your room show just the condition I
should expect, knowing as well as I do the make-up of your class.
Their lack of mental calibre appears in incoherent sentences."
(Here follow specific instances of mistakes to be set right). "I
would not attempt, however, to correct too many points at one
time."
Of course radical improvement cannot go on indefinitely.
What is certain to happen is a steady gain until the maximum
efficiency has been reached. Then the city average for any grade
will oscillate back and forth, advancing as the conditions in the
classrooms make for greater efficiency and falling below the average with the employment of inexperienced teachers or with any
cause which appears against the best interests of the school.
The figures and criticism given above are for the third and
fourth grades only, but the same plan is followed for the other
grades in the elementary schools. In all cases the results are substantially the same.
The method is just as applicable to spelling, penmanship, and
12 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
arithmetic as it is to English. History and geography present a
problem more difficult of solution.
It may seem at first thought that the amount of time required
by this plan of testing for results is so great as to render it impracticable for general use. It is true that considerable time is
required, but this is not the point at issue. The real question is,
does it pay? The superintendent or principal has only a given
amount of available time and it is for him to invest it in such a
manner as to obtain the greatest returns.
Experience indicates that the superintendent with a school
system made up of fifty or sixty classrooms can give these tests
and do all the reading unaided. The pressure of routine work
makes it burdensome if the rooms are much in excess of this number. He must then have some assistance. A little care in the
selection of the clerk who is usually employed in the office will
provide the necessary help. When there are three or four hundred
teachers a special reader is necessary, but it will be found to be a
most profitable investment so far as the good of the schools is concerned. No complications from the employment of some one to do
this reading need be feared. The standard is not one established
by the reader's opinion, and she has no responsibility for it. Her
part is to determine in what degree the papers turned over to her
for reading measure up to the predetermined standard.
We often hear objections to any plan for measuring the
efficiency of teaching by testing the results, on the ground that
there are certain elements of good teaching which cannot be measured. We cannot measure mathematically the effect of the influence of a good woman upon boys and girls. We are utterly
unable to express in figures the degree to which a manly man
shapes the character of the adolescent youth. It is a significant
fact, however, that those teachers who count for the most in this
shaping of character are the very ones who obtain the highest
results under this method of testing. There is no inconsistency
between strength of character and efficiency. Character development is an essential part of education but it is not all of it. It
must be present as a supplement of efficiency.
In the past we have placed emphasis upon what the teacher
knows and the methods she employs, without regard to the results
she obtains. In the future we shall give no less attention to
knowledge and method, but we shall include results. We must
in the end come to the fundamental business principle in education that the efficiency of the teacher must be measured in terms
of what the pupil can do.
