Preliminary Report on the Treatment of
Stuttering, Stammering, and Lisping
In a New York School.
======================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1912, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VI. No. 4.
June 15, 1912.

By Michael Levine, A.M.,
Teacher in Public School 6J+, New York City.1
The first question is: what is tlie difference between stuttering
and stammering, terms which are used interchangeably by the
layman? According to modern physiology they both denote a
disease of the mechanism involved in the production of speech,
disturbances in the organs governing respiration, phonation, and
articulation. While many authorities differentiate stuttering from
stammering, others claim that fundamentally they describe one
and the same condition. Writers who have accepted the view that
stuttering and stammering are one disease, have made subdivisions
based on the kind of cramps experienced by the patient while
speaking. For the purposes of this discussion, however, it will be
convenient to separate the two terms and to allot to each its
peculiar symptoms.
Stuttering may be used to denote faulty speech as a result of
respiratory disturbances, the defects being in the muscles of respiration, or in the larynx, or in both. Stammering, on the other
hand, may be used to denote a disability of the muscles of articulation. These defects do not include disorders of speech associated
with brain lesions, or the conditions described under such terms
as Stammeln, Hornstummheit, or other speech abnormalities.
The possible physiological causes of stuttering are very complicated, but two at least may be distinguished. Stuttering is
caused by highly intensified nervous impulses which pass not only
to the nerves controlling laryngeal activity, but also to those governing other motor activities. In many instances these other activities at first offer relief, but finally become involuntary, so that the
i Public School No. 64 Is under the supervision of Associate Superintendent
Gustave Straubenmuller and District Superintendent John W. Davis, to both of
whom the writer is Indebted for sympathetic co-operation, and also to Principal
William E. Grady, whose suggestions and kind assistance made the work possible.
(93)
$4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
patient is unable to speak without them. In many cases, however,
these associated motor activities are involuntary from the beginning. This is self-explanatory when we remember that the laryngeal nerves are branches of the vagus. All the muscles except the
thyro-cricoid, which innervated by the superior laryngeal, receive
nerve filaments from the inferior laryngeal branch of the vagus,
the fibres being derived from the accessory roots. This cranial
nerve sends off branches which supply the heart and other internal
organs. Moreover, the vagus has practically the same origin as
the glosso-pharyngeal and the facial nerves. The glosso-pharyngeal supplies motor fibres to the muscles of the pharynx and the
base of the tongue, and secretory fibres to the parotid gland. The
facial motor branches supply the muscles of the face, scalp, and
ear, while its secretory fibres supply the submaxillary and sublingual glands. It is not surprising, therefore, that in severe
attacks of stuttering not only do the lips move, but also the head,
the jaws, the eyes, the nostrils, the arms and the legs in a frantic
endeavor to produce the desired sound. These are the external
manifestations. There are concomitant internal manifestations
such as palpitation of the heart, dull pain in the stomach, parched
throat, and other depressing symptoms.
Stuttering may be due to some aberration of the superior
laryngeal or recurrent fibres. The temporary paralysis of these
fibres deprives the stutterer of the power to speak because this
nerve controls the smaller muscles of the larynx which in turn control the size of the glottis. The sudden changes in the larynx destroy the rhythm of breathing which is of fundamental importance
to normal speech.
As distinguished from stuttering, the term stammering may
be used to denote defects of the speech organs employed in producing consonants. The patient repeats involuntarily the sound
of a consonant several times before he can glide on to the next
sound. As a rule the stammerer speaks very rapidly when he is
not in difficulty. In all cases there seems to be a lack of proper
respiratory control.
The views expressed by the leading German authorities (see
bibliography, page 10G) show that at present there is no consensus
of opinion as to the causes of stammering and stuttering. The
best ciiterion of their theories would be the results of methods
based upon them. \\ ithout doubt many factors are involved
in producing stuttering and stammering, and many causes are
assigned, the most common of which are fear, imitation, injury to
STUTTERING, STAMMERING, AND LISPING. 95
organs of articulation, and heredity. An investigation of thirtytwo cases showed the following causes. In the case of the four
marked "unknown," the parents simply stated that their children
had suddenly developed the habit.
TABLE I. CAUSES OF STUTTERING AND STAMMERING.
Imitation  7
Results of disease  8
Nervousness caused by fright  13
Unknown   4 32
The defects made their appearance between the ages of five
and eight years, and in but one case did a pupil begin to stammer
after he had attained the age of eight.
Lisping is a relatively minor speech defect, usually due to
absence of front teeth, an unusual protrusion of the lower jaw,
to carelessness, and in many cases to a lack of knowledge concerning the position of the tongue and the shape of the mouth
necessary to the production of various sounds.
Assuming the truth of these fundamental considerations, yet
remembering that our inferences are based on the limited material
supplied by a single city school, let us inquire:
(1) What is the percentage of stutterers, of stammerers,
and of lispers in the school ?
(2) What effect does school life have on the production of
speech defects ?
(3) What specific remedial measures may be adopted?
The figures given in Table II are very conservative, in that
they represent only the pupils who are sent to the speech class
because their speech is so poor as to handicap their progress. It
is probable that a thorough examination of all the pupils in the
school would largely increase these figures.
TABLE II.
Per cent of Per cent of Per cent of
bchool Enrolment defective stammerers and lispers or
speakers stutterers "babytalkers"
2997 3.0 1.8 1.2
Investigations conducted abroad, in German and Belgium
(see bibliography, page 106), show approximately similar results.
As an index of general conditions the figures correspond to those
given in table II, and while it may seem premature to generalize,
96 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
yet it seems as if a thorough investigation of the problem in our
city schools would reveal an even higher percentage of speech defectives here than abroad.
In addition to ascertaining the number of speech defective in
the schools, an interesting problem would be to find the distribution
of such pupils in the grades, with a view to drawing .conclusions
as to the influence of school conditions in producing speech defects.
A careful study of the problem of distribution and school
influence by Eouma in Belgium showed that the proportion of
lispers diminishes from the first to the sixth school year, while
the proportion of stutterers and stammerers increases in the same
period. His figures also show a gradual increase in the number
of stuttering and stammering boys from the first to the fourth
grades, as in the following table:
TABLE III.
First year 8 per cent
Second year  1.3 " "
Third year  2.0 " "
Fourth year  2.4 " "
Fifth year   1.8 " "
Sixth year  2.3 " "
Table IV shows the distribution of children with speech defects in Public School No. G4, New York City, (see page 97).
In this table the number of stammerers, stutterers and lispers
in each grade represents the number sent to the speech class by
the grade teachers. Owing to duties imposed upon them by their
parents, many of the children could not attend either the morning
or afternoon sessions. As the table shows, only sixteen of the
thirty-seven lispers attended the speech class.
A study of table IV will show that lisping is greatest in the
early school years, and that it has a tendency to become less as we
approach the third and fourth years. On the other hand the percentage of stammerers and stutterers increases rapidly. Few if
any are found in the early grades, but the number increases until
we have as many as 4 per cent in the eighth year of the elementary
course. These results are substantially in accord with the findings
of Rouma. Apparently the school is increasing rather than decreasing the number of speech defects. It is true that, as Rouma
has remarked, indifference and neglect on the part of parents,
are factors contributing to the acquisition of habits of faulty
STUTTERING, STAMMERING, AND LISPING. 97
TABLE IV.?DISTRIBUTION OF DEFECTIVE SPEAKERS IN PUBLIC SCHOOL NO. 64
Kgn
1A
IB
2A
2E-2B
3A
3E-3B
4A
4E-4B
5A
5E-5B
6A
6E-6B
7A
7B
8A
8B
Totals
75
204
145
174
188
187
184
190
252
237
253
243
189
155
127
95
99
2997
STUTTERER8 AND
Stammerers
55
0.7
1.1
1.5
0.5
3.2
1.0
2.3
1.2
2.3
3.7
3.1
1.2
4.2
3.0
1.5
So
a-S
11
32
Lispers and } Total Defect"Babytalkebs" ive Speakers
o o
11
37
1.3
1.9
2.7
1.1
1.0
1.0
0.5
1.5
1.6
0.7
0.8
0.5
1.2
2.3
2.1
1.0
1.2
? rt
e5
ll5
II
0
0
0
0
2
2
0
1
3
4
0
0
0
0
3
0
1
16
1
4
5
4
5
3
6
3
10
7
8
11
7
4
3
7
4
92
1.3
1.9
3.4
1.1
2.6
1.5
3.2
1.5
3.9
2.9
3.1
4.5
3.7
2.5
2.3
6.3
4.0
3.0
speech by children, nevertheless, modern pedagogical methods probably produce many stutterers and stammerers. Devices such as
perception cards, rapid oral arithmetic, rapid interrogation, compulsory answering irrespective of the pupil's readiness and willingness, and those school activities in general which require intense
mental effort combined with immediate oral response, frequently
tend to transform a nervous tendency into a disease. There are,
of course, still other factors within the control of the school. For
example, a number of children who have been under instruction
in, the speech class have relapsed into their former manner of
speech shortly after promotion into a new class. Investigation
has proved that various influences snch as nagging, over-pressure,
sarcasm, and mimicry of classmates, all tend to disturb the pupil
and hinder him from living up to the standards set for him in the
speech class.
The pertinent question still remains, Avhat specific remedial
measures can be adopted to assist the child with defective speech.
98 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The first problem is one of organization. There are various possible modes of grouping such pupils:
(1) Isolation and segregation of speech defectives in a special class, the session of which shall last from 9 a. m. to 3 p. m.
(2) Compulsory attendance of speech defectives in the room
of a regular teacher, preferably a departmental teacher, who having been relieved of official class work, can give within the limits
of the school session, instruction for an hour or more daily to
pupils who report to his room.
(3) Attendance, compulsory or optional, of speech defectives
before the regular session (8 to 8:30 a. m.) or after the regular
session (3 to 3:30 p. m.) for instruction by a regular or a special
teacher.
(4) Looking at the problem in terms of a school district,
rather than one particular school, attendance compulsory or optional at a centrally located school, conforming to any of the foregoing schemes.
Without going into the relative merits of these various
plans, it may be remarked that it is inadvisable to isolate the
defectives as suggested in (1). We may well apply to such pupils
the statement of Dr flames Kerr Love with reference to the deaf.
Instead of stuttering, stammering or lisping being a reason for
sending a child to a special class, it is a good reason for keeping
him out of it. Grouping him with others like himself would make
him more conscious of his condition and this consciousness would
become the basis of timidity. Moreover, it is obvious that normal
pupils can set a better standard of speech than can any group of
speech defectives. In connection with (2) it may be noted that a
special class takes the pupil away from his regular lessons and
retardation may result, not only directly from speech defects,
but indirectly from absence during periods of instruction in sequential subjects.
Conclusions like the above led to the organization in Public
School T\o. 64 of a class which met for two short periods daily,
one in the morning prior to the opening session (8 to 8: 30 a. m.),
the other at the close of the session (3 to 3: 30 p. m.). The grade
teachers were urged to co-operate bv attending a session of the
speech class to note the method of instructing the pupils, and by
making the pupils conform to certain standards in the daily recitation. The speech defectives were told to consult with their regulai class teachers and to indicate their willingness and readiness
STUTTERING, STAMMERING, AND LISPING. 99
to recite orally by raising the hand. When reciting, the pupils
are supposed to stand erect, to take deep breaths, to talk very
slowly, and to try to vary the pitch. The teachers were requested
to encourage the pupils to live up to these requirements. To
compel speech defectives to recite in response to questions sharply
put when they are not ready with an answer, frequently throws
them iuto such a nervous state that in their attempt to answer, they
will relapse into their former habits and nullify the results of
special instruction.
Three forms of exercises were employed in the morning and
afternoon speech classes.
(1) An exercise to build up the weakened respiratory system.
For this purpose, use was made of the "Two-minute drill" as given
in the city schools. This drill, when properly done, becomes a
"minute-and-a-half drill," and consists of deep breathing, armstretching, and forward bending at hips to touch tips of fingers to
toes, knee-bending with thumbs locked behind back. Abdominal
breathing was taught and a conscious use of this mode of breathing was encouraged.
(2) A second exercise for the purpose of recapitulating the
steps taken by a young child in acquiring speech. This exercise
was based on Wundt's Development of Speech in Children (Entwicklung der Kindersprache). Inarticulate sounds (Schreilaute)
gradually lead to the development of articulate sounds, and these
in turn lead to the word in the sentence.
(3) Ear training. This enables the pupil to hear his own
voice and to make an effort to change the tone of his speaking
voice from a low monotonous pitch to the modulated speech of a
normal child. Inasmuch as speech defectives tend to crowd their
speech and use a faster tempo than normal, a metronome was employed to give the pupil a standard by which to measure the gait
of his speech.
In the first exercise, the effort is made not only to strengthen
the weakened respiratory and circulatory system, but to impress
upon the pupil the fact that proper breathing is a means of overcoming his difficulty. The child is placed on his back and told to
inhale and to feel the movement of the belly wall during inhalation
and exhalation. In a stutterer, during these respiratory movements, a marked quivering of the diaphragm may be felt. The
pupil can not control his breath in exhalation, nor can he in any
way check the quivering of the diaphragm. Moreover, the breath100 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ing is usually very shallow. The pupil is made to realize these
defects, and at once puts forth a conscious effort to take deeper
breaths and to control the exhalation. Constant practice of abdominal breathing causes the spasmodic contractions of the diaphragm
to disappear and enables the pupil to control his breathing. The
following exercises for strengthening the diaphragm are used.
The pupil is told to inhale deeply and then to exhale slowly
with the tongue, teeth and lips in the position for pronouncing
the consonants / or v. At the beginning of the work, the length
of time the child can sustain a tone is usually very short, but he
is encouraged to hold a definite tone until perfect control of the
diaphragm and larynx is obtained. To a moderate degree, relaxation of the muscles of the larynx is obtained through suggestions as
to the poise of the head, absence of collar pressure, front or back,
the necessity of talking "up," etc. After telling the pupil that
he should have a sense of ease in the throat, breathing exercises are
begun. Inhalation is performed very slowly, and exhalation assumes the sound of ah. Inaudible at first, the sound becomes
louder and louder in successive drills until finally it is normal.
The second exercise is then begun. Expiration takes the
form of a vowel or a series of vowels, for the defective never
falters on a vowel but always on a consonant. The vowels are sung
and sustained at a definite pitch. In the early stages of the work,
the duration of this sound varies from five to ten seconds, but after
a few days' practice, it reaches thirty to fifty seconds. That is
to say, during one exhalation, the vocal cords, the glottis and the
diaphragm, can be so regulated as to allow the continuation of
one sound for half a minute or longer. The exercise is repeated
with each vowel in turn. Later the vowels are combined with
single consonants, as ha, be, bi, bo, bu, and the series is gone
through with one breath. Drills on the more difficult consonants
follow, special attention being given to the peculiar difficulties of
the individual children. To some g gives the most trouble, to
others b, p, 1c, v, etc. Frequently, the initial consonant of the
pupil's name is the most difficult. The most difficult consonant,
whatever it may be, is combined with a vowel and a method is
devised by which the pupil eventually succeeds in producing it
easily. This sound is then combined with another consonant and
both are prefixed to vowels, as pra, pre, pri, pro, pru.
The third exercise is intended to develop a keen sense of pitch
and rhythm. The pupils find little difficulty in repeating the syllables mentioned, especially in a sing-song manner. The introducSTUTTERING, LISPING. 101
lion of melody in speaking serves the very good purpose of developing a new habit; it produces a change of tone. To break the
pupils of the habit of speaking in a low-pitched monotone, all the
vowels and syllables were at first recited in a sing-song. This led
to the fourth development, namely slower, rhythmic speech. The
slower utterance was taught through the use of a metronome and
through simple rhymes or jingles. Varied intonation was secured
through imitation and by the use of charts containing sentences
underscored with colored lines suggesting the proper variations of
pitch. For example, in the following sentences the intonation is
a rising or a falling one, according to the thought expressed in the
sentence, and the pupil is taught to indicate the change in tone
by raising or lowering the hand.
The flag was raised.
I walked down the steps.
I jump up and down.
Further sentences expressing everyday occurrences were put
on charts and colored chalk used in marking the vowels, each vowel
being marked with a different color.
Inasmuch as the vowels are easiest for the pupil to sound,
this device seems to encourage him and enable him to master the
consonants more easily. In cases where the first word in a sentence begins with a consonant, and difficulty is encountered in
sounding it, the pupil is taught to introduce a vowel before the
consonant. For example, in the sentence, "Prince George became
King of England," if the initial consonant prevents the pupil from
getting a start, he is instructed to read the sentence as though it
were "A Prince George," etc. Having once got under way
through the help of such a device, the child encounters no further
difficulty provided the respiratory activities are normal. He
then practices the initial sound in this connection until he can
repeat the sentence with ease. Merely suggesting that the pupil
can say a word often enables him to do so; he becomes confident,
and finds himself trying to verify his growing belief in his
ability.
Drills in reading the vowels in a sentence are also very helpful. A rhyme is written on a chart and all the vowels are marked
in their characteristic colors. The pupil then reads the vowels
slowly in a sing-song manner according to one of the five types of
melodies shown in Fig. 1. The consonants are then slipped in and
the pupils read the entire sentence in a musical tone. The selection
102 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and presentation of reading material is of great importance, and
should come as a final step in the treatment.
The pupils are taught to be self-critical of their speech. Inappropriate movements, a dull monotonous tone, lack of breath, careless pronunciation or enunciation,?all these faults arouse immediate criticism. Through experience the pupil learns (1) to inhale
until the belly wall is well extended; (2) to speak slowly and in
rhythm; (3) to use a melody; (4) to pay close attention to vowels;
(5) to introduce a vowel when in straits.
The application of these exercises was fraught with difficulty.
The oral rendition of any selection from the reader seemed to
undo all that had been laboriously accomplished. The pupils still
lacked power and confidence, and the sight of a reader or any
.o
s:
o
i
FIG. 1. THE FIVE TYPE MELODIES.
FIG. 1. THE FIVE TYPE MELODIES.
STUTTERING, STAilOfflZlZVG, AM LISPING. 103
other book made them revert to their old habits. This may have
been due to the association of a reader with the unsympathetic
audience in the classroom. For a long time it was hard to develop
a type of recitation other than that of question and answer, which
would serve for the application of principles already taught; but
the imitative instincts of the children suggested a plan which was
followed with excellent results. They originated games which
were nothing less than a dramatization of familiar occupations.
One game that proved very effective was called "grocery." The
pupils first told what could be bought in a grocery store, and then
chose a grocer, several clerks, errand boys, and so on. Although
it usually required an entire period for the mere organization of
the game, it was worth while because it aroused a deep interest in
the work. The pupils talked freely and seemed to forget their
difficulties. The next two or thrtee periods were spent in buying
at the imaginary shop, the grocer, his clerks, and the purchasers
taking their respective positions, and conducting the transactions
in a realistic manner. This type of play became very popular
with the children. The transition from this to the dramatization
of reading material would not be too difficult.
The course of work briefly outlined above tended to make the
stutterers and stammerers optimistic. Each felt that through his
own efforts he had ceased to be a legitimate object for the gibes of
his classmates. Even if he had not been entirely cured, at least
he felt more confident of his ability to improve, and the attempt
had been made to imbue him with the idea that if he faithfully
followed up the work he was bound to succeed.
Lispers include that group of defective speakers who are
unable to give certain letters their proper sounds. This inability
may be due to the persistence of a habit formed in childhood of
dropping the final syllable or of substituting sounds for those
required in a word. The latter form of speech is often called
"baby-talk" or more properly "infantile stammer". It may be
due to malformation or late development of the teeth, and in the
case of many foreign pupils, to a lack of knowledge as to the position of various parts of the articulatory apparatus for the production of certain sounds. Figure 2 shows the position of the tongue,
teeth and lips to form such difficult sounds as r, tli, I, s, v and wh.
Investigation disclosed the fact that the most difficult sounds were
the six just mentioned, and w, z, d and t. The s and 2 are especially difficult for children who lack the incisor or canine teeth,
and they frequently substitute th for s or z. The I, r, t, d, wh and
104 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
*
V \ wK.
FIG. 2 POSITIONS OF THE TONGUE, TEETH AND LIPS TO FORM THE SIX MOST DIFFICULT SOUNDS.
FIG. 2 POSITIONS OF THE TONGUE, TEETH AND LIPS TO FORM THE SIX MOST DIFFICULT SOUNDS.
STUTTERING, STAMMERING, AND LISPING. 105
w are usually mispronounced because of inability to place the
tongue, teeth and lips in the proper position.
In correcting such defects the work is individual. Each
pupil is studied thoroughly and his difficulties understood. In
cases where nothing could be done because of the condition of the
teeth, the children were advised to consult a dentist and then
return to the class. The pupil who lisps the I, is brought before
a mirror and shown how to place his tongue in order to sound the
letter. He then repeats numerous words containing I, and practice
in reading from a book follows. To make the sound of s, the
pupil is told to close his teeth and to touch them lightly with his
tongue. After he masters the position he is told to blow his
breath between his teeth. The letter r is sinned against chiefly by
our foreigners and "baby-talkers". It is especially difficult for
Russian Jewish children. The tongue plays an important part in
the production of the r sound, being placed opposite the middle
of the hard palate and vibrated while its outer edges rub against
the hard palate. This sound, like the I, is taught with the aid of a
mirror, and also by imitation of another pupil who practices at
the same time. Wh is not a difficult sound, except for the foreigner. The pupil is told to protrude his lips in the form of a
funnel and to blow out his breath as if trying to cool a spoonful
of hot liquid. V, which is sometimes interchanged with w, is
made by placing the upper teeth on the lower lip and blowing
the breath between the lip and the teeth. Tli, a sound incorrectly
given by many, is made by placing the tip of the tongue between
the upper and lower teeth and quickly withdrawing the tongue
while allowing the breath to escape between the teeth. The sound
may also be made by opening the teeth and forming a slip between
the upper teeth and the tongue, but the former method was used
because it proved to be easier. T is made by placing the tongue
on the upper teeth, d by placing it on the hard palate near the
teeth. The mouth, of course, is open and the breath is forced out
while the tongue is rapidly moved downward.
Only two pupils found trouble in forming the cli and sh
sounds, which as they gave them, were thick and resembled the
escape of steam. On close examination it was found that the
mouth was drawn to one side and the sound emitted through an
aperture made by the lips and teeth. The defect was overcome
by making the pupil control the motion of his lips and close the
teeth as much as possible when producing th'e sounds.
106 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Further study of speech defectives is urgently needed.
Physiological investigation should be made of pupils who are not
cured in a reasonable time, because of conditions obviously other
than weak mentality. Pedagogical investigation should discover
a method for the successful treatment of theste peculiar cases.
Statistics should be collected for the purpose of determining the
character of the speech of pupils in city schools, so that the investigator of speech defects may give his attention to those groups
which most need his assistance.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
1. Bell. Principles of Phonetics, with directions for the cure of stammering.
2. The Faults of Speech.
3. Coen. Xeueste Erfahrungen uber Sprachstorungen; 11)01.
4. Uber die pUdagogische Behandlungen stotternder Kinder in den
Schulen; 18S9.
5. Fach, M. Die Behandlung stotternder Schiiler; 1894.
6. Grunbaum. Erklarung des Stotterns.
7. Gutzman, H. Das Stottern, I, II; 1899.
8. Uber die Verhiitung und Heilung der wichtigsten Sprachstorungen; 1898.
9. Die Gesundheitspflege der Spraclie.
10. Hinckley, A. C. A Speech Defect Case Treated at Columbia University.
The Psychological Clinic, November 15, 1911.
11. Howell. Textbook of Physiology.
12. Konigs. Die Behandlung stotternder Kinder; 1897.
13. Lewis. Practical Treatment of Stammering and Stuttering; 1902.
14. Liebmann. Stotternde Kinder; 1903.
15. Vorlesungen iiber Sprachstorungen stotternder Kinder; 1898.
16. Meiinert. Uber Sprachstorungen; 1904.
17. Ott. Practical Physiology.
18. Rogge. Was hat die Scluile zu tun um die Sprechfehler zu bekiiinpfen ?
1895.
19. Rouma. EnquOt Scolaire snr les Troubles de la Parole chez Ecoliers
Beiges; 1906.
20. Scrifture. Treatment of Stuttering and Stammering; 1907.
21. Treatment of Negligent Speech by the General Practitioner;
1908.
21. Stewart. Manual of Physiology.
22. Stegemann. Heilung d?s Stotterns; 1903.
23. Stotzner. Die Behandlung stammelnder und stotternder SchUlkinder;
1891.
24. Strumpell. Piidagogisclie Pathologie; 1899.
25. Wundt. Physiologische Psychologic.
