The Conservation of the Child
===============================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

By Arthur Holmes, Ph.D. Philadelphi a and .London: J. J3. Lippiricott Company: 1912. Pp. 345.
In more than half the public school rooms in America can be
seen, painted as a frieze upon the wall, or printed and hanging in a
frame of raffia, or simply written upon the blackboard in the teacher's
precise handwriting, the axiom, "We learn to do by doing." If this be
a true law for children, it is no less true for those who have to do with
children. The way to learn how to run a psychological clinic is to
run it.
Under the direction of Dr. Lightner Witmer, Dr. Holmes has conducted for several years, three of the five afternoons a week, the Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania. His "Conservation of the Child" tells as much as it is possible to tell of the way the
clinic is carried on, its organization, its equipment, and its function in
the community. Workers in this very rich field of scientific and social
activity can, of course, learn more of the practical methods of the Psychological Clinic by spending a few weeks in daily observation, preferably in summer when the special classes are in session, than they can
180 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
by reading any book. But even those who liave passed such apprenticeship will find that Dr. Holmes has much to offer them. In the chapter
on "Classification of Clinic Cases" he gives an excellent version of the
Binet tests, as well as the pedagogical tests in use at the clinic at the
University of Pennsylvania. lie includes likewise a questionnaire for
the general examination of a clinic case, a report blank for the Binet
tests, a schedule for the physical examination, and a report blank for a
thorough mental examination based upon psychological tests. The
"Tests for Mental Analysis," as the author calls them, have been worked
out by Dr. Clara Harrison Town. Some of them need no apparatus, and
are applicable to the routine examination of children. Others are more
complex, and require for their performance a well equipped psychological laboratory with a trained psychologist to adjust the instruments
and take the record.
It is for the general public, however, not for a few specialists, that
Dr. Holmes has written his book. Everyone who cares about children
(and where is the sane man or woman who does not care for them?)
will read it with interest. Parents who are baffled by the problem of the
"child who is different" will get from the book the beginnings of insight.
Teachers who have had experience with difficult children will find it an
aid to better understanding. Even those who have no children to worry
over, provided they possess what is loosely called "the social consciousness," and take a living interest in the welfare of theif kind, may spend
a profitable hour or so with "The Conservation of the Child."
To the Casual Reader, if any such there be, we would suggest that
a good way to get an idea of what a psychological clinic is like, is to
read first the chapter on "Sociological Relations," near the end of the
volume. This tells where the children come from, what they look like,
and how they behave,?or generally, how they misbehave. Then he,?
our Casual Reader,?may look at the many photographs of children of
all sorts. After that he may take the chapter 011 the "Operation of the
Clinic," and then finish the book at his pleasure.
A. T.
