Effects of Coffee-Drinking upon Children
==========================================

By Charles Keen Taylor, M.A.,
Philadelphia, Pa.
First of all, what is tlie composition of coffee? "Coffee," says
my materia mcdica, "contains caffeine and caffeo-tannic acid.
During roasting a volatile oil is developed and several substances
formed, which give to coffee its aroma and flavor, these empyreuin-
atic substances being known collectively as caffeone." It goes on
to say that "it produces a general feeling of warmth and well-
being, dilates the superficial blood-vessels, and lowers arterial
pressure. It also stimulates the nervous system, in some persons
causing exhilarating effects upon the cerebrum and increasing
capacity for intellectual labor, and frequently is the cause of head-
ache in persons who take it habitually or in excess." Note these
three words, "frequently," "habitually," and "excess". One point
more from the materia medica, "Coffee differs from caffeine in
being more stimulating to the intestinal tract, especially increasing
the peristaltic movements, which are not affected by caffeine."1
The last statement we will consider first, briefly, coffee does
not act just as does pure caffeine. It is rather common in these
days to read articles concerning tests made in the endeavor to find
the effects of habitually taking caffeine. It is said, generally, that
caffeine increases physical and mental capacity, and leaves 110 bad
after effects. This seems to be the consensus of opinion upon the
habitual use of caffeine. The fact is that these results too often
are taken to mean that regular coffee-drinking has 110 bad after-
effects, under the impression that caffeine is the only active prin-
ciple in coffee.
We have already read, however, upon good authority, that
coffee does not act just as does caffeine. If coffee influences so
important a thing as the peristaltic movements of the intestinal
tract, it might well have other physical effects, some possibly not
so blameless.
The writer who has made a special study of the physical and
mental development of children, has felt for some time that coffee-
drinking children were less "fit" physically and mentally than
those who did not use coffee. Statistics 011 such matters arc diffi-
cult to obtain, so that when an opportunity came several months
1 Shoemaker's Materia Mcdica, Pharmacology anil Therapeutics.
(50)
EFFECTS OF COFFEE-DRINKING. 57
ago to study some hundreds of scliool-cliildren physically, and to
some extent mentally, considerable effort was made to obtain
figures bearing on this question.
Statistics were obtained from 404 children. It was found
that about 29 per cent of these children drank no coffee at all, 46
per cent drank a cup a day, 12 per cent drank two cups, 8 per
cent three cups, and the remainder four or more cups of coffee each
day. Certain measurements were taken of these children, that is
?their height, weight, and strength of hands. From their school
reports their lesson and conduct "averages" were taken. With
these on hand we had something to work upon.
First the lesson values and conduct marks of those drinking
coffee and those not drinking it were compared. These children,
it may be said, were divided between two schools, one of a poorer
neighborhood than the other. The difference in circumstances,
seemed to show a little effect in the final results. The general
average for conduct of all those not drinking coffee was 75.6,
while that for all those drinking coffee was 73.1. This average
began at 73.3 for those drinking one cup per day, and ran down
to 67.8 for those drinking four or more cups. In the marks for
lessons we find similar results. Those drinking no coffee averaged
73.4 for lessons in the month in which the test was made, while
those drinking coffee averaged 70.8 in the same month. In all, it
might be said that there were lower and lower grades for lessons
as the amount of coffee taken each day increased. For instance,
those drinking four or more cups per day averaged 63.8. for their
lessons, a very great difference from the 73.4 of those drinking no
coffee! In the school containing the poorer children, those tested
numbering 134, it was found that the coffee drinkers averaged 4.4
per cent lower in conduct and 7.5 per cent lower in lessons than
those drinking no coffee.
These statistics are hardly sensational, but it seems to the
writer that if such differences exist between the mental ability,
as shown by lesson-work, and behavior, as shown by conduct-marks,
of those drinking and those not drinking coffee, that this beverage
must have some unwholesome effect upon children that it does not
have upon adults.
The physical measurements taken of the children studied in
this test were made for quite another purpose than that for which
they are used here. Thinking it might be interesting, the writer
compared the weight, height, and strength of those drinking and
those not drinking coffee. In the following results the records of
58 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
151 children were used. These children were studied in groups
according to age. It is an easy matter to arrange the results in
the form of a table, as follows:
TABLE SHOWING DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CHILDREN USING COFFEE AND CHILDREN
NOT USING COFFEE DAILY.
Age
9
9
11
11
12
12
Children
No.
Exam.
Without Coffee      8
With Coffee  16
Without Coffee  11
With Coffee i 30
Without Coffee  17
With Coffee  29
Without Coffee  17
With Coffee  17
Weight Height
(lbs.) 1 (ins.)
54.3 48.2
52.0 47.9
60.0 50.7
58.0 49.1
72.9 54.S
09.5 53.0
78.7 55.8
74.0. 55.4
Grip
(lbs.)
27.9
20.0
33.0
32.3
38.7
38.7
45.3
42.0
In other words, the children concerned in this test who drank
coffee regularly, averaged from one and a half to more than four
pounds less in weight, from a half-inch to more than an inch less
in height, and all the way to three pounds less in hand-strength
than those who never drank coffee. These differences may not be
startling, but it is evident that there are differences.
As a conclusion, then, to this very brief paper, the writer
would say that it seems likeily that the regular drinking of
coffee by children has an effect which is certainly not beneficial,
that indeed it seems to make children less "fit" physically as well
as mentally than those who do not use coffee. If this be true, then
some support is given to the modern movement which advocates
the substituting of cocoa or chocolate for coffee as a beverage for
children.
