A Survey of Mentally Defective Children in the Schools of San Luis Obispo, California
======================================================================================

By Lewis M. Terman, Ph.D.,
Associate Professor of Education, Stanford University, Cal.
San Luis Obispo is a town of about five thousand inhabitants
in the south central part of California. Its people differ little
from those of other well-to-do cities of similar size in this state.
With the exception of a small Spanish element they (or their
parents) have migrated here from various eastern states. The
population includes progressive farmers, trades-people, a sprink-
ling of professional men, and the families of several hundred
skilled laborers on the slopes of the Southern Pacific Railroad.
The children enrolled in the grades below the high school number
somewhat more than six hundred.
The newly-elected superintendent of schools, Mr. Charles R.
Small, had noted with much concern the large number of over-age
pupils in the grades. He had already formed two ungraded rooms
in which special instruction was being provided for about thirty
children. Some of them were making satisfactory progress, but
by no means all. There were also several other puzzling cases
in the schools for whom special classes had not been provided,
children who had repeated grades over and over until they had
become either apathetic or incorrigible. It was the anxious
desire of the superintendent to secure all available light on these
school failures which prompted him to call in the assistance of
the writer in the conduct of the Binet and other mental tests.1
Twenty-four pupils were examined and reported on. These
were by no means all of the difficult cases in the school, but
only this number could be tested in the week available. It is
hoped the following summary of the results of the survey, together
with a brief description of some of the cases examined, may serve
to direct the attention of other superintendents to that large class
of children in the public schools who range somewhat above
1 Superintendent Small, who Is a Harvard graduate and a wide-awake school
man, entered the profession only a year ago from the ministry. It is interesting
to note that immediately after beginning his work his attention began to gravi-
tate toward some of the fundamental problems of school administration until
lately so utterly neglected by the average "routine" superintendent. It is an inter-
esting illustration of how the weak spots of a system can best be apprehended by
one who has not become its slave.
(131)
132 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the border line of true feeblemindedness but decidedly below
the level of normality. Our interest in this class of children
has greatly increased in the last few years, for we find evidence
that from it are recruited probably one-fourth of our habitual
criminals and a still larger proportion of our paupers and "white
slaves". The children of subnormal mental endowment undoubt-
edly constitute one of our gravest social problems, one Avliich
closely concerns the schools but to which they have thus far paid
very little attention.
The following table shows the real age and the "mental age"
of the twenty-two retarded cases who were examined. Children
h a
y, o
w.<
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
G
CHRONOLOGICAL AGE IN YEARS
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
I 1
of normal mentality would be tabulated in the black-faced squares,
while the distance a child falls "below the black-faced squares rep-
resents in years the amount of his retardation in intelligence.
The table for example shows one 17-year-old pupil with a men-
tality of 9 years; six 15-year-old pupils, of whom three have a
DEFECTIVE CHILDREN IN SAN LUIS OBISPO. 133
mentality of 9 years; one 11-year-old wlio has a mentality of 6
years; etc. Of the twenty-two cases, fifteen have an intelligence
3 years or more below the level for their age; twelve are 4 years
or more below normal; and eight 5 years or more.
By the use of a rather elaborate "characterization blank"
of the German type, descriptions and miscellaneous data wTere
secured regarding each child. Though the information available
was far from being as extensive as desired, it was possible to
give with a fair degree of confidence certain conclusions and
recommendations in most of the cases. A few of these descriptions
and recommendations are here presented. They contain no espe-
cially notable features, but as concrete descriptions may serve to
call attention to similar cases in other schools.
(1) D. C.
Teacher's description. Boy, age nearly 17, fifth grade. Can
not do work of this grade satisfactorily.
Portuguese family, well to do, English spoken at home. Ten
children, most of whom are stupid.
Weight 180 lbs., slightly stooped, rather good looking, no
serious physical defects, no time lost by illness.
Quiet, sleepy. Has no self-confidence. Polite, generous,
well-behaved. Intellectual ability even; mental processes slow;
easily distracted; soon wearied; memory very poor; cannot com-
mit verses to memory. Tattles; ideas vague; thoughts absurd;
imagination weak. Does not appreciate stories. Voice loud and
monotonous.
Heads fourth reader; drops syllables; no memory for things
read; no home reading. Writing fair on the mechanical side;
spelling and punctuation poor. Poor in arithmetic. Neat in
drawing. Plays little and shows little social spirit in his play.
Tests and recommendations. Mental retardation 8 years
(tests barely 9 years). Mentality weak in every direction. Note
failure on "absurdities". Case of true feeblemindedness (high
grade). Mentality will probably never reach above 11 years.
Seems thoroughly stable and dependable, and considering
his excellent physical equipment and good appearance should be
able to get along in some simple vocation. Advise that effort be
abandoned to bring him up through all the usual work of the
grades and that emphasis be placed on the things strictly neces-
sary for getting along in the world. The important thing is to
make such cases self-supporting and to instil a liking for some
' hind of employment.
134 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
(2) J. F.
Teacher's description. Boy, age almost 13 years. High
second grade, started to school at 7; can do no work of grade he
is in.
Good family, well to do. Three other children, none re-
tarded in school.
Eyes poor; throat bad; stooping posture.
Quiet, shy, fearful; lacks physical energy; without self-
respect or self-confidence. Polite, obliging, modest, conscientious
and generous. Mental processes slow; tries to attend; memory
poor in all school work; ideas vague and slowly formed. Sensitive ;
appreciative of stories. Speech whispering and nasal; poor sing-
ing voice. Poor in colloquial expressions. Plays few games.
Reads the first reader, the second with difficulty; learns words
slowly; makes mistakes on small words; reads none at home.
Writes fairly well. Arithmetic fair. Accurate and neat in draw-
ing ; good taste in color.
Tests and recommendations. Mentally retarded nearly 5 years
(tests a little above 8 years). In conversation appears less dull
than he really is. Mental condition probably aggravated by eyes
and throat. Mind may brighten a little if he is fixed up physically
but will always be weak. Being apparently of the stable and
reliable variety he may be made self-supporting and able to look
after his own affairs if they do not become too involved. The
regular class is the last place where he ought to be. J. will reach
adolescence in a couple of years. If he is ever to make any
progress it is important that it begin before that time. Diligent
search might reveal some lines of activity in which he could meet
fair success.
(3) E. H.
Teacher's description. Boy of 14% years. German parent-
age, rather poor, English spoken at home. Five children, mother
dead, father an old man. R. is cook and housekeeper. Drinks
much strong coffee. Teeth defective. Began school at G, and is
now in the fourth grade. Repeated grades one and three; can-
not do present work satisfactorily. No time lost by illness.
Learned to walk at two years and to talk at three years.
Polite, obliging, modest and conscientious.
Ability even. Very slow in school work, but reads news-
papers and talks much of current events. Just now interested in
the present Mexican trouble. Memory poor for all school work;
mental processes slow; is appreciative of stories. Voice clear;
speech connected. Comprehends commands slowly.
DEFECTIVE CHILDREN IN SAN LUIS OBISPO. 135
Reads fourth reader with hesitation and lack of expression.
Writing fair. Can do almost nothing in arithmetic. Draws fairly
well. Enjoys the music period. Talks as long as anyone will
listen to him about the mechanism of air ships. Plays little on
the school ground, but at home is often building play houses or
making doll furniture for the little girls.
Tests and recommendations. Mentality O1/^ years; 4 or 5
years retarded. Lateness in walking and talking a bad indication.
Least retarded in vocabulary and practical judgment. Weak
in handling of abstractions, e.g., gives blue as opposite of black;
long as opposite of thick; black as opposite of dark, etc.
Note failure on "stamp test" and making change for 4 cents
out of 25. Strongly advise that he be placed under a good special
teacher and taught the elemental things he will have to know;
don't try to cover the whole curriculum. Judging from the sup-
plementary blank R. appears to have some constructive ability that
ought to be given a chance. It might be possible to use construc-
tion problems as a vehicle for getting some number concepts into
his head.
(4) M. M.
Teacher's data. Girl, age 15. Present grade 5b; does work
of this grade poorly. Swiss-Italian parentage; English spoken in
the home. Parents well to do, but give little attention to matters
of diet, sleep, etc.; mother "peculiar". Brothers and sisters not
retarded. No time lost by illness. Eyes and ears good; teeth fair;
stooping posture; muscles twitch.
Touchy, whimsical, restless, talkative. Laughs hysterically,
unsteady in movements. Lacks self-respect and self-confidence.
Vain, flighty, suspicious; tattles; plays underhand tricks.
Intellect uneven and flighty. Attention poor, easily dis-
tracted ; absent-minded; memory uniformly poor. Ideas vague
and confused; thoughts absurd and foolish; imagination weak and
easily excited. Likes stories and poems. Speech sharp. Poor in
comprehension of commands and conversations.
Reads in the fourth reader inaccurately; no memory for
things read; no reading at home. Writing fair. Drawing very
poor. Special likinc; for music. Plays little and knows few
games; shows no social spirit in plav.
Tests and recommendations. Tests at 9% years; mental re-
tardation of nearly 6 years. Has a fluency and readiness of
language which with fairly normal "phvsical maturity make her
seem less dull than she really is. Notable failures, arranging
136 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
weights, ball and field test, questions of comprehension in year IX,
making change, absurdities, etc. Touchiness, whimsicality, ten-
dency to tattle, play underhand tricks, etc., taken together, indi-
cate a persistence of infantile traits. Should remain under
special instructor. As she likes to cook it would be a splendid
thing if she could devote half of each day to training in house-
keeping. Her life success depends wholly on the latter, not on
instruction in grammar, advanced arithmetic, geography, history,
etc. She will never leam much in these. Iier entire disposition
might be improved by such a change in her schooling. M. is
fairly attractive in appearance but weak and of less than average
sense of responsibility. It is not necessary to dwell on the moral
dangers involved in this combination of traits.
The remaining cases were not less interesting. Almost, every
schoolrom has one or two problems of this general type. The
city of five hundred school children usually has about two dozen of
them. A city of the size of San Francisco, Los Angeles, Seattle, or
Indianapolis, may be expected to have about a thousand. They
clog the educational machinery. They consume a disproportion-
ately large part of the regular teacher's energy. They pull down
the standard of achievement for other children. Finding them-
selves chronic failures they either become disheartened and de-
jected, or else they grow case-hardened and apathetic. They drag
along to the third, fourth or fifth grade, sometimes the sixth or
seventh; but the regular work of the last grades they never do
satisfactorily. Grammar, arithmetic and the more abstract fea-
tures of other subjects they cannot master. Usually they have
not thoroughly learned the multiplication table when they leave
school at the age of fourteen or fifteen.
Most of them would be capable of learning a trade if they had
the opportunity, and in no other way can the school help them
so much as by affording them the kind of education which will
make them self-supporting. Children who cannot compete on
equal terms with their fellows in the schools will not ordinarily be
able to compete on equal terms with others in the business world.
Hence they become industrial drags after thev leave school. Voca-
tional unfitness is the open door to crime, vice and pauperism.
In the absence of educational facilities for vocational instruc-
tion, what can the average city do for such children ? The writer's
answer to this question is contained in the following recommenda-
tion to Superintendent Small, relative to the retards of San Luis
Obispo. ! 1
DEFECTIVE CHILDREN IN SAN LUIS OBISPO. 137
"You will understand, of course, that as the result of an
hour's examination it is impossible for one to outline fully the
form of training which will best suit the individual child. The
exact needs of each child can be ascertained best by a capable
special teacher, who has the pupil in his charge every day and
is able to make all kinds of side explorations into his personality
and intellectual abilities. The Binet tests, however, do give an
extremely accurate estimate of the innate intellectual ability in
general.
"I have advised the special class for the large majority of
the pupils tested. It seems to me there can be no doubt about the
advisability of this in most cases provided you can secure the
right kind of special teachers. The very fact that these children
have been failing every year is itself an indication that something
radically out of the ordinary will have to be done for them if they
are to be kept from utter discouragement by repeated failure.
The important point is to make their work consecutive instead of
repetitive so that they will be forging ahead constantly instead of
going over and over what they have already tried. In the special
room as little as possible should be said about the grade. The
pupil might even be kept entirely in ignorance of the grade he is
in. It will sometimes give the pupil greater confidence not to
know how far behind the others of his age he may be.
"It strikes me that you could use some of the results of this
survey as a good argument for the introduction of manual train-
ing, domestic science, etc., into your schools. These subjects are
of course, good for all the children, but for many of these special
cases they are indispensable. At least fifteen or eighteen of the
cases examined are strictly on the border line between normal intel-
ligence and what is usually recognized as true feeblemindedness;
that is, they are mentally weak. Mental weakness frequently, if
not usually, includes moral weakness ; sometimes, also, physical
disability. It is thus highly important that such children be taught
a vocation of some kind so that they can be self-supporting and will
not be tempted into lives of crime or left dependent upon their
families. For such children there can be no question of following
the regular schedule of studies. There is extremely little geog-
raphy that they can learn, very little American history that they
can appreciate and their ability for grammar and advanced arith-
metic is in many cases nil. They will need to be placed in small
ungraded classes under teachers who have had special training
in the conduct of work with backward children. Each child will
need to be made a special problem. The per capita expense for
138 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
such instruction is greatly in excess of the average, but in the end
it will be cheaper than the present policy of neglect."
In conclusion, a few additional points deserve emphasis.
The first concerns the value of the improved Binet scale as
a means of getting a definite idea of the intellectual status of
a child. Teachers sometimes assert that there is no need of psy-
chological tests to differentiate the dull child from the bright. It
is true, of course, that common observation does tell us in a gen-
eral way whether the child is dull, but it does not give us definite
or usable standards by which we may judge the exact degree of
dulness.
Moreover, observation unaided by tests leads often to entirely
erroneous judgments in regard to dulness. Not infrequently it
fails to distinguish between real, native dulness and mental re-
tardation which has been artificially induced by lack of educational
opportunities or by unfavorable home environment. For example,
one of the boys tested in this survey, whose intelligence was
strongly suspected by his teachers, was found by the tests to have
almost normal mentality. His apparent dulness was largely
accounted for by the fact that his parents were uneducated deaf-
mutes.
Perhaps still more frequently the teacher overestimates the
intelligence of the retarded child. She tends to use the same stand-
ard for all the children in her class regardless of age differences.
The writer has found several instances of almost ludicrous mis-
takes due to this fallacy.
For example, eleven-year old A. P. was in the low second
grade. She was able to do the work of the grade, not well, but
almost passably. Her teacher concluded therefore that A. P. was
only a little less bright than the other children of her class.
What the teacher overlooked was that A. P. was being measured
by a seventh-year standard of intelligence, and that instead of
merely being able to do second grade work indifferently she
should have been equal to the work of the fifth or sixth grade.
In reality, A. P. is a feebleminded child, with a mentality of
barely six years. She could not carry out the three commands
or repeat sentences of twelve to fourteen syllables, in the fifth
year group of tests. She did not know the month of her birth,
the right hand from the left, could not name the days of the week
or months of the year, or state what month it then was. She
failed on the simple "question of comprehension" in the sixth
year group, was unable to name four common coins, arrange the
weights or give the value of the stamps.
DEFECTIVE CHILDREN IN SAN LUIS OBISPO. 139
Again the case of D. C., who was nearly seventeen years old
and in the fifth grade, illustrates the same fallacy. His teacher
knew he was dull but had never thought of him as belonging to
the class of feebleminded children. She had judged this young
man by the eleven-year standard of children's intelligence. She
may have been further deceived by his rather intelligent looks
and exceptionally satisfactory behavior. But D. C., although
nearly seventeen years of age, has barely nine-year-old intelli-
gence. His vocabulary is that of the average child of eight years.
In the tests he failed to repeat sentences of fourteen to sixteen
syllables or remember five digits, or name fifty words in two
minutes. There is little chance that he will ever exceed the normal
ten-year-old child in understanding and prudence.
It will be an interesting and important task to follow the
later histories of children whose intelligence has been found two,
three, four or five years retarded at a given age. We want to
know, for example, what may be safely predicted regarding the
later development of a child who has been tested say at nine
years and found three years retarded. When a sufficiently large
number of such cases have been followed up we will be in a position
to predict with a good deal of assurance (taking all pertinent cir-
cumstances into account) whether the child above mentioned is
likely to have at fourteen years a mentality of eleven years, or
only ten, nine or even less.
Finally the writer would suggest the desirability of coining
a special name to designate the border-line cases. The term
"feebleminded" has a connotation which makes it objectionable
for this purpose. In educational matters, at least, the old saying
that "there is nothing in a name" is not true. It is practically
certain that as long as we include these children in the class called
normals nothing will be done for them educationally. Just the
right name coined to designate them may direct sufficient interest
and attention to the class to revolutionize within a few years our
educational efforts in their behalf.
