Tiie School Feeding Movement
=============================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1912, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VI. No. 2. ' April 15, 1912.

By Louise Stevens Bryant,
7n Charge of Social Work, Psychological Clinic, University of
Pennsylvania.
Three years ago the author of a German book 011 school feeding opened her discussion of the movement in other countries with
the remark that she would begin with the United States, as so
little was done there. Since then the number of cities having
begun the practical experiment of furnishing lunches in elementary
schools has grown from three to thirty. Moreover, the work is
under consideration in about thirty other cities. Judging by the
rate of expansion of analogous activities in the socialization of
public schools, such as medical inspection and open air schools, it
seems safe to assume that in another year the present number of
cities with school feeding will be trebled. Obviously the movement
needs no propaganda. But it does need a basis of correct information and for its workers the control of free discussion, comparison
and mutual help if statistics are not to outrun the development of
technique and efficient administration. This number of The
Psychological Clinic has been planned as a contribution to help
meet these basic needs.
Early Beginnings.
The provision of meals in the public elementary schools is
neither new nor rare. The very first provision of which we have
any record was made in Munich in 1790, when municipal soup
kitchens were started as part of the international campaign against
vagrancy initiated by Count Kumford. The kitchens were designed
to meet the needs of the people of all ages, and from the start the
schools were encouraged to send groups of children to them for a
warm meal at noon, for which the children paid 01* not as they
were able. This work, which antedated compulsory education, was
unorganized for a long time, but it was never discontinued, and
in the seventies the obligation of providing meals was put upon
the school authorities. ISTow there is a municipal ordinance in
Munich requiring that every new school house shall have a kitchen
and dining-room. Begun thus, the school feeding movement has
(29)
30 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
spread throughout the German Empire until now it is national in
scope and about one-half of the cities contribute to support wholly
or in part school breakfasts or dinners.
School feeding in France began in 1849 when the National
Guard in the Second District of Paris presented to the city the
unexpended balance in their treasury with the request that it be
used to help poor children get a schooling. One of the first uses
of this money, which was increased by other contributions, was to
furnish a warm dinner at noon to the poorest children of the
district. This was the beginning of the Caisses des Ecoles, or
school funds, which in 1882, at the time of the passage of the
compulsory education act in France, were made obligatory throughout the country. The purpose of the school fund was to increase
the efficiency of the school system in any way the local authorities
might see fit?to aid, for example, in medical inspection, to finance
vacation colonies and school excursions, to provide scholarships
and prizes for brilliant children. But for the most part, the
"School Funds" have been used in maintaining the Cantines
Scolaires or school restaurants that are now universal in France.
From the beginning the cantines have been real restaurants
where all children may come and buy warm meals, and only in
exceptional cases are the meals given free. In the large cities
particularly, care is taken that no visible distinction shall be made
between the children paying and those not paying, this being
assured by the simple device of having each child pass through a
little box office to buy his meal ticket. When a child claims to be
unable to pay, he is given the ticket, but his* name and address
are noted. Immediately a school officer visits the family, and
finds out whether the parents are able to pay regularly for their
child's meal. If so, they are forced to pay; if not, they are furnished with tickets for as long a period as may be necessary. In
any case the child is never made to feel that he is an object of
"charity" in receiving meals any more than he is in being educated
or medically "inspected". This practice,- which illustrates the
instinctive delicacy of feeling among the French people, has always
been commended though not always followed in other countries.
The founder of the school feeding in England was Victor
Hugo, who in the early sixties provided warm meals in his own
house in Guernsey for the children attending a nearby school, and
so gave the initial impetus which led to the establishment in
London in 18GG of "The Destitute Children's Dinner Society."
During the next forty years similar charitable societies were
THE SCHOOL FEEDING MOVEMENT. 31
formed, until in 1905, when tlie Provision of Meals Act was under
consideration, there were in London alone no less than 158 voluntary organizations for school feeding and a total of 360 in England.
For the most part these societies were conducted by teachers in
the different schools with little attempt at central organization
and no aim beyond the immediate relief of acute distress.
The Provision of Meals Act, passed in 1906, gave the local
educational authorities permission to install school restaurants as
part of the regular school equipment. This resulted in the rapid
development of a system similar to the French cantines, which by
March, 1909, has extended to over one hundred towns and cities.
Wide Extent.
From these early beginnings in Germany, France and England and with the various objects of charitable relief, promoting
hygiene, and encouraging school attendance, the work of school
feeding has spread until now, grown beyond a local issue, it has
received national recognition and been made the subject of national
legislation in France, Bavaria, Denmark, Switzerland, Holland,
and Great Britain. It is national in scope with support by the
municipalities in Germany, Italy, Sweden, Norway, Austria, and
Belgium. It has been started in Spain, Russia, and the United
States.
Prominence of Movement.
The movement for school feeding is by no means an obscure
one, and during the past two decades has been the subject of
serious and extensive investigation in most of the countries mentioned. In England, the Provision of Meals Act came as the
crystallization of public opinion that had been shaping for forty
years and had been tremendously stimulated for four years by the
activities of four Parliamentary Commissions appointed to investigate the physical condition of the people. The lioyal Commission
on Physical Training in 1903 declared that malnutrition and not
lack of gymnastics was responsible for the low physical standard
obtaining throughout the nation, and suggested school meals as a
necessary accompaniment to any possible scheme of physical training in the schools. The Committee on Physical Deterioration in
1904 corroborated the findings and suggestions of the earlier commission. During the next two years two national bodies, the Interdepartmental Committee on Medical Inspection and the Feeding
of Children Attending the Public Elementary Schools, and the
Select Committee on the Provision of Meals Bill, made specific
inquiries into the subject of school feeding. In reports as ponder32 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
cms as their names, these two committees declared that voluntary
effort could not meet the need, and that this might only be dons
by the school authorities. In London alone, by March, 1910, no
fewer than 55,552 children were eating daily at the 842 meal
centres.
In Germany the problem has been given wide publicity ever
since 1890, when a national congress of vacation colonists was held
and it was agreed that if the children were to receive permanent,
benefit from their country outings, they must be assured good food
all the year round. In 1897 the Social Democrats introduced
a bill in the Reichstag providing for school feeding in cities, but
this was defeated on the grounds that such a measure would
increase the migration of jieople to the large cities. However,
since England has passed her act, the subject has been exhaustively
studied in Germany and there is now serious and widespread
agitation for compulsory national legislation.
Beginnings in America.
The movement for school feeding is very young in America,
if we except purely charitable work like that of the Children's Aid
Society, which in 1855 began to furnish free lunches to the children of the industrial schools of jSTew York City.
Almost from the beginning of his superintendency of the
New York schools, Dr. William II. Maxweill has urged the installation of lunches in the elementary schools where all who wish
might buy at cost a warm nourishing meal at noon. In 1908
permission was given to a committee of social workers, physicians
and teachers to try the experiment of serving three cent lunches
in two of the New York schools. After two full years of trial, it
was found that the meals might be made self-supporting to the
extent of having food and service covered by the three cents, and
the board of education agreed to allow similar luncheons to be
established in any other of the city schools. At present the committee is serving luncheons in seven schools.
The Starr Centre Association started penny lunches in two
Philadelphia schools over fifteen years ago; a work that has continued and grown with the co-operation of other societies until at
present there are nine schools with some form of school lunch,
attended on the average by 40 per cent of the school enrolment.
After two years of agitation and investigation, the Board of
Education in Chicago, in the fall of 1910, appropriated twelve
hundred dollars for the experiment of installing lunches in six city
schools. The experiment was a success and the work has continued.
THE SCHOOL FEEDING MOVEMENT. 33
In twenty-seven other cities in ten different states women's
clubs, teachers and medical inspectors have organized to introduce
lunches; in the elementary schools and in about thirty other places
they are under consideration. This work is not limited to
the large cities nor to any section of the country. It is found in
cities as diverse in size and locality as New York and Eau Claire,
Wisconsin; Boston and Memphis; Chicago and Houston. A
beginning of lunches in the rural schools is reported from Minnesota, but no statistics 011 this are at hand. The national character of the interest roused in the problem is indicated by the fact
that the United States Bureau of Education published a bulletin
in 1909 on "The Daily Meals of School Children," and that
Commissioner Claxton has under way an investigation of the cost,
administration and efficiency of the service where it has been
developed.
Such in brief is the general history of the School Feeding
Movement. Begun over a century ago, it has in the last twenty
years attained such momentum that it is now in the forefront of
social and educational activity in Europe and is attracting increasing attention in our own cities.
In vcstigation of Underfeeding among American School Children.
In this country, as elsewhere, there have been two main
channels of interest leading to the introduction of the lunches. On
the one hand, workers seeking to extend the influence of the schools
have seen in the noon hour an unrivalled opportunity for reaching
the whole child at the most vivid point in his consciousness: the
food interest. On the other hand are persons with sympathies,
poignantly awakened by accounts of children forced to attend school
with bodies and brain weak and without energy from malnutrition
and underfeeding, who see in school meals a partial remedy for
this unquestioned evil. Because the latter interest is the most
widespread and most debated, it seems well to marshall the results
of the more notable investigations in this subject, with no further
comment than to disclaim any attempt at conclusive statistical
deductions other than the most general estimate of the extent of
the condition.
The Number of Underfed Children.
General public interest in school feeding began with the
publication in 1904 of Robert Hunter's book, "Poverty". I11
trying to give some estimate of the amount of suffering that must
exist as a result of poverty Hunter made the statement that there
must be "very likely sixty or seventy thousand children in New
34 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
York City alone who often arrive at school hungry and unfitted to
do well the work assigned to them."1 This statement has received
more publicity than any other one sentence in the whole book, and
it was all too often translated by the newspapers into "70,000
starving children in New York City come breakfastless to school."
As a result many so called investigations were made and most
conflicting reports published which alternately refuted, corroborated and outdid Hunter's original statement.
Shortly after the publication of this book, John Spargo undertook to find out by personal investigation the real facts about underfed children in New York City.2 He first confined his attention to
the subject of the usual breakfasts eaten by school children. He
was able with the cordial co-operation of principals and teachers to
gather fairly reliable information in regard to the breakfasts of
12,800 children, in sixteen different schools.
The method used was as follows. Each child was questioned
privately by the class teacher, as to what he had for breakfast that
day. If he reported no breakfast, the fact was noted, and also if
he reported an inadequate breakfast. For this investigation, an
inadequate breakfast was defined as one not containing any of the
following articles: milk, eggs, meat, fish, cereal, butter, jam or
fruit; it further meant one consisting of coffee or tea, either alone,
or with bread or cake or crackers. Each teacher reported to the
principal the number of children with no breakfast, and those with
inadequate breakfasts, omitting so far as possible children of fairly
good circumstances whose lack of breakfast was accidental or
unusual.
The inquiry revealed the following facts: of 12,800 children, 987 or nearly 8 per cent had no breakfast; 1963 others, or
over 15 per cent had inadequate breakfasts. This made a total of
23 per cent of all the children in those schools who were badly fed,
so far as this might be indicated by breakfast alone.
Mr. Spargo then tried to find out what sort of lunches the children had. He was assured by teachers and principals and by his
own observation that many children did not go home at noon, but
remained playing about the school yard, with no lunch at all. No
exact figures were gathered on this point. Erom questioning by
the teachers, it was found that anywhere from 10 to 20 per cent
of the children were given pennies to buy their own lunches. He
watched what they bought and reports this special illustration as a
fair example of their choice in winter. Fourteen children, eight
1 Hunter, Robert. Poverty. The Macmillan Company, p. 210.
- Spargo, John. The Bitter Cry of the Children. New York, The Macmillan
Company, 1906, pp. 61-124.
TEE SCEOOL FEEDING MOVEMENT. 35
boys and six girls, in one delicatessen store, bought, seven of tliem
pickles and bread, four of them pickles alone, two of them bologna
and rye bread, and one pickled fish and bread. On a.summer day
he saw a group of nineteen buy, six of them pickles, two of them
pickles and bread, six ice cream, two bananas, and three candy.
Mr. Spargo found that another way the lunch pennies go is in
gambling, especially among boys.
This investigation was followed by many others, both in New
York and in other cities, which may be grouped in two classes;
the first being confined, as was Mr. Spargo's, to a study of the
kind of breakfasts and lunches eaten by the children, and the second a survey of the children's nutrition, made by physicians.
The following is an account of various other inquiries into
the subject of the breakfast of school children:
In 1906 Dr. Lechstecker, acting for the New York State
Board of Charities, examined 10,707 children in the twelve industrial schools of the Children's Aid Society. ITe found that of
these, 439 had had no breakfast on the day of inquiry and 998
others had had breakfasts of coffee alone or with bread. These
children, who formed 13 per cent of all examined, showed marked
anemia. Dr. Lechstecker declared that ho found that only 18 per
cent of all children had started the day with what he considered
suitable and adequate meals.
In a similar examination made in 1905 in Chicago of 5150
children in five schools, 1586 or 31 per cent reported an entirely
inadequate breakfast or none at all. In Buffalo, of 7500 children
in eight schools, 5105 reported a breakfast of tea or coffee and
bread. The principals in these schools asserted that there were
1150 or 15 per cent of all examined who were obviously handicapped by poor nutrition. In Philadelphia 4589 children Avere
examined and 189 reported no breakfast, and 2564 tea or coffee
and bread, making a total of 59 per cent coming to school inadequately fed.3
Beginning with the year 1906, medical inspectors in New
York public elementary schools, have recorded cases of malnutrition. During these five years from 1906-1910 inclusive, in a total
number of 860,728 examinations the average percentage of cases
found was five. This means that in the proportion of one in twenty
cases examined, the condition of malnutrition was so marked that
it was entered on the official records as one of the physical defects
of the child.4
3 The Hunger rrohlem in tho Public Schools?What the canvass of six his cities
reveals?Special correspondence in tho Philadelphia North American, May 31, 1905.
* Reports of the New York Superintendent of Schools, years 1906 through 1910.
36 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
In 1907 the ISTew York Committee on the Physical Welfare of
School Children found oil examination of 1400 typical New York
school children that 145 or 10 per cent showed marked symptoms
of malnutrition, and visits to the homes showed that the daily
food of many others was unsatisfactory. A few months after the
first examination 900 of these children were re-examined more
carefully and of those 128 or 13 per cent were declared to ho suffering from malnutrition.5
In 1909 Dr. E. Mather Sill, at his clinic on the lower east
side of the city, made a very careful medical examination of 1000
children whose ages ranged from six years to twelve years and
found 400 children who were badly undernourished.0'
Finally, in the early part of 1910, the School Lunch Committee made a special examination of 2150 children in the lower
grades of two ISTew York schools, and found 283 of these or 13
per cent were marked cases of malnutrition. These children
weighed on the average nine pounds less than the normal for their
ages.
In Chicago in 1908, of 10,090 children in twelve schools, 825
children were found by medical inspectors to be suffering seriously
from malnutrition, due to deficient food. In addition, 353 others
were found who were undernourished, but for whose conditions
other causes than inadequate food might be responsible. This
means that a total of 1178 or 12 per cent of those examined were
badly nourished.
One striking fact shown by the Chicago investigation was that
the number of acutely undernourished children decreased in the
higher grades. An analysis of the distribution of the 1178 children in flic different grades follows:7
Underfed
Grade Number Per Cent
Kindergarten   70 15.5
First grade  502 14
Second "   235 11
Third "   195 10
Fourth "   91 9
Fifth and above  85 0
Total   1178 12
c The Physical Welfare of School Children, Quarterly publication of American
Statistical Association. Boston, 1007.
0 Sill, E. Mather, M.D. A Study of Malnutrition in the School Child. Journal
of the American Medical Association, Vol. LII, No 25 p 1081
7 Reports on Underfed Children. Reprinted 'from 'Minutes of the Hoard of
Education of the City of Chicago, October 21, 1008.
THE SCHOOL FEEDING MOVEMENT. 37
In Philadelphia, in 1909-10, a special investigation of 500
children in one school in a poor district, including a medical
examination and a visit to the home of each child, revealed serious
underfeeding in 119 cases, forming 24 per cent of the whole.
In Boston, the routine medical inspection of all children in
1909 revealed between 5000 and G000 cases of underfeeding and
anemia,, among a total of 80,000 children.
In St. Paul, in 1910, Dr. Meyerding, head of the Medical
Inspection, made a special examination of 3200 children in schools
frankly chosen from the poorer district. lie found that 644 or 20
per cent of the whole showed marked underfeeding.
In Rochester, in 1910, Dr. Franklin Bock examined 15,157
children. Of these he designated 752 or 5 per cent as showing
evident lack of nutrition, and 1285 as anemic.
As a general conclusion from these investigations it seems
fair to place the probable number of seriously underfed school
children in New York and other American cities where official
inquiries have placed it in European cities,?at 10 per cent of
the school population. This number doubtless includes many who
might be able to pay for an adequate lunch at noon, if the opportunity were provided.
Poverty, Ignorance and Malnutrition.
No one doubts that there is a close relationship between
poverty and underfeeding?the terms are practically synonymous.
Many persons, however, insist that the immediate cause of most
of the underfeeding among the school children in American cities
is not poverty but. ignorance?that if the majority of incomes,
slender as these are, were expended wisely, the children might be
properly fed.
Light on the general problem of the relation of income to
nutrition was thrown by Dr. Cliapin's study of the Standard of
Living among Workingmen's Families in New York City.8 His
investigation involved keeping a detailed account during one week
of the actual expenditures for and consumption of food in one
hundred typical families of a dozen nationalities. So far as
possible "normal" families consisting of a father, mother and three
children were chosen. The material gathered in this investigation
was submitted to dietetic experts, who estimated the actual food
value consumed each day per family, and by each member of the
family. These results were compared with the American standard
ration of persons of different ages as computed by Atwater. In
8 Cliapin, Robert Cort. The Standard of Living among Workingmen's Families
in New York City. New York, 1907. Pp. 123-101.
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
this computation the unit taken is the daily food need of the
father of the family, a man at moderately active muscular work.
The needs of the women and children are then calculated in progressive fractions of this unit, varying from three-tenths for the
child under two to eight- and nine-tenths for the women and
adolescents in the family.9
When the expenditure for food was compared with the actual
amount of food purchased, it was discovered that in general the
families that spent on food less than 22 cents per man per day,
were underfed, that is they were unable to buy enough to support
life on a plane of physical efficiency.
The yearly expenditure for food in each of the 391 families
was then determined, and it was found that applying the minimum
standard of 22 cents per man per day, the families might be
grouped as follows, according to the income and the percentage of
necessary underfeeding, as estimated by the amount spent on food:
Annual Total No. Underfed Families
Income of Families Number Per Cent
$400- 599   25 19 70
600- 799   151 48 32
800- 899   73 10 22
900-1099   94 8 9
1100 and over 4S 0 0
Totals  391 91 23.2
The figures in this table indicate that with less than $G00 a
year to spend, an adequate food supply is not provided in three
families out of four. On incomes from $G00 to $800, one family
in three is underfed, while less than one-tenth of the families
having $900 to $1000 to spend fall short of the minimum allowance for food. The income of $1100 for a family of five is apparently a safeguard against underfeeding.
Incomes of Families of Underfed School Children
The study made by Dr. Chapin was not directly concerned
with the problem of underfed school children. So far as specific
investigations have been made of the family incomes of underfed
school children Cliapin's findings have been corroborated. The
most careful study of the kind yet made was that conducted by the
l^ew York School Lunch Committee in 1909, This study covered
2G2 cases of undernourished children. Records were made of all
9 United States Department S. Agricultural Farmers' Bulletin, No. 142, p. 3:5.
THE SCHOOL FEEDING MOVEMENT. 39
the details in their liome life which might bear on their condition.
Some of the results were as follows:
Of the families of 10G children, it was found that in G9 per
cent of the cases the yearly income fell below $825. The families
were grouped according to incomes as follows:
Annual
Income Number Per Cent
$825 and over  33 31
500-800   38 3G
400-500   11 10
Less than $400   24 23
Totals   10G 100
Home Feeding.
A study of the food given to these 2G2 undernourished children at home showed that 93 per cent had tea or coffee every day
and of these nearly 40 per cent had it twice a day.
Given a breakfast of tea or coffee and bread, a great many of
these children had to wait till night time for a real meal. In
nearly 10 per cent of the cases the mother worked away from
home all day and could not prepare any lunch at noon. In 23
per cent there was no prepared lunch at home and the children
had to get it for themselves. In a still larger number of cases
forming 38 per cent of the whole there was no available lunch at
home of any kind and if the children did not have pennies they
had nothing at noon. This makes a total of G8 per cent for
whom there was no regular provision for a noonday meal at home.
From accounts given by the mothers, the evening meal was not of
such character as to make up for the other poor and irregular
meals. Detailed accounts of the actual food eaten at home by 141
children showed that 77 per cent were receiving too little food of
any kind, leaving suitability out of the question.
Housing.
But poverty may affect nutrition in other ways besides
mechanically limiting the food supply. Poverty means narrow
living quarters and even a limit to the supply of air. This was
well illustrated during the same investigation, when details were
gathered of the housing of 217 families with undernourished children.
40 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The following table shows the number of persons to a room
No. Per Cent
1 person or less per room  17 8
1-1.5 person " "   47 22
1.5-2 persons " "   03 2S
2-2.5 " " "   39 18
2.5-3 " " "   38 18
Over 3 " " "   13 0
Total   217 100
In 42 per cent of the families there were more than two
persons to every room in the house. This means that the sleeping
rooms were even more crowded because the kitchen is included in
the number of rooms. In seventeen families there was a room
for each member of the family. The number of rooms taken by
itself is only a rough indication of the actual condition of crowding
and bad air, because of the fact that many rooms are windowless.
Further, in the old style "railroad" flat, which still outnumbers
any other type in New York, the "rooms" are simply vaguely
defined sections in a long corridor.
Similar investigations into the social and economic factors
making for underfeeding in New York and other cities have given
results like those just outlined. Among the conditions making
for underfeeding in school children, especially in large cities, are
overcrowding, irregular and bad food habits and actual lack of
enough to eat. These are not the only ones, but they are the
important ones, and in a majority of cases are directly traceable
to poverty.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Atwood, W. 0., Ph.D. (Special Agent in Charge of Nutrition Investigations,
Office of Experiment Station, U. S. Bureau of Agriculture):?Principles
of Nutrition and Nutritive Value of Food. Farmers' Bulletin No. 142
(corrected to April 5, l!)0(i). Washington, Government Printing Offices.
(Popular introduction to the study of food values, standards used
being based on observation of what people do eat, not ou experimental
work.)
Bradford Education Committee-.?Report for 1000. Education Office, Manor
Bow, Bradford, Eng.
(Statistics of school feeding in Bradford, 1008-0. Descriptive
account of plant.)
Also
Recipes, compiled by Marian E. Cuff" (Superintendent of Domestic
Subjects) and used in the preparation of the Seventeen Dinners served
in the School Dining Rooms. Published at Education Offices, Manor Row,
Bradford, Eng., February, 1008.
Bryant, Louise Stevens:?School Feeding in Europe. Journal of Home
Economics. April, 1010, pp. 140-150.
(A summary of the present condition of school feeding in Krance,
England, Germany, Italy and other European countries, with description
of typical organizations.)
TIIE SCHOOL FEEDING MOVEMENT. 41
Bryant, Louise Stevens:?The Feeding of School Children. The Dietetic and
Hygiene Gazette, September, 11)10, Vol. XXVI, No. 9, pp. 527-530.
Bkyant, Louise Stevens:?Some Recent Experimental Work in Children's
Food Needs. The Dietetic and Hygiene Gazette, June, 1911.
(An account of work on children's diet analogous to Crittenden's
work on diet of adults. Comparative study of requirements of fifteen
standard authorities on children's diet. Four tables.)
Bonnell, Henry H.:?First Annual Report of the School Lunch Committee
of the Home and School League. Philadelphia, December, 1911, 19 pp.
(Account of Lunches in Philadelphia Schools. Particular reference
to experimental work and study of home conditions.)
Bougiiton, Alice C.:?Penny Luncheons. Tiie Psychological Clinic, Vol.
Ill, No. 8, January 15, 1910.
School Luncheons, Journal of Home Economics, Vol. Ill, No. 1, February, 1911.
(Plan of lunches under auspices of Home and School League in Philadelphia.)
Burniiam, Wm. II. Ford:?Cyclopedia of Education, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1911. Vol. II. pp. 027-030, Food and Feeding.
(Section on Nutrition, School lunches in America and England.
Bibliography. Feeding. Careful argument for school feeding as part of
school life and equipment.)
Cornell, Walter S., M.D.:?Health and Medical Inspection of School Children. Philadelphia: F. S. Davis Company, 1912. School feeding, pp. 100114. Chapter on Nutrition, pp. 479-498.
Crowley, Ralph E.:?(Medical Dept. of Board of Education, tvreat Britain.)
1. The Hygiene of School Life. London. Metliuen & Co., 30 Essex
St. W. C. 1910.
(General treatment of nutrition of child, p. 12 fl". Chapter on the
Provision of School Meals. This chapter represents the author's conclusions in regard to the subject, reached after several years of practical
experience in organizing meals in Bradford.)
2. Report by the Medical Superintendent (in conjunction with Superintendent of Domestic Subjects, Marian E. Cuff) on a Course of Meals
given to Necessitous Children from April to July, 1907. l'ub. by City of
Bradford Education Committee, Bradford, Eng., and September, 1907.
(Out of print.)
(This is an account of an experiment to determine the efTect of food
alone on the health and growth of school children. It is notable in being
the first experiment where propsr precautions were taken to isolate the
factor of food, and to have control records kept. The original report is
out of print, but a summary of its conclusions and the chart in the original are given in Progress, April, 1908. See also in this Bibliography
articles by L. S. Bryant.)
CnAriN, Robert Coit:?The Standard of Living among Workingmen's Families in New York City. Pub. by the Russell Sage Foundation. New
York: Charities Publication Committee, 1909.
(The factor of food is treated prominently. Estimates are given of
the percentage of "underfed families" in New York City, grouped according to income. Underfeeding exists in 70 per csnt of the cases where the
family income lies between $400 and $000, and is found to lessen as the
incomes rise, until only 9 per cent of the families receiving $900?$1000 a
year are underfed, and disappears with the income of $1100 and over.)
Frere, Margaret (Member of of the Education Committee, London County
Council) :?Children's Care Committees. London: P. S. King & Son,
Great Smith Street, Westminster, 1909, 80 pp., Is. net.
(Unofficial handbook for members of "care committee having charge
of social and charitable work in schools." Ch. II on "How to Feed
Necessitous School Children." Appendix giving typical menus.)
Gorst. Sir John Eldon:?The Children of the Nation: How their Health and
Vigour should be promoted by the State. London: Metliuen & Co., 1907,
207 pp.
42 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Gastpar, Dr. (of Stuttgart) :?Die Beurteilung dcs Erniilirungszugtandes der
Scliulkinder. Zeit. Scliulges., XXI, Jahr., 1908, pp. 689-702.
(The correlation of thirteen diseases found in 8000 school children
with their nutritional condition. Four times as many cases of disease
arc found among the badly nourished as among the well nourished. Six
tables. Practical method of classifying nutrition. A remarkable, and
highly significant piece of work, and the first of its kind.)
Great Britain, Parliamentary Reports. (These all to be obtained from Wyman & Sons, Fetter Lane, E. C., or Eyre and Spottiswoode, East Harding
Street, Elect Street, E. C.)
(Reports of work of the Official Commission leading to the passage
of the "Provision of Meals Act," and dealing with its subsequent carrying
out.)
1903 (Cd. 1507) :?Report of the Royal Commission of Physical
Training (Scotland).
1904 (Cd. 2175) :?Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on
Physical Deterioration.
190G (288) :?Special Report and Report from the Select Committee
on the Education (Provision of Meals) Bill, 1900; and the Education
(Provision of Meals) (Scotland) Bill, 1900; together with the Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes of Evidence, and Appendix.
(Methods and administration in England, particularly in voluntary
systems of feeding, reported on by 28 witnesses, all with practical experience. Valuable and suggestive for practical workers.)
1907 (Cd. 3037), Mackenzie, W. Leslie, M.D.:? Report on a collection
of statistics as to the Physical Condition of Children attending the Public
Schools of the School Board for Glasgow.
(Most extensive investigation of the kind ever made, including 72,800
cases. The heights and weights of the children classified according to
housing and nutrition.)
1910 (Cd. 5131):?Report of the Working of the Education (Provision of Meals) Act, 1900, up to the 31st of March, 1909.
(Includes a classified report of information received from over one
hundred towns having adopted the act. Administrative, financial and
educational issues.)
Hunt, Caroline L.:?The Daily Meals of School Children. Washington, Government Printing Office, 1909.
(Main emphasis on food values and dietaries for children. Bibliography and index.)
Hutchinson, Robert:?Food and the Principles of Dietetics. London, Arnold,
1906.
(G'eneral textbook on nutrition. Not written especially for the
trained reader. Considerable matter on children's diets.)
Kaup, Dr. Med. I.:?Die Ernahrungsverhiiltnisse der Volksschulkinder. (Vorbericlit und Verhandlungen der 3. Konferenz der Zentralstello fur Volkswolilfalirt. 1909. Darmstadt.) Berlin: Carl Heymanns Verlag, 1909,
170 pp., 22 tables.
(Ibis is an account of the most extensive investigation of school
feeding that has ever been made in any country. Tt covers the reports
of school feeding organization in all towns of 10,000 and over in the
German Empire (these are analyzed and the results tabulated); an
account of the daily food of about 500.000 school children; the report of
a special examination of the nutritional conditions of 170.000 children.
The causes and effects of malnutrition are discussed at length. Plans
and outlines for future work; the correlated social reforms, etc., arc given.
Critical analysis of the food values in the meals of some 25 towns.)
Kittridge, Mabel H.: Experiments with School Lunches in New York City.
Journal of Home Economics, April, 1910.
Lancet Reports: Hie Free Feeding of School Children. A reprint of the
reports by the Special Sanitary Commissioner of The Lancet on the action
taken by the municipalities with regard to the provision of meals for the
children attending the elementary schools of Paris, Brussels, Milan,
THE SCHOOL FEEDING MOVEMENT. 43
Vercelli, San Remo, Mentone, Nice, Cannes, Toulon, and Marseilles. Sec:
ond edition, 1907. The Offices of the Lancet, 423, 424, Strand, London,
W. 0.
(Tiiose interested in the important questions of the popular and
political reactions to the introduction of meals into the schools will find
these reports most valuable. The political and financial dangers and
complications as well as their final solution are given in detail for each
place.)
Mayer, M. J.?Vital Question of School Lunches, III, Rev. of Rev., 43, 455-9,
April, 1911. (See also Edit.) Pa. Sell. Jour., December, 1911, ?. 261.
Organisation des Cantines Scholaires S, Paris. A report in manuscript manifold issued by Direction de l'Enseignement primaire, 3me
Bureau. Prefecture du departement de la Seine.
(An account of the origin and history of the cantines in Paris from
1879 to 1903, with a detailed description of their conduct in the 18th
district, regarded as the model in this respect.)
Simon, Helene:?Schule und Brot. 1908, Leipzig, Leopold Yoss. 1st edition,
1907, 112 pp.
(General treatment of the whole problem from the social, economic
and legal points of view. Propagandist rather than statistical. Historical
and descriptive account of English, French and G'erman systems to date.)
Simon, Helene:?Die Schulspeisung. 1909, Leipzig. (Oct.) Duncker und
Ilumblot. 93 pp. Appendices.
(General treatment of whole subject, taking into account the latest
German reports. (See Kaup.) Social, economic and legal aspects and
implications. Other countries.)
Simon, Helene:?Schulspeisung. 1911. Enzyklop. Handbucli des Kinderschutzes usw. Englemann, Leipzig. II, pp. 206-213.
(Material of Die Schulspeisung, 1909, condensed for an encyclopedia
and brought up to date with bibliography.)
Tokrey, Emmeline E.:?Penny Lunch Movement (Illustrated). Good Housekeeping, Vol. 52, pp. 242-4. February, 1911.
(Describes lunches in Boston Schools.)
