Frank Charles Shrubsall
========================

We greatly regret to record the death of Dr. Frank Shrubsall, Senior
Medical Officer of the London County Council, which occurred on
September 25th at his home in Hampstead, just after his return from
holiday.

Dr. Shrubsall was a Vice-President of the C.A.M.W. and for many
years a member of its Education Committee. At the Medical Officers'
Courses organised by the Association in conjunction with the University
of London, he ivas responsible for the arrangements in connection with the
students' visits to L.C.C. Special Schools for demonstration purposes. At
the Short Courses for Teachers of Mentally Defective and Retarded
Children, he ivas a frequent lecturer and his help and counsel were ever at
the disposal of those directing the Association's work.

The following tribute to him is written by his friend, Dr. Ralph
Crowley, Chairman of the Education Committee, in the name of the
C.A.M.W. Council, its officers and staff.

A great blow has fallen upon us all. We of the Central Association
have in very truth lost in Dr. Shrubsall a guide, philosopher and friend. To
the aid of the mentally defective Dr. Shrubsall brought an acute intellect,
a sympathetic understanding and rare administrative ability born of a long
and wide experience. These were at all times unreservedly available for all
of us concerned, from whatever angle, with the many problems and difficul-
ties connected with the ascertainment, care and treatment of these fellow
citizens of ours, debarred from so much which constitutes the fullness of life
accompanying full mental development.

Dr. Shrubsall spared no pains to do the best for each individual child
or adult brought under his care. No one, I know, can have realised this more
than his colleagues at the London County Council, but I call to mind the
many cases in regard to which we were in consultation with him at the Board
of Education and the helpful discussions we had over the many difficult
administrative points that arise so frequently in this work. His one purpose
was to strive that administrative action should be made to accord with the
human requirements of the individual boy and girl in need of help.

And the teacher found in him, too, a sound instructor and wise counsel-
loi and friend. This was, of course, especially true in the case of the teacher
entrusted with the care and education of these children in the special school,
but, through the Short Courses of the Association and in other ways, Dr.
Shrubsall reached a wide circle of teachers to whom his great knowledge of
the subject and his clear mode of presentation of difficult points of law and
administration, together with the practical application of these, as illustrated
by examples drawn from his unrivalled experience of cases of all descriptions
and variety, was greatly appreciated. We are fortunate that so much of his
knowledge has been embodied in the book entitled " Mental Deficiency
Practice," brought out last year in conjunction with his colleague. Dr. A. C.
Williams. Dr. Shrubsall's great knowledge and experience were of the utmost
value to the Joint Committee of the Board of Education and the Board of
Control on Mental Deficiency of which he was a member.

But it is not simply a learned and able colleague we have lost but one
whose delightful human qualities and real friendship we learnt so warmly
to appreciate and enjoy. Our deepest sympathy will go out to Mrs. Shrubsall,
so closely associated with him in all his work, and to his daughter.
Ralph H. Crowley.
