Mind and Mine
=============

MENTAL WELFARE 19
?ok Reviews and Abstracts
y
. By Raymond B.
London. George G. Harrap and Co.,
tcl- 1934. Pp.314. Price 7/6 net.
on pre are several reasonably good text-books
tychology for the elementary student
^ wou^ be hard to think of any one
the a comPrehensive view of
thatV field), but there is a real lack of books
st Can be recommended to the man in the
a]j - Who wants to know what Psychology is
as<, ?ut! Dr. Cattell's new book is written
t an account of Psychology for the Inquiring
shoIilari an<^ ^he ProsPective Student/' and
the become a popular book in every sense of
vv?rd. It is comprehensive, up-to-date, and
*? read- ^ might be argued that it is too
p y and likely to lead the Layman to think that
ych?iogy itself is an easy subject.
of tjG auth?r's method is to unfold the progress
ty psychological research by describing the
snr. ?f well-known Psychologists in their
Vl fields.
for ?pening chapter discusses the " Search
Mind in the Nervous System " and makes
^or the general reader the results of
ky Head and Lashley which it would be
i cult to find elsewhere in easily compre-
Med form.
^le two following chapters on Abilities the
^ earches of Binet, Spearman and Terman are
fussed. Dr. Cattell is a convinced adherent
int i ? " factor School " and other theories of
^Uigence are not discussed.
4n i succeeding chapters deal with instincts
, ^ emotions, and the psychopathology of
/Way life. The most fundamental theories
js ^reud are described at some length, and there
c, a brief account of Adler's views. In a long
P aPter on " The Complete Architecture of
n laracter " the author finds in McDougall's
tj e?ry of instincts and sentiments the explana-
j0ri that makes sense of the Psycho-analytic
Q?ctrines. A chapter on " The Mind out of
.ear " deals with the exaggerated forms of
^ rrilal mechanisms, and discusses the relation
eUveen the normal and the abnormal.
?j, then follow two interesting chapters on
n^perament and Psychological types in which
e researches of Pinard, Stephenson and the
tHhor himself from the standpoint of the Factor
0f ??1 are discussed, as well as a brief account
the theories of Berman and Kietschner. It
?uld be difficult to find elsewhere the results of
recent investigations on these lines explained in
such a clear and balanced account for the
general reader.
The book concludes with a chapter on the
applications of Psychology to education,
industry and social problems. It is, in the re-
viewer's opinion, the best of the book and will
probably be found the most interesting by the
enquiring layman. Here, as might be expected,
the outstanding names are those of Burt and
Myers, and throughout the book it is good to
see that the work of British Psychologists is
given due recognition, which may in some
measure redress the balance of most American
books of this type which do them less than
justice.
There are, of course, in a book of this nature
several points of detail which any particular
Psychologist might question, but the size of the
book naturally precludes any but the briefest
discussion of different theories.
Dr. Cattell is careful in his explanations and
illustrations to appeal to the everyday experi-
ence of his intended readers, who should find
the book interesting and valuable. The
comments on the social implications in particu-
lar, of modern psychological theory are always
pertinent.
It is likely that some readers will be irritated
by the style of writing which seems needlessly
journalistic at times. It is surely unnecessary,
in order to make a popular book, to imitate the
technique of a special correspondent describing
some new scientific discovery for a popular
newspaper.
The book is very fully illustrated, and the
photographs and diagrams will probably be
found helpful by most laymen to an understand-
ing of the text. There is a good index, but it
seems a pity that the prospective student is given
no suggestions for further reading and study.
A.H.D.T.
Heredity Mainly Human. By Eldon Moore.
Pp. VIII + 343, with 37 diagrams, 10 in
colour. London: Chapman and Hall, Ltd.
1934. Price 15/-.
Heredity is a subject that attracts perennial
interest not only amongst those whose work
brings them into contact with its operations,
such as physicians, social workers and adminis-
trators, but also amongst lay people generally.
During the last thirty-five years this field of
biology has seen intense activity and an enor-
mous literature has been produced. The
20 MENTAL WELFARE
subject has become very complex and it is
difficult even for the specialist to follow all its
ramifications. While there are admirable
works of a technical character and also books
that include excellent summaries of inherited
abnormalities in man, it is far more difficult to
find books that deal simply and also adequately
with the whole subject in a way that the layman
can understand. Works that attempt this task
tend either to be too academic and assume too
much knowledge on the part of the reader, or
else, by omitting and minimising complexities,
give an impression of false simplicity. The last
danger is the commoner and the most confident
opinions are often expressed that are based on
a knowledge of genetics that would have sufficed
thirty years ago, but which ignores all that has
been discovered since.
The task of presenting the science of heredity
adequately and at the same time simply is one
of the most difficult in the whole of biology. The
author of this book approaches it with admirable
qualifications. Starting with a thorough grasp
of the principles of the subject and with a wide
knowledge of the literature, his experience as
Chief Officer of the Imperial Bureau of Animal
Genetics, and as Editor of the Eugenic Review,
have made him thoroughly familiar with the
problem of presenting the science of genetics to
the layman. It must be said at once that Mr.
Eldon Moore has been notably successful. It
would be difficult to find a more lucid account
of the phenomena of Mendelism. As the theme
is developed a host of interesting topics have
been introduced. The difficulties and complexi-
ties have not been evaded but have been
squarely faced with the determination to express
them in the simplest possible form. The chap-
ters dealing with inheritance and mentality will
be found especially interesting, particularly the
chapters on inheritance of great ability and on
twins. The chapter 011 amentia is open to some
slight criticism. The author has given a very
full account of some valuable families investi-
gated by himself, but this is not adequate sub-
stitute for a comprehensive review of the sub-
ject, which in fact is treated very briefly. The
chapters on Lammarkian experiments and on
alleged racial poisons are trenchant and ad-
mirable. There is a valuable appendix which
presents original work on the numerical propor-
tions of social classes and distinguished men.
Mr. Eldon Moore has performed a notable ser-
vice in producing a book which is authoritative
and comprehensive and at the same time won-
derfully simple and straightforward. The P P
fessional biologist will find it an exceU v
account of the subject, but in particular it 0 0
be confidently recommended to all those vV^0
without being professional biologists, wish g
familiarise themselves with this important asp c
of biology. J. A. F. |
The Health of the School Child. An11*!. ,
Report of the Chief Medical Officer ?f ;
Board of Education for the Year, 1933. j
Stationery Office, 1934. 3/- net. I ]
Particular attention is paid in this Report
the Chief Medical Officer of the Board of
cation to the importance of good nutrition a11 I
to the recent developments in Physical Train1
in the schools.
Undernourishment is due, not only to aC^tj
starvation or shortage of food but can freq11^1
ly be traced to improper feeding, fatigue,
hygiene or disease. Amongst nearly 2,000,^
children medically examined in 1933, 11 1 Pji
thousand were found to be malnourished a11
lui^
3valept
12.8 per thousand undernourished and requn
treatment. There is no evidence of preval ^
or increasing malnutrition but, as was to
expected, there are patches of serious und
nutrition due to unemployment in certain 01
tricts or amongst certain groups of persons.
into
The Milk Marketing scheme which came
operation this year should do much to help \ \
combating this particular weakness. The
headings of the scheme are set out in the Rep0
(p. 28). As in the provision of meals, the Pr?,
vision of daily milk (free of charge) is decioe
by medical selection and a standard of incoJ
which is adopted by individual Authorities. j
is true that the under-nourished child does 11.
always come from the poorest family, but mllC
can be done by urging all parents to allow tlie^
children to receive meals or milk at school ofl
small payment. . I
The Report goes on to deal with PhyslC^
Education (Chap. II). Much credit is given
the revised Physical Training Syllabus for tj1
development of keenness in this subject on tj1
part of Authorities and of teachers and for W
subsequent benefit to the health and happy ?u,
look of school children. Head Teachers rep0
that since suggestions in this Syllabus have beeI^
carried out, the children are more alive a*1,
alert; faulty posture which has hitherto passe
unnoticed has been corrected and, an importa11
point, parents are taking a far greater intereS
in the physical development of their children.
MENTAL WELFARE 21
Vafa^aph from the Report will show how
I of e is the awakened interest in this branch
Ration:- (p. 37)
8rou i re *s no doubt that the modern play-
chj^ ^esson' full of action and movement, with
preg rei1 lightly clad, high spirited and eager,
hav^ v!S an ^tractive spectacle, and the parents
?Pd ? clu^c^ t? appreciate the value of such
aClf0 unities. Their interest can be turned to
tyg Unt in many useful ways?appropriate gar-
ho\v S are forthcoming, suitable shoes are some-
tUs Pr?vided; not infrequently sets of appara-
etc' Urdles, jumping stands, bats and sticks,
fath' are made and presented by an approving
er' It is hardly necessary to add that the
esti 6S *his co-operation cannot be over-
deD^ted. Co-operation between the different
i^j^ftients in the school is also a practical
Wo j Worthy of note. In many schools the
ann ?rk centre is making much of the simpler
jjgg^tus needed in modern lessons, while in the
art' i ?rk classes the girls produce special
San? ^ress needed for physical exercise and
p- ?s> and bags and other containers for ap-
'he r S* Thus, for example, it is reported by
ou Glamorgan County Organiser, that numer-
al- sets of netball and pillar ball stands, stool-
. wickets and target-ball targets have been
the ^ ^e boys attending for instruction at
^anual centres."
d r ealing with the education of the mentally
t0 ?!^1Ve child (Chap. XI), reference is made
he Wood Report of 1929 and to the effect
0utS?me of its recommendations. This Report set
chilff P?kcy ?f treating both certifiable and dull
^ uren as one unit for educational purposes.
Sc,e abolition of certification for children of
def??l a?e was advocated so that all mentally
j^ctive children should come under the Ele-
?a aty School system. This recommendation
ty e some Authorities the impression that there
tjjjS no longer any use for Special Schools and
^ s mistaken idea has led to the Special School
? ^modation in some areas not being used to
asVull- This is much to be regretted and,
tie Chief Medical Officer points out, the Wood
$ /^tttittee did not recommend that Special
cl^?1s should fall into disuse, nor that defective
\Vji~ren should be left in the elementary schools
th any proper provison being made for
eiii. They recommended various types of
^,Clal provision, of which the existing Special
??ls (possibly under another name) should
W0lle ^orm?n?t only for the certifiable child
for the less retarded or dull child.
The changes in legislation necessary to carry
out this recommendation have not been made, but
there has undoubtedly been a definite movement
made in establishing some special arrangements
for educating retarded children within the ele-
mentary schools, particularly in areas where
Iladow reorganisation has brought into existence
schools where there are two to three classes in
each age group and there are enough children
to warrant making provison for a minority.
In the past Special Schools have been in-
spected only by the Medical Branch of the
Board of Education. From September, 1934,
the district Inspector for Elementary Schools
took over entire responsibility for the educa-
tional inspection of day special schools for
mentally defective children (as well as those
physically defective, partially sighted and par-
tially deaf). It is hoped that this arrangement
will help to prevent Special Schools from be-
coming isolated from other schools in their
area.
Voluntary Sterilization. By C. P. Blacker.
Oxford University Press. London. 1934.
Pp. 145. 5/- net.
This is a frank plea for the legalizing of volun-
tary sterilization and is written by the secretary
of the Eugenics Society who has done probably
more than any other single individual to further
the movement in this country. It is written for
the doctor and the layman?but more especially
the latter?and aims at helping him to come to
a decision on a matter which is coming more and
more in the sphere of everyday politics.
It is the least pretentious and probably the
most useful book on the subject that I have
read: brief, relevant, forcible, frankly biassed
?but tactful. As the title indicates, the volun-
tary principle is stressed.
There are nine pithy chapters and a useful
appendix summarising recent continental and
American studies on the inheritance of mental
deficiency.
Chapter 1 deals with the history of the move-
ment in this country up to the drafting of a
Sterilization Bill by a Joint Committee organized
by the Council of the Central Association of
Mental Welfare in 1934. Chapter 2 describes
the sterilising operations. The next chapter dis-
cusses the uncertainty in interpreting the law
with regard to sterilization. Chapter 4 deals
with hereditary defects and diseases both
physical and mental.
Chapter 5 deals with that most difficult
MENTAL WELFARE
group, the Social Problem Group. It is sug-
gested that to deprive this large group of
facilities for voluntary sterilization after they
have had all the children they wanted is to dis-
criminate against the poor.
The sixth chapter summarises the state of
sterilization in other countries and suggests that
the German Act of 1934?and the atmosphere
amid which it was born?has hampered rather
than helped the legalizing of sterilization in this
country.
Chapter 7, in discussing the pros and cons
of voluntary and compulsory sterilization, sug-
gests that compulsion in any shape or form is
foreign to British sentiment and likely only to
attach a stigma to the operation.
The eighth chapter deals with safeguards
against abuses. It points out the twin dangers:
on the one hand, of people getting sterilized for
frivolous, neurotic or fashionable reasons: on
the other hand, of people being sterilized against
their will. A Nazi state may wish to sterilize
those who do not possess the Nordic triad of
blue eyes, fair hair and Congenital Honesty; a
Capitalist state may ultimately seek to dis-
criminate against those who hold Communist
views but no job; a proletarian Dictatorship
may seek to sterilize those whom an inherited
income has rendered incapable of wage-earning.
The safeguards recommended by the Brock
Committee are considered adequate.
In the last chapter the objections to steriliza-
tion are considered.
It is pointed out that the type of mental
defective affected would be the high-grade type
who are fit for community life but not for
parenthood. Voluntary sterilization would en-
able them to obtain legitimate gratification of
their sexual impulses in marriage.
It is also suggested that the voluntary sterili-
zation of the recovered insane and the high-
grade defectives will be a negligible factor in
the suppression of possible genius when com-
pared to the practice of contraception among
the most gifted and most socially valuable
individuals. H.H.
