Mental Welfare 31
==================


(The following paper was read at the recent Conference of the Association of
Mental Health Workers and is published with their permission.)
>ome uoservations on
By DENIS CARROLL, M.A., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.,
Co-Director of the Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency
Madam Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, these observations are not
intended to form a complete account of modern psychological methods of
treating asocial individuals. They are intended simply to give you some idea
of the point of view from which the psychiatrist observes the delinquent and
of some of the reasons which lie behind his recommendations.
Treatment may be purely medical in character, including all the various
psychological methods and all the organic methods such as those employed
in treating cases of encephalitis lethargica or persons whose asocial behaviour
can be attributed to a curable glandular abnormality. Or it may be sociological,
including measures of prevention either by force, by education, by the super-
vision of early and late environment and the modifications of it, by training
or by the methods employed by probation officers for offenders placed on
probation. This last group is on the border between the sociological group
of methods and the penal group, which includes all those methods involving
punishment and threats of punishment. The general tendency nowadays is
towards the adoption of non-penal methods and especially to the development
of prophylactic measures of a kind which can be applied in practice to a large
number of people. The medical psychologist is concerned primarily with
the treatment of an actual offender but the tendency is more and more to
regard this as a stepping-stone to knowledge which will enable us to design
sound prophylactic measures. Treatment is still largely experimental, but the
results have been very encouraging and many real successes have been achieved.
The object of treatment is not only to prevent the repetition of an offence but
also to make a good citizen. The greatest success has, on the average, been
achieved with the young; not only because they arc easier of approach by in-
tensive psycho-therapeutic methods than adult criminals but also because it
is easier to effect permanent changes of character in them by sociological
measures, which are always easier to apply to large numbers.
In deciding what treatment to give to a particular delinquent, we arc
guided by various classificatory and diagnostic systems. For example, we might
divide delinquents into organic types, mental defectives, psychotics, neurotics,
epileptics, psychopathic personalities, sexual perverts and criminal personalities.
This classification is rather rough and ready, but will serve to show what I
mean. In the organic type we have all those cases where the offence can be
regarded as a symptom of an organic disease, such as encephalitis lethargica,
sufferers from which may exhibit very widely divergent kinds of asocial be-
32 MENTAL WELFARE
haviour, and who are peculiarly difficult to relieve, though it is often possible
to do something towards preventing offences. Many such cases require
institutional care. Another example is provided by patients with a glandular
disorder, and such cases often show a combination of an organic and a
psychological abnormality. For example, Herbert, aged 20, had committed
thefts sometimes with violence at intervals since the age of 14. At that age
he had begun to develop abnormally in height owing to a disorder of his
pituitary gland. At 16 he was 6 ft. 4 in. tall, and, with his disproportionately
large hands and long limbs, presented an ungainly appearance. As a result
of this he developed a feeling of great sensitiveness about his appearance and
later a feeling of marked inferiority which he ultimately overcame (but not
completely) by means of theft. He showed no signs of any text-book mental
disorder, but investigation soon showed that he would not have reacted to his
physical disorder in this way had he not been in quite serious unconscious
mental difficulties which had shown themselves in the form of various social
inhibitions. In view of this it was likely that measures directed to the relief
of these psychological difficulties would cure the delinquency, although they
would do nothing towards curing the gigantism, and this was found to be
the case.
Mental defectives may be regarded as severe, or borderline. The severe
ones require institutional care; the milder types can often be helped by train-
ing either in or out of institutions, while some have benefited from psycholo-
gical treatment, and recent psychoanalytic work with such cases has been
encouraging, though it could scarcely be applied to any large numbers.
On the whole there is little to be done for the mental defective beyond train-
ing and control.
The psychotic and neurotic cases may be divided into two groups; in
the first the offence takes the form of a symptom of the disease; in the second
we have persons who are suffering from a known clinical disorder who
commit an offence which cannot be regarded as in any way symptomatic of
that disorder. In the first group, as with the organic types, the appropriate
treatment is that of the basic disorder, and it would be as irrational, and
usually as futile, to treat such offenders by punishment as it would be to treat
pneumonia, insanity, or obsessional neurosis by punishment. This is not so
obvious as it seems, since only a century ago they whipped maniacal patients,
and at the present day it is still a widespread idea among laymen that hysterics
are to be treated correctly and adequately by punitive measures of a milder
kind. Common types of psychotic offenders are people suffering from manic
depressive disease and people suffering from paranoia. The offence may be
a method of ending intolerable anxiety, for example, when a man becomes so
depressed and pessimistic about the future that he commits suicide or murders
his family to end matters; or again, when a man commits an offence as the
result of hallucination, for example, he hears a voice say " strike him," and
he does, or, as with many paranoiacs, he believes a certain person is persecut-
ing him and under the influence of this delusional belief he protects himself
by persecuting the persecutor. A mild though good example of this was
MENTAL WELFARE 33
provided by a woman who persisted in knocking on her neighbour's front
door in the belief that this neighbour was doing the same to her, and would
not stop unless she retaliated. The psychoses are notoriously difficult to treat,
but many can be aided and many recover with a good prognosis, so that it is
well worth while giving such cases the full benefit of modern psychiatric
treatment. If they belong to the first group, it is unlikely that their delin-
quency will be repeated when they are normal.
The neurotic is fortunately much easier to treat, and cure is much more
frequent. The neurotic criminal forms a large group. A type of neurotic
criminal well worth noting is the obsessional type. Here the offence is a com-
pulsive act, and is beyond the control of the individual in exactly the same way
that an ordinary obsessional action such as compulsive washing is beyond his
control. Such patients always show other signs of the obsessional neurosis,
which is fortunate from the diagnostic point of view, since many criminals
are only too ready to assert that the offence was the result of a sudden over-
whelming impulse. Obsessionals are often difficult to cure, but are sometimes
surprisingly easy, and it is an interesting point that when some obsessional
delinquents have been treated psychologically, they have given up their asocial
symptoms long before their obsessional state as a whole has disappeared. This
is a very fortunate outcome of such treatment since it is otherwise very difficult
to prevent the obsessional criminal from repeating his offence while treatment
is achieving cure. Very often it is necessary in the public interest to commence
treatment in an institution or to arrange for the patient never to be alone
where repetition of the offence is possible. Indeed, it is very important when
treating any offender never to lose sight of the need for protecting the public
until treatment has reached a stage where repetition is really improbable.
The neurotic criminal is the most approachable by psychotherapeutic
measures from psychoanalysis to hypnosis. The principles of treatment
follow the same general rules as in the neuroses with modifications to suit
the circumstances of the criminal, who often comes under duress and has to
be wooed into treatment before treatment proper can be carried out.
The second group of psychotics and neurotics, whose asocial behaviour
is not to be regarded as a symptom of their disorder, seem at first sight to be
unsuitable for treatment by the doctor on the score of their delinquency. This
is not so. The neurotic is more likely to succumb to temptation than the
normal and his temptation is usually greater, so that if we cure the neurosis
we are likely, incidentally, to cure the delinquency, and while the neurosis
remains the delinquency is likely to recur. Moreover, the emotional factors
underlying the neurosis are also involved in the factors underlying
the delinquency, whether these are asocial, psychological, conscious
or unconscious, so that in dealing with the one we automatically deal with
the other. So that success is to be looked for in these cases too, though not so
frequently, as in the neurotic criminal.
The epileptics are found committing many different kinds of offences.
The offence may follow or precede a fit or it may occur instead of the usual
epileptic fit, and is followed by complete amnesia for the offence, e.g., he may
34 MENTAL WELFARE
undress in public and be arrested for indecent behaviour, or he may attack
someone violently, in each case having no subsequent recollection of what
he has done. Treatment is both organic and psychological, and the patient
frequently requires institutional care.
The sexual offenders are very frequently regarded as especially suitable
for psychological treatment. They, more than any other type of offender,
are generally regarded as mentally abnormal. This is undoubtedly true, and
it is a commonplace that punishment gives disappointing results. They are
frequently very unwilling patients, and often difficult, but much can be done.
I remember a youth who had been several times convicted for indecent ex-
posure. His behaviour was attributable to the fact that he had been brought
up in an exclusively feminine environment, and to the way in which the
women around him had dealt with his characterological peculiarities, and
comparatively simple psychotherapeutic measures sufficed to cure him.
There are two other large groups: one is that of the psychopathic per-
sonalities, people of an abnormal and weak type who do not fit into any other
definite clinical group, and among whom are found many embezzlers, persons
charged with false pretences, sneak thieves, etc.; the other is that of the so-
called normal criminal, a person who is to be regarded as having a criminal
character, and who shows no signs of mental abnormality apart from his
asocial behaviour. Psychopathic personalities tend to sink to the level of the
lower of their immediate associates rather than to rise to that of the better
of their companions, and consequently punishment, especially imprisonment,
does not tend to have a curative effect. Prolonged training is often useful,
whether in a home, in an approved school, Borstal or elsewhere. Psycholo-
gical methods have not been applied very extensively. As a rule these offenders
make bad patients because they lack application even more than most. Good
results have been obtained and with research there is reason to hope that good
methods for their treatment will be devised.
It is very difficult to assess how many offenders belong to these various
groups, but apart from the " normal criminal," the foregoing groups together
probably represent about 60 per cent, of all offenders.
If we group offenders according to a classification such as the above, it
is often easy in theory to see what the treatment is?it is that of the basic
disorder. In practice it is more complicated. Society has to be protected and
ways and means have to be considered. The ideal treatment is not always
available or possible, and so on. In this process of compromise all the known
causative factors are considered too. Asocial behaviour is often the resultant
of a number of causes, e.g., constitutional abnormalities, early and late
emotional factors, education, opportunity, social conditions, economic stress,
companions, etc., and it may be that the balance in favour of delinquent be-
haviour is so small that the removal of one of the more superficial of these
factors will suffice for cure, e.g., there are many more offences against pro-
perty during a wave of unemployment which lessen when prosperity returns.
These temporary delinquents could be cured by financial aid. Unfortunately
such methods are too superficial since they do not touch those deeper factors
MENTAL WELFARE
35
in the absence of which (as is the fact with the non-delinquent majority of
unemployed) economic stress would not result in delinquency, so that in treat-
ing offenders by remedying very superficial causes we must beware of neg-
lecting serious deeper factors which usually require long treatment.
The " normal criminal " is the hardest to deal with and is probably
similar as far as concerns treatment to the character case met with in ordinary
psychiatric practice. Much more research is needed and is being carried out
at the Institute and many other places on this type both into its aetiology and
treatment, and there is reason to hope that effective treatment will become
more certain. Even now successes have been achieved.
The length of treatment is very varied, from a few weeks to years, but
is usually a matter of a few months, much depending on the type of offence
and the method of treatment. No doubt it would be beneficial to psycho-
analyse all offenders in addition to whatever other treatment (penal, training,
etc.) they had. In practice this cannot be done because, apart from expense,
there are not, and are not likely to be, enough analysts to do it. Another
reason is that many offenders are not suitable subjects for analysis because they
only come to treatment under duress, and analysis of sufficient depth to pro-
duce cure is often impossible under such conditions. With others, social
factors prevent attendance at a clinic for a sufficient time. It is desirable,
however, to analyse offenders of all types for research purposes. It is in this
field of research that analysis renders its greatest service to the study of delin-
quency.
At the Institute methods of all kinds are applied to the problem, and a
feature of our policy is to include all methods in the study of delinquency.
The aim is to cure, where possible, and to develop preventive methods. The
future is most promising in the field of prevention in childhood, and with
the recognition and treatment in the widest sense of the pro-delinquent child,
crime should show a marked decrease. Many years will pass before this is
achieved.
To conclude, it will be interesting to mention in a simple way some-
thing of the more advanced theories upon which psychological recommenda-
tions are often made. The particular example I give is only one of many, and
I give it in a schematic way for the sake of clarity. We can regard the mind
as divided into conscious and unconscious and also into id, ego and super ego.
Simply, the conscious is that part of the mind of which we are aware, the
unconscious that of which we are unaware. The id is wholly unconscious
and consists of all the primitive, crude impulses, aggressive sexual, etc.
The super ego is partly conscious and partly unconscious and is a sort of
hyper-conscience. The super ego exercises a check on the id, it is critical
towards it, and its severity depends on the severity of the id impulses, parti-
cularly the aggressive ones. The id is therefore antagonistic to the super ego
and the two are at war. The ego tries to act as a mediator. The ego and
super ego are influenced by environmental factors in their development. The
stronger the super ego the harder it is for the ego?the logical and
partly conscious self?to develop. In the normal the super ego is
36 MENTAL WELFARE
moderate and benign, the ego strong and the id under control. In
the neurotic the super ego is over strong and the patient is over-
moral. The delinquent is amoral, and this is often regarded as due
to a weakly developed super ego. Actually delinquency may result from too
strong a super ego, in which case the offence represents a compulsive attempt
to overcome the difficulties it causes and the patient feels, unconsciously,
much more guilty than appears on the surface. Consequently in treatment
we must modify the super ego so that these difficulties are removed; we must
make it more benign; where it is weak we must strengthen it, and so on.
These modifications can be produced ideally by analysis which reorganises
the whole structure. It is often possible to do something in other ways. For
example, the super ego is formed to some extent by incorporating into it the
critical attitude (real or imagined) of parental figures with whom the child
comes into contact. Now an over-severe or harsh super ego is likely to cause
abnormality so that the more benign the super ego is the better (I say benign
and not wea\ and mean " firm though kindly," i.e., the criticism must come
from figures who are felt to have a loving attitude to the child). Consequently
the more loving and rational the parental figures with whom the child is
in contact the more benign will be the super ego and the better will be the
child. In the adult the same process continues though to a lesser degree, and
the super ego can be modified to some extent in this direction by adopting
a benign attitude to the offender. I recall a case in which this occurred very
successfully. A burglar of over 50 with many convictions was treated by a
probation officer. He became very friendly with the man and helped him
in many ways of real practical value, and the man kept straight for two years.
He then began to behave suspiciously and was arrested. The probation officer
realised this was a critical moment and remained friendly and advised the
man how he should proceed in court. As a result he was discharged for lack
of evidence. He had not actually committed an offence as it happened. The
result was that he remained straight till he died many years afterwards. The
officer's attitude had enabled him to realise that a critic could also be a loving
figure, and in this way he had been able?by incorporation?to render his
super ego more benign and in that way lessen his tendency to delinquency
sufficiently to give him conscious control over his impulse to steal. Some
persons deal with the conflict between super ego and id by projecting one of
the two on to the external world as a whole or in part. Suppose such a person
projects his id impulses on to another person. He then identifies himself
with his super ego and becomes harsh and critical to the other person and
visits upon him all the severity with which his super ego formerly treated
himself. But in doing this he is being righteous (in his unconscious) because
he has identified himself with his conscience and is behaving as such. To
punish such a person cannot result in cure because the punishment increases
the conscience and therefore the severity of the super ego, and therefore the
extent of the subject's behaviour which is asocial, i.e., it makes him more a
delinquent than ever. Suppose he identifies himself with the id and the
outer world with the super ego in order to deal with the conflict. His asocial
MENTAL WELFARE 37
behaviour then represents the struggle of the id to overcome the super ego.
In such a case the ego is necessarily weak, and punishment cannot strengthen
it because it acts by increasing the super ego, i.e., it gives the id all the more
reason for attacking the super ego and may therefore result in still further
delinquency. The only way punishment can cure in this group is by making
the super ego (the external world for such people) so strong that the id is
conquered but at the price of tremendous inhibition.
Such cases are extreme and probably never occur in pure form, but
the existence of either of them to any considerable extent means that we
must consider them in advising the type of treatment and whether it is to be
severe or mild, critical or non-critical, penal or not, etc., in character. The
correct procedure is to advise a method of handling which will lessen the
conflict and so permit the ego to develop and control the situation. This is
very theoretical but nevertheless of great practical importance.
We may conclude by saying that as a rule the more benign our treat-
ment of offenders, the greater our successes will be, always remembering that
by benign we mean kindly and not a carte blanche to commit crimes, and that
the kindliness is combined with a watchful eye on the needs of society.
