Developmental Problems in Childhood
====================================

:Author: Margaret Lowenfeld,
iV1-R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Gollancz. 1935. 8/6.
The subject of play is one that is claiming
?re and more the attention of psychologists
educators and others who are concerned
the developmental problems of childhood.

Only slightly understood in the past, the work
of the present century has done much to throw
light upon the importance of play and also phan-
tasy, dreams, day-dreaming and so on, these
subjects being found of importance in the educa-
tion and medical care of children and adoles-
cents. The work of the psycho-analysts and the
development of play techniques for the study
of childhood are characteristic of the present
time. The study of the subject of play, by one
who is actually engaged upon therapeutic work,
and presented as is this volume in non-technical
language, is, therefore, likely to be of interest
to all who have to do with children.

Dr. Lowenfeld's book is a rich and detailed
descriptive survey of the games and play of
children of all ages, based very largely upon
her work and observation at the Institute of
Child Psychology. Most of the examples are
drawn from the study of child patients at the
Institute. At the same time the findings and
conclusions of the book are supported by an
extensive exploration of, and quotation from
the literature of the subject.

The book consists largely of an exposition of
a new classification of play worked out by the
author, in which she recognises theories of play
put forward by earlier writers (Froebel, Groos,
Hall, Sully, etc.), but supplements these views
by what has been added to knowledge in recent
years by the experimental psychologists on the
one hand, and the psycho-analysts on the other.

The types of play enumerated follow roughly
the order of the child's development:
"1. Play as Bodily Activity; 2. Play as
Repetition of Experience; 3. Play as Demon-
stration of Phantasy; 4. Play as Realisation of
Environment; 5. Play as Preparation for Life."
Other sections deal with " Group Play ",
" The Comic Element in Play ", and " Child-
ren who Cannot Play." There is a useful
bibliography and an index.

Dr. Lowenfeld regards play as no extraneous
or unimportant manifestation, a mere " em-
broidery " on the canvas of life, but as giving
expression to the child's personality, as being of
fundamental importance in the child's develop-
ment, as well as of significance in the diagnosis
of abnormality. There is a commendable
breadth in this point of view, recognising as it
does the value of the psycho-analytic contri-
bution as applied to certain forms of play, but
realising also that this is not necessarily applic-
able to the whole field. The reviewer is par-
ticuarly interested in the author's attitude to
the social development of children: "No child
combines naturally with his fellows before the
age of four or five years . . (p. 322). An
authoritative statement on this point is valuable
because of the tendency on the part of some
educators to attempt too early to secure reactions
to social situations.

The author's descriptions of the play activi-
ties of the children at the Institute, and of the
materials used, are varied, entertaining and full
of useful psychological material. Dr. Lowen-
feld has given generously from her own observa-
tions and those of her assistants. At the same
time the more theoretical exposition in relation
to this material is somewhat disappointing, being
rather scanty, and consisting largely of com-
ments interspersed among the numerous ex-
amples. The general exposition is not in-
timately related to the actual examples given,
nor is there any attempt to show what a
particular game or phantasy meant to the child,
or to interpret the symbolism either of the game
itself or the particular choice of materials. On
first opening the book one is led to hope for
a fuller discussion of this functional aspect of
play. In those cases in particular where a
sequence of dramatic play is described showing
a gradual change with each repetition in the
content or structure of the game, some indica-
tion of what this change of content signifies, its
relationship to the child's developing attitudes,
would have been extremely valuable. This
phenomenon of sequence or spontaneous
repetition, which the author calls " progressive
phantasy " (pp. 171 ff.) can be traced in the
imaginative or phantasy activities of most
children, and appears full of significance for
development. It is probably by a study of such
sequences that the central problem of learning
and of adjustment in general can best be in-
vestigated, thus making manifest the function
of the play activity, and its importance for
education as well as for preventive medicine.

The volume teems with examples of interesting
mental mechanisms, and a fuller exposition of
this subjective aspect would, in the reviewer's
opinion, have made the book more valuable
and meaningful to the average reader.

However, the volume as it stands is a useful
handbook on the subject of play and the
materials of play, and presents a useful classi-
fication of types of play, as well as a wealth
of valuable and delightful description. In the
conclusion there is a reference to a possib^6
volume on child logic. It is certain that an)
reader of the present volume, will eagerj)
anticipate a further work from Dr. Lowenfel
upon the subject of childhood experience.
R.G.
