Mental Welfare
==============

:Author: Stanley H. Thornton.
(Superintendent and Secretary, Midland Counties' Institution, Knowle, near
Birmingham).

Many volumes have been written dealing with occupational therapy for
those suffering from mental defect. The majority have dealt with indoor
occupations, from cloth-weaving to brush-making. Few writers have pub-
lished their views on outdoor occupations. The writer, who has had
over thirty years' experience of persons who are mentally weak, will deal with
gardening as a healthy and useful occupation.

Ten years ago, the Managing Committee here purchased a " tumbled-
down " horticultural nursery adjoining the Institution estate. This nursery
had about six acres of land, with eight glasshouses. This was an innovation,
as the outdoor activities of mental defectives in institutions had previously
been limited to elementary jobs, such as sweeping the paths, and generally
acting as labourers to the staff engaged on the ornamental gardens. It was
recognised that, for many ? years, patients in large mental institutions and
colonies had been employed on farms, pig feeding, etc.; some of them had
been taught to milk cows, and general dairy work. We planned something
more ambitious.

The patients, ranging from 14 to 40 years of age, came here mainly from
agricultural districts, and it was thought that, with the help of two skilled
gardening instructors, we might attempt not only to supply our own require-
ments of bedding plants, flowers, and certain fruit, but also to compete with
our products in the open market.

Our efforts have been highly successful, both in the mental improvement
of those employed, and from a financial point of view. Thirty patients have
been employed 5^ days a week during the Spring, Summer and Autumn, and
these show a marked benefit both physically and mentally. Our sales to local
residents last year amounted to ^550.

In detail, our methods are: Low grade patients under supervision are
engaged in sweeping paths, weeding, generally tidying-up, and acting as
labourers to the higher grade. The medium grade undertake general water-
ing in glasshouses, tying-in perennials, potato planting, whitewashing, spray-
ing, and general digging. The high grade " prick out " annuals from the
seed pans, plant annuals and perennials, disbud tomatoes and chrysanthemums,
lay crazy paving, and a few have even become proficient in budding roses and
making floral wreaths.

We have nothing special to report as regards the general planting of our
flower beds, herbaceous borders, rockeries, etc., but we consider that our orna-
mental gardens have reached a high standard. We believe that our routine
popping of the glasshouses may be of general interest. In the Spring, we
plant early tomatoes and lettuces, and follow with our seed pans of annuals
and perennials, the latter being subsequently " pricked out " and hardened
in cold frames. Then follows our main crop of tomatoes in all glasshouses,
J;0 be succeeded by chrysanthemums. Small brick annexes are being used
*?r out-of-season mushroom cultivation.

At convenient periods, the houses are whitewashed, repainted, and re-
glazed where necessary?all by patients' labour, .under supervision.
In the Winter months, the gardening boys are engaged in tree felling,
wood chopping, and assembling seed trays for the coming Spring.

The subsequent beneficial cfTects on those employed have been so marked
that we now provide at least twelve boys to act as garden labourers or assistant
gardeners for local residents?and no complaint has been received as to their
conduct or the quality of their work. Of course, a small charge is made for
sUch labour supplied. We have out on licence, away from the Institution, a
number of boys employed on gardening, and their ultimate complete discharge
from here is anticipated.

To those interested in the grading of mental defectives, and the giving
pf certificates as to mental defect, it is worthy of note that, when these garden-
lfig patients are examined by our medical officers or by the statutory visitors,
to ascertain the degree of the patients' defect, the questions put are now:
When do you plant lettuce?", " What colour is Lobelia?", "What is the
name of your favourite rose?", "What is the present price of tomatoes?".
Certainly more interesting to the subject that the well-worn questions: " How
rriany pennies are there in 2/6?", or " How far is London from Birming-
ham?", etc.

The writer submits that our experiment has proved highly successful in
every way. It has provided a healthy and useful occupation for the patients,
has produced an abundance of flowers at all times for the Institution wards,
has supplied such products as tomatoes and lettuces as a routine issue in the
patients' dietaries, and, owing to the outside sales, has been a financial success.

Up to this point, this article has been a recital of arrangements and
operations of an experiment which has proved worth while. It is now
suggested that the knowledge thus gained may be handed on to officers in
charge of institutions and occupation centres.

The following suggestions may be helpful to those who would like to
give the occupation a trial. It is fully appreciated that local circumstances
rnust govern such experiments; these circumstances may be, quantity of ground
available, whether there arc glass-houses, the amount of money allocated to
the purpose, and the skill and knowledge of the instructors.

The industry need not be limited to male patients. Young female mental
defectives can adequately deal with light jobs, such as flower seed planting,
pricking out, wreath making, etc.

Let us assume that an occupational centre has a small plot of land attached
to the buildings. This will have to be roughly dug over, by the patients
physically strong enough, on suitable days this Winter. In the Spring, the
ground is scarified or raked over, and most of the stones removed. Then the
flower seeds are selected, purchased, and planted according to the directions
on the packets.

I know of nothing better to start with than the common English Orange
Marigold (Calendula). The seed is cheap, it is easy to grow, and the results
are excellent. Last Summer, the writer noticed how popular a table
decoration this flower had become. It is now an established favourite on cafe
and hotel tables.

Part of the ground should be allocated as a bed for perennial seeds, to be
planted in late Summer for flowering the following season. Only a very
small quantity of seed is required, as the perennial plants can be multiplied by
splitting up or by cuttings. If money is available, a few perennials should be
purchased as plants rather than seeds.

Your plot is thus ornamental. To make it useful too, grow lettuce and
mustard and cress. Little skill is required to grow these. It must be rather
interesting to a patient to plant mustard and cress seed in little grooves or
furrows marked out in his own Christian name in capital letters, such as JACK-
I am sure there will be satisfaction and pride on all sides when a patient
is able to return home to his parents with a bunch of marigolds, a lettuce, or
a bunch of mustard and cress, which he, or she, has planted, tended, and
plucked. Of course, all this is very elementary, but it is a commencement
leading to something more advanced.

The possibility of planting window boxes should not be overlooked.
As regards this industry in larger institutions and colonies?there is
nothing further to suggest than the operations mentioned in the earlier part
of this article.

At institutions in which there are schools and workshops, the gardening
industry can provide much useful and necessary work for the other sections.
Labels of requisite size can be cut from manilla paper or waterproofed card by
the juniors, perforated at one end by an automatic machine, brown gummed
cardboard eyelets fixed. These are obtainable from more than one prominent
paper maker, all ready for use, and the stores staff should be warned to save
all their second-hand string. There you have complete and satisfactory labels.

The next item is wooden labels, 6 in. to 8 in. long by i in. wide and
3/16 in. thick?made by the carpentering boys from waste sugar boxes. The
paint shop can put on one coat of white priming, and then high grade boys
in the fancy articles department can, by means of poker work, burn on the
names of the roses,perennials,etc. There is now on the market a cheap electric
poker set which can be used without risk to the patients.

The carpenters' shop can also be employed on assembling seed boxes.
The slats for these can be purchased cut into requisite sizes, ready to make up.
In addition this shop can provide window boxes and wooden flower boxes
from waste wood.

The various schools and shops can thus help the gardeners. In return
the gardeners, in addition to providing the usual flowers and produce for the
institution, can grow lavender, for use when dry by the fancy articles depart-
ment. The gardening boys can also supply pine cones, oak apples, husks of
beech nuts, etc., which, in the absence of flowers, can be made by the handi-
crafts department into ladies' posies, table decorations, etc.

In conclusion, the writer expresses the wish that, with clarity rather than
brevity, he has in this article sown a few seeds of suggestion on suitable ground,
with the hope that the labour has not been in vain, and that there may be a
little to harvest in due course by those interested.
