From Birth to Maturity
=======================

:Author: Dr Charlotte
Buhler, Professor at the University of Vienna.
Kegan Paul. 7/6.

From the very outset, this book gives one
re-assurance. First?because it deals with the
formal child, and second?because it is written
y Professor Charlotte Buhler, the sanity of
v^'hose outlook, and the carefulness of whose
^ ies are well known. We feel certain, there-
ore, that the book will fill a long-felt want in
reading of parents, teachers and students,
,vhile those who have had the pleasure of meet-
Dr Buhler and hearing her lecture will
e glad to have at least some of her observations
and deductions in a more permanent form.

Dr Buhler's method is that of observation
and collation of facts, from which certain con-
Usions are deduced. Never does one feel in
fading her records that facts have been
rtably presented in order to prove or illustrate
n ln theories held by some one school of
Psychology. Here the method of investigating
ls really scientific.

*he book, as it promises, deals with the
00rrnal child from birth to maturity. About
e half of the volume is devoted to the com-
aratively short pre-school period. This
division, is, in our opinion, justified, since so
much less research has been done on these early
years than on the later stages of childhood.
To the uninitiated, almost any means of test-
ing the development of an infant seems little
short of miraculous?the avenues of approach
are so few. It is fascinating, therefore, to watch
not only how that approach is made, but how
the tendencies and development of very young
children are gauged. The testing for " matura-
tion " covers six fields of activity. The tests
are careful, comprehensive and thorough-going,
so that there is little danger of a wrong con-
clusion being reached owing to lack of sufficient
evidence. According to the results of these
tests, those who are in charge of the child are
advised as to what stimulus may be necessary
for its all round harmonious development?thus
the possibility of any unwitting neglect of any
part of the child's " maturation " is likely to
be checked. By these tests, too, any retardation
or neurotic trouble is quickly noted, and the
cause of such investigated.

In the study of early childhood, one or two
points come out with extraordinary clearness.
One of these is the importance of environment.
Again and again it is shown how children who
are brought up in an Institution are likely to
suffer in intellectual development. They are
well cared for physically, but that whole world
of interest and intercourse which is a child'3
right in an ordinary home, is not open to those
children, and the effect of this lack of stimulus
is very marked. The evidence arising out of
these tests, too, is made the basis for the choice
of home for the adopted child. This is a point
which has been overlooked too long. How
often has one seen the wrong child sent to the
wrong home, which is either incapable of giving
it the stimulus it requires, or else provides a
stimulus to which the child is incapable of re-
acting.

Another interesting point is the evidence that
children are better to develop at their own rate.
With a bright child many parents and teachers
are inclined to " force the pace," but the
foolishness of such a step is clearly shown since
development which comes at its own time is not
only quicker in the end, but stronger and surer
also. At the same time it is made clear that
the right opportunity should be given to en-
courage development at the right time, otherwise
reaction is apt to be slow, and performance
clumsy and unsure.

The latter half of the book deals with the
school child and the adolescent. Here also,
the findings are interesting, but of course have
not the novelty of those dealing with the earlier
years. It is significant that the sign that a child
is ready to go to school is its ability to pass
from mere activity to " work maturity," i.e.,
constructive work with a purpose, leading to
some definite end, not just mere entertainment.
Embedded here lies a big educational truth
which many would be well to lay to heart.,
Emphasis is laid also on the effect of good health
and sufficient nutrition as these have a very
direct bearing on the development of the school
child. In the study of this early school period,
there are some interesting remarks on the sub-
ject of the child's powers of criticism and self-
criticism, which should make parents and
teachers to pause. Too often do we assume
that the young school child is capable of sharing
our point of view regarding its own work and
that of its schoolmates. According to this
psychological study, which we are inclined to
trust, it would appear that we were thus wasting
much time and energy in dealing with matters
which the young child simply cannot under-
stand.

The pre-adolescent stage is wisely and sym-
pathetically treated, and the tendencies of the
adolescent, together with all the troubles and
dangers of this stage of development are
described clearly, but without that element of
hysteria that is so apt to creep into such dis-
cussions. The growth of the personality, and
the need for its enrichment by contact and
friendship are brought out. There is an interest-
ing chapter also on Heredity.

This is a book which ought to find its way
into the hands of all parents and teachers who
are impressed with the delicacy of the task en-
trusted to them in the bringing up of children.
M.J.C.
