Mental Welfare
===============

Conference on Mental Welfare, November, 1934
The experiment of organising the C.A.M.W. Conference jointly with
the Council of the Public Health Congress was most successful. Well attended
meetings were held in the Royal Agricultural Hall, Islington, and in British
Medical Association House, Tavistock Square; 340 delegates were appointed,
and a Luncheon at the Hotel Russell, at which the Association was honoured
by the presence of the Minister of Health, was attended by 137 representatives.
The excellent exhibition of work done by defectives taught in Centres
and in their own homes, under the Middlesex Training Scheme, aroused
much interest, and astonishment was expressed by many delegates at the high
standard of the work shown.
Visits to institutions, clinics and schools were arranged for some delegates
from long distances who seldom had an opportunity of visiting London.
In addition to the ordinary sessions of the Conference, an interesting
meeting, at which various problems arising in connection with Guardianship
and Boarding Out, was held at the C.A.M.W. Offices. On Wednesday even-
ing, November 21st the Secretaries of Local Associations met at an informal
dinner at the Albemarle Club, as guests of the Association, and after the
dinner a presentation of a silver cigarette box, case and match-case was made
to Miss Evelyn Fox as a token of affection and a recognition of her services
during the past twenty-one years.
A verbatim report of the Conference is being issued and may be obtained
from the C.A.M.W. Offices, price 3/6 post free. An order form is enclosed
in this issue of Mental Welfare.
An account of the Friday morning session of the Public Health Congress,
when " Voluntary Sterilisation " was the subject of discussion, may be obtained
from the offices of the Joint Committee for Voluntary Sterilisation, 69,
Eccleston Square, S.W.i, price i^d. post free, or 1/1 per dozen.
Holiday Homes for Defectives
Bognor.
In view of the success which attended the arrangements made for holiday
parties of defectives in 1934, the C.A.M.W. has again reserved the whole
of the accommodation at Franklin House, Bognor, for the period April 12th
until October 25th, 1935. Parties of not more than 28 can be received at
a time. Young boys attending Occupation Centres are eligible, but otherwise
only girls and women can be accommodated.
Last year nearly 300 visitors spent a holiday at Franklin House, most
of them staying for a fortnight each. We hope that in 1935 an equally large
number of defectives will be able to take advantage of a holiday by the sea.
Rhyl.
A demand for a holiday home accessible to patients in Institutions in
the northern part of the country led the C.A.M.W. to decide to open a home
16 MENTAL WELFARE
in North Wales. A most suitable house has been found at Rhyl, and negotia-
tions are now proceding with a view to opening the home on April ist, 1935.
The house will accommodate 33 visitors and 3 visiting staff.
Applications for accommodation should be made as soon as possible, for
both Holiday Homes, to the Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace
Road, London, S.W.i, from whom details of charges, etc., may be obtained.
Dates of Courses, 1935
1. Course for Medical Officers.
May 13th?25th, 1935, at the University of London, South Ken-
sington.
2. Courses for Teachers.
Nine Weeks Course for Teachers of Retarded Children, May 20th?
July 19th, 1935, in London.
Board of Education Short Courses for Teachers of Retarded Children.
(a) Elementary Course. August 29th?September 18th, in Leicester.
(b) Advanced Course. July 2nd?24th, 1935, in London.
3. Course for Supervisors, Enquiry Officers and Institution Staff.
July 6th?27th, 1935, at Notcutt House, Dorset Square, N.W.i.
Vacancy for a Teacher of Retarded Children in Southern Rhodesia
A trained certificated teacher (woman) is required as soon as possible
by the Education Department of Southern Rhodesia for an " opportunist "
class. The candidate should have special training and experience in classes
for feeble-minded children. She should be between the ages of 23 and 35,
and physically fit.
Salary will be on the scale ^230-10-270-15-390. Increments to the maxi-
mum of four are allowed for each year's similar service. Passage paid. Three
years' agreement.
Teachers interested arc asked to apply for full particulars to:?Society
for the Overseas Settlement of British Women, Caxton House (West), Tothill
Street, S.W.i.
The class is for European children some of whom are Dutch.
Handbook for Speakers on Voluntary Sterilisation
The attention of readers is called to an excellent Handbook which has
been published by the Joint Committee on Voluntary Stenlisation and may
be obtained from their Offices, 69, Eccleston Square, S.W.i, price 1/- net.
The Handbook is intended to be supplementary to the Report of the
Department Committee on Sterilisation to which frequent reference is made.
Copies of this Report (minus the appendices) may also be obtained from
the same office, price 6d.
The Handbook was designed primarily for the assistance of lecturers in
the selection and preparation of their material but anyone interested in the
subject will find it a most useful epitome of the history of eugenic sterilisation,
MENTAL WELFARE 17
the present position, and arguments in favour and against the legalising of
voluntary sterilisation.
Association of Mental Health Workers Conference
The Annual Conference of the Association of Mental Health Workers
will be held at Newnham College, Cambridge, during the week-end begin-
ning Friday, March 22nd. Accommodation in the College is limited to 55
but in addition to this private hospitality can be arranged for a number if
desired. Full particulars may be obtained from Miss Eltham, 6b, Florence
Road, Ealing, London, W.5.
Catholic Congress of Social Workers
The Fifth International Conference of the Union Catholique de Service
Social has been arranged to coincide with the International Exhibition to
be held in Brussels in the summer. The Union which was founded in 1925
links up forty Catholic Schools of Social Service in Europe and America.
The Conference will be held from July 29th?31st and amongst the sub-
jects to be discussed are the moral and sociological foundations of Social
Service; Social Service as an Integral Part of Modern Economic Organisation
and Social Service in Public and in Private Institutions and Organisations.
Full particulars may be obtained from Mile. Baers, General Secretary of the
Union, 111, Rue de la Poste, Brussels.
Burden Mental Research Trust
At a meeting held recently in London the Burden Mental Research Trust
Committee of Administration had before them reports of the first year's
working of the Trust, which Mrs. R. G. Burden recently endowed with
,?10,000. The investigations contemplated by the Committee are being car-
ried out by Mr. J. A. Fraser Roberts, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.E., assisted by Mr.
R. M. Norman, M.D., D.P.M., and Miss Ruth Griffiths, M.A., Ph.D. An
extensive survey of the mentally normal as well as the mentally abnormal
has been initiated, and when the Trust eventually publishes its final report
it is hoped and expected that much valuable information will be forthcoming
as to the nature of the transmission of mental abilities and disabilities. The
Trust has also arranged for the co-operation of other distinguished investiga-
tors from different parts of Great Britain, one of whom, Dr. Shepherd
Dawson of Glasgow, has already complied with the request of the Committee.
Mental Health Course (Social Science Department)
An advertisement in this issue invites applications for Commonwealth
Fund scholarships for the next session of the Mental Health Course at the
London School of Economics and Political Science. This course of training
provides a general background in the theory and practice of mental hygiene
but allows also for some specialisation in the social aspects of child guidance,
mental deficiency and mental disorder. It is, therefore, a useful additional
qualification for trained social workers who are anxious to take up case work
18 MENTAL WELFARE
in connection with child guidance clinics and voluntary associations, or to
apply for appointments under the mental deficiency, public health, or mental
hospital committees of local authorities. During the past year or two the
qualification has been increasingly recognised, particularly by local authorities,
who are availing themselves of the new provisions of the Mental Treatment
Act, by appointing social workers to the staff of their observation wards
and mental hospitals. At the present time the demand for trained psychiatric
social workers is rather in excess of the supply.
Admission to this Course is by decision of a Selection Committee, and
preference is given to candidates who have had some experience of social
work, in addition to their general social science training. The Committee
is glad to consider applications from experienced workers who may be already
employed by mental deficiency or mental hospital committees, and who could
be granted a year's leave of absence for further training. During the last
ten years a great deal of useful knowledge has become available in mental
hygiene, and important legal and administrative changes make it particularly
desirable that social workers should be given an opportunity of reviewing
this knowledge and of studying its implications in terms of practical social
service.
Those who are interested are asked to make early enquiries from the
Social Science Department, London School of Economics, Houghton Street,
W.C.2.
The fee for the Course (including Registration Fee) is 31 guineas.
Obituary
It was with much regret that we read of the death of Sir Maurice Craig,
C.B.E., M.D., F.R.C.P., who died at his home, East Preston, Sussex, on
Sunday, January 6th.
Sir Maurice's name will be well known to most of our readers as a
leading Psychiatrist and as a Consultant whose wisdom and genuine human
sympathy caused his opinion to be widely sought. The son of a doctor and
proprietor of a home for mental patients, he was early attracted to similar
work and shortly after qualifying took a post at Bethlem Royal Hospital
(of which he was afterwards Governor) and from that time onwards devoted
his whole attention to the study and treatment of mental disorder.
Sir Maurice did valuable work during the war as neurological advisor
to the R.A.M.C. and as a member of the War Office Committee on Shell
Shock. He has also filled a number of public positions on the governing
bodies of Hospitals and Institutions. His recognition of the important part
which preventive measures played in mental health work led him to interest
himself in the formation of the National Council of Mental Hygiene in this
country to which body he has acted as Chairman for many years, he was also
a Vice-President of the International Committee. Sir Maurice acted as Chair-
man of the Mental After-Care Association and was a Vice-President of our
own Association.
