Imagination in Early Childhood
===============================

:Author: Ruth Griffiths, M.A., Ph.D., with a Preface by
Professor Flugel. 358 pp. Kegan Paul.
12/6.

This book is an interesting record of an
original and valuable piece of research. The
work upon which it is based was done partly in
Brisbane and partly in a school of the London
County Council when Miss Griffiths was Re-
search Assistant to the Burden Mental Research
Trust, and one of the particularly interesting
features of the book is the comparison between
the two sets of statistics.

At the outset, Miss Griffiths set herself the
task of investigating the imaginative content of
the minds of elementary infant school children,
and devised a new means of technique for this
purpose. She selected thirty London, and twenty
Brisbane children; of the London children
fifteen were boys and fifteen girls, with chrono-
logical ages of between 5 and 6 years. These
children were divided into three groups: 5 of
each, boys and girls, being chosen as having
an intelligence quotient of more than 115; those
of the next group falling between 90 and 105,
while those of the remaining ten children were
in every case below 80. Of the Brisbane child-
ren, also in age between 5 and 51- years, the
highest intelligence quotient was 129 and the
lowest 79.

Each of the children was interviewed separ-
ately, on successive school days, for a period
of 20 days or until 20 interviews had been com-
pleted, and each interview lasted from about 20
to 40 minutes. At these interviews a selected
series of tasks was presented to the child. Every-
thing he said was taken down, and the work
done was itself preserved and selections of it are
reproduced wherever possible.

The tasks suggested to the children were the
telling of a story, the making of drawings, the
description of images that came up in the mind
after the eyes were covered with a hand, the
recital of dreams, and an investigation of ^
interpretations of 20 ink blots made by the
vestigator, only four of these being shown ata
interview. Each child was left free to draw <>
talk as he wished, and the order in which $
tasks were done was left to the individual choi^
of the child. Part I of the book is the reco?
of the actual work produced.

Part II is concerned with a theoretical dj5'
cussion of the conclusions suggested by ^
nature of the material given in Part I, and cof1'
tains Chapters on Phantasy and Emotional Lne'
Some Aspects of Childish Thinking, The Fuflf
tion of Phantasy, The Symbolic Process 111
Children's Thinking, Phantasy and Education
Play and Children's Dreams; chapters are alf
included on Children's Drawings, Imagery
Children, and the Ink-Blot Reactions.

The first conclusion of very considerable W
terest to which Miss Griffiths comes, is that therf
is a coherency and even something of a consi?'
tency underlying the group of material present^
by any one child. This coherence is not form3'
but emotional. She admits that, regarded fro^
a logical point of view, there is a great deal oj
confusion in these products, but points out tha*
"For the child, who so far has no experience
of the ordered logical classification in adult pe?
ception, there can be no sense of confusion-^
What then is the underlying unity in the child 5
material? Miss Griffiths finds the answer to th*5
to lie in the relation between a child's emotio*1
and his phantasy. Quite rightly Miss Griffith5
regards phantasy as the expression of a child'5
emotional problems and it is a delight to read
the clarity with which this point of view is set
out.

Miss Griffiths notes how varied are a child'5
emotional problems, and how urgently they
press upon him for solution, and points out that
for a child, attack upon the solution of his prob-
lems can only be made piece by piece and in a
phantasy fashion, each solution of each part of
the problem being tried out in a piecemeal
fashion before the whole can be comprehended-
This is a notable advance upon views current
among: educationalists of the nature and mean-
ing of phantasy in childhood.

The second and very valuable observation
made by Miss Griffiths is the relation of day-
dreaming or phantasy to work. She notes the
relationship between absorption in phantasy and
inhibition in work. It is significant that this
conclusion emerges, not from the evidence of
Psychotherapeutic work with emotionaUy dis-
r r children, but from the results of technical
'^arch with normal children, as it draws atten-
11 to and provides material for further in-
, shgation of one of the most important prob-
s of mental health and education?that of
e relation of the emotional to the intellectual
fector
'M
wred picture of the actual intellectual cap
felt m Youn? children. It has for long been
blu ^nte^ectua^ tests alone give but a
?f many children, and if we are to arrive
a true picture of the intellectual capacities of
ofdny of the duller and more inhibited members
r child population, it is to work like Miss
jjnths' that we must look in the future.

-U a criticism has to be made of this book, it
**1 be of Miss Griffiths' account of the cap-
. ..y for concentration in a child. It is inter-
to set in contrast to this Dr. Charlotte
^uhler's record in her Study of the Child's First
ear of Life, " The perseverance of the one-
^ ar-old who spends an uninterrupted two
?urs and twenty-three minutes in experiment-
8 is especially remarkable." This does not
Pport the view of lack of power of concen-
011 in the child. The solution of the prob-
J?1 presented by this contrast is indicated by
h!SS Griffiths herself, though not perceived by
^r- Mental work to which the child cannot fix
s attention is work prescribed for him by the
0r na-l world, work which fulfills no conscious
r I ^conscious need of the child himself. In
ation to such tasks the power of concentra-
^0ri of both child and average adult is through-
t life consistently small. Tasks the child him-
sh ^ev*ses' as whole of Miss Griffiths' book
ovvs, can claim his whole-hearted attention
c 9nty f?r longish periods at a time, but for
^sistently recurring periods throughout a
^cession of days.

? ^ a short review it is not possible to do
, stice to the many-sided interest of this book,
t as will easily be seen from the above selec-
it is a book whose perusal will benefit
ery thoughtful worker among children, and
^lch makes a definite and new contribution to
r understanding of small children.
M.F.L.
