he Problem of Mental Disorder
==============================

98 MENTAL WELFARE
Book Reviews
T. The
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Ltd. 1934.
(pp. 388. 24s. net.)
This is a study undertaken by the Committee
on Psychiatric Investigations of the National
Research Council of America, whose Divisional
Chairmen, Professor Madison Bentley, Cornell
University, and Professor E. V. Cowdiy, Wash-
ington University, are the editors. The work
was supported by a grant from the Carnegie
Corporation and it is certainly a far-sighted
policy of this body to give a portion of their
funds for research into mental problems.
The material is excellent, the twenty-five
papers are of a high standard and there is
evidence of originality of thought, and of clinical
or laboratory experience in each of them. They
are indeed teeming with both facts and sug-
gestions, and no matter how senior the
psychiatrist, he will find something to learn.
Moreover, there is that subtle difference in style
of writing and arrangement of the book which
makes this American symposium most fresh and
fascinating.
The book was undertaken because the Com-
mittee felt that while the curative arts are con-
stantly discovering new measures and medica-
ments for preventing and relieving many of the
graver ills of the body, no like agency is success-
fully coping with the mentally disordered in
public and private institutions for the insane and
in the open life of the community. They realised
that nearly every hospitalised patient means a
disturbed and disorganised family and were
conscious of the magnitude of the problem, since
the number of mentally disturbed and un-
governed outside the hospitals probably exceeds
that of the hospitalised cases. There is a vast
army of mental sufferers under the care of
physicians and psychoanalysts, and also under
faith-healers, magicians, quacks, astrologers,
mystics, and the like. The problem of mental
disorder not only includes those who are insane,
but also the queer, the vagrant, the flighty, the
incorrigible, the suspicious, the irascible, the
unstable, and reclusive people. All these are
individuals who, because of defective self-
direction and of unbalanced performance, are
more or less incapacitated for effective living in
society.
It was therefore decided that a genera
approach might be made by undertaking an
inventory of the scientific support which ma>
now profitably be used to extend knowledge
of mental disorders, and of the best ways afl
means to direct diagnosis and therapy. ,
The first five papers are entirely medical, afl.
the full value of them can only be got by phy^1
cians who have specialised in the work. T*1
names of the contributors give confidence a
once for they are already known to Engl^
students of psychiatiy and psychology. 1
first is by Dr. C. Macfie Campbell, B?s^?,
Psychopathic Hospital, who deals with Clinic^
Psychiatry, and speaks here as a physician
the sick personality. He suggests severa
avenues of research leading towards an extensi0
of psychiatrical knowledge and, as can be e*
pected from such a physician the view-p01
is wide. The second is by Dr. A. Myers0^
Boston, who takes the general physicia11
attitude and his primary search is
fore for the pathological condition unde
lying the symptoms presented. This tyPjj
of research, as everyone knows has, been ^ ^
rewarded in the past in G.P.I., pellagra,
the toxic psychoses and may yet elucidate
cause of other mental disorders. Dr. WechsI<V
Columbia University, takes the neurology .
point of view and puts emphasis first and la^
upon the study of structure and function aI\
insists upon the utilisation of scientific and e
perimental methods in fathoming such pr? ,
lems. Dr. Adolf Meyer, John Hopkins Hosp1^.
(whose teaching has inspired so many of ?.
English psychiatrists), takes the psycho-biol??
cal point of view and contributes a most co
centrated and clear thesis. Dr. Kubie .
upon psychoanalysis and presses for research
discovering the neurotic origins and tendenc
of childhood; he counsels rigid, methodical a^.
liberal training for the psycho-analytical prf
tioner, pointing out how many very superficia '
trained people practise what they call psyc i
analysis. These five papers should be cons uey
separately and then reflected upon, when
will be found to have many common ,u\s
which dovetail into each other and make
little series complete in itself.
The major part of the book deals with s ^
jects which are only indirectly connected
mental disorders and consists of twenty paP
each of them upon a different theme. The pi ^
bers of the personnel of the Universities
MENTAL WELFARE
99
^arvard, Washington, Chicago, McGill, Hop-
kins, Boston, Cornell, Columbia and others
c?ntribute papers, as also do workers of the
Rockefeller Institute, Lilly Research Labora-
tories, etc. General biology and genetics are
represented as are also such diverse subjects
as endocrinology, nutrition and pharmacology;
anthropology and education account for two
short papers, the latter a most refreshing one.
Some of the papers in this section are quite
suitable reading for those who are not physi-
Clans, and social workers, biologists, and
Psychologists will find its pages stimulating.
The book, however, is not an easy one and
cannot be read in a few days for each article
demands thought and reflection. The whole
^end of the text is to encourage scientific
Workers from every field, to help in elucidating
^e great problem of mental disorder, which as
^he editors point out, touches to-day not only
individuals but also nations. Gratitude is due
the collaborators for so widely selecting the
Papers and for their comments upon them.
Isabel Emslie Hutton, M.D.
