For Backward Children
=======================

9o MENTAL WELFARE

It will be of special interest and encouragement to Mental Welfare
workers to know that the Memorial to the Founder of the Church of England
Waifs' and Strays' Society?the late Prebendary Rudolf?has taken the form
of a Home for backward and difficult children in need of special educational
and psychological treatment. The Home is in Balham, London, where a
mid-Victorian house with a good garden has been acquired and adapted for
the purpose.
A beginning has been made with some dozen little boys, ultimately to
be increased to 30, selected from children already under the care of the
Society, and the Home's work is carried on in close contact with the London
Child Guidance Clinic whose Chief Psychologist has tested all the children.
Nearly all have been found to be very backward educationally, though half
are normal in intelligence as measured by mental tests; the remainder are
" dullish " or " dull " and some have behaviour difficulties. Their teaching
is carried on entirely in the Home itself by methods specially adapted to
individual needs, ana the children are thus given every opportunity of over-
coming difficulties.
The Home is not intended for children who are definitely mentally
defective, but for those who, though commonly regarded as " hopeless " only
need " individual care and understanding treatment to enable them to take
their proper place among children of their own age, and to grow up happy
and useful members of society." The provision it makes is felt by the Waifs'
and Strays' Society to be in line with its scheme for " giving every needv
child a chance " and to be a fitting memorial to its Founder.
As the Home only started its work a few months ago it is too early
yet to assess results, but already very marked changes have been noted in the
children.
Boarding-Out in Italy
During a discussion on the boarding-out of mental patients at the Third
European Mental Hygiene Congress held in Brussels last July, Prof. Corberi
of Milan said that the method had been used in Italy since 1900. The foster-
parents were mostly peasants living in the neighbourhood of a hospital, but
since the War, there had been a reduction in the number of cases so dealt with,
owing to the increasing recognition of the value of occupational therapy
carried out under direct medical control.
At Imola a new system was being tried, consisting of the formation of
little colonies of patients in the care of peasant families, under the control
of a central organisation. About 10% of the mental patients from the local
hospital were being cared for by this method which was thought to be capable
of considerable extension.
MENTAL WELFARE 9i
The Need of the Retarded Child
Commenting on the increase in juvenile delinquency in the age group,
*4 to 16, recorded in the Home Office Criminal Statistics for 1933, a corres-
pondent to the Times Educational Supplement writes: ?
" It is a common experience that many of the delinquents are or have
been among the backward children at school. Usually, though not in-
variably, their maladjustment to the demands of life in society is accom-
panied by some measure of retardation, and it is increasingly clear that
the treatment of the young delinquent must be begun early in his school
life before his tendency to delinquency has brought him into conflict with
the law. Probably his delinquency is the symptom of a mental and moral
disorder which may be early diagnosed and treated."
This line of thought is now exercising the minds of a number of adminis-
trators. The work of the London Child Guidance Clinic is demanding
notice. It is gratifying to know that the Birmingham Education Authority,
after having observed for two years the work of a voluntary clinic, have
now decided officially to take it under their auspices.* The Education
Authority of Leicester is tackling the problem in a more comprehensive
way. The whole matter of the incidence of retarded and maladjusted
children is being investigated and experiment in appropriate treatment
is being carried out. Other authorities are endeavouring to treat this prob-
lem of backwardness by special classes in re-organised schools."
" There is little doubt that school re-organisation, with its insistence upon
better classification of the children in the schools, has helped to bring the
treatment of the retarded child into clearer significance, and the next year
or two may see interesting developments in this regard."
This whole problem of the retarded child, in its educational and ad-
ministrative aspects, is engaging the close attention of the C. A.M.W. Education
Committee, and we hope in our January number to publish an article on the
subject, by Miss Grace Rawlings, the Association's Educational Psychologist,
based on her personal contacts with teachers and education authorities.
Child Guidance for London School Children
The extensive use made of Child Guidance Clinics for London school
children is referred to in the Report of the L.C.C. School Medical Officer for
J934? which has been recently published.
There are now five Clinics in London recognised under Section 80 of
?f the Education Act, 1921 (i.e., where attendance is regarded as equivalent
to attendance at school for registration purposes)?viz: The Maudsley Hos-
pital Clinic, The London Child Guidance Clinic, The East London Clinic,
The Institute of Medical Psychology, and The West End Hospital for Nervous
Diseases, and 1,055 school children were dealt with at these Clinics during
the year 1934.
The Council regard this work as of great importance and it is closely
linked up with the school educational and medical services. Every type of
*Ne\v Child Guidance Clinics are also being opened in Cheltenham and Cardiff, each
with a psychiatric social worker loaned for the first year by the Child Guidance Council.
92 MENTAL WELFARE
neurotic condition and behaviour difficulty is dealt with by the Clinics and
the most satisfactory results are reported as being obtained " through the
team work of the psychiatrist, the psychologist and the social worker, who,
after careful observation of the child's reactions, especially during periods of
play when the child exliibits self-expression without hindrance, are able to
suggest a mode of treatment best suited to the individual child and the peculiar
problem."
The Results of a Clinic
In view of the steady increase in the number of Psychiatric Clinics?we
read of new ones recently opened, or about to be opened, at Leeds, under the
management of the West Riding Mental Hospitals Board, and in Lanarkshire
by the Lanark County Council Public Health Committee in co-operation with
the Lanarkshire District Board of Control?a report proceeding from the
Institute of Medical Psychology (Malct Place, London, W.C.i), on the " After-
Results of Psychotherapy in 500 Adult Cases " is of special interest and value.
The Report contains detailed statistical information about the 500 con-
secutive cases concerned analysed in various ways, the principal facts emerging
being that: ?
(1) On discharge from treatment, 65.6% of the patients were " much
improved " or " improved." After three years' follow-up, this
figure is reduced to 55%.
(2) With regard to length of treatment, 250 cases were treated by short
methods (under 20 interviews), 195 attended between 20 and 60
times, and 55 over 60 times. The results in the three groups are
almost identical.
(3) The best results recorded are for cases of anxiety states and for
those complaining of sexual difficulties.
The enquiry was undertaken by Dr. Mary C. Luff and Dr. Marjorie
Garrod and the report first appeared as an article in the British Medical
Journal of July 13th, 1935.
The Value of Special Schools
The Birmingham Special Schools After-Care Committee, which has
recently presented another Annual Report to the Birmingham Education
Committee, has now 6,112 cases of ex-Special (M.D.) School children on its
books, ranging in age from 14 to 50.
Of these, 49.3% (54-5% males, and 42.7% females) are doing remunera-
tive work and there has been an increase in the average earnings of 6d. a
week in the case of boys, and 8d. a week in the case of girls, making the
averages respectively, 26/7 and 20/-.
Almost every type of industrial occupation is represented in the list
recorded in the Report. The largest number of males are to be found in
MENTAL WELFARE 93
unskilled factory work, in the engineering trades, and as outdoor workers,
these three groups together accounting for 70% of all the males employed.
A minority are engaged in skilled or semi-skilled work. In the Birmingham
Special Schools, the main handicraft subjects taught to boys are carpentry and
boot-repairing, and the measure of the direct practical utility of this may be
seen by the fact that of the 1,170 males employed, 24 are working as carpenters,
cabinet makers or in other branches of woodwork, and 18 as boot repairers,
boot-makers or boot finishers. Of the 757 females employed, the large
majority are in factories, or workshops, only 71 being in domestic service.
The Committee has continued its enquiries concerning the family
histories of former Special School boys and girls known to have married or
to have had children. The records now show that 495 of the girls and 390
of the boys have become parents, being responsible between them for 1,667
children. (This number includes 61 illegitimate children born to 53 mothers,
15 of whom have since married.) These statistics with regard to children
cannot, of course, be taken as final, as practically all the parents concerned
are still of child-bearing age; moreover 44 of the families have been lost sight
of and their present position is not known; 2 of the fathers and 7 of the
mothers are now in Institutions. It has not so far been possible to institute
an enquiry with regard to the intelligence of the children born.
Dealing with some results of Special Schools training in Glasgow, the
Director of Education (Dr. Allardyce), reports that of the mentally defective
ex-pupils of Glasgow Specials Schools, between the ages of 16 and 30, 56%
of the boys and 48% of the girls are in paid employment; if girls employed
in domestic work at home are included, the proportion rises to 74% of the
girls and 63% in the case of boys and girls.
Wages earned vary from 8/- to 50/- a week for the men and from 6/-
to 25/- a week for the women.
This information was included in a report made by Dr. Allardyce to the
Glasgow Education Committee in reply to Dr. Ivy Mackenzie's unfavourable
criticism of the Special School system made at the Conference of the Scottish
Mental Welfare Association. " If children with mental ratios so low that
they can only with difficulty reach by the age of 16 years, the standard of
attainment of the normal child of 10 or 11, can yet be trained' to use their
limited powers and to conduct themselves rationally to such a degree that
they can earn their own livelihood, then surely," Dr. Allardyce maintains,
" the extra expense has been justified."
Occupation Centres
The Central Association for Mental Welfare has recently issued a pam-
phlet on " The Organisation and Administration of Occupation Centres and
Home Teaching for Mental Defectives," which can be obtained at a cost
of 3d., from the offices of the Association, 24, Buckingham Palace Road,
S.W.i.
94 MENTAL WELFARE
The information given in the pamphlet is based chiefly on the experience
gained by the C.A.M.W. in the running of Occupation Centres (now amount-
ing to 8) for the Middlesex County Council and is therefore of an eminently
practical nature.
The pamphlet has been sent to all Local Authorities under the Mental
Deficiency Act and to all Mental Welfare Associations accompanied by a
letter offering the expert services of Mrs. Anderson (who so successfully
organised the Middlesex Centres and who is a trained certificated teacher with
many years of experience in Occupation Centre work), to any Authority or
Organisation who would welcome counsel and help for their Centre Super-
visor in methods of training, schemes of work, etc., and on the general
organisation of Centres, the establishment of new ones, and the employment
of Home Teachers.
It is hoped that in this way that Supervisors of Centres?whose work
is always difficult and frequently carried on in almost complete isolation?
may receive valuable practical help and encouragement, and that the rate of
establishment of further Centres, still needed in so many areas, may be
speeded up.
Royal Eastern Counties Institution
An extension of this ever-developing Institution was recently opened at
Colchester by the Duke of Kent.
The portion of the scheme now completed comprises 8 villas for male
patients, assembly hall, kitchen and domestic staff block, lodges, and a portion
of the administrative block and workshops. The complete scheme will
provide for 21 villas, each for 52 patients, and 2 villas, each for 40 low-grade
patients. The whole is to form a self-contained community and will be
known as Turner Village.
The authorities concerned in the scheme are the County Councils of
Essex, East Suffolk, West Suffolk and Cambridgeshire whose representatives
on the Building Committee were joined by those of the Royal Eastern Counties
Institution, but its inspirer and moving spirit is Dr. Douglas Turner himself,
to whom and to his family, this great institution owes its origin and its high
reputation.
Royal Scottish National Institution
A new Colony, covering an area of 750 acres, for adult mental defectives
has been opened by the Countess of Mar and Kellie, as an extension to the
Royal Scottish National Institution, Larbert.
The extension?designed to provide permanent care for those who were
admitted to the Institution as children?has been largely financed by voluntary
subscriptions which were obtained to the amount of .?60,000, of this, the
Council of the Scottish Women Citizens' Association contributed ^12,000.
At present, 180 patients are in residence, and another 50 or 60 will shortlv
be added.
MENTAL WELFARE 95
Holidays
During the holiday months, the C.A.M.W. has arranged holidays for
103 of the defectives under the care of its Guardianship Department. Of this
number, 23 were sent to relatives or friends; 8 accompanied their Guardians;
7 joined Occupation Centre parties; 33 were boarded with hostesses living at
the seaside or in the country; a party of 29 girls went to the holiday home
at Bognor used by the C.A.M.W.; and 3 returned by special request to the
Institutions from which they had come.
The great majority of those sent away were girls, most of whom are in
domestic service. Only 13 boys figure in the list, not because their need is
less but because the majority of the boys under Guardianship work on the
land or in factories where no provision is made for holiday breaks, and the
necessary arrangements are therefore very difficult to make.
This enterprise involves a great deal of detailed administrative work,
as each case has to be arranged for separately; usually, too, the holiday maker
has to be met and escorted from one station to another and during August,
there were moments when every available member of a depleted office staff
was engaged in piloting a defective across London!
The extra work entailed is, however, felt by everyone concerned, to be
very much " worth while " for every holiday arranged has brought great
happiness with it and has contributed to the general well-being of its recipient.
The contribution printed on page 87 telling how the Bognor party responded
to conditions of happiness and freedom, bears convincing testimony to the
value of this aspect of Guardianship work.
The children attending the Middlesex Occupation Centres, run for the
County Council by the C.A.M.W., and some of those being taught in that area
by the Association's Home Teachers, were also included in the holiday scheme,
and 86 of them?" children " of all ages?enjoyed the delights of Bognor
or of another holiday home for boys at Seaford.
Conference on Mental Nursing
We are asked to announce that a Week-End Conference on " Mental
Nursing; its Aims and Ideals," is to be held at High Leigh, Hoddesdon, Herts,
from Friday, November 15th to Sunday, November 17th, 1935. The inclusive
cost will be 22/-.
The Chairman of the Conference is Dr. Noel Harris, Medical Super-
intendent of Woodside Mental Hospital, Winchmore Hill, and amongst the
speakers will be Sir Francis Freemantle, M.P., M.D., and Dr. H. P. News-
holme, Medical Officer of Health, Birmingham.
Attendance at the Conference is not limited to those actually engaged
in mental nursing, but an invitation is cordially extended to all who are in-
terested in the subject from any angle. Full particulars can be obtained from
Miss Mabel Hankin, Overseas League, Park Place, St. James's Street, S.W.i.
96 MENTAL WELFARE
Recent C.A.M.W. Publications
Readers of Mental Welfare who were interested in the article " Beyond
Hospital Gates " on some boarding-out systems for mental patients in Belgium
and Holland, published in our last issue, will be glad to know that re-prints
of the article are now available.
Another useful little pamphlet recently published by the C.A.M.W. is
on the subject of Mental Health work as a career for women. It comprises
articles by S. Clement Brown, M.A., Tutor, Mental Health Course, School
of Economics, on " Social Work in Mental Health by Marjorie U. Welfare,
Secretary of the C.A.M.W., on " Mental Welfare Work " and by Grace
Rawlings, B.A., Education Psychologist, C.A.M.W., on " Teaching Mentally
Defective and Retarded Children." There is also an article by Dr. Norah
Hawordi, of Severalls Mental Hospital, on Occupational Therapy.
The articles form a re-print from Careers, published by the Women's
Employment Publishing Company, Ltd.
Both these pamphlets can be obtained from the Central Association for
Mental Welfare, 24, Buckingham Palace Road, London, S.W.i, at the price
of 2d. a copy, post free.
Mental Health Congress, London
The fourth biennial Conference on Mental Health arranged by the
National Council for Mental Hygiene will be held at the Caxton Hall, West-
minster, from January 23rd to 25th, and is to be opened by the Duke of Kent.
The Programme includes papers and discussions on the organisations and
correlation of mental health services in local areas, problems of marriage and
the establishment of courts of domestic relations, and the function of the priest
and the doctor in the treatment of nervous and mental disorders. The last
day will be devoted to a discussion on " Education for Living," divided into
different age-periods.
A delegate's ticket admitting to all sessions of the Conference and the
Luncheon on January 24th is ?1 is.; an inclusive ticket for all sessions of
the Conference is 15/-; single session tickets are 3/6 each.
Further particulars can be obtained from the Secretary of the National
Council for Mental Hygiene, 78, Chandos House, Palmer Street, London,
S.W.i.
International Mental Hygiene Congress, 1936
A preliminary notice has been issued announcing the Second Inter-
national Mental Hygiene Congress, which is to be held in Paris in July, 1936.
A programme of great variety and interest has been drawn up in which
eminent psychiatrists and psychologists from many countries are to take part.
The Congress will consist of Active Members and Associate Members.
Active Members have the right to present papers and to take part in the
discussions and to receive the Congress papers and reports; membership fee,
MENTAL WELFARE 97
125 French francs. Associate Members can attend the sessions and take part
in the visits to institutions, etc., but are not entitled to contribute to the
discussions or to receive papers or reports; membership fee, 75 French francs.
Those who wish to take part in the discussions are requested to notify the
Chairman of the Program Committee, Dr. Rene Charpentier, 119, Rue
Perronet, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France, before January 1st, 1936. The Permanent
Secretary of the Congress is Mr. Clifford W. Beers, International Committee
for Mental Hygiene, 50, West 50th Street, New York City, U.S.A., from
whom all particulars can be obtained.
Institute of Medical Psychology
The Institute of Medical Psychology announce an interesting programme
of Lecture Courses for the 1935-6 Session.
The Programme includes a Year's Course in the Children's Department,
for Psychological Students; a Week-End Course on Methods of Psychotherapy
and Courses on " Anxiety States and Allied Conditions " and " Sexual Mal-
adjustments " (all for members of the medical profession only). There are
also Courses on " Mental Health in Childhood," " Problems of Parenthood,"
" The Theory and Practice of Mental Testing " and six Lectures for Clergy
and Ministers.
At the beginning of the Session, Professor C. G. Jung conducted Five
Seminars on Fundamental Psychological Conceptions, open to Medical
Graduates and University Professors, Readers and Lecturers.
The Post-Graduate Course in Psychotherapeutic Theory and Method for
medical practitioners, is already full and no further applications can be
received.
For further particulars of any of the Lectures and Courses, application
should be made to the Educational Secretary of the Institute, Malet Place,
London, W.C.i.
Mental Treatment Act
The Board of Control, in their Report for 1934, report satisfactory pro-
gress in the development of the provisions of the Mental Treatment Act.
There were, at the end of the year, 134 out-patient centres in connection
with public mental hospitals, and the number of voluntary admissions rose
during the year from 2,961 to 4,078.
The growth in the number of temporary admissions is slow, though there
are indications of improvement. Among temporary patients the death rate
has been very high, owing to the gravity of many of the conditions leading
to loss of volition, but that certification should be avoided in cases where
death is likely to occur is felt to be of the greatest value in diminishing the
suffering of relatives.
