Another Year's Work, Report Of The Board Of Control,  1934
===========================================================

82 MENTAL WELFARE
,^
The Board of Control's Report is an annual landmark recording the
position reached by the community in dealing with the problem of the men-
tally disordered and the mentally defective. As such, it is worthy of close
attention by everyone concerned in that work, and the following summary
of the position arrived at by the end of 1934 with regard to Mental Deficiency
will be of interest to those who have not had an opportunity of reading the
Report itself.
Ascertainment
The total number of defectives under the care of Local Authorities on
1st January, 1935, was 74,691 (in State Institutions, 1,268; in Certified In-
stitutions, 26,782; in Public Assistance Institutions (Section 37 of the M.D.
Act), 9,128; in Certified Houses, 219; in Approved Homes, 590; under
Guardianship or Notified, 3,327; under Statutory Supervision, 33,377). To
the uninitiated this figure may seem a large enough one, and it does represent
an increase of 3,927 on the corresponding figure for 1933, but in the section
of the Report dealing with " Ascertainment," the Board point out that Local
Authorities have so far taken cognisance of only a little more than half the
number of defectives in their areas for whom they may at any time become
responsible. The total number of known defectives (including some who
are not at the moment "subject to be dealt with under the Act") represents
a proportion of 2.69 of the population whereas the estimate given in the
Wood Committee's Report of the number likely to be found in the com-
munity, is 4.52. The discrepancy is obvious and is no doubt in part due to
inadequate methods of ascertainment by certain Authorities, for the propor-
tion of defectives ascertained ranges from 0.68 per 1,000 to 7.05.
Feeble-Minded Children between 14 and 16
The position with regard to feeble-minded children in this age-group
the Board view with " much uneasiness," for in their case a position has
arisen which was not contemplated when the Mental Deficiency Act of 1914
was passed.
Under that Act, educable feeble-minded children can only be dealt with,
except in special circumstances, if notified to the Local Authority when they
are about to leave a Special School or Class, and despite the Education Act
of 1921, making the establishment of such Special Schools or Classes com-
pulsory, their development is completely at a standstill (and in rural areas
and small towns recognised to be impracticable), so that only about one-seventh
of the estimated number of feeble-minded children in the country are provided
for. Consequently the number of feeble-minded children notified and thus
ensured of the legal protection they need, was in 1934 only 3,488?a decrease
of 55 on the 1933 figure.
*21st Annual Report of the Board of Control for the year 1934. Part I, H.M. Stationery
Office. 1/6.
MENTAL WELFARE 83
Until amending legislation is introduced enabling the feeble-minded child
between 14 and 16 to be notified whether he is in attendance at a Special
School or not, large numbers of these children?though definitely known
to be mentally defective?
" are left at a most critical period in their lives without the supervision
and control which the Legislature intended to give them. Even when they
emerge from limbo at the age of sixteen, nothing can be done for them
by the local mental deficiency authority unless they are neglected or unless
their anti-social behaviour brings them into conflict with the law
Legislation will be needed to fill this gap and the need for filling it is
becoming more and more generally recognised."
The difficulty which this anomalous position creates for Local Authorities
with every desire to carry out their obligations, is further illustrated in the
Report by a statement taken from the Annual Report of the Nottingham
County Council: ?
" Again it is necessary to emphasise the very great handicap to the
effective performance of their duties by the local authority as a result of
the large number of educable defectives who evade notification because
of the lack of Special School accommodation. Statistics show that in
the next two years, more than 100 educable defectives will pass out of the
jurisdiction of the Nottinghamshire Local Education Authority without
having been to Special Schools and the majority of them will fail to become
' subject to be dealt with.'
By close and informal co-operation between Mental Deficiency Com-
mittees, Education Committees and Voluntary Associations?the Board point
out?the gap can be bridged to some extent, but nothing short of legislation
can fill it effectively.
Institutional Accommodation
In reporting steady progress in this direction, the Board refer to the
part played by the transfer of Public Assistance Institutions to County and
County Borough Councils. This they suggest, has had the effect of bringing
the urgency of the problem to the notice of Local Authorities, for formerly
a considerable part of the expenditure on mental defectives was merged in
general Poor Law expenditure.
During 1934, there has been an increase of 2,026 beds in Certified In-
stitutions provided by Local Authorities, making the total number available,
17*452. Most of the increase is accounted for by extensions at already existing
institutions, and several further schemes were being undertaken by Local
Authorities at the end of the year under review. In addition, 9,053 beds
are available in Institutions provided by other bodies, and 9978 in Public
Assistance Institutions under Section 37.*
*In this connection it may be noted that in another section of the Report, the Board
comment unfavourably on the practice of sending low-grade mentally defective children
to mental institutions as voluntary patients under Section I of the Mental Treatment Act
?f which a certain number of instances have been noted. Such a proceeding is, they
consider, an abuse of the provisions of the Mental Treatment Act and of doubtful legality.
84 MENTAL WELFARE
Community Care
The development of an efficient system of Community Care for
defectives for whom permanent institutional accommodation is not necessary,
is recognised by the Board to be of great importance. Indeed, the care of
defectives living in the community is stated in the Report to be " perhaps
one of the gravest responsibilities confronting those administering the M.D.
Acts."
In any effective programme for Community Care, the following are
considered to be essential items: ?
(a) Guardianship
(b) Occupation Centres
(c) Home Training
(d) Statutory Supervision (with some provision for training or occupation)
(e) Licensing from Institutions Hostels.
(a) Guardianship
The number of cases under Guardianship on ist January, 1935, was
3,083, an increase of 274 on the 1933 figure. The Board urge Local Authorities
to consider this alternative to institution care in all cases of defectives of
amenable and harmless type who cannot be looked after in their own homes,
but with the proviso that no such child should be placed with a Guardian
unless an Occupation Centre is available, and that in placing high grade
adults in private homes, care should be taken to ensure for them some sort
of employment, paid or unpaid.
(b) Occupation Centres
The rate of increase in the number of Occupation Centres, Industrial
Centres and Clubs for defectives is regarded by the Board as disappointingly
small, for there are still only 191 throughout the whole country, ana 42 towns
with a population of over 50,000 have failed as yet to do anything in this
direction.
That the Centres are appreciated by those whom they are designed to
help is strikingly proved by the regularity of attendance. The average attend-
ance in 1934 at the 52 whole-time Centres was 75.8% of the numbers on the
registers?an achievement which the Board considers remarkable in view
of the enfeebled condition of many of the children and of the fact that there
is no legal compulsion. At the 9 whole-time industrial centres the average
attendance was 88%.
(c) Home Training
In cases where defectives are unfitted to attend Centres or where no
Centre exists, the Board urge the provision of Home Teaching. This can,
they consider, be best given by supervising officers of Local Authorities, as is
done in Suffolk, Wiltshire and Kent, whereby overlapping of visiting is
avoided, and they suggest one of the qualifications looked for in making such
appointments should be some knowledge of handwork and training methods.
MENTAL WELFARE 85
(d) Statutory Supervision
Under statutory supervision?a method of care which should, wherever
possible, be combined with some provision for occupation and training?
there were on 1st January, 1935, 33,377 defectives this being an increase of
r)456 on the 1933 number. In addition there were 23,544 cases under " volun-
tary supervision " compared with 22,665 last year. There are still six areas
m which no use at all is made of this provision of the Mental Deficiency Act.
Licence and Hostels
Discharge from institutions " on licence " is urged by the Board as being
not only a means of testing capacity for complete discharge but in some
cases as the most suitable form of prolonged care following on a period spent
*n an institution. Stable low-grade patients may be licensed to foster-parents,
and high-grade patients may be allowed to return home on licence or be placed
with employers.
The Board consider that a Hostel from which selected patients go out to
work daily, should be attached to every large institution and used as a pre-
liminary to Licence, but at present only five of the larger institutions have
such hostels attached to them. There are, in addition, 13 other Hostels
functioning as separate establishments under the control of local authorities
?r of voluntary organisations.
Mental Defect and Crime
The Report for the year 1933 dealt with this question viewed from the
standpoint of the triennial period, 1931-3, and when the figures for the further
triennial period, 1934-6 have .been obtained, it is proposed to deal with the
subject in greater detail.
During 1934, 334 persons found guilty of criminal offences were dealt
With as mentally defective (compared with 278 in 1933). Of: this number,
48-4% were between the ages of 16 and 20; 18.3% were under 16, and
33-3% were over 20. 93% of the cases were dealt with by the Courts under
Section 8 of the M.D. Act, and 7% by the Secretary of State under Section 9.
The fact that 17.4% of these cases were sent to Public Assistance Institutions
and 4% placed under Guardianship shows, observes the Board, that many
Local Authorities when called upon to find a vacancy for an urgent case
coming before the Courts, " have to fall back upon these admittedly inadequate
alternatives owing to lack of colony provision."
It is regarded as significant that out of the 334 criminal defectives dealt
With in 1934, only 32.4% had been previously ascertained by Local Authorities
and of these only 28.8% had attended Special Schools. This throws another
side-light on the present legislative position with regard to feeble-minded
children between 14 and 16.
Nursing in Institutions for the Mentally Defective
During die past year, the Board record some inquiries made into the
nursing in Institutions for Mental Defectives. Their returns are not yet com-
86 MENTAL WELFARE
plete, but they serve to show that considerably more than half the Matrons
in the 67 Institutions where there are more than 100 patients, are either
registered or certificated in Mental Nursing, or State registered in General
Nursing, and of these, several are doubly qualified. A rather smaller propor-
tion of Assistant Matrons in these Institutions possess similar qualifications.
Whilst stressing the importance of both general and mental training for
Matrons and Superintendents, the Board urge also that additional experience
in the training of low-grade defectives should be regarded as an essential
qualification for those in charge of the smaller Homes. Those who take
the certificate of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association in a Mental
Hospital rarely receive such experience, and less than half of the larger Mental
Deficiency Institutions are at present recognised as training schools. The
Board therefore hope that Managers of unrecognised Institutions will consider
the possibility of obtaining recognition through application to the General
Nursing Council or to the Royal Medico-Psychological Association.
The Defective and Ourselves
The general attitude of the Board to the whole social problem of the
mentally defective and an indication of what they expect from Local Authori-
ties, may well form the concluding paragraph of this summary: ?
" The more complicated the social fabric becomes, the greater the need of
the defective to have a place found in it for him. The tendency to think
that defectives can only be properly looked after in an institution is due
to the frequency with which they are found to be neglected at present.
But segregation except for purposes of training, should be a last resort,
only to be justified on the grounds of social incompetence or anti-social
proclivities. There is all the difference in the world between a defective
left to fend for himself, unprotected, and with his weaknesses unrecognised,
and one who is given the special training, protection and control which
enable him to meet social requirements. The double responsibility falls
upon the local authority of seeing that' every defective in the community
has the training and occupation he needs and of showing the public how
to protect mental defectives as they would do cripples or blind. The
defective must be fitted for his environment and the environment
adapted to the defective. The task is not an easy one and requires skilled
and experienced workers to carry it out; otherwise it fails. But the ex-
penditure which must be faced by the local authority is worth while
economically and socially."
Sir Leslie Scott
As we go to press, news reaches us that the Rt. Hon.
Sir Leslie Scott, K.C., President of our Association, has been
appointed a Lord Justice of Appeal. Readers of Mental Welfare
will wish to join with the C.A.M.W. Council in congratulating
Sir Leslie, who has given such invaluable service to the Association
since its foundation, on this new honour which has been conferred
on him.
