Sterilisation
==============

A Christian Approach
:Author: Kev. J. P. Hinton, B.A., and Josephine E.
Calcutt, B.A. George Allen and Unwin, Ltd.
5/-.

The voluntary sterilisation of those who are
Unfit to produce healthy children is practiced in
^any countries, including Denmark, Norway,
^Weden, Switzerland and Germany and certain
states in America and Canada. The question
ls whether Great Britain should follow suit.
In July, 1931, a Bill introduced to Parliament
*?r the sanction of voluntary sterilisation was
Set aside without debate!

In 1934, the Departmental Committee on
sterilisation (known as the Brock Committee)
jssued its report. Its terms of reference had
been " To examine and report on the informa-
h?n already available regarding the hereditary
ansmission and other causes of mental disorder
and deficiency; to consider the value of sterili-
sation as a preventive measure, having regard
its physical, psychological and social effects
and to the experience in other countries per-
mitting it. "

The Committee was unanimously in favour of
sterilisation on a voluntary basis for mental
defectives. Passing beyond their terms of refer-
erice they added:

' But we would go further. We would point
?ut that the considerations which led us to this
c?nclusion apply with at least equal force to
grave physical disabilities, such as certain forms
?f blindness, deaf-mutism, haemophilia, and
yachydactyly which have been shown to be
transmissible. . .

The evidence they produced was weighty
enough to win Dr. Tredgold to their viewpoint;
one who had been active against it. The
question is not one merely of academic interest.
If sterilisation is a worthy method of reducing
the number of unfortunates who are born with
crucial handicaps then it is one that should com-
mand the instant enthusiasm and support of all
men.

The evidence this book advances lavishly
shows that the end sought may be achieved by
vasectomy in the male or salpingectomy in the
female. These operations are not dangerous.
The physiological effects are slight and there are
no devastating psychological changes as in the
case of more drastic measures. Where sterilisa-
tion is in vogue promiscuity has actually
lessened, not increased, but the practice is op-
posed by H.H. Pope Pius XI in the Papal
Enclycical called Sasii Connubii (1930). " There
is no possible circumstance," says the En-
cyclical, " in which husband and wife cannot,
strengthened by the grace of God, fulfil faith-
fully their duties and preserve in wedlock their
chastity unspotted."

This book is an appeal to Christian people
to study the alarming results of inherited and
environmental factors upon the unfortunate off-
spring of defective stock. It calls them to a
reasoned consideration of the case and to action
in educating public opinion and obtaining legal
reform and it deals with sterilisation from the
legal, medical, psychological, social and religious
aspects, presenting an alarming array of facts
which are sufficient to condemn the present
order.

The writer of this review feels that the case
presented in the book is reasoned and un-
answerable. He feels that for the most part
opposition is largely due to rationalisation such
as is apt to occur when any matter of high
emotional tone is considered. He feels also that
a wider knowledge of the extent of the misery
caused by the mating of the unfit is a necessary
preliminary to reform. This knowledge the book
amply supplies. N.C.
