Subnormal Mind
================

MENTAL WELFARE yi
Book Reviews
The

By Professor Cyril
^urt. Oxford University Press. 1935. 10/6.
rl^is book is an expansion of the third series
Health Clark Lectures delivered at the Uni-
ersity of London in 1933. Although intended
j Warily for doctors, the matter is dealt with
such a manner as to form what the Americans
an orientation course in the subject of men-
u abnormality for all interested in this work,
Aether doctors, psychologists, teachers or
s?cial workers.
a hi *erm " sub-normal " has been consider-
y extended. There are chapters on the in-
ectually subnormal, both mentally deficient
dnd dull or backward, the morally subnormal
)r delinquent, and the emotionally subnormal
r neurotic. Partly because of his own special
, xperience in the field and partly acting on the
euef that prevention is better than cure, Pro-
cessor Burt has dealt mainly with the wide
,ange of problems as they occur in children. As
p says, " at these younger ages, the nature of
e difficulties and of the causes that produce
eiri, is presented in a simpler and more trans-
ient form."
, ^n his opening chapter on the normal mind,
e Maintains that psychology is to be considered
^ so much a branch of physiology as a branch
1 biology and further, that individual psychol-
sy is of most importance for the medical
udent and others interested in this problem,
e then sets out from the practical psychoi-
d's case-history sheet, to define the various
ndencies that can be usefully assessed and to
evise a method for the quantitative measure-
ent of each. He pays particular attention to
e intellectual and temperamental aspects and
^les to indicate the extent to which they are in-
??n or acquired, and general or specific factors.
1 he chapters on intellectual subnormality are
' summary of the author's more extended works
ready available on these subjects and serve
introduction to those who are not familiar
'th his larger works and a very useful refresher
,? those who are, and also a foretaste of his
,?ng-awaited book on the backward child. It
s important to note his caution that the study
a backward group alone is not sufficent. Our
n?nplnsions should always be based on the com-
parison of such a group with a control group of
ormal children taken from the same mass of
school population.
He clearly distinguishes between the extrinsic
and intrinsic cases of backwardness and shows
that while the former are amenable to short
periods of tutorial treatment and restorable to
ordinary classes, the latter require permanent
adjustment of the curriculum to their mental
level. He advocates special classes for the
juniors and special schools and a complete re-
modelling of the curriculum for the seniors.
In discussing the delinquent, he treats crime
as a natural psychological reaction and suggests
a psychological diagnosis of the underlying
causes and a course of treatment rather than
punishment in order to re-educate the young
delinquent in the hope of producing a law-
abiding adult citizen instead of a hardened crim-
inal. The chapter on the delinquent along with
the four succeeding chapters on the neurotic
and their ascertainment and incidence, should
serve as an excellent introduction to work in the
field usually covered by Child Guidance Clinics.
In his discussions of the neurosis, the author
has not adopted a dogmatic position based on
the findings of any one system of psychology,
but has rather tried to show how each and all
of the many varied theories may help to
elucidate the actual cases which occur most
frequently in clinical work with children.
He proposes to distinguish two main groups
of neuroses. In the one, the inhibiting emotions
?fear, sorrow, submission and disgust?are pre-
dominant; in the other, the aggressive emotions
?anger, self-assertion, curiosity, sex and the
like. Teachers would call the former "nervous"
and the latter "naughty" and doctors, "neur-
asthenic " and " hysterical," but the author
suggests the terms " asthenic " and " sthenic."
They are distinguished in the main as follows:
the former, less deeply psychological than the
latter, are based on more recent causes and are
more dependent on physical conditions.
After discussing the different types with much
illustrative detail from actual cases, the author
gives some tentative figures for the frequency of
incidence of the neurotic child. From his own
figures obtained in a sample borough in London,
he finds as many as 4% in urgent need of special
treatment, and another 13% requiring further
investigation of the case. He states that if these
cases could be dealt with intensively in early life
by some such means as child-guidance clinics,
we should save countless individuals from
definite breakdown in later life and enormously
diminish the amount of unhappiness, inefficiency
and social friction.
72 MENTAL WELFARE
In three appendices are given his Tests of
educational attainments, his revised scale of In-
telligence Tests and a questionnaire on neurotic
symptoms.
Anyone who wants to ascertain the present
status of these various types of diagnosis in
clinical work with children in England, could
not do better than make a careful and thorough
study of this book, which requires frequent
perusal to realise the full wealth of material
which it contains. D.K.F.
