Beyond Hospital Gates
======================

:Author: Lucy E. Beach

Guardianship Officer, Central Association for Mental Welfare
This paper is an attempt to pass on to others the encouragement gained
by a visit recently paid to selected places in Belgium and Holland to see some
of the methods there employed for the care of mental patients boarded out in
the community.

The expenses of the journey were generously met by a donor, whose
anonymity concealed, we are aware, a very active concern for mental welfare
work, who thus enabled Miss Burdett, Secretary of the Suffolk Mental Welfare
Association and Miss MacMichael, Secretary of the Devon Mental Welfare
Association and myself, to obtain some idea of what can be accomplished for
mental patients by treatment carried out extra-murally. We are very grateful
for this opportunity, and should like here to express our thanks also to the
many workers in Belgium and Holland and also in England, who readily gave
us all possible information.

Exchange visits are insufficiently frequent between mental health workers
on the Continent and in this country, and the general trend towards inter-
national co-operation should surely be more evident in this sphere as in others.
Be that as it may, we return from our visit with admiration for the way in
which certain methods have been tested and have been shown to triumph over
the difficulties which appear to many in this country to be insuperable.
Our tour was originally planned as a short visit to the Colonie de Gheel
in Belgium, but was extended to include as a modern " follower " of Gheel,
Stichting Beilerood at Beilen in Holland, and other hospitals where board-
ing out has been adopted in conjunction with the usual hospital treatment.

To be at Gheel, and not to visit the near-by " Etablissement central
d'observation " at Moll-Huttes would have been to miss the chance of seeing
that most interesting example of the psychological study and treatment of
delinquent behaviour.

Some general view of work in Holland we gained by visits to: ?
The large Hospital at Santpoort, already so well-known to many in this
country for its outstanding success in organising occupation for its patients:
the Willem van den Bergh Stichting at Nordwijk-Binnen, where the small
group system is carried out in ideal surroundings for 330 feeble-minded
patients, boys and girls of special school and lower grade type, and some
adults: a Special Day School at Amsterdam: Child Guidance Clinics at
Amsterdam and the Hague: After-Care workrooms for mental patients at
Amsterdam.

We saw the conditions of boarding out from the main hospitals, as already
practised in England, at Vught, and at Franeker?Vught, where the Roman
Catholic Psychiatrische Inrichting Voorburg is an example of modern equip-
ment, excellent workrooms, beautiful grounds, and sunny gardens for each
ward and a markedly high standard of care given by the Nuns and Brothers;
Franeker, with its main building on the site of the 14th century University
abolished by Napoleon, and its excellently equipped new two-storied crescent-
shaped building, and its intensive land cultivation.

In our brief survey of community-care certain points struck us in both
countries.

1. The attitude of the -public towards those suffering from mental disorder.
A greater tolerance, a recognition of how thin is the line between normal
and subnormal or abnormal, a rather amazing absence of fear, and readi-
ness to trust the patient, make the reception of mental patients in the com-
munity less a matter of remark than in this country.
2. Mental Deficiency Acts and Lunacy Acts.
In England activities under the Mental Deficiency Act have made the care
of the defective in the community more complete perhaps than in any other
country. In Belgium and in Holland there is no separate legislation for
adult defectives as such; they are " alienes " just as the mentally disordered
are " alienes," and can be dealt with only under the Acts dealing with the
insane.

It is easy to see that this has tended to leave many defectives without
needed care and attention, but on the other hand it has obviated that deep
cleavage in the public mind between mentally defective and mentally
disordered patients. Workers in this country are aware that there is con-
siderable fear in the minds of many of receiving into the home anyone who
has been in a mental hospital where no such fear is aroused by a patient
from a mental defective institution. Until this fear can be lessened it
will be difficult to extend the Boarding Out of Mental Hospital patients.
3- Boarding out as a condition of treatment.

Living in the community instead of in hospital is definitely accepted as
the " better way " in cases where the mental trouble can be dealt with
under fairly free conditions. The doctor's sphere of work is not only in
the hospital, it is equally in the home, and nothing struck us as more
remarkable than the acceptance of this by the doctors. At Gheel, five out
of the seven doctors have duties only outside the hospital; at Beileroord,
the two doctors work both outside and inside the hospital. These two
schemes are, of course, definitely extra-mural, but at other places where
boarding out is only part of the general activity of the hospital, the doctor
undertakes supervision. Much of this side of the work would be under-
taken in this country by the social worker, but it should be emphasised that
boarding out is definitely an alternative to hospital conditions for treat-
ment, and the doctors look upon it as such. We were assured that many
patients who were most unmanageable in hospital gave no trouble when
boarded out. The patient remains a unit of the hospital, and may be
coming in and out for work, or for recreation or medical attention. Visits
to the home are frequent, to an extent unknown, surely, in this country:
by the doctor once a month, by the nurse once or twice weekly. Here
such frequent visits would probably be felt excessive both by the guardian
and the patient.

4. Type of patient boarded out.

This frequency of visits is probably partly acc6unted for by the degree of
illness of boarded out patients. A feeling of confidence must be given to
those having difficult patients when they know that the doctor is watching
closely over the case and noting any change for the worse, and one can-
not help thinking that it is the part played by the doctor that makes it
possible to board out patients who in this country would be regarded as
" unsafe."

At present in England boarding out is confined almost entirely, one
may say, to those who have become chronic or have almost recovered?
for whom treatment has already done all that is possible.

One would like to see the Medical Superintendent of one of our
hospitals boarding out certain patients (after a period of observation) near
to the hospital and being able to visit them as he does patients in the
wards.

Some details of the places we visited may be of interest.

Colonie de Gheel
-----------------

This colony is already well-known to many in this country and a descrip-
tion of it was given by Miss Clement Brown in the Mental Welfare Magazine
for January, 1933, to which readers are referred for detailed information and
interesting comment.

The unique religious origins of the Colony dating from the time of St.
Dymphne have invested the whole work with a devotional aspect. The 18,000
inhabitants of Gheel are so accustomed to the presence of the 3,000 (3,233,
January 1st, 1935) patients in their midst that their appearance and behaviour
excite little remark. It has become almost a hall-mark of respectability to have
one or as a rule two, patients living in the home. All guardians must be
married couples, and as the number of children per family in Belgium is
usually seven or eight, a very large proportion of the households are concerned
in the work. Such is the eagerness of die inhabitants to be guardians, that
no newcomers to the town are accepted on the waiting list. At the time of
our visit there were already about 100 approved applicants on the list, and
148 additional applications had been received between the first of January
and April, 1935.

The growth of the Colony may be studied on an interesting chart. In
the middle ages the number of patients appears to have been about 300. In
1805 there were known to be about 600; and from 1875 exact records have
been kept (it may be of interest to mention that in that year Charles Dickens
expressed his admiration of the Colony in an article entitled " The crazy
colony " in " All the year round "). In 1908 there were 1,291 patients and
with the exception of a heavy decline about 1915 owing to the death-rate from
influenza the numbers have steadily increased, and of late years have been
round about 3,000. The Colony was under the Church up to 1789, when it
was taken over by the Province of Antwerp up to i860, at which date it was
transferred to the State under the Ministere de la Justice.

Many private cases (some foreigners) are admitted: they pay higher rates
to the guardians and a percentage to the Hospital. There are about 600 Dutch
patients (sent by public authorities) admitted at a rate slightly lower than the
rate of the ordinary private case. It was interesting to note that the reason
for so many Dutch patients was said to be that the standard of Dutch Hospitals
had become so high: a certain number of authorities therefore sent their
patients to Gheel, where the cost of maintenance was about one-third. Not
infrequently, we were told, Belgian, Dutch or German patients are placed in
a foreign hospital as their relatives are glad to have the frontier between them!
The minimum charge to private patients is about 13 francs a day (one
American pays nearly three times that amount) to the guardian, plus 16% to
the hospital. The general rate is 7.50 a day. Of this, 5.50 goes to the guardian
for a patient who can work for him, 6.40 for a patient who cannot work but
is easy to manage, and 7.75 for a difficult patient (which represents a loss of
25c. to the hospital). Clothes and medicine are provided by the hospital. A
normal person who required accommodation would pay about 10 to 20 francs
a day (the agricultural wage being from 25-30 francs a day), so that it will be
noted that as in England, people are found to accept patients at a somewhat
lower rate than they would the ordinary lodger. The accommodation selected
is as far as possible in accordance with the usual style of living of the patient.
Every patient must have a bedroom alone. There are no baths in the houses,
and at present it is only possible to arrange a bath a month for each patient at
the bath houses established in the four districts of the Colony. The Colony
has a certain number of cases under 21 (usually about 50) and the rate for those
who can work is 8 francs a day (of which 6.50 goes to the guardian, 1.25 to
the Hospital and 25c. is set aside to be given to the patient on attaining 21
years). For other children the rate is 7 francs a day, of which 25c. goes to
the hospital. There is a small school for the children managed by the hospital
where they are taught until 14 (the general school leaving age in Belgium is
12). Figures taken out in 1922 showed that out of 446 children, 148 had
returned to the community and were self-supporting.

Patients come to the hospital on the certification of one doctor, and after
observation in hospital for five days, the certificate must be confirmed. During
the last seven or eight years, a certain number of uncertified private cases have
been received but certification is general. Dr. Sano accepts all patients but
after observation has to return some and it appears there is a certain amount
of wasted effort, as people will not realise the necessary limitations for such
conditions of freedom, and we understood that, except at Brussels and Ant-
werp, there are no observation wards for previous selection.

Patients find their occupation where they are placed, on the land or in
the house or in the shop. There is very little recreation or entertainment
organised by the hospital. Under the charge of a Committee some handicraft
is being encouraged?patients may obtain material for basket work, em-
broidery, etc., and there is an exhibition of work annually, each patient being
allowed to keep the proceeds of the sale. For the Dutch patients there is a
Protestant Church; and a special Club Room attached to the Hotel l'Agneau.
The supervision of the patients is carried out by the doctors, each of
whom has two nurses attached to his district. The number of patients to
each doctor is in accordance with conditions of access, etc.?two of the doctors
have 700 patients each, while one doctor is responsible for the children. Bi-
cycles, not motor cars, are used, and each patient is visited by the doctor every
month and by the nurse every week. There is a trained social worker but her
time is almost entirely taken up with after-care work outside the Gheel area.
One doctor is in charge of the hospital, and here there is accommodation for
too patients, but in practice there are seldom more than 50; of these, some
are under observation, some recalled temporarily to hospital, some requiring
physical treatment, some awaiting transfer as unsuitable, a few who have
become chronic or are nearing the end.. At the time of our visit a powerful
man who had become violently maniacal had been brought to hospital, was
deemed unfit to be placed out again, and would be transferred to an ordinary
mental Hospital. A feeble-minded girl living in one of the outlying hamlets
of Gheel was brought into hospital for physical treatment. Dr. Sano had
warned the guardian that she would be fetched some day: when he arrived
at the farm with the ambulance the girl was sorting potatoes in the potato-
heap, and was brought to hospital there and then. A man about 30 was in
hospital for a temporary period. He was a remarkably clever maker of
mats: he had strong obsessions which changed about every three months?he
imagined himself to be Christ and cut stigmata on his body?or a Russian
officer and made himself the complete uniform. At the present time while
with his guardian he had become obsessed by the idea that his guardian's
little girl was his sister and he wished to take her about with him everywhere.
When this obsession had passed, another guardian would be again found for
him.

Typical cases in the homes were the following: ?
(a) Two low-grade feeble-minded girls working at a small farm in an out-
lying hamlet of Gheel.

(b) A painter (private patient) who had two rooms?one as a studio where
he painted not very pleasing pictures for which he would only ask
exorbitant prices: and in the same house, a mentally defective boy
about 18.

(c) A feeble-minded girl about 20 who had been born to a patient who arrived
at Gheel in a confusional state. The mother died, and the guardian
brought up the child, who proved to be mentally defective and was
educated at the Hospital School and had become fairly useful, able to
help in the house and small shop.

(d) A strong-looking man about 32 who chose to spend his time chiefly in
taking walks of about 10 miles a day.

While we sat in the inn in the main square one evening, a man about 30
walked up and down beneath the window monotonously for about two hours,
even though it was already dark. No one took any notice of him.
The recovery rate is not high, as many of the patients sent to Gheel are
chronic.

A natural question is, do the patients abuse such freedom? It is admitted
that many mental patients would be totally unsuitable. But for those at Gheel,
where the whole community is friendly towards them, the records show that
on the whole it is justified. Violence there has been, and injury inflicted, but
in all the years since 1875 there has been no fatal result and it is claimed that
on the average there has not been more than one illegitimate child born a
year. Some patients abscond but are frequently returned, and on the whole
this does not present a great problem.

Beileroord
-----------

Some have thought it would not be possible to establish a colony on the
lines of Gheel if there were no long tradition behind it. But the same prin-
ciples have been carried out for some fifty years in France at Dun-sur-Auron
and Ainay-le Chateau, some descriptions of which have already been given
by Sir Lawrence Brock and Miss Fox, and we understand that at Lierneux,
the province of Liege established a Colony about 1895 for some 800 patients,
but this has developed on somewhat different lines,

Beileroord is a modern example, with excellent hospital accommodation
as an adjunct to the boarding out of some 338 patients. The present Medical
Superintendent (Dr. Hemmes) inclines to think that 400?450 is perhaps the
ideal limit. Stichting Beileroord belongs to the three provinces of Fries-
land, Groningen and Drenthe, but patients are received from any part of
Holland. It is situated in the small town of Beilen with a population of about
8,000, most of whom are engaged in the cultivation of the land.

The work began in 1922, when eight patients were placed in a house no
longer required for the Burgomaster, with three nurses responsible for their
care. From these small beginnings has grown the present boarding out organ-
isation. The hospital has two separate buildings, one for certified, and the
other for uncertified patients built four years ago?long low buildings of
delightful architecture, with excellent gardens and fields and small sunny
wards and work rooms. There is accommodation for 78 patients. The
observation period may be two to three weeks or even six months, and a few
patients are permanently in hospital, having become too infirm, such as an
old woman of ninety who had been in family care for ten years.

The principle of freedom is the same as at Gheel, but the hospital stands
for the centre of activity as well as for the reception of patients. For whereas
at Gheel patients work in and around the house they are living-in, at Beileroord
the great majority of them work at the hospital, either on the land or in the
workrooms busy at mattress-making (with alpen grass), bookbinding, weav-
ing, tailoring repairs, and the usual occupations. A splendidly built garage,
and sun-parlours for two of the wards were the work of patients. One man?
a mental defective, who had threatened his family with an axe?had as his
particular occupation the chopping of logs for the hospital fires, and very
proud he was to show the really enormous pile of wood he had prepared.

Organised activity is dius the linch-pin of the whole. Only about a dozen
patients boarded out are unable to do anydiing. The Medical Superintendent
and his assistant see most of the patients daily, and the advantages of this
arrangement are apparent. There are some patients working away from
hospital for their guardians and seven men have their own little businesses,
selling flowers and potatoes and vegetables from door to door.

The general attitude to the hospital is the same as at Gheel: there are
always keen applicants for patients and at the time of our visit there were 50
approved homes but no patients on the waiting list. (We were told that the
boarding out idea had not yet been fully accepted by all public bodies in
Holland.) Even troublesome cases could be placed without difficulty. One
girl had recurring maniacal periods. She had been in 20 different homes, and
after a stay in hospital had just been placed out again?this time with fresh
applicants who were most anxious to be on the books of the hospital. The
guardian of two old women about seventy-five needing pretty constant care
and attention to habits had recently died and they were placed without delay
with a young woman who had just lost her husband?one had obsessions, the
other was an epileptic. Their home was a sunny newly-built house with gay
colours and the lovely flowering plants one sees in almost every Dutch house.
Just as at Gheel, a new house is scarcely saleable if it has not the two rooms
available for patients.

The cost per patient is about 600 guilders a year (which may be compared
with other hospitals in Holland, such as Franeker, circ. 760 guilders, and
Voorburg, circ. 650 guilders, though the cost at Santpoort is over 1,000 guilders
per patient). The guardians are paid 1.25 guilders a day for the first patient,
1.10 for the second and .90 for the third. Furniture, bed and bedding are
provided by the hospital?clothes, tobacco and sweets and 5c. pocket money
(usually). Paying patients are of two classes and get better accommodation?
the first class (10-12 patients) has two rooms, the second class (50-60 patients)
one room. An excellent Bath-house is at the hospital (for there are no baths
in Beilen) and the patients have weekly baths. During the week-ends the
patients are with their guardians?they can go to the church in the village,
to the pictures, etc. For the girls there is basket ball, for the men football.
There is a pleasing sense of activity and friendliness everywhere and the
exceptionally high standard of Dutch homes was observed in every case we
visited. In a measure the householders have become part of the staff and
they are encouraged to take part in discussions of the principles of care at die
hospital. They receive the unannounced visit of doctor and nurse in a way
that would surprise the social workers in England who have sometimes to
exercise their supervision with marked tact.

The staff consists of the Medical Superintendent and an assistant, 25
nurses (only 5 of whom are men), 18 servants and 4 men in charge of the work.
There is one nurse who lives at the hospital but works entirely outside
and is also responsible for after-care. Dr. Hemmes selects the home, and visits
frequently?a weekly visit is paid either by one of the doctors or by the nurse.
The type of patient seems to be similar to that of Gheel. The older
schizophrenic is considered particularly suitable for this form of care. There
are only four children at Beileroord?one a pathological liar attending the
village school, two feeble-minded aged 15 and 14, one a recent encephalitis case
who had been under observation three weeks and was about to be placed.
Among those we were taken to visit were three male patients at a baker's
?one was a psychopath who assisted in the bakery and was paid two or three
guilders a week, one a hysteric, one inclined to be violent. Three women in
another house were occupied, one at the hospital, one working in the house for
the guardian and the other mending stockings for people in the village, for
which she earned about half a guilder a week.

It is to be observed that the feeble-minded and mentally disordered are
frequently placed in the same home?indeed it is claimed that this is a positive
advantage as the quieter feeble-minded is a counteracting influence to the
more excitable type.

Beilen is proud of the hospital in its midst, and the villagers co-operate
in helping to protect the patients by informing Dr. Hemmes if they see them
wandering away or behaving in an undesirable manner. Vigilance has
triumphed over difficulties, and the results have been admirable. It is a proud
boast that no illegitimate child has been born during all these twelve years.

If in this country it were possible to find the right district for such an
experiment, and it were begun on a small scale there seems to be no reason
to doubt that it would be equally successful, and would prove an excellent
way of treatment for many patients who would do less well under hospital
restraint.

Here again, one would like to emphasise what appears to be a greater
willingness to take risks, in regard to mentally disordered patients. It is true
that the examples to be quoted are not in connection with boarded out patients
but they illustrate this contention. At Santpoort there are two separate wings
accommodating respectively 18 men and 18 women, where the patients live
practically without supervision and manage their own " house," and have
their meals sent there, with no nurse in attendance, and being visited once only
at night. Somewhat similar arrangements are made, it is true, at Brentry
Colony, for some of the mental defectives, but have they been adopted any-
where in this country for mental hospital patients? An even more surprising
example was at Franeker (in the hospital there is also a " free " ward for about
twelve men) where a large house about a quarter of a mile away from the
hospital on the main road is occupied by about ten women. One is responsible
for the " housekeeping " and for telephoning to the hospital in any emergency;
a nurse is in attendance in the morning and at night, but the patients are
entirely alone all afternoon and evening. It was delightful to see the moderate-
sized rooms and two dining rooms with small tables, flowering plants, easy
chairs, and a general atmosphere of home.

Other Boarding Out Schemes
---------------------------

The boarding out which we were introduced to in other areas was on
lines more familiar to us in this country. It was developed however, in close
proximity to the parent-hospital and had the advantage which such proximity
gives over the more scattered boarding out which is the usual method in this
country.

It may be noted in passing that at Moll-Huttes no less than six hundred
had, in seven years, been placed out in the surrounding district.
We were not in a position really to judge whether the cases we saw
boarded out from the mental hospitals were of a different type from those at
Gheel and Beileroord, but we incline to think that they approximated more
closely to those for whom boarding out is developing in England under the
supervision of social workers.

At Franeker there was an attempt made some fifty years ago to start
boarding out on the lines of Gheel, but the inhabitants objected and the project
was dropped. But of recent years, boarding out from the mental hospital has
become acceptable, partly owing to the economic difficulties of the inhabitants,
who are chiefly occupied in land cultivation or in connection with the canal
which intersects the town. There are 512 patients in the hospital; in 1929
there were only six patients boarded out (a beginning being made by placing
patients in the homes of some of the nurses) and by 1934 there were 38 (28 of

whom were male) and there are many householders awaiting patients. The
Medical Superintendent, Dr. Piebenga (who is about to go to another hospital),
selects the home, and visits from time to time, and one of the two other
doctors gives one afternoon a week to visiting. The payment to guardians
is i guilder 25c. for the first patient, 1.10c. for the second, 90c. for the third.
Furniture and bedding (clean sheets weekly) are provided by the hospital. The
patients have from 5c. to 40c. pocket money weekly.

We visited the home of one of the attendants?a beautifully kept house
where there lived two women (working at the hospital) and another, where
two men lived and had just finished their mid-day meal after working all
morning at the Hospital. Their guardian was a chairmaker, but trade was
bad and he and his wife were depending for the time on the payments from
the hospital. A third man who had been with them had had to be returned
to hospital, and they were hoping he would soon be replaced.

As at Beileroord, during the week-end the patients remained with their
guardians.

Voorburg
----------
At Voorburg in Vught, the methods were reversed. The guardians
were responsible for giving the patients suitable occupation but they came to
the hospital for their weekly baths, and for church and recreation on Sundays.
A fine large room was set aside at the hospital entirely for these boarded out
men where meals were brought to them, and they played billiards or received
their friends. By either method, at Franeker and at Vught contact with the
hospital was constant.

The costs are about the same as for patients inside the hospital (600 guilders
a year instead of 650). Fifty men and thirty-two women are boarded out:
they receive pocket money from the hospital (30c. for men and 25c. for
women): furniture for the bedroom is provided by the Institution.

The doctor visits once a month, a nurse twice a week. This nurse is not
under the control of the Nuns at the Hospital but is appointed by the
's Hertogenbosch town authority to whom Voorburg now belongs. She has
to draw a plan of the house of each applicant and give very full details, and
the Authority send a visitor before the recommendation is accepted. Two
patients were boarded out on a farm?one man aged 55 was feeble-minded,
obviously very proud of the cows which he helped to look after, the other
was a young man about 26, a dementia praecox patient.

One man (also a dementia praecox case) was an inveterate wanderer:
his guardian works at the Hospital and the wife was alone with the patient
who helps on a small piece of land?as there was another man (also suffering
from dementia praecox) in a house not far off who had no desire to run away,
they were sent together to the hospital for their Sundays.

There was a pleasant girl who had been two years in the home where we
visited her: her guardian paid her a little additional pocket money, as she
was useful to her?there was seven sons in the family. This girl had been
hysterical and very troublesome in hospital but gave no trouble as a boarded-
out patient.

After-Care
-----------

A word may be said about after-care. At Gheel, the social worker was
responsible for after-care cases, mostly in Antwerp. At Franeker we had the
opportunity of visiting some of die cases with one of the doctors who visits
about two hundred patients (15-20 a day, one day a week)?some of whom
were " on trial " for one year, and others discharged but kept under some
supervision for five years. Nearly all were living with relatives who were
cultivating land.

It was said at Santpoort that earlier discharge from hospital was definitely
possible because of the excellent system of after-care in Amsterdam both for
men and women. We visited the workrooms at Amsterdam for men dis-
charged from mental hospitals and the weaving rooms for the women. The
standard of work done is very high, and the goods are saleable. Orders are
obtained for large quantities?such as five hundred reed mats for one firm.

About forty women a day are thus employed, mostly in weaving, and one
hundred and five men. They are paid small wages, and the workrooms are
self-supporting.

To sum up the main impressions of our visit?the hospitals were more
cheerful and less formalised than most of those we had visited in this country.
Bright curtains, dainty tablecloths, gay paint, growing plants catch the eye.
But these are externals?what more than anything impressed us was the
general attitude towards the mental hospital patient who was not so isolated
and cut off from the community as in this country. One can only hope that
in England the fuller use of the Mental Treatment Act will encourage a more
tolerant attitude and that boarding out will develop.
