Speech in Childhood
====================

:Author: George Seth, M.A..
B.bd., rh.JJ., and Douglas butane, M.D.,
F.R.S.E. Oxford University Press. 10/6.
This is a book which effectively bridges the
gap between the purely medical text book and
those written from the educational point of
view. Although somewhat too technical for the
average teacher of ordinary subjects, it should
prove extremely useful to the medical student
and the Speech Therapist, and should be on
the book shelf of every speech clinic.

The illustrations are excellent, clear and con-
cise, and the tables on the development of speech
(pages 84 and 85) and the development of
words (page 97) are very useful for reference
purposes; parents would do well to study these
and compare them with the speech progress
made by their own child.

One feels that the authors take too gloomy
a view in regard to the treatment of speech
defects in England, when they state that " The
subject has been largely neglected in this
country." Had they visited the schools they
would find that speech training is given as a
separate lesson in the majority of schools, and
that most towns have at least one Speech Climc
organised by the local Education authorities and
one or more, run in connection with the local
general or dental hospital.

The chapter on " Hearing and Speech " lS
particularly interesting, as too often the question
of deafness is neglected. The tests of hearing
to be carried out with a tuning fork, are simple
and sensible and can be used when it is im-
possible to have the use of an expensive in'
strument such as the Audiometer; the authors
give very sound advice when they say: " spe'
cialised education should commence as soon as
the deafness is detected, and it should never be
delayed until what is known as school age
(page 133). The importance of training the
parents of the deaf child, is dealt with on page
143, and a set of rules for their guidance is
given which should be of great assistance both
to the parents and to the nursery school
teacher.

The suggestion that special schools should be
established for the hard-of-hearing child is a
good one, although not very practical but the
idea of having special classes in the ordinary
school is being put into practice in a number
of schools to-day.

The articulatory disorders of speech are ex-
plained clearly in chapter 8, and some helpful
suggestions as to the treatment of these disorders
are given in this chapter, but in the reviewer 5
opinion the use of a glass rod as suggested on
page 159 is not to be recommended, owing t?
the danger of its breaking or of being bitten
through by the child.

In chapter 10, Stuttering is dealt with more
from the theoretical side than the practical, and
the question of treatment dismissed rather too
tightly; we cannot help feeling, moreover, that
the suggestion that breathing exercises should
be accompanied by arm movements is definitely
tad. The relaxation treatment recommended,
ls in itself excellent, but not sufficient to com-
plete the cure, and the influence of imitation
(page 187) is considered from the home only,
mention being made of the child who
copies " a stammer at school.

The diagram on page 214 illustrating the
organisation of Speech Clinics is excellent, as
ls also the classifications of different types of
clinics given on the following page.

The book as a whole makes interesting read-
lng, and gives much useful information.
K.E.J.
