Psychology in Our Poets
========================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Art. I.?.
It may appear paradoxical to collect illustrations of psychology
from the poets, or the novelists, who may be legitimately
regarded as prose-poets. But such authors are either of
original native genius or of cultivated faculties and taste, and
whether reproducing from their own consciousness, or from
observation, the shadows as well as the sunshine which enlivens
the human mind, could not fail to represent those conditions
which give a prominence and character to individuals, whether
these depend upon strength or weakness, health or disease. It
may be even suggested that the very constitution of the intel-
lect and emotions of writers of fiction, especially when
imagination or fancy predominates, may possess intuitively a
special power of penetrating into the errors, extravagancies,
and exaltation which distinguish erratic, excited, or perverted
natures. In a critical examination of the works of many of
those who, through the supremacy of a strong and natural
ideality have analysed the workings and wanderings of a
morbid ideality, it becomes palpable that they have even
learned to trace the prodromes or early indications of insanity,
and have depicted the first stages of an unhinged or tottering
intellect with a suspicion, if not the conviction, that they are
dealing with what is abnormal rather than anomalous, which is
unnatural rather than consistent. But where delineations of
dipsomania, and such are now very numerous, and of senile
dementia have been attempted, uncertain and equivocal opinions
have been advanced. Many of these word-painters regard the
first as habitual drunkenness, as a vice, as a moral rather than
a morbid indication, as susceptible of cure or alleviation by the
same process as is applied to evil passions and propensities;
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. B
2 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
while they treat the second not as a specific malady, but as the
effects of old age and decay, as the lengthening shadows of the
evening of life. It is not to be expected that such observers
shall be vaticinatory, should be competent to trace in the
orgies of the inebriate indications of gradual evolution into
profound and incurable disease, or into the multiform deviations
from sound intellect and rectitude which are predicable by
science, but it is desirable that the melancholy close of such
perversions should be recorded by our poets as well as by philo-
sophers. It is not, of course, our purpose here to record either
the errors or the success of those who have dealt with this
subject. Our object is to present a broader and bolder exempli-
fication of what men of genius have done in our department,
and in order to accomplish this, it will only be necessary to
quote a few specimens of the more noteworthy pictures pre-
served in the works of certain of our recent authors :?
Imbecility.
Sir Walter Scott lived from 1771 to 1832. During the
earlier part of this long lifetime there existed but one asylum
in Scotland, Montrose, which he unquestionably never entered,
and which was appropriated as the old home of about fifty or
sixty dements. When detention of the insane was resorted
to, which was rarely the case, they were committed to the
tender mercies of jailers or to the chains and bonds, or other
modifications of durance vile, dictated by the equally tender
mercies of parents or guardians. Nor were the interests of this
unfortunate class cared for by a Board of Lunacy nor by any
chrysalis form of that more perfect form of organisation. The
author of Waverley had not, accordingly, a lazar-house, like
Fuseli, where he could observe and study, and in bis mind's eye
sketch the different forms of mental imperfection, extravagance,
or perversion. Yet notwithstanding this apparent poverty of
resources, the works of Scott present a greater number of illus-
trations of the aberrations to which the human mind is subject
than those of any other writer extant. It is not that he throws
off with unexampled prodigality and profusion particular forms
or types of insanity with which his position, profession, reading
might have rendered him familiar, and with which every man
of ordinary observation and perspicacity must come into contact
in the daily walk of life, but that he has presented, not merely
some of the lineaments, but perfect living portraits of all the
recognised species of madness, and that every volume which
flowed from his fertile brain embodies some special aspect of the
Neuroses. His works, in fact, constitute a perfect and delight-
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. o
ful Nosology. His creations are not merely meagre sketches
on approximations to likeness. They are patients whom you
have seen, pitied, or prescribed for. This extraordinary fertility
finds a ready elucidation in the observation and genius of the
bard acting upon the ample materials which occurred at every
part and point of his native country at that time. Large
numbers of lunatics roamed through the country unkempt,
uncared for, and very often homeless. A small numb?r of
the class were still privileged and petted in the castles of
the affluent, generally, however, because they were half-
witted or useful, but the vast proportion affected some district,
hamlet, homestead, where they were fed and fostered, or
persecuted, but to which they invariably returned after more
distant wanderings as to the place of their nativity or naturali-
sation, and where every act and trait of conduct or character
were noticed and formed a staple element of local gossip.
Traditions of the sayings and doings, and peculiarities of these
outcasts, are still preserved, and reveal a wealth of humour, a
diversity of gifts, and innumerable eccentricities which have
died with the possessor, or have been obliterated by the rule and
discipline of asylum life. If we add to this narrative that the
habitations of our northern neighbours were, at this time,
segregated into small distinct communities, of which the
members were mutually known to each other, it may be under-
stood in what manner idiots, imbeciles, and even maniacs, who
were not destructive, formed prominent individuals, and drew
upon themselves the attention not merely of their friends and
patrons, but of every passer by, and especially of such keen and
kindly critics as Walter Scott. Such cases might fix attention
by the prominence of their symptoms, the pathetic aspects of
their history, or by their painful and picturesque surroundings
when the observer came into contact, as he often did, with the
peasantry of his country, or while be sojourned in one of those
secluded corners where every inhabitant was known, and every
act watched and recorded. But our author's fancy took a
wider range, and his picture-gallery includes not merely the
erratic and fantastic village fools, but the insensate and absurd
of the higher and the cultured and privileged ranks. Nor was
it merely conspicuous examples of disease, the outrageous, the
irritable, or glaring disturbers of society which he painted, as
we have instances of the faintest departures from right reason,
healthy deportment, and the recognised observances of society.
We have Mumblazon and Dominie Sampson, in whom the mind
seems to have been dwarfed or mummified by peculiarities of
habits and pursuits, and by the lack of ali natural external
stimulus; we have Gurth, the son of Wamba the Witless,
B 2
PSYCHOLOGY IX OUR POETS.
whose limited and obtuse sagacity seems to have been still
further obscured by the nature of his employment; we have
Elspeth at W estburnfoot, in whom a few external impressions
recalled the recollection of sad and stirring events in which she
had been engaged, but which had been long buried in the
oblivion of senile dementia, as flashes of summer lightning
suddenly and for a moment illuminate the darkest spots in the
landscape; we have the shadowy Clara Mowbray ; the pythoness
Meg Merrilies, and many other striking complications of reason
and derangement, folly and wisdom. But the scope of Sir
Walter s discrimination did not stop even here. He knew that
human intelligence and sound sentiment may be often moulded
or warped by opinions, or convictions, or even feelings, which,
although they do not destroy the capacity to judge or to act are
so far impairments of health as to influence conduct as powerfully
or more tyranically than rational or recognised motive. We have
his description of the sway, the omnipotence of delusions over
an able, brave, calculating, and energetic character in the
appearance and effect of the Bodach Glas over Fergus Mac Ivor.
It matters not whether the author wrote as a sceptic or a
believer in the reality of the vision. If he produced one of the
most beautiful glimpses of the reign of superstition with which
we are acquainted in the spirit of philosophical criticism, and
desired merely to show the association of delusion with an other-
wise sane mind, he has afforded but another proof of the extent
and minuteness of his observation. But if he was actuated
by credulity, by a belief in the reality of the apparition which
ever announced to the family of the hero the approach of doom,
he incorporated with fiction what was, even in his own time, the
creed, expressed perhaps with hesitation, but assuredly cherished
by many of those who belonged to the politico-relirious party
of which he may be lairly designated a relic. But the northern
magician likewise knew that a large portion of the celtio
inhabitants of Scotland were dominated by other and equally
powerful faiths or tancies, as the belief in warning spirits or
avengers, and that these mental conditions often reduced the
mind to a state of alienation or perversion, the most notorious
of these was, perhaps, Second Sight. Many of the readers of
his romances will remember the splendid scene evoked by the
heated imagination of Allen Macauly in lining the walls of his
paternal hall with armed Highlanders bearing blazino- pine
roots in contrast or competition with the silver candplahrn nf
Musgrave Hall, which his brother had betted he could outrival
But an infinitely more interesting phase of this man's character
is to be found in his early history, his dark hours and the visions
which were to a large extent the principles alike of his belief and
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. O
action. His birth was preceded by afrightful tragedy; the outcast
and proscribed clan, called the " children of the mist,"' murdered
his uncle, brought the head of their victim to the sister, and
in mockery demanded food. The effects upon the pregnant lady
were repeated attacks of insanity, and during the recurrence
of which her infant was born. This offspring endowed with
intense hereditary taint, never passed into genuine childhood, or
the joys and pleasures of early life; but became peculiar,
gloomy, solitary in his habits; listened nightly and with
avidity to the tales of bloodshed and mystery which must have
formed the current conversation of his clansmen; sought solitude
and revenge upon the feudal enemies who had destroyed
his relatives, and reached manhood brave, enthusiastic and
superstitiously insane. His malady is manifested in two forms,
the first of these is correctly designated his " dark hours " when
he is plunged in profound melancholy and reverie, almost trance,
during which it would appear there was great moral suffering,
and probably the presence of hallucinations, and from which he
could only be roused or soothed, and restored to his natural
condition by the music of a lute, played by a maiden to whom
he was attached. He alludes to the paroxysms: " Be my
visions from heaven or hell, or from the middle sphere of dis-
embodied spirits?or be they, as the Saxons hold, but the
delusions of an overheated fancy, &c." His disorder presented
itself under the following circumstances, there was ever present
to him a Highlander, armed with a dagger, whose figure, tartan,
&c., he could distinctly see, but whose face was always averted.
This was not merely a creation of the second sight, but embodied
a prophecy which involved the life of a kinsman and rival.
The seer had struggled against the influence of this apparition.
He changed the contour of his own plaid, and resorted to all
the measures known to his race as calculated to test the reality
and issue of the impression, but all in vain, and he lived on
ever haunted by this companion spirit, ever convinced that his
kinsman's safety was jeopardised, and yielding passively to what
all those around would have given their unqualified assent, and
this even after the reversal of his plaid had, according to the
authority of a gifted brother, infallibly proved by the imitation
of the act on the part of his supernatural visitant, that his own
hand and dirk would perpetrate the homicide.
But the author dealt with the deformed, as well as the
transformed members of our race, and has produced the
singular compounds of the rickety Black Dwarf, the hideous
hob-goblin Flibberti Gibbet, the half fairy, whole intriguante,
Fenella, the half savage Dugald Creature, and the redoubtable
Sir Geoffrey Hudson of Pyecrust notoriety; but, to whatever
6 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
class belonging, a finer and a fairer model must have sat for
Davie Gellatley, who may be accepted as a link between the
attractive and repulsive characters encountered in the long
series of which he may be regarded as the commencement; he
is thus introduced to our acquaintance:?" Waverley began to
despair of gaining entrance into this solitary and seemingly
enchanted mansion, when a man advanced up one of the garden
alleys, where he still retained his station. Trusting that this
might be a gardener, or some domestic belonging to the house,
Edward descended the steps in order to meet him, but as the
figure approached, and long before he could descry its features,
he was struck with the oddity of its appearance and gestures.
Sometimes this mysterious wight held his hands clasped over his
head like au Indian Jogue, in the attitude of penance; some-
times he swung them perpendicularly, like a pendulum, on
each side; and anon he slapped them swiftly and repeatedly
across his breast, like the substitute used by a hackney-
coachman for his usual flogging exercise, when his cattle are
idle upon the stand in a clear frosty day. His gait was as
singular as his gestures, for at times he hopped with great per-
severance on the right foot, then he exchanged that supporter to
advance in the same manner on the left, and then putting his feet
together, he hopped upon both at once. His attire, also, was
antiquated and extravagant; it consisted in a sort of grey
jerkin, with scarlet cuffs and slashed sleeves, showing a scarlet
lining; the other parts of the dress corresponded in colour, not
forgetting a pair of scarlet stockings, and a scarlet bonnet,
proudly surmounted with a turkey's feather. Edward, whom
he did not seem to observe, now perceived confirmation in his
features of what the mien and gestures had already announced.
It was apparently neither idiocy nor insanity which gave that
wild, unsettled, irregular expression to a face which naturally
was rather handsome, but something that resembled a compound
of both, where the simplicity of the fool was mixed with the
extravagance of a crazed imagination. He sang with great
earnestness, and not without some taste, a fragment of an old
Scottish ditty :?
False love, and hast thou play'd me this
In summer among the flowers ?
I will repay thee back again
In winter among the showers.
Unless again, again, my love,
Unless you turn again;
As you with other maidens rove,
I'll smile on other men.
" Here lifting up his eyes, which had hitherto been fixed in
observing how his feet kept time to the tune, he beheld
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. I
Waverley, and instantly doff d his cap, with many grotesque
signals of surprise, respect, and salutation. Edward, though
with little hope of receiving an answer to any constant question,
requested to know whether Mr. Bradwardine were at home, or
where he could find any of the domestics. The questioned
party replied, and, like the witch of Thalaba, ' still his speech
was song':
The knight's to the mountain
His bugle to wind ;
The lady's to the greenwood
Her garland to bind.
The bower of Burd Ellen
Has moss on the floor,
That the step of Lord William
Be silent and sure.
This conveyed no information, and Edward, repeating his
queries, received a rapid answer, in which, from the haste and
peculiarity of the dialect, the word ' butler' was alone intel-
ligible."
The members of Davie's class were rarely elevated to the
lady's bowers, and the occasions when they were admitted to
the parlour in order to amuse the laird by their oddities,
whimsicalities, and real humour, must be relegated to an
earlier period ; but they were still tolerated in the kitchen to
turn the roast, in the butler's pantry to clean the silver, as
loiterers in the stable-yard, or even to groom the horses, as
competent to clip salmon, to carry the. sportsman's game, or,,
as in the present instance, to act in the humble capacity as
master of the hounds. Accordingly, in the present instance,
the extemporised whipper-in is found " in a grassy vale," lead-
ing two very tall staghounds, and presiding over half-a-
dozen curs, and about as many bare-headed boys, who, to
procure the chosen distinction of attending on the chase, had
not failed to tickle his ears with the dulcet appellation of
Maister Grellatley, though probably all and each had hooted
him on former occasions in the character of " daft Davie." The
next scene in which this graft of cleverness, cunning, and
domestic attachment upon congenital imbecility is represented,
rises thus before us, "' Ou ay, sir, I'll brander the moor-fowl
that John Heatherblutter brought in this morning; and ye see
puir Davie's roasting the black hen's eggs. I daur say, Mr.
Wauverley, ye never ken'd that a' the eggs that were sae weel
roasted at supper in the Ha'house were aye turned by our
Davie ??there's no the like o' him ony gate for poutering wi'
his fingers amang the het peat-ashes and roasting eggs.' Davie
all this while lay with his nose almost in the fire, nuzzling
g PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
among the ashes, kicking his heels, mumbling to himself,
turning the eggs as they lay in the hot embers, as if to confute
the proverb that ' there goes reason to roasting of eggs,' and
justify the eulogium which poor Janet poured out upon
Him whom she loved, her idiot hoy.
4 Davie's no sae silly as folk tak' him for, Mr. Wauverley; he
wadna hae brought you here unless he had ken'd ye was a
friend to his honour; indeed, the very dogs ken'd ye, Mr.
Wauverley, for ye was aye kind to beast and body.' "
The final appearance of the imbecile was
When war its deadly hlast had blown,
and the baronial hall and its trim, well-ordered terraces and
approaches had suffered from the ravages of the spoiler and the
enemy.
"While, plunged in the sad reflections which the scene
excited, Waverley was looking around for some one who might
explain the fate of the inhabitants, he heard a voice from the
interior of the building, singing in well-remembered accents an
old Scottish song:
They came upon us in the night,
And brake my bower and slew my knight:
My servants a' for life did flee,
And left us in extremitie.
They slew my knight, to me sae dear;
v They slew my knight, and drave his gear;
The moon may set, the sun may rise.
But a deadly sleep has closed his eyes.
4Alas!' thought Edward, 'is it thou? Poor helpless being,
art thou alone left, to gibber and moan, and fill with thy wild
and unconnected scraps of minstrelsy the halls that protected
thee ?' He then called, first low, and then louder, ' Davie?
Davie Gellatley!'
" The poor simpleton showed himself from among the ruins
of a sort of greenhouse, that once terminated what was called
the terrace-walk but, at first sight of a stranger, retreated as
it in terror. Waverley, remembering his habits, began to
whistle a tune to which he was partial, which Davie had
expressed great pleasure in listening to, and had picked up
from him by ear. Our hero's minstrelsy no more equalled
that of Blondel than poor Davie resembled Coeur-de-Lion, but
the melody had the same effect of producing recognition.
Davie again stole from his lurking-place, but timidly, while
Waverley, afraid of frightening him, stood making the most
encouraging signals he could devise. 4 It's his ghaist,' mut-
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 9
tered Davie ; yet, coming nearer, he seemed to acknowledge
his living acquaintance. The poor fool himself appeared the
ghost of what he had been. The peculiar dress in which he
had been attired in better days, showed only miserable rags of
its whimsical finery, the lack of which was oddly supplied by
the remnants of tapestried hangings, window curtains, and
shreds of pictures, with which he had bedizened his tatters.
His face, too, had lost its vacant and careless air, and the poor
creature looked hollowed-eyed, meagre, half-starved, and nervous
to a pitiable degree. After long hesitation he at length
approached Waverley with some confidence, stared him sadly
in the face, and said, 4 A' dead and gane?a' dead and gane !'
" ' Who are dead ? ' said Waverley, forgetting the incapacity
of Davie to hold any connected discourse.
'" Baron?and Bailie?and Saunders Saunderson?and Lady
Eose, that sang sae sweet?A' dead and gane?dead, and
gane!'
But follow, follow me,
While glow-worms' light the lea
I'll show ye where the dead should be?
Each in his shroud,
While winds pipe loud,
And the red moon peeps dim through the cloud,
Follow, follow me;
Brave should he be
That treads by night the dead man's lea.' "*
Exception might be taken to the faculty and fertility of
the invention or memory of this half-witted and educated
creature in pouring forth, as an im pro visa tore might have done,
these scraps of national ballads and ditties ; but the incident
demonstrates how thoroughly the artist had made himself
acquainted with all the possible characteristics and even
requirements of the class, and how elaborately he had depicted
this specimen, so that it might be at once typical, attractive,
and in harmony with the surroundings. Examples of solitary
talents springing from a general waste of mind are not unique.
Besides the enormous accumulation of poetical and other
literary compositions which might be found by those curious
in such matters in the separate works which have issued from
the press, in various asylums, and especially in the periodicals
which have appeared from the same source, especially in America
and Scotland, one of these having now reached the thirty-
sixth year of its existence. Delapierre, in his " Histoire
Litteraire Des Fous," records the names of Arcilla, Gruillaume
Dubois, and Nathaniel Lee, who still displayed their original
genius after they had been reduced to imbecility or mental
ieebleness by the more acute forms of disease.
* Waverley, passim.
10
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
M. Billod has given a specimen of incoherence in verse.
The lines were not, however, extemporised, nor did rhyme form
the patient's ordinary form of communication. The composi-
tion is part of a poem produced by a patient labouring under
?what is styled " geographic or historic association," in which
places and persons seem to suggest the course of the thoughts:
Viens, viens, mon tres cher Eug6ne,
Yiens, viens, revoir la carene: '
L'Indoste suit toujours Tamerlan:
Tu prends le casque de l'eperlan;
Tu vas renaitre sur le mont Acide
On j place l'etendard d'Acide.
Tu porteras chez nous la sainte dague,
Tu verras les clochers de Copenhague.
Incoherence in itself affords many faint shadowings of the dis-
ruption of recondite mental relations, of errors within errors ; but
quotations showing the effect of association of ideas directed by
the sound of the sign must suffice. An illustration of a modifica-
tion of this relation was afforded in the case of a person who
could still construct his sentences according to the ordinary
mode, but who was guided in his choice of expressions by the
sound of the terminal syllable or word, or by some rude notion
of rhyme. So dominant and necessary did this tendency
appear to be that he paused to consider the appropriate word ;
sacrificed every pretension to sense or reason, and embraced
every incongruity and absurdity with a view to accomplish his
object. If he concluded a phrase by the word "remorse," it
was certain that " horse " or " worse " would occupy a similar
place in that which followed ; if he used " firkin," gherkin was
immediately suggested ; and while he continued to make his
harangue a vehicle for his wishes, and for sneers at those around,
if he failed to summon up a term which harmonised with
coverlet," he immediately adopted plover-wit, or some term
equally euphonious and absurd. A patient for three con-
secutive days vociferated incessantly words terminating in
ation, or rather he added to every word that occurred to him
that syllable; while many others whom we have observed chant
or sing whatever they have to say. We have memoranda of a
lady who, unguided by cadence or rhyme, seems to have been
influenced by the sound of the principal word of the sentence.
Some of her observations follow: " The stick she had was
the handle of a pick to dig potatoes, and peas and plums ; but
the dog dragged the dust through the mignonette, and made
sad work with the willow wands, and the sands on the sea-shore.
Give me that book, the crook of the blot?Lot's wife was
a witch and a pillar of salt and of sorrow." Another illustra-
tion has occurred in our practice. Amid great incoherence it
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 11
was evident that a word in one sentence almost invariably
suggested the succeeding thought and sentence. The following
paragraph may be said to have been dictated by her: "The shells,
the beautiful pink shells, cast upon the sea-shore require fifty
days to consolidate; but then marble coffins are expensive, and
will not make into statues. And then they speak of their
Venus, but for my part I would rather go to Carlisle than
Venice, for I have an old pier glass, that my ancestors got from
Lord Stair, and he was a peer, and he had steps to his castle,
and did not wander from our communion, for it takes fifty
years for their progress. Mr. S. was a hundred and four, but
what is time to the fair flowers, and the thyme that feeds the
birds and the bees?" {Journal of Psychological Medicine,
1st Series.)
Mania.
Mania implied, at no very distant date, vehemence, violence,
strife, or struggle, or some outrage which endangered life or
limb, or property, or the breach of some conventionalities of
society. Many of the symptoms which gave to this epithet its
formidable name and reputation have disappeared, or greatly
diminished in intensity and frequency. In order to estimate
the fury of the patients affected with the disease, or the fears of
those who were expected to control them, it would be necessary
to visit certain of the collections of the apparatus and instru-
ments employed in effecting this control or coercion, which are
still preserved on the continent. In these museums may be
seen in linen, leather, wood, iron, every conceivable contri-
vance by means of which the limbs of the resisting and
refractory were rendered motionless, or the whole body was
reduced to the state and aspect of a mummy. There were
chains, locks, belts, straps; there were chairs, boxes, coffin-
looking caskets, provided with breathing and seeing apertures,
in which the patient was confined in a state of complete
immobility for indefinite periods of time ; there were broad ban-
dages of linen, of almost interminable length, in which the body
was rolled or swathed until it resembled an Indian papoose and
could be moved about as an inanimate piece of furniture. A more
easily accessible mode of becoming familiar with such devices,
all dictated, be it observed, by humanity or pusillanimity, will
be found by reference to Gruislain's " Histoire d'Alienation Men-
tale," where representations of all the machines which have been
alluded to, and many more, are inserted. It is probable that the
extreme length to which restraint was carried, whether justifiable
or not,was the origin of that revulsion of feeling, or opinion, which
]2 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
has latterly reduced such interference with personal liberty to a
minimum. It is, moreover, probable that the very discon-
tinuance of this practice, associated as it has been with great
ameliorations in the condition and management of the insane,
may have contributed to conduce to that change of type, that
milder form of mental excitement which now characterises mania,
and which renders it difficult to distinguish between the different
species of madness, or to believe that the individuals with whom
we may come in contact in our passage through an asylum are
of wild or erratic unsoundness, and that their quietude and
composure are solely the result of the influence of hospital
regulations and general treatment.
It would be absurd to suppose that the author of the " Tales
of my Landlord," even when wrapt in poetic or prophetic
vision, could have foreseen and predicted this change in the
features of the malady he describes ; and adopting more mode-
rate views, we must suppose that he bad become acquainted
with different degrees or species of the affection ; that he
detected in these a total overturn of the intellectual and
emotional faculties, but not necessarily frantic and dangerous
conduct; that he discovered that the wildness and wandering
were rather in the thoughts and feelings of the maniac than in
the conduct, and that the menaces and apprehensions which
paralysed and deceived the beholder were the offspring of his
own imagination or cowardice.
Let Madge Wildfire, with the exhibition of that clever,
cunning, and euphoria which distinguishes many of her class,
speak for herself. " The officer retired, and introduced upon
his return, a tall, strapping wench of 18 or 20, dressed fan-
tastically in a sort of blue riding jacket, with tarnished lace,
her hair clubbed like that of a man, a highland bonnet, and a
bunch of broken feathers, a riding shirt (or petticoat) of
scarlet camlet, embroidered with tarnished flowers. Her
features were coarse and masculine, yet at a little distance, by
dint of very bright wild-looking black eyes, an aquiline nose,
and a commanding profile, appeared rather handsome. She
flourished the switch she held in her hand, dropped a courtsey
as low as a lady at a birth-night introduction, recovered herself,
seemingly, according to Touchstone's directions to Audrey, and
opened the conversation without waiting till any questions were
asked.
" ' Grod give your honour gude een, and many o' them, bonny
Mr. Sharpetlaw; Grude een to ye, Daddie Eatton; they tauld
me ye were hanged, man ; or did ye get out o' John Dalgliesh's
hands, like half-hanget Maggie Dickson.'
" 4 Whisht, ye daft jaud,' said Ratcliffe,' and hear what's said
to ye.'
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 13
? ' Wi' a' my heart, Ratton. Great preferment for poor
Madge to be brought up the street wi' a grand man, wi' a coat
a' passemented wi' worset-lace, to speak wi' provosts, and
bailiies, and town-clerks, and prokitors, at this time o' day?
and the hale town looking at me, too?this is honour on earth
for anes.'
" ' Ay, Madge,' said Mr. Sharpetlaw, in a coaxing tone,' and
ye're dressed out in your braws, I see, these are not your every-
day's claiths ye have on.'
" "4 De"il be in my fingers, then,' said Madge ; ' Eh, sirs,'
(observing Butler come into the apartment) ' there's a minister
in the Talboth, wha will ca it a graceless place, now? I'll
warrant he's in for the guid auld cause?but it's be nae cause o'
mine,' and off she went into a song
Hey for cavaliers, ho for cavaliers,
Dub a dub dub a dub;
Have at old Beelzebub,?
Oliver's running for fear.
" ' I'm Madge Wildfire,' said she,' and that I have ever been
since I was something better?heigh ho !' (and something like
melancholy dwelt on her features for a minute)?' but I canna
mind when that was; it was a long syne at ony rate, and I'll
ne'er fash my thumb about it.'
I glance like the wildfire through country and town ;
I'm seen in the causeway?I'm seen on the down;
The lightning that flashes s?. bright and so free,
Is scarcely so blythe or so bonny as me.
" ' Do sae, minister?do sae,' cried Madge, 41 am as weel
worth looking at as ony book in your aught. And I can say
the single carritch, and the double carritch, and justification,
and effectual calling, and the assembly of devines at West-
minster, that is,' (she added in a low tone) ' I could say them
anes?but it's lang syne?and ane forgets, ye ken.' And poor
Madge heaved another sigh.'
" By this time they had gained the deepest part of a patch
of woodland. The trees were a little separated from each
other, and at the foot of one ol them, a beautiful poplar, was a
hillock of moss, such as the poet of Grrasmere has described in
the motto to our chapter. So soon as she arrived at this spot,
Madge Wildfire, joining her hands above her head, with a loud
scream that resembled laughter, flung herself all at once
upon the spot, and remained lying there motionless.
14 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
" Jeanie addressed her in a soothing tone and endeavoured to
raise up the forlorn creature. She effected this with difficulty,
and, as she placed her against the tree in a sitting posture, she
observed with surprise that her complexion, usually florid, was
now deadly pale, and that her face was bathed in tears
" ' I'll tell ye a' about it, for ye are a decent man's daughter?
Douce Davie Deans, ye ken?and may-be ye'll can teach me to
find out the narrow way and the straight path, for I have been
burning bricks in Egypt, and walking through the weary
wilderness of Sinai for lang and mony a-day. But whenever I
think about mine errors, I am like to cover my lip for shame.'
Here she looked up and smiled. ' It's a strange thing noo?I
hae spoke mair gude words to you in ten minutes than I wad
speak to my mother in as mony years?it's no that I dinna
think on them; and whiles they are just at my tongue's end
but then comes the devil, and brushes my lips with his black
wing, and lays his broad, black hoof on my mouth, &c.' . . .
" Jeanie endeavoured to bring her back to the confessional,
but the fancy was gone by. In fact, the mind of this deranged
being resembled nothing so much as a quantity of dry leaves
which may for a few minutes remain still, but are instantly
discomposed and put in motion by the first casual breath of air.
She had now got John Bunyan's parable into her head, to the
exclusion of everything eise, and on she went with great
volubility.
" ' Did ye never read the " Pilgrim's Progress " ? And ye shall
be the woman Christiana, and I will be the maiden Mercy, for
ye ken Mercy was of the fairer countenance, and she was more
alluring than her companion, and if I had my little messan dog
here, it would be Great Heart their guide, ye ken, for he was
e'en as bauld that he wad bark at ony thing twenty times his
size ; and that was e'en the death of him.'
" 4 It's very true,' said Madge, shaking her head ; 4 but then I
maunna think on my puir bit doggie, Snap, when I saw it lying
dying in the gutter. But it's just as weel, for it suffered baitli
cauld and hunger when it was living, and in the grave there is
rest for a' things?rest for the doggie, and my puir bairn, and
me.'
" Notwithstanding Jeanie's puritanical repugnance to thekist
fu' o' whistles, and the prelatial place of worship from which it
sounded, she, like a hunted animal, willingly took shelter in this
interdicted refuge.
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 15
" No sooner had Madge put her foot upon the pavement,
and become sensible that she was the object of attention to the
spectators, than she resumed all the fantastic extravagance of
deportment which some transient touch of melancholy had
banished for an instant. She swam rather than walked up the
centre aisle, dragging Jeanie after her, whom she held fast by
the hand. She would, indeed, have fain slipped aside into the
pew nearest the door, and left Madge to ascend in her own
manner, and alone, to the high places of the synagogue ; but
this was impossible, without a degree of violent resistance,
which seemed to her inconsistent with the time and place, and
she was accordingly led in captivity up the whole length of the
church by her grotesque conductress, who, with lmlf-shut eyes,
a prim smile upon her lips, and a mincing motion with her
hands, which corresponded with the delicate and affected pace
at which she was pleased to move, seemed to take the general
stare of the congregation, which such an exhibition necessarily
excited, as a high compliment, and which she returned by nods
and half-curtsies to individuals amongst the audience whom she
seemed to distinguish as acquaintances. Her absurdity was
enhanced in the eyes of the spectators by the strange contrast
which she formed to her companion, who, with dishevelled
hair, downcast eyes, and a face glowing with shame, was
dragged as it were in triumph after her.
" Madge's airs were at length fortunately cut short by her
encountering in her progress the looks of the clergyman, who
fixed upon her a glance at once steady, compassionate, and
admonitory. She hastily opened an empty pew which happened
to be near her, and entered, dragging Jeanie in after her.
Kicking Jeanie on the shins by way of hint that she should
follow her example, she sunk her head upon her hand for the
space of a minute. Jeanie, to whom this posture of mental
devotion was entirely new, did not attempt to do the like, but
looked round her with a bewildered stare, which her neigh-
bours, judging from the company in which they saw her, very
naturally ascribed to insanity. Every person in their imme-
diate vicinity drew back from this extraordinary couple as far
as the limits of their pew permitted, but one old man could not
get beyond Madge's reach ere she had snatched the prayer-book
from his hand and ascertained the lesson of the day. She then
turned up the ritual, with the most overstrained enthusiasm of
gesture and manner."
Theomania.
The diseases and delusions of the insane are sometimes
created, or at least coloured, by the follies, weaknesses
16 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
fancies, and temperament of the population of which they
form a part, as well as by the climate in which they live.
This truth becomes still more striking when applied to the
religious opinions and to the super sensuous and supernatural
beliefs which still linger among the partially educated, nay, even
find a lurking-place in the fears and emotions of the sensitive
and susceptible, whether educated or not. Climate and weather
are supposed to have their efficacy, and while providing an
appropriate heaven for the gods of Scandinavia, to have darkened
the waking dreams and apprehensions of those who are no
longer worshippers. The hideous gibbering ghosts of the North
have been compared with the sprightly and blooming, and
even alluring, fairies of the South, while the phantasms which
torment the unhealthy brain of the semi-arctic regions partake
of the gloom and protracted winter which reign around. We
have the Mania Transitoria of Finland, the Nostalgia of
Switzerland, and the Neuroses, which imitate the steps and
stages of the different species of ague of the marshy tracks
which occur along the borders of the Rhine. Although lying
somewhat outside the ordinary paths of knowledge, Sir Walter
Scott doubtless knew of this, and has given to derangement?
founded upon sorcery and superstition, a most impressive and
romantic local habitation and name.
" The woman who pronounced this singular tirade was as
striking in appearance as extravagantly lofty in her pretensions
and in her language. She might well have represented on the
stage, so far as features, voice, and stature were concerned, the
Bonduca or Boadicese, of the Britons, or the sage Velleda,
Acerinia, or any other fated pythoness, who ever led to battle
a tribe of the ancient Groths. Her features were high and
well formed, and would have been handsome but for the ravages
of time, and the effects of exposure to the severe weather of
her country. Age, and perhaps sorrow, had quenched, in some
degree, the fire of a dark blue eye, whose hue almost approached
to black, and had sprinkled snow on such parts of her tresses
as had escaped from under her cap, and were dishevelled by the
rigour of the storm. Her upper garment, which dripped with
water, was of a coarse, dark-coloured stuff, called wadmaal, then
much used in the Zetland Islands, as also in Iceland and Norway.
But as she threw this cloak back from her shoulders, a short
jacket of dark-blue velvet, stamped with figures, became visible,
and the vest which corresponded to it was of crimson colour,
and embroidered with tarnished silver. Her girdle was plaited
with silver ornaments, cut into the shape of planetary signs ;
her blue apron was embroidered with similar devices, and
covered a petticoat of crimson cloth. Strong, thick, enduring
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 17
shoes, of the half-dressed leather of the country, were tied with
straps like those of the Kornan buskins, over her scarlet
stockings. She wore in her belt an ambiguous-looking weapon,
which might pass for a sacrificing knife, or dagger, as the
imagination of the spectator chose to assign to the wearer the
character of a priestess or of sorceress. In her hand she held
a staff, squared on all sides, and engraved with Runic characters
and figures, forming one of those portable and perpetual calen-
dars which were used among the ancient natives of Scandinavia,
and which, to a superstitious eye, might have passed for a
divining rod."
" Such were the appearance, features, and attire of Noma of
the Fitful-head, upon whom many of the inhabitants of the
island looked with observance, many with fear, and almost all
with a sort of veneration. Less frequent circumstances of sus-
picion would, in any other part of Scotland, have exposed her to
the investigation of those cruel inquisitors, who were then often
invested with the delegated authority of the Privy Council, for
the purpose of persecuting, torturing, and finally consigning to
the flames those who were accused of witchcraft or sorcery.
" Among those who were supposed to be in league with dis-
embodied spirits, this Noma, descended from, and representa-
tive of, a family which had long pretended to such gifts, was so
eminent that the name assigned to her, which signifies one of
those fatal sisters who weave the web of human fate, had been
conferred in honour of her supernatural powers. The name by
which she had been actually christened was carefully concealed
by herself and her parents; for to its discovery they supersti-
tiously annexed some fatal consequences. In those days the
doubt only occurred whether her supposed powers were acquired
by lawful means. In our days, it would have been questioned
whether she was an impostor or whether her imagination was so
deeply impressed with the mysteries of her supposed art, that
she might be in some degree a believer in her own pretensions
to supernatural knowledge. Certain it is that she performed
her part with such undoubting confidence and sucli striking
dignity of look and action, and evinced, at the same time, such
strength of language and energy of purpose that it would have
been difficult for the greatest sceptic to have doubted the reality
of her enthusiasm, though he might smile at the pretensions to
which it gave rise."
Closer intercourse with this claimant of subterranean, as well
as supernatural power, discloses the broad margin where enthu-
siasm becomes the delirium and delusion of divine pretension, and
where the local pythoness merges in the theomaniac. Magnus
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. C
18 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
Troil resolved to seek aid from the skill or enchantments of
a priestess or a physician of a faith or a knowledge, still trusted
in by many of the islanders, and visited the sybil in her half-
ruined dwelling on the Peak of Burghead, with his daughters,
one of whom was to be her patient or victim, as the case may
be. They found their adviser " in a darkened apartment amidst
a confused collection of books of various languages, parchment
scrolls, tablets, and stones inscribed with the straight and angular
characters of the Runic alphabet and similar articles which the
vulgar connected with the exercise of the forbidden arts.
There were also lying in the chamber, or hung over the rude
and ill-contrived chimney, an old shirt of mail, with the head-
piece, battle-axe, and lance which had once belonged to it."
Ihere^weie likewise arranged around fancied thunderbolts, celts,
a sacrificial knife, &c., and to add to the grimness of the scene,
there growled in a corner a half-tamed seal.
After an altercation as to her gifts and deportments,
the tremulous Minna is at length seated in a chair " which
was composed of stone, formed by the rough and unskilful hand
ot some ancient Grothic artist." The girl having indicated her
heart as the seat of the malady, Norna " threw off her long dark-
coloured mantle, and stood before them in her short jacket of
light-blue wadmaal, with its skirt of the same stuff, fancifully
embroidered with black velvet, and bound at the waist
with a chain or girdle of silver, formed into singular devices.
She then placed a small crucible upon a chafing dish,
dropped a few drops from a vial on the charcoal below,
pointed towards it her wrinkled fore-finger, which she had pre-
viously moistened with liquid from another small bottle, and
said with a deep voice, ' Fire, do thy duty ;' and the words
were no sooner spoken than, probably by some chemical combi-
nation of which the spectators were not aware, the charcoal
which was under the crucible became slowly ignited ; while
Norna, as if impatient of the delay, threw hastily back her dis-
ordered tresses, and, while her features reflected back the
sparkles and red light of the fire, and her eyes flashed from
amongst her hair like those of a wild animal from its cover, blew
fiercely, till the whole was in an intense glow. She paused a
moment from her toil, and muttering that the elemental spirit
must be thanked, recited in her usual monotonous, yet wild,
mode of chanting, the following verse :
Thou bo needful yet so dread,
With cloudy crest and wing of red;
Thou, without whose genial breath,
The north would sleep the sleep of death;
Who deigns't to warm the cottage hearth,
Yet hurl'st proud palaces to earth,
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 19
Brightest, keenest, of the Powers,
Which form and rule this world of oura I
With my rhyme of Eunic, I
Thank thee for thy agency.
By means of the flame a portion of lead was melted, cast into
water, and the fantastic forms which it is thus made to assume,
aud with which every schoolboy is familiar, were then carefully
examined. Norna, meanwhile, is either gesticulating wildly in
the apartment, tearing her hair, opening the window in order to
invoke the genii of light, and air, and ocean, improvising
addresses to these and more obscure powers, or interrupting
these incantations or orisons to the unseen beings whose inter-
ference she craved, in order to address personal warnings and
advice to her patient, who seems to have become a disciple.
Failure having attended the first essay with the metal, it is
again molten and cast into the water, with fresh ceremonies and
even improvised threats and warnings to the influences which
she attempted to bend to her own will. At length, after a
minute search among the morsels of lead, a portion is dis-
covered by the experimenter presenting a fantastic resemblance
to a human heart. This resemblance is hailed by the sorceress
as a realisation of all her hopes and wishes, and as affording the
means of restoring to the anxious Minna her original health
and happiness. The symbol, or perhaps the charm, for Norna
evidently acts in good faith, and believes with a superstitious
dread in the efficacy of the miracle she has accomplished, is
suspended to golden wires and chains, and hung around the
neck of the individual whom it is to supply with a new heart,
and with all the feelings and affections which are supposed to
be connected with this organ. Noma's last words indicate her
personal belief in her power of healing, of penetrating the dark-
ness of futurity, of possessing prophecy and prevision, and of
bending coming events, and the laws by which these are regu-
lated, to her own purposes.
Acute Mania witii Delusions.
The Reverend Greorge Crabbe was originally educated in
Medicine, and had actually engaged in its practice so that either
during his studies in some of the London hospitals, or in his
visits to the humbler classes of his patients, he must have seen,
cursorily it may be, some of the more striking forms of mental
disease. It is certain that had such an impressive event crossed
his path, the impression would have been reproduced with all
that marvellous accuracy and minuteness with which he depicts
every scene that met his eye, from the aspect of the hall to the
c 2
20 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
flat meadows, the pollard trees, and sluggish streams, with
which he was familiar, and which may have reacted in the
formation of that measured, equable, tame, but eminently
descriptive versification which was his characteristic. It is,
however, much more probable, that, considering his position
as a country clergyman, most faithfully discharging his
duties, whether these led him to the altar or to the pauper's
hovel, that his opportunities of coming closely into contact
with insanity, or, rather, with some of the perversions of mind
which simulate insanity, would be in the parochial almshouse or
the workhouse of the adjoining town. The same sympathy, or
clerical responsibility, which led him to the interior of prisons,
would inevitably make him a frequent visitor to the poor, the
enfeebled, and decayed, whether in their own homes or in public
institutions. What Crabbe wrote, some sixty years ago, presented
a very sad and solemn picture. The almshouse was not merely
a retreat for the poor, the aged, the infirm or the deserted, but
it was a place of detention for many of the dissolute, the
depraved, and the diseased classes. In our more discriminating
and differentiating days vigorous and successful efforts have been
made to separate these very discordant elements, and to
eliminate from the general mass of decay and putrescence the
individuals who owed their misfortunes to natural and unavoid-
able causes, and not to vice or profligacy. Throughout Britain
a very large proportion of the insane are placed in hospitals
specially adapted for their reception and treatment; in Scot-
land distinct buildings, or wards, are appropriated to those of
imperfect or perverted intelligence in the great majority of
poorhouses ; and in England, where special portions of the
building have not been allocated to imbeciles, dements, and
such cases of unhealthy mind as await transmission to the
public asylum, great exertions are made to segregate them,
and to protect them from the evils of communication with
the other members of the community. Indeed, except in
the instances of Caterham, Leavesden, and so on, where an oppo-
site tendency has been manifested, classification may be regarded
as one of the indications of progress in the domestication and
management of lunatics. Ln these succursal establishments,
which may be designated vast charnel-houses for the entomb-
ment of the morally and mentally dead of the metropolitan
poor, you may positively pass through hundreds of unfortunate
sufferers from mental decay, and yet you may not encounter a
solitary illustration of what would be popularly accepted as
madness. You will see the congenital idiot, the mind from
which the faculties have been blotted out by intemperance; the
dotard, who is sinking under the complication of " second
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 21
childishness " and paralysis, and the victim of sin, syphilis, and,
it may be, of crimes unrevealed to any confessor.
It is not our present purpose either to condemn or even to
criticise such arrangements, but solely to suggest that, from
such materials, upon a very small scale, Crabbe must have ob-
tained the colours of the picture which he has limned. He
represents a rude unprincipled and violent fisherman who, after
escaping from the commission of parricide, gradually deterio-
rates into more distinct and determinate crimes, instigated
either by the greed of gain or by his cold-blooded and uncon-
trolled passion. " He fished by water and he filched by land."
Solitary in his avarice as well as in his other habits, he extem-
porised a mud hovel where he dwelt, dreaming of the pleasures
of the possession of power. This rude vision he realised by
engaging, although buying is the proper word, from the London
workhouses where such a traffic was then sanctioned, three boys,
ostensibly for the purpose of assisting him in his trade, but
really that he might play the part of master, ruler, tyrant.
These helpless urchins, after toiling in his service, he either
directly or indirectly murdered.
We next hear of this blood-stained boor when remorse has
obviously asserted some sway in his imaginings, "dull and
hopeless, lie down "?
When tides are neap, and, in the sultry day,
Through the tall bounding mud-banks made their way,
Which on each side rose swelling, and below
The dark warm flood ran silently and slow ;
There anchoring he essayed to hide,
There hang his head, and view the lazy tide
In its hot slimy channel slowly glide.
Physical health next gives way, and prostrated either by
fever or frenzy?
Cold nervous tremours shook his sturdy frame,
And strange disease, he couldn't say the name ;
Wild were his dreams, and oft he rose in fright,
Waked by his view of horrors in the night?
Horrors that would the sternest mind amaze,
Horrors that demons might be proud to raise.
At this stage of his distemper he is depicted as occupying his
boat on the river, without apparent aim or object, unprovided
with any of the instruments of his craft, but gazing moodily
and gloomily on the stream as it crept lazily among the sedges.
As a natural issue of this stage of incubation
Furious he grew, and up the country ran,
And there they seized him?a distemper'd man;
Him we received, and to a parish bed,
Follow'dand cursed, the groaning man was led.
There paralysed by fear and incipient madness he reveals bis
harrowing reveries to the attendants surrounding his bed, and
22 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
conjures them to look upon the phantoms by whom he was pursued
and persecuted. Still in fancy floating on the river he sees three
figures rise from the depths below, one of an aged man, who shook
his hoary locks and froze the gazer by a look, holding in either
hand a thin, pale boy, whose features were too vividly remembered.
It might be from the bosom of a dark still pool, or from the
reaches which swept inland, or from the sparkling waves of the
ripples " unheard by day," which marked the pebbly floor below;
but wherever he seemed to row, wherever his glaring eye rested,
there haunted him the spectres which he dreaded, from which
he fled but from which he never could escape, for even the
ominous warnings of the aged ghost " come, come," crept along
the stream. The frightful images conjured up by the incoherent
ravings of the sufferer, are represented as inspiring even his
auditors with terror, especially when in the last awful death-
struggle he repeated the words " come, come." By many
minds this death-bed scene, which has been shorn of some of
its revolting features, may be dismissed as the fanciful creation
of a sad or sickly imagination. But the description suggests
other interpretations. The water-spirits who flit before the
panic-stricken penitent may be pictures traced by conscience,
the ghastly photographs and gibberings of real events, but
which the sufferer still knows to be unreal. Or, these water-
spirits may be delusions called up in delirium and cerebral
disease actually seen and heard by their victim. Or, these
visions may be hybrids of both conditions, they may be hallucina-
tions embodying the pangs of guilt as well as the phenomena aris-
ing from changes going on contemporaneously in the brain. It is
believed that Crabbe painted from nature, and that his pictures
or sketches were faithful reproductions of what he had met with
in his official life. All his transcripts may be said to be plano-
convex, there is first the flat surface of unornamented fact and
then a slightly raised addition of invention. Of this nature,
may be the story of the fisherman. Designedly the tale
may have been intended to shadow forth the effects of the
combination of crime and cerebral disease, of physical and
psychical symptoms; and it is most desirable that such an
example should be followed, and that the modifications induced
in the specific Neuroses by hereditary tendencies, by education,
profession, mode of life, and above all, by complications with
bodily diseases, should be more rigidly and accurately deter-
mined and recorded than they have hitherto been.
Idiocy.
About thirty years ago Dr. (subsequently Commissioner) Graskell
published a paper, descriptive of the numerous weak-minded
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 23
individuals encountered in the ranges of hills which surround
or traverse Lancashire, Cumberland, &c. These persons were
either simpletons, imbeciles, idiots, or presented the various
degrees of imperfect intelligence which connect rudimentary
with mature intelligence. Certain of the class were cretinoid,
but the majority were conspicuous chiefly by their dwarfish
stature, their repulsive features, shambling gait, and mutism or
odd articulation. They were generally harmless, sometimes
merely the pets or the persecuted outcasts of the village; some-
times they were industrious and resided with the family to
which they belonged ; but in no instance, whatever might be
their condition, capacity, or surroundings, did there exist at
that time any means or arrangements by which they could be
protected from the effects of their own degraded habits, or of
the cruelty or indifference of those around, or by which they
could be elevated above their original state, and so far educated
and trained that, if not useful to the community, they might
possess resources within themselves which would increase their
happiness or enjoyments, and widen the range of the limited
faculties with which they had been endowed. It has been
affirmed upon good authority that this opening up and ex-
panding the child-like mind has been so far advanced and so
successful as to impart to the untractable pupil conceptions of
Deity, and of the Christian revelation. The stunted moun-
taineers of whom Dr. Graskell wrote, may now be found either
in the Albert Institution for Idiots or in the county asylums,
shielded and sheltered, and undergoing such education as may
be adapted to develop whatever physical or mental powers
they may be possessed. Long before the philanthropist had
embraced the subject, the poet Wordsworth had doubtless
become familiar with many of these grotesque urchins in his
wanderings in the dales and among the mountains, which so
richly contribute to render his works a local picture, as well as
a poem addressed to the world. It is not rash to affirm that
Johnny Foy was a member of the neglected or degraded class.
It would be absurd, however, to go further, or to believe that
the object of the poet was to celebrate or to record the idiot
boy. The simple ballad was intended in all probability to
demonstrate certain of the principles or peculiarities of the
Lake School of thought. It may have been designed to show
that the beauties of nature shine through not merely grotesque-
ness and uncouthness of diction, but in despite of the conven-
tional euphony, the sentiment, and the picturesqueness which
raise even compositions of this kind to the rank of poetry.
There may have been even a covert desire to connect romance
with the lowliest grade of life, the baldest histories, and
24 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
the vulgar events of a remote hamlet. The tale is
of the rudest and the simplest. Two old women inhabit
adjoining cottages, one of whom is writhing in pain and
impatient for medical aid, which can only be drawn from a
distant town. The other, moved by sympathy, determines to
send for the doctor, although the way be long and through
woods and wilds, although the time be night, and although her
only messenger must be her imbecile child, who is regarded
with that passionate fondness which generally mark such rela-
tionship. We have not much intercourse with this cherished
boy, who is chiefly distinguished by his docility in being
mounted, it may be for the first time, upon a shaggy mountain
pony, which he is instructed to urge forward by means of a
branch of holly ; secondly, by his manifesting his thoughts or
feelings, whatever these may be, by uncouth sounds like
" burr," " burr," although he could articulate other words in
imitation, as so often happens in his class, of the cries of
animals; and thirdly, by his obedience or boldness in under-
taking a journey which he had never before performed. It is
almost needless to say that Johnny Foy never reached his destina-
tion ; that his mother, at first animated by the pleasing glow of
having endeavoured to aid a suffering neighbour, became cold
and anxious as the night advanced and no one arrived to relieve
the object of her compassion; that at length alarmed, almost
despairing, she pursued the route which Johnny should have
followed, reached the medical man's residence, but all natural
and maternal feeling having obliterated the purpose of her
journey, she forgets her real object, and meets an inevitable
rebuff. On retracing her weary and anxious steps she finds
that the friend on whose behalf she has been exerting all her
powers, and has encountered such great misfortune, has been
relieved from physical pain by her anxiety and sorrow for the
loss of both her companions. Johnny is subsequently discovered
gazing upon a waterfall which he had to pass on his way, while
his more practical pony is busily engaged in cropping the
grass. The rider is described as free from all fear and
wonder, and as limiting his narrative of his adventures to the
phrases?
The Cocks did crow to-whoo, to-whoo,
And the Sun did shine so cold.
There may have been a subsidiary aim in leading the half-
crazed mother in the search for her lost child through the
woods and wilds which he must have traversed, although in her
preoccupation she could not have seen aught save her precious
idol and his pony, and had she been a real personage would
have passed them by unnoticed, except as landmarks on her
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 25
?way. But the poet saw and traced out the long green glades
along which his homely heroine travelled, skirted by bush and
brake, from which hung in tangled profusion natural garlands
of honeysuckle and woodbine, interrupted occasionally by
glimpses into the deeper and more sombre masses of coppice
from which a solitary fir-tree or a waving birch might rise ;
and all dimly lighted up by rays of moonlight struggling
through the drifting clouds and branches of the trees; nor was
all silence, for the plashing brook which had attracted Johnny
Foy's notice, if not his admiration, relieved the stillness of the
night, and gave its echoes to the woods, mingled with the
" burr," " burr," of the astonished boy, and the plaintive cries
of the night birds.
The author has dedicated one of the books of the "Excursion "
to Despondency, but the sentiment so beautifully delineated is
that shadow or twilight which falls over imaginative and
emotive minds, even when they are healthiest and happiest,
and is a proof of delicacy and refinement of feeling, and of the
nervous temperament, but not of disease. The supposed victim
of this gentle melancholy says :
Syria's marble ruins towering high
Above the sandy desert, in the light
Of sun or moon. Forgive me if I say
That an appearance, -which hath raised your minds
To an exalted pitch (the self same cause
Different effect producing) is for me
Fraught rather with depression than delight,
Though shame it were, could I not look around,
liy the reflection of your pleasure pleased.
A fragment occurs beginning " Her eyes were wild, her head
was bare, the sun has burnt her coal black hair," which might
be interpreted as the complaint and ravings of a maniac, but
is rather the outpourings of a deserted, desolate, aggrieved
woman.
In place of accepting Peter Bell, the wagoner, as a sketch
intended to embody the peculiar views of the writer, it has been
argued that " Nature ne'er could find the way into the heart
of Peter Bell;" that "This Carl as wild and rude as ever hue
and cry pursued, as ever ran a felon's race ; " that " this savage
character," that this brutish, ignorant, and abandoned lout is
intended as a portrait of that mental obtuseness and non-
development of intellect which approximates the man with the
brutes that perish, or with the imbeciles of his own species.
But although
A primrose by a river's brim
A yellow primrose was to him,
And it was nothing more,
let us recollect that if the community were tried by such a
26 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
test our crowded cities as well as the untrodden ways of our
mountain land, or colleges as well as cottages, might be peopled
by Peter Bells. But hypercriticism has pretended to protest
in the exquisite lines " We are seven," the faintest taint or
tinge of infantile feebleness and ignorance, while we recognise
the hand of the great priest of nature tracing the features of
simplicity, innocence and purity.
Melancholia.
In passing through the wards or galleries of an asylum
appropriated to the reception of melancholies, or in examining
a community of the insane where the sounder principle is
pursued of distributing such patients through different wards
or galleries, where they may be roused, interested, soothed, or
solaced by companions labouring under other and different and
antagonistic forms of disease, which may act as anodynes or
counter-irritants to sorrow or suffering; it cannot fail to be
observed that the external manifestations and aspect of this
affection are infinitely varied. We shall there inevitably note
steps and stages of mental disturbance, from the fanciful pen-
siveness of the great conqueror of our age, Napoleon, who loved
darkness and ghost stories, and was " fond of all that leads to
reverie, of Ossian, of the twilight, of melancholy music " (Mad
Remusat) ; onward to blank despair, with all the intervening
links which connect these two extremes of simple depression of
tsedium vitse, of dark moroseness, of hopeless and helpless des-
pondency which admits no ray of hope, of the pale emaciated
victim quivering under fear and foreboding, endeavouring to
injure the person or commit suicide. When it is recollected
that physicians have recognised in this form of insanity?
(1.) Simple melancholia presenting the following symptoms:
?Despondency, or the inability to enjoy; despair or simple
anguish from exaggerated feelings or delusions as to personal
and social condition ; nourishment of sentimentalisation or bliss
of suffering, &c., and that this aspect may be met in children,
in voluptuaries, and wherever exquisite or sensitive feelings
have been pampered or cultivated.
(2.) Hypochondriacal melancholia, where the attention is
directed to self and the body in which self is contained ; exal-
tation of coenesthesis; the misinterpretation of impressions
conveyed to consciousness ; zoomorphoses ; belief in the pre-
sence of fatal or foul diseases ; in the conversion of some portions
of the body into glass or metal; delusions or false sensations
which often induce or are accompanied by actual changes and
degeneration in the parts to which they refer.
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 27
(3.) Religious melancholia presenting remorse, repentance of
crimes never committed ; dread of eternal damnation; in which
trifling events or words are magnified into imaginary and
heinous crimes; such as sin against the Holy Ghost; the dread
of being the object of universal execration, under which voices
proclaim, preachers denounce, newspapers point at, and every
event is a preparation to punish the infamy entailed upon
them ; and this infamy is confessed and the punishment de-
clared to be just.
(4). Mercantile (impecunious) melancholia. This may be
displayed even in the partially healthy by greed, avai'ice, and
the overweening desire for the accumulation of property.
When the mind has lost its balance, there arises a dread of
poverty or absolute destitution, of imaginary debts or obliga-
tions, of an environment of frauds or peculations. These fears
and delusions may afflict the poor as well as the affluent, who,
paralysed by doubts and difficulties, can do nothing to extricate
themselves, and who may positively resort to starvation in order
to prolong life.
Melancholia has been popularly defined to be partial aberra-
tion, moroseness, or depression, or any mental disease not mania
nor fatuity; but it may be more strictly described as a true mono-
mania or partial derangement affecting principally emotions or
sentiments, or a single morbid association of such feelings, or a
single morbid tendency or mental direction of a particular class
of emotional faculties, and these tendencies are sometimes de-
veloped not in speech, not in language, but in acts and conduct.
It is probable, however, that the entire mind may be involved
or influenced by the presence of a single omnipotent sorrow or
shame or doubt or dread ; but be this as it may, and whatever
may be the particular modification of mental pain under which
the sufferer writhes, the features, attitude, deportment, imply
the overruling presence of depression or dejection, although
special differences of expression or conduct may characterise
each individual case. It is accordingly natural, indeed inevit-
able, that observers, and especially imaginative observers, such
as the poets, should portray the physiognomy and the condition
of melancholies in very different terms : and it seems better to
form a catena of a number of such portraits than to limit the
exposition and illustration to the impressions of a single word-
painter. Spenser speaks of this neurosis in the following
lines:?
The knight was much enmoved "with his speech,^
That as a sword's point through his heart did pierce,
And in his conscience made a secret breach,
Well knowing true all that he did rehearse,
And in his fresh remembrance did reverse
28 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
The ugly view of his deformed crimes,
That all his manly powers it did disperse,
As he was charmed with unchaunted rhymes
That oftentimes he quak'd, and fainted oftentimes.
In which amazement, when the miscreant
Perceived him to waver weak and frail,
While trembling horror did his conscience daunt,
And hellish anguish did his soul assail;
To drive him to despair, and quite to quail,
lie shewed him, painted in a table plain,
The damned ghosts that do in torment wail,
And thousand fiends that do them endless pain
With fire and brimstone which for ever shall remain.
The sight whereof so throughly him dismay'd
That nought but death before his eyes he saw,
And ever-burning wrath before him laid,
By righteous sentence of the Almighty's law:
Then 'gan the villain him to overcraw,
And brought unto him swords, ropes, poison, fire,
And all that might him to perdition draw;
And bade him chuse what death he would desire:
For death was due to him, that had provoked God's ire."
Collins, whose " Ode on the Passions " may be legitimately
styled a vividness of exaggerated, and even insane sentiments,
" for madness ruled the hour," writes thus :?
With woful measure wan Despair
Low, sullen, sounds his grief beguiled?
A solemn, strange, and mingled air ;
'Twas sad by fits, by starts 'twas wild.
Wordsworth delineates a less excited, hut perhaps more
painful species of despondency :
Far as she can go
Through time or space, if neither in the one
Nor in the other region, nor in aught
That Fancy, dreaming o'er the map of things,
Hath placed beyond these penetrable bounds,
Words of assurance can be heard ; if nowhere
A habitation, for consummate good,
Nor for progressive virtue, by the search
Can be attained, a better sanctuary
From doubt and sorrow, than the senseless grave.
Eogers depicts despair when mingled with superstition :
Hence, to the realms of night, dire Demon, hence!
Thy chain of adamant can bind
That little world, the human mind,
And sink its noblest powers to impotence.
Wake the lion's loudest roar,
Clot his shaggy mane with gore,
With flashing fury bid his eyeballs shine ;
Meek is his savage, sullen soul to thine !
Thy touch, thy deadening touch, has steeled the breast
Whence, through her April shower, soft Pity smiled ;
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 29
Has closed the heart each godlike virtue blessed,
To all the silent pleadings of his child.
At thy command he plants the dagger deep.
At thy command exults, tho' Nature bids him weep.
Among the gentler and more attractive forms of pensiveness,
is the profound uncontrollable but morbid longing experienced
by mountaineers for their native land ; and so intense was this in
the Swiss that, in order to avoid the risk of rousing the feeling,
the playing of all national airs within the hearing of the
natives of that patriotic Alpine region, who at one time formed
the soldiers of the Royal French Gruard, was strictly prohibited,
as such music induced great excitement, suffering, and irresisti-
ble impulses which tempted to desertion, even to suicide. The
" Ranz des Vaches," or the evening summons to the cattle was
especially prolific in such dire consequences, and was accord-
ingly rigidly interdicted. In the following lines Goldsmith has
indicated the origin and influence of the sentiment:
Where every good his native wilds impart,
Imprints the patriot passion on his heart;
And e'en those ills, that round his mansion rise,
Enhance the bliss his scanty fund supplies.
Hear is that shed to which his soul conforms,
And dear that hill "which lifts him to the storms ;
And as a child, when fearing sounds molest,
Clings close and closer to the mother's breast.
Keats, in his beautiful though rather florid " Ode to Melan-
choly," says :
She dwells with Beauty?Beauty that must die;
And Joy whose hand is ever at bis lips
Bidding adieu; and aching pleasure nigh,
Turning to poison while the bee-mouth sips:
Aye, in the very temple of Delight
Veiled Melancholy has her sovran shrine,
Though seen of none save him whose strenuous tongue
Can burst Joy's grape against his palate fine;
His soul shall taste the sadness of her might,
And be among her cloudy trophies hung.
Bowles, in apostrophising the " Harp and Despair of Cowper,''
says:
But ah! what means that look aghast,
E'en while it seem'd in holy trance,
On scenes of bliss above to glance ?
"Was it a fiend of darkness pass'd!
Oh speak?
Paleness is upon his cheek?
On his brow the big drops stand.
To airy vacancy
Points the dread silence of his eye
And the loved lyre it falls, falls from his nerveless hand I
The night of deeper woes
30 PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS.
Seems o'er the head e'en now to close ;
In vain the path of purity he trod,
In vain, in vain,
He poured from fancy's shell his sweetest hermit strain,
He has no hope on earth?forsake him not, 0 God!
But the most- frightful complication of this malady is where
mania alternates with melancholia, and furious madness becomes
the lash wielded by conscience. In a somewhat rude but
effective ballad-tale Southey has interwoven this combination,
of which we shall give a portion. The victim has either com-
mitted or imagines she has committed infanticide :
There sat a woman on a grave,
And he could not pass her by.
Her feet were bare and on her breast
Through rags did the winter blow,
She sat with her face towards the wind,
And the grave was covered with snow.
" I have fire in my head she answer'd him,
I have fir6 in my heart also;
And there will be no winter time
In the place where I must go!
A curse upon thee, man
For mocking me!" she said ;
And he saw the woman's eyes, like one
In a fever-fit, were red.
Burns, in his " Man was made to Mourn," has shrouded
the world in funeral gloom and grief, and has suggested the
recollection of that universal and epidemic despondency and
despair, fear and foreboding which prevailed in the middle
ages and from which kings, warriors, the strong, and the weak,
the young and the old, fled to monasteries, mountain caves or
hermitages for protection.
Hypochondriacal Insanity.
In framing any scheme of the origin, nature, and connections
or complications of mental diseases, it will be discovered that
many of the forms which these assume not merely closely
resemble each other, but present characteristics or symptoms
which render it difficult to establish a distinct and unapproach-
able diagnosis between them. Notwithstanding the similarity
of designation, no such difficulty can occur in distinguishing
hypochondriacal melancholia from hypochondriacal insanity.
In the former there is deep-seated depression, with complete
prostration of all the powers, both physical and mental. In the
latter there exist proteform delusions, all involving the condi-
tion or shape or structure of the body, creating signal and often
absurd disturbance in the intellect and sentiments, but often
PSYCHOLOGY IN OUR POETS. 31
perfectly compatible with the exercise of manifold personal
functions and social duties. The affection has been ridiculed as a
fancy, a folly, a self-deception, which could be cast off as a foul or
fantastic piece of raiment; but to those who have lived in near
proximity to patients affected with hypochondriasis, who have
narrowly observed their symptoms, the bodily conditions with
which the disease is generally associated and its issue, there
appears to be no unreality in the malady or in the misery to which
its victims may be for years subjected. While endless varieties
may be detected in the anxieties and errors by which such
patients are agitated, they may be legitimately arranged under
two genera. In the one the concentrated attention of the
patient is directed towards the presence of diseases in his own
person which do not exist; while in the other it is fixed upon
changes and transformations which the system has undergone.
The former has been well caricatured by Moliere, who, although
a prosaic poet, was an excellent humourist, in his " Malade
Imaginaire." Argan describes himself, upon the authority of
his physicians, as at the same time labouring under diseases of
the liver and of the kidneys; that he suffers from time to time
under pains in the head; that he suffers from partial blindness ;
that he likewise occasionally suffers from affections of the heart;
that he experiences exhaustion through all his members; and
finally, that he suffers from colic. In combating this host of
internal enemies he is sanctioned by his physician in taking
potage, fowl, veal, boiled beef, fresh eggs, plums to relax the
bowels, and wine well watered (act iii. scene xiv.).
Pope has presented the following ludicrous picture of the
extravagances of the second variety:
Unnumber'd throngs on every side are seen,
Of bodies chang'd to various forms of spleen ;
Here living tea-pots stand, one arm held out,
One bent, the handle this, and that the spout;
A pipkin there, like Homer's tripod walks;
Here sighs ajar, and there a goose-pye talks ;
Men prove with child, as pow'rful fancy works,
And teeming bottles, cry aloud for corks.
