Contribution to the History of the Development of the Humafi Race
==================================================================

By Lazarus (xeiger. Translated by David Asker,
Ph. D. Triibner & Co., London. 1880.
The philological inquiries of Lazarus Geiger have earned for
him a reputation extending not only through the whole of Ger-
many, hut wherever the study of language, in its relations to
13G REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
historical development, has engaged the attention of the scholar
and the investigator. It is therefore a matter for congratulation
that any portion of his literary labours is accessible to English
readers in the mother tongue. The light thrown by philology
on the early efforts of mankind, and of race of men in the path
of progress, proves the intensest interest for modern studies, as
well as being the surest guide towards the ascertainment of
those primary steps of advance which opened up the way for
future civilisation. There is not, probably, at the present time
a single student of science who has not, at some time or other,
felt the intimate connection existing between the growth of
language and the development of those characteristics which
serve to distinguish nations in the aggregate, and likewise the
individuals who go to form them. Observation of the manner
in which the child mind gradually expands, and acquires the
attributes of adult being, tends to demonstrate how closely
ideas are associated with the differences of sound; how
thoughts and actions are at first modified as they are influenced
by the impressions conveyed by names ; and how, further, there
is slowly gained a power of appreciating and weighing the differences that go to form variations in expression and in meaning.

The limited vocabulary of the primitive type is wholly inadequate to the performance of more than the most limited acts
of speech, and also it must have rendered impossible the evolu-
tion of complicated, or even complex, ideas, if, as we are led to
assume, the process of reasoning pre-necessitates the existence of
words as tools. The mode in which these words originated will
probably remain, for all time, a matter of mere conjecture ; the
scornful rejection of theory, whether it be of one kind or an-
other, will do little to place this origin on a certain bads, and
in the existence of differing notions concerning the first growth
of language we may possibly find a good deal to help in the first
apprehension of some view useful in determining the extent of
our personal interest in the larger function of after growth. Too
much attention, it may almost be said, has been devoted to
determining the steps marking the progress of earlier races
along the permanent way of improvement; from the nature of
the only means at hand to assist in this inquiry, there is reason
to think that speculation beyond a certain point must be vain
and profitless; the further back into antiquity we are led, the
less comprehensible are the evidences of it that come to hand ;
indeed, the teaching of Greiger on this head are clear and definite,
and are well worthy of universal acceptation. He avers that" man's
works are always the less recognisable the less artistic they are."
"We might, therefore, just happen to discover, from times which
are the most important to the origin of things, implements in
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 137
which we could not with certainty recognise the human hand that
fashioned them. Besides, it is with these rude productions of
art as with everything that has come into being ; we see them
lie before us, indeed, but they tell us nothing about their origin
or the mental process that preceded it. Hence, to have any
value, the theories of the present should endeavour to explain
the significance of those links that bind the ascertained facts of
observation, links that are presented in profusion to the diligent
student of signs and symbols representative of thought. The
earliest endeavours of men, as well as the most recent attempts
of discoverers and mechanical geniuses, were directed to the
perfection of means for securing personal advantages and
comforts. From the outset of civilisation, and along the whole
course of its growth, development is marked by the creation
of new terms, and extension of the meaning of those already
invented. That language of a primitive kind preceded the
manufacture of tools, of whatever description, must be accepted,
a demand that is in no sense unreasonable since the justice of it
is illustrated by reference to the morphological adaptation
attendant on the development of human over animal structures.
On this head Geiger is so explicit and complete in demonstra-
tion that the whole of a lengthy passage may be quoted; and it
will serve also to show the elegant perspicacity of his reasoning
as evident in the whole volume before us. " On considering
a word denoting an activity carried on with a tool, we shall
invariably find it not to have been its original meaning, but
that it previously implied a similar activity requiring only the
natural organs of man. Let us, e.g., compare the ancient word
mahlen (to grind), eniitile (mill), Latin, molo, Greek, /jlvXtj.
The process, well known from antiquity, of grinding the
grains of the bread fruit between stones, is no doubt simple
enough to be presupposed as practised already in the primitive
period in one form or another. Nevertheless, the word that we
now use for an activity with implements has proceeded from a
still more simple conception. The root mal, or war, so widely
diffused in the Indo-European family of languages, implies ' to
grind with the fingers,' as well as ' to crush with the teeth.' I
would remind you of niordeo, ' to bite,' and the Sanskrit root
mrid, which implies to pulverise and to rub, e.g., one's forehead
with one's hand, of the Greek jjio\vyco, to spread over and soil
with flour, mud, or the like, which may be compared to the
Sanskrit mala, ' soiling,' Gothic mulda, ' soft earth.' On the
one hand fis\as, i black,' on the other, fxaXaKos, mollis, mellow,
belong to this class ; aye, so do even a number of designations
of morass-like fluids, and the word meer (sea). In German, two
different words from cognate roots perfectly coincide in sound.
138 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
The malslen (grinding) of the corn and the raalen (painting)
of pictures. The fundamental meaning of both is to rub or
spread with the fingers ; and an equally close resemblance may-
be found in the designation of these two notions in the Latin
puiso and puigo?
A thorough evolutionist, Greiger is able to explain the
special conformation of man in accordance with the principles
of evolution, and in a way so ingenious that it should commend
itself to the acceptance of every disciple of the great apostle.
He considers that " the figure of man seems to be a decided
indication that the tree must have been his original habi-
tation. His erect gait finds its most natural explanation
in his former climbing mode of life, and from his habit of
clasping the tree in his ascent we can best explain the trans-
formation of the hand from a motory organ into a grasping one,
so that we shall be found to owe to the lowest stage of our
culture that seems credible?our distinguishing advantages?
the free and commanding elevation of our head, and the pos-
session of that organ which Aristotle has called the " tool of
tools." We cannot doubt that the explanation of the gradual
transformation of human activity, contained in the secrets of
philology, is that to which we must trust for the illumination
of the dark pages of man's earlier history; nor can we with-
hold admiration of the luminous demonstrations of the connec-
tion subsisting between words and progress contained in the
lectures of Greiger. He frames always a perfect system of
illustration, which carries the reader, by the certainty of the
conclusions arrived at, to acquiesce unreservedly in the few
unverifiable assertions that are made. In a work of the kind
we are dealing with, it must of necessity happen that demons-
trable proofs are sometimes wanting to complete confirmation,
but in every such case the matter is so presented as to ensure
the weight of probability in favour of the author's views. One
instance of the kind will suffice. Still speaking of the .origin
of tools, Greiger continues : " I do not hesitate to assert that
there must have been a time when man did not possess any
implements or tools, but contented himself to work wholly
with his natural organs ; that there followed a period when he
was already to recognise and use accidentally-found objects
resembling those organs, and by their aid to enlarge, heighten,
and arm the power of his natural tools?e.g., to employ a hollow
shell of a plant as a substitute for the hollow of the hand,
which was the first vessel. Not until after the employment of
these objects that accidentally presented themselves hud become
familiar, did man's creative activity in the shape of imitation
take its rise."
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 139
"The Colour Sense" is the subject of an essay of remarkable
power, and one that will have an especial interest for the
Alienist. The frequent occurrence of impaired visual sensa-
tions among those of unsound mind is a point on which it
would be possible to collect a fund of most valuable informa-
tion, but which, up to the present time, does not appear to have
engaged any very particular attention. The persistence with
which lunatics will adhere to opinions concerning the hues of
common objects; the not uncommon occurrence among them
of inability to perceive more than one, or at least two, primary
colours, and the frequency of a condition not accurately described
as colour blindness, lead one to anticipate that a good deal that
is interesting and might be useful in a scientific sense could be
obtained by a carefully and systematically conducted series of
observations. That " the history of colour sense is of para-
mount importance to the total development of sensation,"
is incontrovertible; and in the admirably clear and succinct
account of the development of the sense given by our author,
there is contained the pith of all that has resulted from years
of laborious investigation. In connection with this subject,
Mr. Grant Allan's invaluable contribution to the philosophical
library of Messrs. Triibner & Co., entitled the " Colour Sense,"
is already well known. The short chapter in Greiger's work
is of course only an indication of the lines on which inquiries
have been pursued, but it is so far complete and in place that
it blends perfectly with its companion chapters in being a step
in the history of man's primitive development. Whether
physiologists will accept the dicta laid down is for them to
determine. The philosophical excellence of the article cannot
be questioned. Alluding to the universal prevalence of de-
ficient colour sensations in the early ages of man's existence,
and the absence in the oldest records we possess in any tongue
of description implying an appreciation of blue, our author
says of Homer and the sightlessness attributed to him, " If,
however, this pathological explanation should apply to Homer
(his individual existence presupposed), many other poets of
antiquity, the whole human race itself, must have been in the
same condition during a whole series of millennia."
"The Origin of Writing," "The Discovery of Fire," also "The
Primitive Home of the Indo-Europeans," are the titles of the
three concluding papers in the volume. Each reflects the best
attributes of a philosophic spirit, and is a model of descriptive
reasoning. Involving, as all these essays do, the consideration of
subjects on which schools are likely to be ever of differing opinions,
it is impossible to withhold a sincere admiration of the calm
and dispassionate, although earnest character pervading them
140 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
throughout. That they will be widely welcomed among
English thinkers, and by all who appreciate the philosophic
utterances of a master mind, is a certain consequence of these
publications.
The addition of this volume to Messrs. Triibner's English
and foreign philosophical library is a wise decision; its tone
and teaching are pre-eminently philosophic ; in execution it is
scientific in the best sense of that comprehensive term; and
the translator of the work, Dr. Asker, has succeeded in ac-
complishing his labour with scholarly excellence. The death
of the author himself is an irreparable loss, but the publication
of his writings will secure for him the best memorial possible
to any worker, viz., admiration of his wondrous powers, and
imitation of his greatest deeds.
(1) The State Asylum for Insane Criminals, Auburn,
New York.?21 st Report.
In the twelve months ending 30th September 1880, a total
of 180 patients were under treatment in the State Asylum for
Insane Criminals at Auburn, New York, and of these 31 were
discharged. It is satisfactory that only three of the latter left
the institution "unimproved;" 14 recovered, 8 were found to
be not insane, 2 underwent improvement, and 4 died. The
causes of death?always important in connection with the
insane?were acute inflammation in three out of the four,
pulmonary consumption accounting for the last. Acute
meningitis is returned as the cause in one case, this being the
only instance noted since the opening of the asylum in 1859.
Appended to the pamphlet is a very valuable table indicating
the results of post-mortem examination of the four patients
who died during the year. The record of the necropsy on the
man referred to, gives under " cause and duration of disorder,"
" two weeks' excitement from being prevented from escaping,"
and the condition of the brain was plainly suggestive of the
diagnosis described. The lung was in a state of tubercular
infiltration, but ulceration of the nodules had not occurred. Bubo
scars were plainly discerned in the groins. The other three cases
are similarly carefully described, and the impression conveyed
by consideration of these tables is that very much highly
valuable information would result from the universal adoption
of the plan followed in this report. The tabular contents of it
are prepared in a like careful and intelligible manner; one of
especial importance gives the probable exciting causes of in-
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 141
sanity of tliose admitted daring the year. Naturally c< confine-
ment in prison" yields the largest proportion, eleven, all male,
having succumbed to the depression thus produced in 1S80, and
a total of 48, amongst them two women, having been affected
thus since September 1875. This is itself an instructive fact,
as showing the greater power of resistance to oppressive in-
fluences possessed by women than by men, a point to which
more attention may be given with advantage. " Unascertained "
causes refer to eight admissions in 1880, and to 47 since 1875.
The death rate at the Auburn Asylum is worthy of note as being
remarkably low. During the year of which this report treats, it
amounted to only 2*18 per cent., a number only one-third the
usual rate in insane asylums. This may, of course, be ascribed
to several favouring causes, but it must, at any rate in part, be
consequent on the excellent medical supervision and sanitary
arrangements enjoyed by the patients.
(2) Twenty-fifth Annual Report of the State Lunatic Asylum,
Northampton, Mass.
The Trustees of the Northampton State Asylum report that
during the year ending September 30, 1880, 559 patients were
under treatment. Eighty-four were discharged, and 29 died.
Of the discharged, 19 were unimproved, 28 recovered, and 23
left improved. The number of admissions for the twelve
months was 117, two having been received twice. The
resources of the hospital are now but just sufficient to accommo-
date the influx of patients from the four western states it is
designed to relieve, and the trustees, in view of future demands,
have prudently reserved a plot of land adjacent to the asylum
grounds on which extensions may, as required, be erected. The
subject of unwise discharge is illustrated in this report, in the
following passage, which carries its own moral:?" Of the seven
persons who had^ previously been treated in the hospital, the
condition upon discharge upon those former admissions was as
follows: one man recovered once ; one man recovered once, and
improved once; and one man much improved once; two
women recovered twice each; one <voman recovered once, and
improved once; and one woman recovered eight times, and im-
proved three times. The whole number of former recoveries in
this hospital, of six of the persons, is fifteen. The same six
persons have now been discharged as recovered a total of twenty-
one times. One of the six?a man?committed* suicide by
drowning about ten months after his discharge."
The following passage is deserving of attention in con-
nection with the question of suicides:?"The death of a
142 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
woman occurred who, a few days before, had climbed over the
baluster of the stairs in the rotunda, and, after hanging a
moment by her hands from the rail of the baluster,
loosed her hold, and dropped to the floor two stories
below. The shock was such that, after lingering nearly
five days in a state of unconsciousness, she died. In the table
above mentioned, her decease is recorded as the consequence of
an injury from a fall. The question is. Was self-destruction
intended ? The reader of this account will undoubtedly answer
' Yes.' But they who best knew the woman as she was while in
the hospital answer, 4 Probably not.' She had never manifested
any propensity to suicide ; but for several days before the fatal
act she had been haunted by an active but vague apprehension
that some one was about to injure her?an undefined suspicion
or sentiment of approaching evil. Those persons who doubt
that she intended suicide believe that the act was performed
upon the impulse of the moment to escape from the hospital,
believing that by so doing she would avoid that imaginary
evil."
Dr. Pliny Earle, on the subject of " recoveries," comments
strongly and fairly on the unsatisfactoriness of existing mea-
sures in regard to the discharge of patients as cured. His
conclusions forcibly point the evil of permitting patients to
whom reason is apparently restored, being allowed on that
account to leave the asylum, and be submitted to the almost
certain risk of a return of their malady, at a time when they
are far removed from the controlling influences which are
alone to be trusted for preserving both them and the public
against the consequences of their insanity. l)r. Earle pub-
lishes, moreover, the history of a remarkable inquiry he has
instituted concerning the meaning of the " cures" reported
from asylums. He deals with a total of 118 cases of insanity
treated in American Hospitals, "and the statistics of which
have been published in the usual manner in the annual report
of those institutions." He then, after analysing the returns
relating to age, sex, and occupation, thus finally concludes of
them:?" On the assumption that my information is correct,
and I have no reason to doubt either its authenticity or its
accuracy, the foregoing tabulated figures are a true representa-
tion, so far as they go, of the history, in relation to insanity, of
three persons, all of them married women. The three women
were admitted to hospitals a total of 118 times, and discharged
as " recovered" (or under some recorded word or words which
signified recovery) 102 times. Having contributed the 102
recoveries to the published statistics of insanity, one of them
died, insane, in a hospital; another died, insane, at home ; and
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 143
the third and last, at the age of 75 years, has entered an alms-
house there to spend the remainder of her days. In the future,
as for many years in the past, so long as she lives, she will
doubtless have from one to two attacks of insanity annually;
and the probability is that she will eventually die insane."'
Advocates of early discharge may profitably digest this passage.
(3; Illinois Eastern Hospital for the Insane.?Second
Biennial Report.
The Illinois Eastern Hospital for the Insane, is a new institu-
tion, as yet but partially completed, situated at Kankakee, 111.
Patients were first received into it on December 4th, 1879,
since which time until October 1880, 116 admissions had taken
place. Out of these 20 were discharged, viz. six recovered,
live much improved, three improved, three stationary, and three
dead. One case of death by drowning is noted, the oc-
currence being declared accidental by the jury before whom
an inquiry was held. New buildings are in course of erection,
and the accommodation said to be required is that for 350
patients, in addition to the provision already existing. The
report by the physician, Dr. R. S. Dewey, is satisfactory of the
present working condition of the asylum, and particular atten-
tion is drawn to the excellent results found to attend the
adoption of a system of non-restraint of patients. Their con-
tentedness, and general condition was markedly influenced by
the amount of freedom in regard to going and coming about
the premises and grounds; restraint and seclusion together
have been used only on sixteen days out of the year, and this
almost entirely for two cases. " When mechanical restraint
was needed in any case, attendants were ordered to report for
instruction to one of the physicians. If its use was allowed,
the physician went to see it applied, and the apparatus used
was required to be returned from the ward as soon as the time
for which it was allowed expired." This proceeding is com-
mendable, as far as it goes, but it might be improved still
further, as in private asylums generally in this country, by the
entire abolition of restraint pure and simple. A useful table
is incorporated with the reports of Dr. Dewey, for recording
^ occurrences, the work, condition of health, variations
ot diet, amount of amusement indulged in, &c., &c., of all the
patients ot a ward. The adoption of the plan in all asylums
won ea to the accumulation of serviceable information with
respect to the discovery of improved principles of treatment,
tScc. lJie medical and statistical tables are carefully and elabo-
ratel} piepaied, and yield a good deal of instructive reading.
