The Life and Literary Remains of Dr. Appleton
===============================================

By John
H. Appleton, M.A., ana U-. II. JSayce, M.A. Triibner
& Co. 1880.
The steady persistence with which the late Dr. Appleton
devoted himself to promoting the cause of scientific progress
entitles him to rank foremost among the benefactors of our
time. His labours were of the kind to bear a rich harvest of
fruit, only the signs of which, however, he was permitted to
witness during his own life. As the years roll on, and the
example he set is followed by successors in the path he trod, we
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 133
shall see more and more clearly the inestimable value of the
measures he was almost the first to insist on. In an important
sense he was the pilot of advance, for to him we owe it that
research is now fully recognised in this country, as that to
which we must chiefly trust for extending the limits of our
knowledge in every direction. The " Endowment of Eesearch "
is something to which a definite and practical meaning is at-
tached in the present; it is a means whereby we are enabled to
secure and strengthen our position in the field of discovery ; and,
above all, the phrase has become established as the appropriate
designation of a duty to be discharged by the state in its role
of guardian of the national interests. It is not too much to
assert that this good result is entirely due to the indomitable
perseverance of a single individual. To Dr. Appleton must
ever be ascribed the honour and the glory of vindicating the
dignity of scientific inquiry, and pressing its recognition on all
sides as the essential element in every intellectual advance. The
record of such a man's life and works cannot fail to be absorb-
ingly interesting; and the volume in which this is presented
is a noteworthy addition to Messrs. Triibner & Co.'s English
and Foreign Philosophical Library.
Dr. Appleton's special studies led him into criticism of
philosophical systems, and to the discussion of those problems
intimately associated with the speculations of philosophical
thinkers. Hence we do not inherit from him so much in the
way of original ideas, as might have been the case had he been
spared to develop the schemes suggested by his examination of
schools of thought. He has bequeathed to posterity only a few
suggestive works, but the rich promise of their excellence will
engender poignant regret that the fulfilment of the intentions
they indicate is rendered impossible by the lamented death of
their author. " What is the Ego ? " A series of two essays on
" Strauss as a Theologian," and " A Plea for Metaphysic," are the
most important remnants contained in the work before us.
This had been intended to form part of a comprehensive study
of the bases of metaphysics, and, had it been completed by its
author, would have assumed a prominent place among the
philosophical treatises of the period. As it is, enough is pre-
sented to show the precision with which the subject would have
been pursued; and even in its present incomplete forms it will
be accepted as a painstaking examination of the essential
differences which separate modern philosophers. The method
of the undertaking is explained by Mr. Sayce in his " Intro-
duction," who describes Dr. Appleton as believing "that the
knowledge and experience of each age is summed up in one
dominant idea, which it is the business of the metaphysician to
134 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
discover, analyse, and define. The dominant ideas form a
series, connected together, not like the links of a chain, but by
a slow process of growth and evolution. The metaphysician
may pause at any one point in the ? series, and regard all that
has gone before as a single whole or organism, the development
of which may be traced and determined. The dominant idea of
any one age accordingly contains within itself the dominant
ideas of the ages that have preceded it, and can best be studied
in the works of a literary genius who represents and embodies
the ideas and aspirations of his own time. The zeit-geist or
spirit of the nineteenth century breathes through the writings
of men like Matthew Arnold or Kenan; it has been clothed by
them with literary form, and given, as it were, material
shape." This conception of philosophies has an attraction,
where once adequately grasped, that is singularly powerful in
holding the mind of the student; it imparts a living interest
to each separate stage of progress, and surrounds the details of
development in the past with almost as great a meaning as is
contained in the difficulties of more recent conquest. We can-
not too keenly regret the loss of that spirit that would have
presented us with the consecutive history of all philosophies as
leading to the ultimate evolution of a one grand embracing
system, nor with the fragments of demonstration that remain
can we doubt the comprehensive fulfilment of the project,
had not death intervened to prevent it. " The one key
to all these metaphysical ideas is development;" this is the
note that is sounded in every page of Appleton's remains.
This is the guide that he persistently followed; and that it will
lead, whoever accepts it in spirit and in truth, to the appre-
hension of all that is vital and essential in the conception of the
past, and its application to unravel the mysteries of the present,
is surely beyond all doubt. The conflicting claims of meta-
physicians bid fair to erect formidable obstacles against future
advance along the path of knowledge?unless there can be a
more or less universal adjustment of differences?serious enough
to cause a fear lest they should result in irreparable injury to
the c;iuse of progress. To harmonise and associate the views of
differing schools is the work that might have been accomplished
had Appleton's labours progressed to completion. In a series of
notes left by him, on " The Development of Ideas," the fifth
defines "development by absorption, where each stage is
absorbed into the folLowing, as in the progress of metaphysics,
the several stages being preserved as such in literature, but
becoming sterile, and so possessing only a historical importance."
This may be taken as an accurate description of the process
illustrated throughout Dr. Appleton's writings on metaphysical
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. - 135
subjects ; and where not openly expressed, it at least serves to
suggest the manner of his demonstrations. All that is good in
theories of the past we preserve, as far as possible, in schemes of
the present; but as the opinion of each man varies on points of
cardinal importance, so do we necessarily find that no age will
present two thinkers who will be in agreement concerning the
indispensable data of a bygone time. The colouring given to
thought by change in the manner of appreciating details from
other sources than their own immediate understanding, must of
necessity exert an important influence over the character and
extent of particular decisions. It was Dr. Appleton's aim and
endeavour to emancipate himself from every narrowing restric-
tion of this kind. Earnest study of all types and all fulfilments
of philosophic ideal he unstintingly gave, but strove always to
become the critic rather than the adherent of that which
engaged his attention. The difficulty of such a proceeding is
by 110 means inconsiderable, and it is saying that which is the
highest praise that can be bestowed, to assert that the task he
set himself he accomplished.
Perhaps one of the most important acts of Dr. Appleton's
life was the foundation of the " Academy", in 1869. First a
monthly, then a fortnightly, it subsequently became a weekly
literary review ; and it says no little for the energy and
indomitable perseverance of its originator, that since the time
of its first appearance it has never, for a single number, lost the
character he impressed on it of being a high-class, reliable, and
thoroughly honest publication ; struggles it undoubtedly had
to go through, but it has never ceased to be what Appleton
intended, and made it, and we trust it may long preserve its
place in the world of literature.
As the life of an earnest thinker, of strong convictions,
unswerving purpose, and unflagging industry, Mr. Appleton's
memoir of his brother is inestimably valuable by the example
it affords. The remaining portion of the book reflects the best
thoughts of an accomplished scholar, and an eager truth-seeker.
The lament of every reader of this volume will be that so little
remains of him who, had he but lived, would surely have done
so much.
