Transference of Special Sense
==============================

37 Art. III.?
BY J, G. DAVEY, M.D.r Bristol.
The annexed case I have cliosen to name "Transference of
Sense." It will be seen to be one in which the phenomena of
clairvoyance are plainly demonstrated; and these are shown by
the antecedents of the patient to have occurred spontaneously,
and to exist independently of the employment of any prior
and artificial means, to which such are, as a general rule, to be
referred. Clairvoyance is now known as the outcome of a rare
condition of the nervous system?a condition which may have a
spontaneous origin, or be induced in the ordinary way by the
successful manipulator or " mesmeriser " : it may be, in other
words, either subjective or objective. In Mrs. Croad, as her
medical history shows, or her antecedents reveal, the con-
dition is simply subjective. The cause of her " transference of
sense"?or, what is the same thing, her clairvoyance?is altogether
within herself; and this cause, like any other cause, produces its
special effects ; such are described in the following recital.
Dr. William Gregory, in the second edition of his " Animal
Magnetism," confesses to have once doubted the existence of
" spontaneous clairvoyance " in others than the somnambule; but
his opinion in regard to this matter underwent, as it appears, a
material change. In chapter 5 of the book just named, he has
treated of spontaneous clairvoyance as an undoubted fact; as
one occurring from time to time, and not as a sequence of " the
process for causing mesmeric sleep." The case of Mrs. Croad is
very closely allied to " animal magnetism," or " mesmerism"
(so-called), whether or not artificially induced. I would add that,
in spite of the weigiit of evidence in favour of the facts
reported, not a few of the younger medical men in this good city
of Bristol declare that " mesmerism " and " clairvoyance " exist
not in a morbid imagination?but in the minds of the credulous ;
and this much in spite of the asserted and practical conclusions
to the contrary of some ten or twelve of their more experienced
and larger-minded seniors, let alone many more outside the
profession, who have kindly accepted my invitations to see Mrs.
Croad when tested in the severest manner. A few medical and
other friends are content to include my patient with the ordinary
blind, and to affirm (what is in no sense true) " that some clever
* Read before the Bath and Bristol branch of the British Medical Association,
January 20, 1881.
38 TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE.
blind people have the power of detecting colours by the touch."
The officials at the Bristol Blind Asylum tell me that " after an
experience of the blind, extending' over some twenty and thirty
years, they have not been able to find the remotest trace of any
such power " as that so plainly demonstrated in this present case.
It was in the year 1857 that the late Dr. Gr. Wilson, of
Edinburgh, gave to the world a small book known as " The
Five Gateways of Knowledge." To these he, following the ex-
ample of the famous John Bunyan, gave the names Ear-gate,
Eye-gate, Mouth-gate, Nose-gate, and Feel-gate. These gate-
ways we recognise as the " organs of the senses," and call them
by the several names of the eye, the ear, the nose, the mouth,
and the skin. Such are the instruments by which we see, hear,
smell, taste, and touch. " Such," writes Dr. Gr. Wilson, " are
at once loopholes through which the spirit"?whatever that
may be?" gazes out upon the world, and the world gazes in
upon the spirit."
Now these several instruments or loopholes are liable to
accidents and to various diseased conditions, the effects of which
we see realised in the blind, the deaf, and the paralysed. How-
ever, it is with the eye?"the light of the body," "the most
honoured of the organs of the senses," so called by the poet?
that this paper deals. It concerns me, this evening, to call
your attention to the rare, the very remarkable case of a female
who for many years past has been recognised as sightless, as
blind, whilst in the possession of a sense of touch so exceptional
and intensified as to enable her to perceive? and, perceiving,
to describe with more or less accuracy?pictures of various
kinds and photographs when placed in her right hand. In
Mrs. Croad we have an instance of the sense of touch standing
largely in the place of vision?a case wherein " wisdom, though
at one entrance is quite shut out," has found a substitute,
the particulars of which must claim from us a careful and
painstaking consideration. The antecedents of this much-
afflicted person are these. Born in 1840, she is said to have
passed through the greater part of childhood with fair health.
On the occurrence of puberty she had attacks from time to
time of syncope?very probably of the hysterical kind. At the
early age of 19 she married. Five years afterwards she had a
fall, when the spine was said to be injured. To this accident
succeeded epilepsy, attacks of which occurred almost daily
during four months. It was at this time, or near to it, that
she lost a child?it was scalded to death. The shock then sus-
tained by her appears to have been unusually severe and pro-
tracted. The lower extremities gave signs of great weakness,
and became, at length, powerless or paralytic; whilst, as a con-
TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE. 39
sequence or attendant on a chronic gastric affection, she is said
to have lost " all power to partake of or digest solid food." Her
condition in 1866 is described as pitiable in the extreme. The
frequent fits, the lost motive power, and the impairment of the
general health led to her becoming " bedridden." So she has
remained to this time (1880), a period of fourteen years. In
1870, it is stated, "she became totally blind "; in the following
year deaf, and in 1874 speechless. The pai'alysis, which was
limited to the lower extremities, involved, in 1879, the upper
limbs; but at this time the loss of sensation and motion is
limited to the left arm, the fingers and thumb of the left hand
being but partially affected. The right hand and arm have
recovered their once-lost functions. She is now able to
articulate, though with difficulty, from, as it appears to me, a
tetanic rigidity of the temporal and masseter muscles, by which
the mouth is kept, to a large extent, fixed and closed. It was
in October last that I was asked to see Mrs. Croad. I found her
sitting in a semi-recumbent position on a small bedstead, her
head and shoulders resting on pillows. The eyelids were fast
closed, and the left arm and hand resting by the side. The
knees I found then, as they are still, bent at an acute angle,
the heels closely pressed to the under and upper parts of the
thighs. As she was suffering from a cold and general indis-
position, I delayed then any particular investigation of her case,
other than that associated with her temporary indisposition?
that is to say, I preferred not to go into those matters, so rare
and peculiar, and with which her name has become so famous
in Clifton and elsewhere. Since October, and through the
months of November and December, 1880, I have subjected
Mrs. Croad to many and various tests with the view of satisfying
myself as to the truth or otherwise of the statements given
to the world of her blindness, sense of touchT and marvellous
sympathies.
To my near neighbours?Drs Andrews and Elliot?I am
much indebted. The various tests referred to were witnessed
by them in my presence, and with the effect of assuring us that
she (Mrs. Croad) was and is enabled to perceive, through the
aid only of touch, the various objects, both large and small, on
any given card or photograph. After an experience extending
over some nine or ten weeks, during which the " tests " were
many times repeated, and, now and then, in the presence of
several medical and non-medical (ladies and gentlemen) friends,
there remained (I believe) not the least doubt of this " trans-
ference of sense" from the eyes of Mrs. Croad to her fingers
and the palm of her right hand. It need not to be supposed
that I and others were content to believe in Mrs. Croad's blind-
40 TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE.
ness and to take 110 specific precautions against any possible
trick or deception?far from this. On solicitation, she very
kindly assented to be blindfolded, after a very decided fashion;
and so blindfolded that neither deception on her part nor pre-
judice nor false judgment on ours were?either the one or the
other?possible. The blindfolding was accomplished thus: a
pad of cotton wool being placed on each orbit; the face was
then covered by a large and thickly-folded neckerchief;
this was tied securely at the back part of the head, and?even
more than this?more cotton wool was pushed up towards the
eyes, on either side of the nose. Not content, however, the aid
of two fingers of a bystander were called into requisition, and
with these a continued pressure was kept up, during the
"testing" outside and over the neckerchief and wool and
above the closed eyes. At this stage of the proceedings the
room was, on two different occasions, very thoroughly darkened.
Under such circumstances it was the testing commenced,
and continued to the end; the result being, as theretofore, in
the highest degree, conclusive and satisfactory. The transfer-
ence of sense from one organ to another as an acquired and
spontaneous condition of being must, on the evidence here
adduced, be accepted as a demonstrated and certain fact. I
would state here, that on receiving a picture card or a photo'
from a bystander she (Mrs. Croad) places it on and about the chin
or mouth, and perhaps draws it across the forehead, but the
minute examination of the card is, apparently, the work of the
fingers of the right hand. These several acts are, for the most
part, followed by a quiet and intense thought, a well-marked
concentration of mind on the picture or whatever it may be,
when, after a short time, she writes on a slate kept near her, a
description?sometimes a full and detailed one?of the card, its
colouring and the several objects thereon. I have seen some
forty or fifty picture-cards and photographs described by Mrs.
Croad at different times with various degrees of accuracy,
during the whole period I have known her. Occasionally her
rapid and precise perception, or, if you prefer the word, con-
ception, of the picture, and of the many yet minute and trifling
objects going to form its entirety, is really startling. I have
but seldom seen her wholly at fault, though she has met with
her failures.
So far I have dwelt only on one, but that one the principal,
as I conceive, of Mrs. Croad's rare powers ; yet do there remain
other facts of her case to which I must now draw your atten-
tion. The description of the mode in which she is communicated
with?she being blind or blindfolded, as already described?is
thus given in the words of her biographer (Mr. Westlake):
TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE. 41
" It is done simply by writing with the finger on her face,
which is so sensitive that it receives and transmits to the brain
the slightest movements of the finger, whether moved up or
down, across, or in any direction. If circumstances are favour-
able it appears impossible to write too fast for her to
understand." Now in this there is not, as I conceive, very much
remarkable; a small measure of experience proves the easy
acquirement of this same " sensitiveness " of the nerves of the
face and its transmission to the brain ; but much remains to be
said in connexion with this, as a mode of communication
between Mrs. Croad and her daughter. Sitting quietly by or
near to Mrs. Croad, my attention has been again and again
riveted on the manner in which Miss Croad holds com-
munion with her mother. Miss Croad does very certainly
move her fingers over and about the face of her mother, but few,
if any, letters or words are formed by her. Watching her very
narrowly on several occasions, I felt at length assured that Miss
Croad's communications were altogether unlike those made by
either visitors or friends. The latter named formed letters,
and with these words, and so conversed?if the expression be
allowed?with Mrs. Croad ; but it is not so with her daughter.
Impressed with the fact as above stated, I spoke to Miss Croad
of it, when she told me that as the rule it was requisite
simply that she put herself in a close or personal contact with
her mother to convey to her what was wished, or to give
her a knowledge of this or that, as the case may be. Now so
marked a mental sympathy or concordance as this is altogether
without or outside the experience of most of us; and it is
therefore well worthy the attention of those present who have
the courage to investigate, what I may well call, unorthodox
medicine. But to this matter I must again refer farther on,
or in the remarks to follow on the whole case.
Further, Mrs. Croad is said to have the additional power to
detect as it were by sympathy, or by a community of ideas and
feeling, any letter written by a friend of hers and put into her
hands by a third party. This I know, on receiving a letter
some weeks since from Dr. Maclean, of Swindon, I took it
forthwith to her. On receiving it from me she exclaimed,
" Oh, from my dear Doctor Maclean ! "
It is said also by those near and dear to her that such is
Mrs. Croad's prevision that she has been known to have foretold
my own visits to her; what I mean is, that on my approach to
the house she occupies and when at a distance from it, and un-
seen by anyone about her?in fact, not within sight?she has
said, " Dr. Davey is coming; he will be here directly." I
confess to a difficulty in either believing or comprehending
42 TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE.
this. If such prevision or prescience is really within the capa-
city of the human organism, we, of all others, have much to
learn in respect to the nervous system in man and animals.
However, I learn by letter from my friend Dr. Maclean, that
in the early part of his medical career he had a patient of the
hysterical type who displayed a like lucidity.
So much then for the main or principal facts of a singular
case. It remains for me to offer for your consideration
remarks on these facts. Now, I shall treat the subject
in hand from a Physiological stand-point. Of matters super-
natural, or of forces outside nature, I know nothing. If any
one here expects me to discourse or speculate on the immaterial,
the metaphysical, he will be disappointed : for this single and
sufficient reason, I believe in nothing of the kind. As a mate-
rialist I hold that' to degrade matter as is now done, to regard
matter as else than the main-spring?the only direct and suffi-
cient cause of each one and all the vital phenomena?else than
the ever-potent force at work in and through both the organic
and inorganic worlds: and as such doomed, in virtue of natural
law, to realise, ever and anon, that sublime adaptation of means
to the end, at once sustaining, perfecting, and all-wise: so, I
say, to degrade matter, is to stem the tide of truth, of progress,
and humanity. Matter and force stand now, as they have ever
done and will continue to stand, in the near relation to eachi
other of cause and effect, and so it is they cannot be separated
from each other. It is for us to duly appreciate this fact. Now
the condition of Mrs. Croad is one in which we see in operation
a principal of our common organism; that one known as the
" law of compensation." In a state of health the various
organs of this body of ours may be said to realise a state of
equilibrium. In the exercise of the many functions?which,
united in the individual, constitute his life?each one function
aids every other, and with the effect of securing both health and
comfort 4 o man. If from any cause (subjective or objective)
this same equilibrium is disturbed or, what is the same thing,
this mutual aid is interfered with, then does ill-health and dis-
comfort follow. In this case are seen to arise certain salutary
efforts of our nature, the outcome only of our material compo-
sition, i.e. the organism designed to establish or to ensure the
required relief by the law of compensation. Those of you who
have resided in a tropical country will remember the effect
on the kidneys of removal to the colder atmospheres of the
hill-tops from the high temperature of the valley or sea-
side. The skin is then rendered pretty nearly inactive
whilst the kidneys may be said to be in a state of hyperesthesia.
We all know the effects of meredis-use, of accident and disease,
TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE. 43
confined to one side of the body, or to one limb, or to one eye,
on the other the normal side of the body?the other limb or 'eye,
and so on. These are, very evidently, to increase the functional
power of the used limbs and the sound eye, &c. Here, again, we
recognise the " law of compensations." But the same law is ever
active in man and animals; and not only so, but it runs through
the whole of the vegetable kingdom. Standing at the bedside,
the really practical man can scarcely fail to see it in opera-
tion day by day. Dr. Budd, of Clifton, the inheritor of a lost
father's genius, has very recently called the attention of the
medical world to the law just named. He is said to have pro-
pounded a new pathological doctrine resting on this law as a
basis sure and true. It is asserted that, by tying the ureters,
uric acid and its compounds may be demonstrated " in the
connective tissue corpuscles." Certainly this fact favours Dr.
Budd's views in so far as it affords evidence of " the law of com-
pensation ; " and as such I accept it, and in connection, too, with
the case now being considered. In the lower animals, as the
horse and dog, we see this famous law operate. The careful
stepping of the horse when not duly shod, or when not roughed,
is to the point, and indicates the extra demands or strain put,
upon the sense of sight. The conduct of a blind horse or dog,
the mode in which such are led to seek their food, and to
perform other sundry acts of their kind, are evidence clear and
undoubted of the higher claims made on the senses of smell and
touch. Truly, indeed, does the poet affirm?
Nothing in this world is single;
All things by a law divine
In one another's being mingle.
It has been suggested that Plato had some dim forecast of this
when he taught that the world was a huge animal; and others,
since Plato, when they conceived the universe to be the mani-
festation of some transcendent life, with which each separate
individual life was related, "as parts are to the whole."
However, in the 21st Eeport of the Directors of Hart-
ford Asylum are seen the particulars of one Julia Brace,
who became both blind and deaf at the age of five,
and in whom it was observed that in proportion as her
sight and hearing were lost, so her sense of smell became
" wonderfully acute." In the said report we read that: " She
has been frequently known to select her own clothes from a
mass of dresses belonging to 140 persons. . . . Her manner is
to examine each article by feeling, but to decide upon it by the
sense of smell; and in regard to her own things she never
errs. . . . She has been frequently known to discriminate,
merely by smelling them, the recently-washed stockings of the
boys from those of the girls at the asylum."
44 TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE.
The " law of compensation," though an accepted fact, leaves
us very much in the dark in so far as the transference of sense
in Mrs. Croad is concerned. Strange, that the loss of sight in
her, the consequence of disease?or, if you will, the mere blind-
folding of her?as already described, should beget or involve so
very exalted a condition of the sensory nerves of the right upper
extremity as to beget a state of things in any way equivalent to
vision. What is there in the eye itself, or in its evolution
through the lower forms of animal life, to help us to a con-
clusion at all satisfactory ? Is it true, as asserted by an eminent
and modern writer, that " we see very much by the aid of our
fingers " ? Let us examine the basis or grounds of this very bold
assertion. Can these elucidate in any degree the case of Mrs.
Croad ?
Now, it is known that, in the words of the late Dr. GTeorge
Wilson, many living creatures have no eyes. The star-fishes
have, he affirms, " mere sensitive points, by means of which
they perceive neither colours nor forms, but are dimly conscious
of light and darkness." In the sea-side studies of the late
Gr. H. Lewes we are told much of deep interest concerning the
eyes of marine animals. " The molluscs," he says, " like the
heathen idols, have eyes for the most part, yet see not; never-
theless, unlike the heathen idols, they are endowed with these
organs for no make-believe, but for specific purposes. . . .
Molluscular vision is not human vision, nor, in accurate know-
ledge, is it vision at all; it is not seeing, but feeling. . . .
It is not a perception of objects, but a sensation of light and
darkness." Lewes declares that in the doris, eolis, and in the
pleurobranchus the eyes are underneath the skin and rest on the
brain (ccsophogeal ganglia), attached thereto by a micro-
scopic nerve." The same skin, bear in mind, is without an
aperture, as in man, and through which, in him, the rays of
light fall directly on the eye; " so that," says Lewes, " in spite
of pigment, lens, and nerve, the essential parts of a visual
organ, vision is utterly impossible ; as you may conceive your-
self," he playfully adds, " even with your own admirable eyes,
if the lids are obstinately closed over them." Now, although
these eyes of the doris, &c., are incompetent to vision, must
they not be regarded as the " early stages of that marvellous
and complex function " ? Bear in mind, that for a period of
many years the eyelids of Mrs. Croad have been persistently
closed by, as it would seem, a spasmodic or involuntary action of
the muscular structures thereto attached. In her there is no
aperture or apertures?unless you make such by your own act,
i.e. unless you pull the eyelids apart. The eyes of the molluscs
named above may be said to be in a state of evolution?to have
TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE. 45
reached a stage, though a low one, of development. Such eyes
are indeed special organs for the reception of luminous influ-
ences?enabling the animal to distinguish light from dark-
ness, not only in the general way, like a blind man conscious
of a change in temperature in passing from sunlight into shade,
but also in the special way of minute local variations, such
as are caused by the shadows of near objects. If, then, the
position taken by Lewes be accepted, " the eye is a tactile
organ, and that what we call vision is," as he has affirmed, " a
combination of sensations of touch; and of temperature of a
certain kind." Those acquainted with these recent investigations
in regard to the eye and its functions, know well that the opinion
is gaining ground that " images are not formed on the retina
and cannot, therefore, be transmitted as " images " to the brain.
It is affirmed that the thing transmitted is simply a sensation,
or a group of sensations, excited by what is called the " image."
After a very elaborate argument " against the retina as the
receiving screen of images, and in favour of the pigment layer,"
upon which Lewes asserts " the varied images of external
objects are painted, the effect being to raise its temperature,
whilst at the same time they (the varied images) become extin-
guished, but not before such a local disturbance of temperature
lias arisen as to cause the act of vision to commence," Lewes
concludes his argument by declaring that, in the words before
quoted, " ive see very much by the aid of our fingers:" words
which, if put in a milder form, would mean that light or vision
is the product of " a sensation or a group of sensations."
In connexion with the preceding remarks it may be stated
here that, as it is with the lower forms of animal life, so it is
with the genus homo. Even to this time the law of evolution
is not infrequently arrested in its onward march ; and
evidences of the same are seen in the eye itself, including, of
course, the whole organism of man and beast. It was in
1836 that I saw a child which was born with no eyes; but in
the orbits I found (post mortem) some loose cellular tissue, in
the centre of which was seen what was considered as the
rudiments, or beginnings, of eyes. The case is to be seen in
the Lancet at the period named. Not unlikely the orbits of
this poor child contained the eyes?so to call them?of some
mollusc or star-fish; or, it may be, of some unknown or even
extinct form of life. Now, arrests of development are common
enough; no single organ of the body can be held as exempt
from such "monstrosities"; it is equally true that each organ,
although duly evolved or perfected, may slowly, yet surely,
degenerate or fall away from its original perfectibility, and so
realise, step by step, the lower organism of an invertebrate,
46 TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE.
or even of the mollusc. Have not the eyes of Mrs. Croacl so
degenerated or fallen away from their once original or normal
condition ? Have they not within these several years gone
passed through a degenerative process?one which may be even
now in progress ? It should be known that during the early
years of her blindness it is recorded that her eyes remained
open; the eyelids were wide apart, but they are now closed and
fixed, as are those of the doris, eolis, &c. Assuming Mrs. Croad's
blindness to be at this time complete, may it not be concluded
that the requisite "sensations or group of sensations" (Lewes)
are not transmitted onwards to her brain; and because only
the " necessary combination of tactile sensations with sensa-
tions of light" is absent, or non-existent; to use the words
of Lewes. But I confess to be unable to unravel satisfactorily
the large amount of mystery attaching to this case; and
therefore it is I desire?as I really do?your co-operation or
assistance.
It was said, ycu know, by Empedocles, that when matter
assumed shape there were many irregular forms which could
only partially sustain themselves, and which only slowly attained
forms adapted to certain ends. The application of these words
to the eye will directly occur to you, and when taken in con-
junction with the following sentence from Darwin's great work
" On the Origin of Species," will add greatly to their interest,
if nothing more. " The most perfect organ in the body," writes
Darwin, "is the eye; it is the gradual development of a simple
sensitive nerve, which having arrived at its actual condition
by numerous imperfect gradations, is yet susceptible of a much
greater development before arriving at the greatest perfection "
in man. That which Empedocles thought some 2,000 years since,
and Darwin has taught and is yet teaching, appears certain ;
what has been and is will ever be. Who ventures to doubt
that?in the words of Dr. Louis Biichner?" what is at this time
existing in the world are the remains of an infinite number of
beginnings."
All nature widens upward. Evermore
The simpler essence lower lies;
More complex is more perfect, owning more
Discourse, more widely wise.?Tennyson.
To revert to the immediate subject of this paper, and to get
at the real condition of the nervous system of Mrs. Croad,
or such parts of it as beget the rare transference of sense
witnessed in her, I would refer you to the experiments of
Spallanzani, made on the bat. " How," Spallanzani asked
himself, " do these creatures make their nests here in the pitchy
darkness, and how do they move here so swiftly, and with
TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE. 47
perfect self-possession. It cannot be by eyesight. Their very
small eyes may be of some service to them when they are
catching the small soft insects in the open air in the dusk of
the evening, but can be of no use to them here." Spallanzani
had several of these bats caught, and on examining them care-
fully he found that the thin membranous structure constituting
their wings was " full of small streaks or threads," or nerves of
extreme sensitiveness. The next step he took was the destruc-
tion of the eyes of the animals; and having placed a number
of strings across a room, and suspended many more from the
ceiling?"he then introduced a swarm of flies, and let the
mutilated bats loose in the same apartment, and watched
them." The result of the experiment is told in these words : ?
" The bats caught the flies rapidly, shunning every string with
the utmost dexterity never touching a single string, because
aware of their whereabouts by the nerves in their wings. They
felt but without touching?as you and I feel?only their
sense or power of perception is more intensified," and so much
so as to be independent of anything like vision. Without
eyes the bats felt, and feeling, perceived the flies ; and bear in
mind it is without the sight, or blindfolded, that Mrs. Croad
perceives or conceives the objects on the picture-cards and
photographs.
These appended remarks?designed to explain or account,
in some slight measure, for the preceding facts?in a rare
and abnormal form of suffering, or in a case altogether excep-
tional?would be wanting in completeness if I failed to allude
yet again to what I have in a preceding page called " a marked
mental sympathy or concordance " as between Mrs. and Miss
Croad as shown or realised in the mode of communication prac-
tised by Miss Croad, and the results thereof. We have the
authority of Miss Croad thus far?she affirms that, as the rule,
it is requisite simply that she put herself in a close or per-
sonal contact with her mother, to convey to her what she
wished, or to give her a knowledge of this or that, as the
case may be. Can we well doubt that this fact?if it be a
fact?is to be explained only by the occurrence, at certain
times, and under circumstances more or less rare, of what is
called " thought reading," or " community of ideas and sensa-
tions," as between the mother and daughter? Now, the question
arises?What relation, if any, does the said "thought read-
ing," or " sympathy," or " community of ideas and sensations,"
hold to the " transference of special sense," from the blinded
eyes of Mrs. Croad to her fingers and her thumb of the right
hand ? It should be borne in mind that during the use of
the tests, as already described?i.e. the blindfolding and
48 TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE.
padding, &c.?Miss Croad stood or sat, as a very general rule,
on the left of her mother and very close to her; in fact, the
head of Mrs. Croad reclined on the right shoulder of her
daughter, to say nothing of the frequent, though temporary,
contact of the fingers of Miss Croad with the cheek of
her mother. In what relationship, if any, did such close
and personal contact of these two persons stand to the strange
perceptive power already explained in regard to the picture-
cards and photographs, &c. ? Was the said contact the cause
or source in any degree of the lucidity or clairvoyance mani-
fested by Mrs. Croad, -and witnessed over and over again by
so many ? It has been suggested that Miss Croad did, in
some strange way, convey to her mother during the testing
a knowledge of the cards &c., the objects represented on them,
their colours, &c. Well, the suggestion was acted on: the
same testing, on being again and again repeated, and in the
absence of Miss Croad from the room occupied by her mother,
proved altogether and conclusively in favour of Mrs. Croad.
The same evidence of the same " transference of special sense "
from the eyes to the digits was always forthcoming.
We are bound, then, to conclude that the "transference"
was, or is, altogether independent of any kind of influence
imparted by Miss Croad to her mother, and that the existence
of the same in Mrs. Croad is due to what is called " clair-
voyance." To her being in the same condition must be
referred, also, the detection of the letter?already mentioned?
sent by Dr. Maclean to myself, as well as the strange prevision
occurring occasionally in her, and whereby she anticipates my
own approach to her residence.
As a further illustration of Mrs. Croad's peculiar and clair-
voyant gifts, it should he stated that at my second interview
with Mrs. Croad, and in the presence of Dr. Andrews and
others, certain of my own personal and private convictions on a
particular subject became, as it would seem, in a strange and
exceptional manner, known to Mrs. Croad. She asked me if I
would allow her to tell me a secret in my own life history, and
would I be offended if she wrote it on her slate. I replied
" No." That written on the slate was and is a fact, than which
nothing could or can be more truthful and to the point. Dr.
Andrews is prepared to verify this; the others present on this
occasion were but little known to me.
By the above personal experience I am reminded of the
very remarkable case of Lschokke, the celebrated Swiss novelist.
In him the spontaneous occurrence of what the late Dr. W.
Gregory (Professor of Chemistry in the University of Edin-
burgh) has called "sympathetic retrovision," was well known.
TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE. 49
He frequently found himself, as he has described in his works,
possessed of a perfect memory of the past life of the person he
was speaking to; and it is on record that on one occasion he
confounded a sceptic who defied him, by declaring to him cer-
tain passages of his past life known to himself alone, and such
as he could not have wished to be known to others. This was
done in a large company.
In strict connection with the foregoing, and withal the
outcome, I should say of "sympathy," of a specific kind, is the
effect of music on Mrs. Croad. Her biographer (Mr. Westlake)
writes, at page 22 of the " Service of Suffering," that " though
quite deaf she (Mrs. Croad) can perceive and appreciate
harmony; no greater pleasure can be given her than for some
friend or friends to take her hand and sing to her. She will
whistle a second treble most accurately as the tune is being
sung, and at other times she will join in the air." The fact is
of value, inasmuch as it goes to show that the general condition
of Mrs. Croad is one not unlike that manifested by many
persons when under the influence of mesmerism?so-called?or
when hypnotised. Dr. W. Stirling (Professor of the Institutes of
Medicine of the University of Aberdeen) tells us in a pamphlet
but very recently published, entitled " On Animal Magnetism,"
that Mesmer played on the harmonica, an instrument invented
by himself, and " it is curious," writes Dr. Stirling, " to note
that persons in the so-called magnetic or hypnotic condition are
more early influenced by music than when in their ordinary state."
To complete the case under consideration, it should be
added, but on the authority of Mr. Westlake, that " Mrs. Croad
asked his wife whether there was a room beyond, pointing
where there was a passage. Being told 4 Yes, two,' she said,
4 What does the servant do down there at night when you are
all in bed ?' She was told that the servant had no business
there, and the reply was, ' Well, she does go down there; I
have known her to do it more than once. She takes off her
boots first.' " It is added: " We made inquiries, and found that
when she thought we were all asleep, the girl went into these
rooms and helped herself to what was not hers, the result being
that the kleptomaniac had to be discharged." What are we
to think of the foregoing facts and of the above statements
of Mrs. Croad's biographer ? Evidence of the truth of cases
parallel to this case is to be had for the asking. Does it not
behove us to let no opportunity slip to investigate such in view
of their right comprehension ? " In this dark corner of nerve
physiology," writes Dr. W. Sterling of the University of
Aberdeen, at page 12 of his " Animal Magnetism," " much has
to be done."?" The study of hypnotism," to which Mrs. Croad's
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. E
50 TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE.
case bears a close affinity, " is," he affirms, " important, because
it must tend to approximate the sciences of physiology and
psychology."
I know not how to avoid a still further reference to the
clairvoyant faculty evidenced by Mrs. Croad; but this paper
would be incomplete were I to omit some additional refer-
ence to it. The case, though of a mixed character, is clearly
one of " spontaneous clairvoyance," being the exception to a
rule. So far as I have gone into this matter, I feel justified in
this assertion. Dr. W. Gregory?who follows, or did follow, in
the wake of Drs. Elliotson and Ashburner and of Mr. Atkinson?
Dr. W. Gregory, I say, affirmed that that particular condition of
the nervous system held as the cause or starting point of this
strange faculty or power (clairvoyance) is one induced or created
artificially, i.e., by Mesmerism or by Braidism, so-called. The
general or waking state of Mrs. Croad may be held to negative
its spontaneity, but it does no such thing. Clairvoyance does not
belong only to the higher stages of the mesmeric sleep ; it now
appears, writes Gregory, " That it may in certain cases be pro-
duced without the sleep, and, moreover, when the subject of it
is in a state of ordinary consciousness. Indeed," he continues,
" if we are to regard clairvoyance as simply the power of notic-
ing or observing certain very fine or subtle impressions conveyed
from all objects to the sensorium by the medium of a very subtle
agent or influence, which we may call vital mesmerism, the
impressions caused by which are usually overpowered by the
coarser impressions conveyed to the sensorium through the
external organs of the senses, it is evident that the essential
condition of clairvoyance is not the sleep, but the shutting out
of the impressions of the senses. This occurs, no doubt, in the
sleep ; but it also occurs in the state of reverie and abstraction,
and may, in some eases, be effected at pleasure by voluntary
concentration." Now, such " voluntary concentration " is very
plainly seen from time to time in Mrs. Croad, and when
she is doing her best to describe any given picture-card or
photograph.
It is indeed not easy to believe that such things can be, and
yet not overcome us like a summer cloud ; but they are, and
probably ever were, and will be. The transference of the senses,
even clairvoyance, is now a fact well known and duly attested
by men eminent in our profession. Such phenomena, it is said,
are not common?and even when present, are not uniformly so
?in a marked form. Gregory believes that the power is the
outcome of emanations of a peculiar kind, and that these
emanations reaching the sensorium by a special path, become
substitutes for the eyes, and hence the fact of sense-transference
TRANSFERENCE OF SPECIAL SENSE. 51
or clairvoyance. In all these instances, as the late Dr. Gregory
tells us, " it is not that the part acquires the peculiar properties
of the regular external organ of the sense transferred, but that
the nerves of the part serve as conductors to the subtle influence
to the cerebral organ of the internal sense. The fingers do not
collect and transmit the rays of light so that they fall on the
retina, and the image there formed, according to the laws of
optics, be conveyed by the optic nerve to the sensorium; but
the nerves of the fingers convey to the sensorium directly an
influence which there produces an image of the object." Such
is, or was, his opinion ; but you will not fail to observe that this
explanation of the doctor's is widely dissimilar to the views
before referred to, and insisted upon by the late Mr. Lewes.
In confirmation of the preceding remarks in regard to clair-
voyance, I would direct your attention to the condition and
peculiarities of the somnambule. These you will hardly dispute;
they go far to confirm the truth of the foregoing facts.
In the first place, the eyelids of the somnambule are always
firmly pressed together, and the eyeballs not in their natural
position, but drawn upwards; this condition of things is alto-
gether involuntary.
The somnambule is thus described by the late Mr. Sergeant
Cox: "The somnambule, with his eyes closed and all his senses
sealed, will perform his daily work, however intricate, write, read,
thread a needle, sew, and do other arts requiring keen sight,
manual dexterity, and delicate touch, but he neither sees, hears,
nor feels with the bodily organs. The mind only is awake, and
manifestly the mind then receives impressions of external objects
and guides the actions of the body without the assistance of its
usual informants, the senses. ... In this condition he passes
without fear and with perfect ease and safety over places dan-
gerous even to the waking footstep, on the ridge of a house roof,
across a narrow plank, above a strealn, down a steep and perilous
path in a mountain side, with a precipice over which an error
by the footstep of a few inches would hurl him
The eyes must be useless, for in their position no ray from any
external object can possibly be thrown on the retina."*
The same author in his description of somnambulism, adds
these words: "Nor are these phenomena (of somnambulism)
all that is strange in a condition not now disputed by physiolo-
gists and physicians." Not now disputed ? I should be glad,
indeed, if physiologists and physicians did not now continue
to dispute the facts realised by the somnambule, and demon-
strated in him under the influence of mesmerism or when
* Sec "Introduction to Psychology," by E. W. Cox.
e 2
52 TRANSFERENCE OP SPECIAL SENSE.
hypnotised. My late experience goes, I regret to say, in the
opposite direction. But let that pass.
To conclude, I would impress on those present the fact that,
in the hands of the late Dr. Elliotson, ard of Braid and Esdaile
as well as many more in the time gone by, animal magnetism,
or mesmerism (so called) has been employed?and well and
beneficently employed?in the relief of sorrow and of suffering,
also in the removal of pain and disease. The enthusiasm which
animated these men in their good works, and encouraged them
to ignore the rest and be thankful policy, is now very much
needed. For myself, I feel thankful that to Dr. Hack Tuke,
and to Drs. Stirling and McKendrick, including others like
them, engaged at this time in the study of animal mag-
netism and allied subjects, we may look for the realisation of
many and important discoveries in nerve physiology and patho-
logy?discoveries which utilised to the full, may yet aid science,
and promote the good cause of progress and humanity. To
medical men more than to others is, as I believe, entrusted
such high and noble efforts. May such efforts be never wanting
in those who come after us, but rather let us hope that such, our
successors, will ever?
Live
In pulses stirred to generosity,
In deeds of daring rectitude,
In thoughts sublime that pierce the niglit-like stars,
And with their mild persistence urge man's search
To vaster issues. (G. Eliot.)
Postscript.
As the preceding paper was in course of preparation for the
press, Mrs. Oroad fell into a decided state of trance, and in it
she passed five successive days?during which she neither ate
nor drank?but lay for the most part quiet and unconscious;
the only exception being the occurrence at rare intervals of a
sudden, involuntary, and automatic movement of the arms and
upper parts of the body. Now the occurrence of this trance
state adds yet another link in the chain of evidence which assures
us of the identity or very close relationship of this case with the
acquired condition of him or her mesmerised, as well as with
the somnambulist, to which matter reference has been made.
