1the Asylums of Europe
=======================

53J Art. IV.?
By GEORGE M. BEATCD, A.M. M.D., New Yorkr Member of the National Association for the
Protection ?f the Insane ; of the American Neurological Association, &c.
While visiting Europe during the past summer I had occasion
to study the asylums and the asylum systems of Great Britain,
France, and Germany.
My method of investigation was to visit certain represen-
tative institutions, especially those that are supposed to be
most advanced in their ideas of the treatment of the insane,
but not to confine myself to those exclusively; and also to con-
verse with physicians and superintendents and others who had
made themselves acquainted with the methods of managing
asylums in their respective countries.
In studying these institutions I did not usually avail
myself of any letters of introduction, nor did I give any pre-
liminary announcement of my coming, nor was the special
object of my visit always stated until the visit was completed.
Offers of introduction from men of the highest influence in
this department met me, but I had little occasion to accept
them. I wished to see the asylums as they were in their actual
and average daily life ; in undress rather than in dress parade.
In some cases I saw the chiefs of the institutions, in
others assistants or subordinates, in others still only the chief
attendants.
In England and Scotland all classes of the insane are under
governmental supervision, and they are visited regularly by the
officials, without any warning, whether confined in public or in
private asylums. I inspected, therefore, the places that repre-
sented all these different modes of caring for the insane,?
public institutions, those partly public and partly private, and
those entirely private. I also spent two days at the home of
J. Wickham Barnes, Esq., who resides near London, and who
for many years has had in his house an insane patient who is
regularly called upon by the Commissioners in Lunacy. Places
like Grheel and Hanwell, and the West Riding asylums, have
been so often described that it did not seem necessary to go to
them.
* Read before the meeting of the National Association for the Protection of
tho Insane, at Fifth Avenue Hotel, New York, Novembor 11, 1880.
54 THE ASYLUMS OF EUROPE.
Among the institutions I visited were Saughton Hall
Asylum, near Edinburgh, under the charge of J. Batty
Tuke, M.D. ; the Royal Edinburgh Asylum, under charge of
T. S. Clouston, M.D.; Fulborn Asylum, near Cambridge,
under charge of Dr. Or. M. Bacon; St. Ann's Asylum, Paris;
Asylum for the insane at Munich, undercharge of Dr. Gudden ;
the asylums at Vienna and Prague; and, lastly, the institution
that is now exciting so much attention in Germany, at Alt
Seherbitz, near Leipsic. I visited ten places where the insane
are cared for.
Everywhere I was treated with all the kindness and courtesy
that I could ask; not only was I shown through the institutions
thoroughly, but my cross-examinations in order to get at the
modes of treatment, methods of restraint, and general manage-
ment of the institutions, were always pleasantly responded to on
the part of those with whom I was brought into relation.
Assistance of the most valuable character I derived from
conversations with Dr. J. Crichton Browne, formerly of the West
Riding Asylum, and now one of the Lord Chancellor's Visitors
in Lunacy, and who is therefore situated so as to know, as well
as anyone possibly can, the present conditions and the prospects
of the asylum systems of England. By his suggestion I ob-
tained a copy of the lunacy laws prepared by Danby P. Fry,
Esq., and containing all the statutes relating to Private Luna-
tics, Pauper Lunatics, Criminal Lunatics, Commissions of
Lunacy, Public and Private Asylums, and the Commissioners in
Lunacy.
From this volume and my conversations with Dr. Browne,
I obtained points which were more or less new to me, and
which have aided me in reaching the conclusions I am here
presenting. These conclusions, stated as briefly as possible,
are as follows :?
First. In the methods of supervision, and in the general
care of the insane in public and jprivate asylums, Great
Britain has been easily first of all nations. Next to Great
Britain comes Germany, which, however, is so fast improving
that she soon may be on an equality with Great Britain ; of the
three British Isles Scotland on the whole takes the lead of
England and Ireland ; and it may be positively affirmed that
on the average the insane in Scotch Asylums are better treated
than in any other country. Next to Germany comes France in
order of merit.
This relative order of excellence is derived, I may say,
not only from my own personal observation, but from exten-
sive inquiries from men best fitted of all to know the true
facts on this subject in their respective countries. For
THE ASYLUMS OF EUROPE. 55
some of these facts I am under special obligations to Dr.
Westphal, of Berlin, who takes much interest in the subject of
the treatment of the insane, and by whose suggestions and
invitation I visited the institution at Alt Scherbitz. Professor
Ball, of Paris, also gave me information of value in reference
to the French system and institutions. Dr. Arnold Pick, of
Prague, a student of Dr. Westphal's, interested himself very
much in my inquiries. Conversations of this kind with different
individuals in different countries, in asylums and out of asylums,
I found of quite as much assistance as visiting institutions; I
depended, however, neither upon the one method of gaining
information nor upon the other, but, as well as I could, made use
of both.
I may say also that in previous visits to- Europe I had seen
many of the best known alienists, and year before last had
corresponded with them in reference to- some of the special
topics of which I am here to report.
Secondly. Some method of governmental supervision of the
insane appears to be universal, both in Great Britain and on
the Continent. Of the four great countries the United States
appears to be alone in compelling the insane to depend exclu-
sively upon their attendants and superintendents and local
trustees. The method of central supervision in Great Britain
is somewhat complex, but it secures its object,? the guardian-
ship of the insane.
The English Commissioners must not only regularly visit
the institutions, public and private, but they must visit each
insane person who is kept in care for pay in any private house,
and these visits must be made without any warning, and they
must see the patient when they come, and they must inquire
into and report upon the details of his life and treatment. In
the case of wealthy patients?so-called chancery .lunatics?that
is, those who have property, inquiries of the most minute
character are made: the Commissioners are to find out whether
the patients have all the cigars they want, all the means of
amusement and recreation they need; whether anything within
their means, however trifling, is left undone that would be for
their comfort. For all classes of patients, poor and rich, in
asylums the Commissioners are guardians, and for everything
that has a bearing on their welfare. They are consulted in
regard to the plans and sanitary arrangements of buildings ;
they examine the records and registers of asylums, take care of
letters addressed to them by patients, and, so far as possible,
see to it that no persons are improperly admitted or retained.
The system of governmental supervision of Scotland differs
somewhat from that in England, and would appear, on the side
56 THE ASYLUMS OF EUROPE.
of simplicity, at least, to have some advantages over that of
England, but in principle it is similar.
Ireland also has a system which in its details is different
from that of Scotland or England ; but all these countries have
a belief in central supervision; neither superintendents nor any
others who have to do with the insane would think of doing
away with this system of central supervision any more than
they would think of doing away with the asylums.
Thirdly. In the best asylums of Europe mechanical
restraint is reduced to a very small percentage, and instead
of restraint labour is employed as a therapeutic agent. These
two facts, absence of restraint and presence of labour, impress
one at once on visiting institutions like those, for example,
near Edinburgh, or at Alt Sclierbitz, near Leipsic. In England
and (Scotland I found no patient in restraint, and scarcely any
excitement in the wards or grounds.
Padded rooms, and in some cases camisoles, are found in
European asylums ; but padded rooms are often, if not, usually,
empty, and the camisoles I did not see in use in any of the
English asylums, and but very few in France or Germany.
In one of the German asylums the assistant who took me
around pointed out one or two patients with their arms con-
fined, and said, " This is not my idea; if I could have my way
I would not use these."
The extent to which labour is employed seems incredible,
and cross-examinations were constantly needed in order to
convince me that not only washing, cooking, cleaning, and
the immense farm work on the grounds, but also various
trades were carried on by the inmates, the patients of the
asylums. Again and again I asked how they succeeded in
making the lunatics work. The average reply was that, in
general, there was no serious difficulty; that by proper manage-
ment they could be trained to work and kept at work, and
would do as much, and, in some cases, very much more than
persons in health.
Out of three hundred and forty-seven private and pauper
male patients in the West House of the Eoyal Edinburgh
Asylum, two hundred and fifty-four were profitably employed :
one hundred eighty-four in out-door work, thirty-eight as
tradesmen, and thirty-two as assisting attendants. The diffi-
culty that Dr. Shaw, of the Flatbush Asylum, encountered,
that is, the objection of friends of the patients to having their
insane friends and relatives compelled to work, is not met with
in Europe; so far as I could learn no such prejudice has to be
overcome. Of five hundred and forty-one pauper patients in the
Eoyal Edinburgh Asylum, of both sexes, only eighteen men and
TIIE ASYLUMS OF EUROrE. 57
twenty-eight women were prevented by their mental and moral
condition from being employed.
This utilisation of labour is carried out in detail not only
in England, but in France and Germany; and, as it would
seem to me, more thoroughly and successfully in England than
in the other countries. At Alt Scherbitz there is a farm, on
which the inmates work, and on that and in the shops and
in the cooking and washing rooms are carried on almost all
forms of labour,?as much as one would see in a good-sized
village.
Whatever can be said, or has been said, or will be said to
the contrary, the general principle of reducing restraint, or
employing it merely in a very small percentage of cases, is not
only universal in the best asylums of England, but is growing
into favour everywhere in Europe. Among the most thoughtful,
scholarly, and advanced men, especially the younger men, both
in England and on the Continent, it is no longer a question,
but an established principle beyond discussion, the only points
raised being those which relate to the degree of restraint, and
the best methods to be substituted for it. In these particulars
there is not and need not be entire agreement, any more than
there is or need be entire agreement among physicians in
regard to any hygienic or therapeutic measure.
Among the best alienists of Europe, those who have done and
are now doing the most to advance our ideas relating to
insanity, theoretically and practically, in and out of asylums,
the belief that restraint should be reduced to a minimum is
as universal as the belief in the preventive power of vaccination.
According to Westphal, non-restraint is the rule in the asylums
of Hamburg, Gottingen, Charite (Berlin), Halle, Marburg
Heidelberg, Eberswalde, Keppenheim, Werneck, Munich, and
Alt Scherbitz, and in all the asylums of Switzerland.*
Fourthly. In the best asylums of Europe the insane are
treated much like children. This principle has not, I believe,
been formulated in so many words; but, nevertheless, it is acted
upon rationally and instinctively.
All families allow their children liberty, but it is a watched
and guarded liberty; we do not chain them, nor shut them up
in closets, but suffer them to come and go as they please, and
as we please, according to their age, all the time keeping a
guardianship over them to see that they do not wander too far
away and do not harm themselves or others. The insane are
children; diseases of the brain practically depriving them of the
advantages that come from education and maturity, taking
away their manhood, and carrying them back to childhood; it
* Alienist and Neurologist, October 1880.
58 THE ASYLUMS OP EUROPE.
is therefore wise to treat them like children. They are not, as
a rule, to be chained, or cribbed, or bound, or camisoled, or
locked in dark closets, or locked up at all, necessarily, but, like
children, allowed to come and go as they please and as we
please ; all the time watched and guarded, lest they wander
away or run away, or do injury to themselves or to society.
Now and then a child must be deprived of this average
liberty ; now and then a lunatic must be deprived for a time?
a few hours or days, or longer?of this average liberty ; but for
the great majority there should be, always, the freedom of child-
hood.
When I visited Saughton Hall Institution I asked the gentle-
man who showed me through the buildings what kept the
patients from escaping, " Why," said I, " should they not all be
in Edinburgh in half an hour?" He replied that the patients
were watched more carefully than was apparent, and that the
number of escapes was comparatively small. The attendants
watched them without appearing to do so; just as we look after
our children without keeping them constantly under our eyes,
when we know where they are, and would at once miss them if
they should wander, even though they may not know or suspect
that we are looking out for them.
The experiment of carrying on a lunatic asylum with un-
locked doors, dispensing almost entirely with bolts and bars, is
one of the most interesting and important of all the scientific
advances that have been made in the treatment of the insane,
and both alienists and psychologists would do well to study it.
Dr. J. Batty Tuke, of the Saughton Hall Institution, near
Edinburgh, in his report for 1879, says that when he was
medical superintendent of the Fife and Kinross District
Lunatic Asylum, he ordered all the doors of the asylum, inside
and outside, to be left unlocked?only three wards being ex-
cepted, in which 30 out of 260 patients resided. As a result of
this experiment, there were no accidents and few or no attempted,
escapes. There was greater tranquillity among the patients,
and some who had before tried to run away no longer mani-
fested any desire to do so. At first there was a greater anxiety
on the part of the officers and attendants, and this anxiety
caused them to be more watchful and careful, and, for a time,
there was some increase in the number of escapes; but after a
few weeks this anxiety on the part of the officers and the in-
crease in the number of attendants ceased to be necessary, and
the doors were not specially watched. This system was carried
out in the same asylum by Dr. Tuke's successors, Drs. John
Fraser and Joseph Brown.
Dr. Arthur Mitchell, Commissioner in Lunacy, of Scotland,
THE ASYLUMS OF EUROPE. 59
in liis report for 1879, says of this asylum that " it was entered
and traversed almost from end to end without summoning a
servant, or requiring any door to be unlocked ; only three wards
?two female and one male?were locked." In two other
Scottish asylums for the insane this plan has been adopted. In
the Barony Asylum, at Lenzie, near Glasgow, under charge of
Dr. James Rutherford, every door of the institution is unlocked,
although it contains 450 patients.
When Dr. Tuke took care of Saughton Hall Institution, he
carried out the same system of treatment, and in his report for
1879 he says that there have been no escapes and no attempts
at escape; that patients who used to stand at the doors, on the
watch for a chance to get out, no longer do so; that many
whose intellects were but slightly disturbed, and who have
recovered, have expressed their gratitude to him for the relief
experienced by the change from locked to unlocked doors ;
that this system has had an educational influence on all the
inmates, so that it is now possible to give greater liberty than
before. Certain selected cases are allowed to go on parole.
All this, surely, is a new, interesting, and almost incredible
advance on the reforms of Pinel, Hill, and Connolly; it is a
higher stage in the evolution of the management of the insane.
Pinel broke the chains of the insane, took off the manacles.
To-day, we go farther; we unlock the doors.
I visited this Saughton Hall Institution, and found it diffi-
cult to believe the gentleman who showed me over the place,
when he said that it was an insane asylum. In external appear-
ance, in internal arrangements, in the attendants, in the manner
of the inmates, in the furniture and arrangement of the rooms,
there was nothing that suggested an asylum or a hospital; it
was more like a gentleman's delightful country residence, with
open windows and doors, and ample and attractive grounds,
beautified in the English style with varieties of shrubbery and
flowers. I said to myself, This is the poetry of insanity, one
might be willing to become insane if he could be treated
here.
In this asylum, and in others of similar character in Great
Britain, it is the custom to have the patients, during the
summer season, reside in villas by the sea-side, where they
remain for a month or two, during July and August, and with
most satisfactory results. The sea-side home of Saughton Hall
Institution is seventeen miles from Edinburgh. Thus it will
be seen that the insane in England, who have the means to do
so, live like gentlemen and ladies, with their summer and their
winter residences, with proper liberty, and supplied not only
with the necessities, but also with the luxuries of life.
60 THE ASYLUMS OF EUROPE.
Fifthly. The best asylums of Europe are not enormous or
imposing buildings, but a series or collection of small or
moderate-sized unimposing cottages or houses. In Europe, as
in .America, alienists began by placing the insane in gigantic
palaces, and there, as here, they are finding out that with the
increase of insanity, which could not have been anticipated
either here or there, there must also be a change in the method
of the construction and arrangement of asylums, although
many large buildings remain.
The institution at Alt Scherbitz has six or eight cottages,
a small distance from each other, each cottage being about the
size of a moderate country home?all plain brick buildings,
pleasing in appearance outside, and comfortable in reality
inside. The Royal Edinburgh Asylum is composed of five
houses, separated by a considerable distance ; between the so-
called " East House " and " Craig House" there is a space of
almost a mile. It is believed and asserted that this splitting up
of large buildings into a number of small ones, and this scatter-
ing the insane over a wider area than has been the custom
formerly, is an immense practical advantage for all classes of
lunatics. It allows them variety of employment; it allows
seclusion for those who wish to be secluded; it gives change of
scene and environment, so needful for sane and insane.
Sixthly. The methods of treating the insane in and out of
asylums, that have been most satisfactory in Europe, can be
and will be introduced in this country, in spite of and in
the face of certain practical difficulties.
The chief of these difficulties is the nature of our political
system, the motto of all political parties being, as you know, The
spoils belong to the spoiler. Whatever can be obtained from
the State is so much gain to the individual. Offices are the
wages that we pay those who obtain offices for us.
Lunacy reform is, therefore, on one side, a branch of civil-
service reform, and must rise and fall with it.
One of the Lord Chancellor's Visitors in Lunacy told me that
he had a salary of seventy-five hundred dollars, that his position
was a life one, that he could be removed only by the joint action
of both houses of Parliament and the consent of Her Majesty.
But as we have, on the whole, good men appointed on our health
boards, with exceptions now and then, it is fair and right and
rational to hope that we shall have, on the whole, good men
appointed on the central supervising commissions when we get
the legislation.
This practical difficulty, therefore, grave as it may be, though
it should not be forgotten, and must always be considered, is
yet not to be anxiously or discouragingly feared. The first need
THE ASYLUMS OF EUROPE. 61
of lunacy reform in this country is the creation of a mixed board
of government commissioners in each State.
Yet another practical difficulty, not always referred to
in these discussions, is that of getting as good officers and
attendants at small salaries as can be obtained in Europe for the
same salaries. In all departments of activity in Europe we find
men of much ability, native or acquired, filling humble or badly
rewarded stations, who, in this land, might be making themselves
wealthy and illustrious. Q his fact, the result of limited geo-
graphical area and excess of competition, is an advantage to
those who seek for attendants or companions for the insane, or
for superintendents of asylums. A moderate amount of money
will purchase a far higher order of talent, and insure greater
devotion, there than here. In the Saughton Hall Institution
they adopt the plan of having educated, cultured ladies, in
reduced circumstances, as companions for the wealthy insane.
The duty of these companions is to accompany the patients in
their drives and walks, be with them constantly in the drawing-
rooms, to supervise, in a degree, the nurses, and, in some
instances to sleep with those under their charge; and from this
plan results of the most satisfactory character have been gained.
In this country it would be far more difficult to find cultivated
ladies who would be willing to take such positions.
The superiority of Europe is in organisation; in individual
effort in certain directions America is equal to or superior to any
European country. In the treatment of the insane outside of
asylums, by general practitioners and students of the nervous
system, there has probably been as much advance in this country
as abroad; and especially in the treatment of various morbid
states of the nervous system that often lead to insanity there has
been nowhere such satisfactory progress as here. This is the
philosophical method of combating insanity: treating the insane
before they are insane; arresting candidates for lunacy before
they have stepped on the threshold of the asylum.
In regard to private asylums, concerning which Dr. Bucknill
has lately written with so much vigour, these two facts must be
admitted : that the system is liable to abuse or to suspicion of
abuse, even under the central supervisory commissions, but that
they would appear to be in a degree almost, if not quite, a
necessity, with which we cannot entirely dispense.
In this respect, as in all respects, we are to study Europe, not
to imitate it; what is good we are to keep, what is evil we are
to reject; the chances for improvement by invention and dis-
covery we are to resolutely occupy. To aid all these processes
of scientific advance in the study of insanity, and in the man-
agement of the insane, this society has been organised and will
be maintained.
