Physique and Intellect
========================

REVIEWS

By Donald G. Paterson. New York: The
Century Co. (Century Psychology Series). 1930.
There have been during the past few decades many investigations directed
primarily toward the determination of the relation between those two factors
which the author of this book generalizes under the names physique and in-
tellect. The theoretical and practical importance of the results of these in-
vestigations for the entire field of psychology is evident. The published re-
sults of such studies, however, have been widely scattered and not always
available to the student. Thus in the first place Professor Paterson has done
?in extremely useful service in bringing together the gist of all this material
in the present admirable form. This, however, is only the minor part of his
service; the material here treated required not only a systematic presentation,
but likewise the eminent critical judgment which Professor Paterson is quali-
fied to give it.
The first general impression of the book is to make one wonder whether
there have ever been so many commonly held notions?and, to the theoretically
minded, apparently reasonable notions?exploded in so brief a space. Many
of the investigations discussed here were conducted before the more refined
methods of statistical analysis were widely employed, and on what seem now
to be very inadequate grounds investigators hastened to conclusions and gen-
eralizations, a tendency which is not impeded by the fact that the conclusion
is just what one Avould expect to find. This book reveals very strikingly how
what at first sight seem reliable conclusions disappear when exposed to the
light of exacting quantitative analysis.
The general term intellect is used by the author to apply to what in one
chapter he calls intelligence, in another mental age. The most commonly
employed indices of this factor are age-grade location in school and standard
tests among which the Stanford Eevision of the Binet-Simon occupies the most
prominent position although other tests of the verbal type may be substituted
for it. The author wisely does not waste his time in a critical analysis of
what these tests test; his task is to determine whether there is any correlation
between what they test and the various physical factors here considered. The
most important of these physical factors are: height, weight, cranial measure-
ments, anatomical age, physiological development, morphological indices.
The author's conclusions may be summarized briefly. The correlation of
height and weight with intellect is apparently positive but very slight, certainly
not a significant correlation. Even head size and shape, where a correlation
would bo more likely to be expccted, show the same result with no significant
relations to mental development except in pathological cases. Physiological
changes like dentition and pubescence are only slightly, if at all, related to
intellect, as are also morphological indices of body build. Likewise physical
defects and even harmful physical conditions like malnutrition, diseased tonsils,
adenoids, defective teeth, even hookworm, show no deleterious influence upon
125
126 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
mental growth. In fact unless disease or injury affects the central nervous
system directly it lias no significant relation to intellectual development.
Obviously of course, as the author points out, these findings will not diminish
our efforts toward the prevention and cure of every type of physical defect
where possible; we wTill merely know not to expect great changes to result in
the field of mental growth. This review merely summarizes the results gen-
erally negative or only very slightly positive which are found when an at-
tempt is made to find a correlation between physique and intellect. Numerous
tables which give the original data of the various investigations and which
substantiate every point made are included in the book and add greatly to
its value.
The chapter on "Physique and Temperament" is concerned with the re-
lation between physique and certain non-intellectual aspects of personality
which the author subsumes generally under 'temperament.' We find in this
field a great variety of attempts which the author considers critically. Among
the physical factors considered are physiognomy, endocrinological factors, types
of body structure. These range all the way from pseudo-science to the work
of those who are making a serious attempt to develop a science of character-
ology, among whom Kretschmer is perhaps the best known. Relations between
physical factors and temperament, in the author's opinion, may and probably
do exist, but many of the notions put forth should be looked upon merely
as hypotheses. There is also great danger that data based on the observa-
tion of abnormal subjects will be applied in the normal group. That the
study of such factors as endocrine secretion is of great importance to any
science of human behavior will not be doubted but one can not refrain from
quoting the author's apt statement in this connection, "What we need is less
endocrinological speculation in psychology and more psychological experimenta-
tion in the field of endocrinology."
In conclusion stress must be laid upon the extreme value of this book to
the clinical psychologist. It is inevitable that in dealing with individual cases
one becomes impressed with relationships which may occur in one case and
then looks for such relationships in other cases. There is also a great danger
that a mere chance relationship will seem to be a causal one. This book will
teach us to be more cautious in sucli situations. On the other hand, we must
not lose sight of the fact that in clinical psychology we are dealing with in-
dividual cases, often exceptional cases, and the fact that certain relationships
disappear in the statistical treatment of group results, while it throws valuable
light on the probability of the relationship, does not entirely preclude it in
individual clinical analysis.
Miles Murphy
