Experimental Child Study
=========================

By Florence L. Goodenougli and John
E. Anderson. New York: The Century Co. (Century Psychol-
ogy Series). 1931.
This book, while in the same series as the one discussed in the foregoing
review, is quite unlike it, which of course is entirely proper. Described by
the publishers as the first book of its kind, Experimental Child Study contains
such a diversity of material that it is likely upon first examination to create
an impression of incoherence and lack of unity?an impression of having been
"thrown together." Closer examination, however, serves largely to remove
this impression. It is intended as a manual for classes of beginning students
in experimental child study. The reader who takes up the book to learn
something of the experimental findings of work in child study will find very
little. It is a manual of directions for child study, not a discussion of ex-
perimental results.
The book is divided into three parts. The first part, much the shortest
128 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of the three, serves as an introduction, and gives a brief historical resume of
child study. Modern methods of child study are outlined in a general way.
The second and major part of the work is devoted to the description of actual
experiments for class use and an outline of the methods of procedure to be
followed. Forty-one such experiments are given. They are of great variety
ranging from "sleep," through "color discrimination" and "language de-
velopment" to "extroversion and introversion" and "laughter" and "dis-
tribution of teacher's time." It is not expected that any class will be able
to complete all the experiments, but a large number are given so that the
instructor will be enabled to make the selection best suited to the particular
needs of his class. Each experiment includes an outline of problems to be
considered and references to the bibliography. In connection with the ex-
periments there is a running exposition of statistical method; the aim is to
acquaint the student with statistics by introducing gradually the methods of
statistical treatment through actual application in the experiments. Thus the
student progresses from the simple frequency distribution to the more complex
problem of correlation, all the while employing his knowledge in practice.
This is much to be commended. There are of course statistical manuals, but
here the student has in the covers of one book both his experimental and sta-
tistical material. The final chapter of Part II gives a list of suggested prob-
lems for advanced students in child study.
Part III discusses the available methods for collecting data in child study:
incidental observations, case studies, the questionnaire, direct measurement,
rating scales, etc. There is an extensive bibliography arranged in useful
fashion. Appendices give a method of occupational classification, a scale for
rating living room equipment, and a list of statistical formulae.
The success attending the use of this book will depend very much upon
the skill of the instructor both in directing the experiments and in guiding
their interpretation. To be of the greatest value, moreover, child study must,
in our opinion, rest upon a knowledge of general psychology, and with this
the student must be provided by his instructor or his reading.
Miles Murphy
m
