News and Comments
==================

The Psychological Corporation presented a series of six lectures by a group
of psychologists on "Psychology and Its Useful Applications" on Friday eve-
nings at eight-thirty, from January ninth to February thirteenth, at the New
York Academy of Medicine, Fifth Avenue at One Hundred and Third Street.
The program was as follows:
January Ninth: "The Study and Guidance of Early Mental Growth," Dr.
Arnold Gesell; Dr. B. S. Woodworth (Chairman).
January Sixteenth: "The Psychological Foundations of Personality and
Character," Dr. Mark A. May; Dr. E. L. Thorndike (Chairman).
January Twenty-third: "Psychology and the Professions: Medicine, Law
and Theology," Dr. Walter R. Miles; Dr. Frankwood E. Williams (Chairman).
January Thirtieth: "Psychology and Industry," Dr. Morris S. Yiteles;
Dr. W. V. Bingham (Chairman).
February Sixth: "Psychology and Social and Political Problems," Dr.
Floyd H. Allport; Dr. Joseph Jastrow (Chairman).
February Thirteenth: '' Psychology and Education,'' Dr. A. I. Gates; Dr.
James McKeen Cattell (Chairman).
At the biennial convention of the American Association of University
Women to be held in Boston, April eighth to eleventh, it is the plan to devote
one session to the discussion of "The Clinical Approach to the Study of Child-
hood and Adolescence.'' Dr. Augusta Bronner, Co-Director of the Judge Baker
Foundation, will present a paper on this topic as a basis for leading discussion.
Dr. Esther Eichards of the Henry Phipps Psychiatric Clinic, Johns Hopkins
Hospital, will be in charge of the summarizing conference. Among the leaders
in this field who have been asked to participate are: Dr. Marianna Taylor,
Clinical Diagnostician of the Judge Baker Foundation; Elizabeth Dexter, Public
School Clinic of Newark, New Jersey; Dr. Winifred Bichmond, Psychologist,
St. Elizabeth's Hospital; Dr. William Healy, Director, Judge Baker Founda-
tion; and Dr. Ira Wile, Psychiatrist in Chief, Mt. Sinai Hospital. The Ameri-
can Association of University Women extends to all interested a cordial invita-
tion to attend.
The University of Pretoria, South Africa, announces the intention to pub-
lish the "South African Journal of Psychology, Education and Sociology."
The journal will contain any kind of scientific paper dealing with psychological
problems or the psychological aspects of educational, industrial, medical, soci-
ological problems. South Africa offers opportunities in certain fields of re-
search not found in many other countries, particularly research in the psychology
of primitive races. The cooperation of European and American scientists is
invited. Papers will be published in the language in which they are written.
The American Orthopsychiatry Association has established an official
organ to be known as "The American Journal of Orthopsychiatry." The
journal is to be a quarterly and the first number was published in the fall. The
Editor is Lawson G. Lowrey, M.D. The Associate Editors are Herman Adler,
M.D., Augusta Bronner, Ph.D., Porter E. Lee, Harvey Zorbaugh, Ph.D. The
first number contains a report of the Symposium at the 7th Annual Meeting of
REVIEWS 295
the Association (1930) on "The Treatment of the Behaviour and Personality
Problems in Children," and it is the plan of the journal to publish regularly
papers read at the annual meetings. An Editorial Foreword to the initial num-
ber expresses the belief of the Association's officers that "there is a very real
place in American periodical literature for a journal devoting itself entirely to
problems of human behavior, and accepting articles from any field which has
a contribution to make which will aid in the understanding of such problems."
The subscription price is $6.00 in the Postal Union; $G.50 per year for foreign
circulation. Single numbers are $1.50. Communications should be addressed
to the Editor, 145 East 57th Street, New York City.
