A Study of Test Results at the Third and Fifth Grade Levels
==============================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1931, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XX, No. 1 March, 1931

By Dallas Eyre Buzby
Assistant Professor of Psychology, St. Lawrence University
Introduction
This study is based upon standards of performance secured by
testing children in the fifth and third grades of Philadelphia and
its environs. Murphy 1 tested 500 fifth grade children and pub-
lished his results in this journal. He points out that the chrono-
logical ages represented run from eight to seventeen years, and
mentions that the children tested do not represent a homogeneous
group either in respect to chronological age or school proficiency.
He characterizes this level as that of "liminal intellectual ef-
ficiency" and states that the child's progress through the grades
Js differentiated through surpassing intellectual levels." Stand-
ards, not yet published, were also secured by Genevieve McDermott
Murphy by testing 500 children in third grade classes. She found
the chronological ages to run from seven years and two months to
fourteen years and eight months. In the reports of both of these
mvestigations, the data were presented in decile form. Standards
Were thus secured for chronological age and mental age, for In-
telligence Quotient, for memory span (audito-vocal forward and
reverse and visuo-vocal) and for the first and second trials at the
^Vitmer Formboard, Witmer Cylinders, and Dearborn Formboard.
The investigation of the fifth grade children also included an
Arithmetic test.
The first objective of the present study is to find out whether
a group more homogeneous in test scores could be obtained by
1 Murphy, Miles, The Ten Year Level of Competency. Psychological
Clinic, 1928, 17, 33-60.
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
limiting the range of chronological ages. In other words, the
problem was to find out whether by increasing the homogeneity
of the group in respect to age, we limit the variability in test
scores. The results were subjected to statistical treatment. The
effort was then made to determine whether any relationship would
be found to exist between the relative intellectual efficiency of
children within the fifth grade and their proficiencies in the respec-
tive tests.
The word "proficiency" is here employed as used by Dr.
Lightner Witmer.2 He defines "proficiency" as relative superi-
ority demonstrated and expressed in terms of relative superiority
or inferiority to other members of a group. It is a quantitative
measure. The relative proficiency, at the Witmer Formboard, of
an individual subject within the fifth grade may be expressed by
stating the decile upon the table of norms for that grade within
which his score places him. When we assert that a child falls within
a group superior to 70 per cent and inferior to 20 per cent of
fifth grade children, on the basis of time required for successful
performance of the test we are stating his proficiency or relative
superiority at the Witmer Formboard. Nothing is thereby men-
tioned as to the qualitative aspects of the performance. These
aspects are very important but do not lend themselves to statistical
treatment. The phrase "relative intellectual efficiency" is sug-
gested by Murphy's description of the ten-year-old child as possess-
ing "liminal intellectual efficiency." The concept which the phrase
"relative intellectual efficiency" is intended here to express will
be discussed later.
Part I
Procedure
In the first place in order to obtain a group of fifth grade chil-
dren more homogeneous in chronological age, the method adopted
was to eliminate the deciles which varied most from the median
chronological age. The middle 40 per cent of the age range was
found to include those ages from ten years and four months to eleven
years and six months. Upon the suggestion of Dr. Witmer the test
results of the children whose chronological ages fell within this
middle 40 per cent were first studied. By this procedure there
were excluded both those considerably accelerated and those con-
2 Witmer, Lightner, Psychological Diagnosis and the Psychonomic Orienta-
tion of Analytical Science. Psychological Clinic, 1925, 1G, 1-18.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 3
siderably retarded for grade. There were 215 individuals in this
group selected for study which will be referred to hereafter as
"group II." The original group of 500 cases will be called "group
!?" The various sets of data for group II have been deciled, after
the method of Murphy and others. The age range of group II was
then further reduced by selecting those cases within the group
whose chronological ages fell between ten years and seven months
and eleven years inclusive. These limits represent the middle
forty per cent of group II in chronological age. This smaller group
consisted of 98 cases and will be designated as "group III. The
same method of selection was followed with the third grade. In
this grade group I consisted of 496 cases from seven years and two
Months to fourteen years and eight months of age; group II con-
sisted of 211 cases from eight years and six months to nine years
and four months of age; group III consisted of 115 cases from
eight years and eight months to nine years of age. The decile
tables for all these groups follow the body of this article.
It is generally regarded as a valid assumption that the ability
required for success at school is intellect, which Dr. Witmer defines
as the ability to acquire, retain, organize, and use knowledge. In
the case of groups II and III we have two factors which are rela-
tively constant : (1) sameness of grade, i.e., the attained level of
intellectual achievement, and (2) the range of age?fifteen months
for group II and six months for group III. In the case of group
I only the grade level is constant. It would seem legitimate to
expect a much less wide scatter in test scores if proficiency in the
tests and relative intellectual efficiency depend upon the same fac-
tors. The decile tables, however, show that we do not find a limita-
tion in range of scores at all in proportion to the limitation in the
range of chronological ages, as will be pointed out later.
We find in examining the fifth grade tables that while extremes
I.Q. especially are cut off a wide variation in scores is still found.
Group III, with a variation in chronological age of only six months,
still shows a range of from 2 to 6 in reverse memory span. The
very low audito-vocal forward span of 3 is still included. The
range of I.Q. is somewhat restricted, the lower limit being 71 for
group II and 80 for group III. Groups II and III retain the
range of from 0 to 100 in "arithmetic." The decile values for
the performance tests are very similar throughout the three groups.
If we compare scores at the Witmer Formboard, we find in the case
?f groups I and III that the decile values are the same in four
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
places. This is true for both the first and second trials. The most
that may be said of the performance test scores is that some of the
better and some of the poorer scores are eliminated. In some cases
the upper deciles tend to be a little poorer and the lower deciles
a little better than in the case of group I.
Treatment of Results
The problem is to find out whether group II, the middle 40 per
cent of group I in chronological age, is more homogeneous in test
scores than group I; also whether group III, the middle 40 per
cent of group II in chronological age, is more homogeneous than
group II. In order better to interpret such differences as may
exist between the groups in test scores, the raw scores were treated
statistically.3 The tables show the results obtained in terms of
mean, sigma, skewness, and coefficient of variation. It seemed to
be desirable to make these calculations in the case of I.Q., mental
age, visual memory span, Witmer Formboard (first trial), Witmer
Cylinders (first trial), and Dearborn Formboard (first trial).
The reason for the choice of I.Q. and of the non-verbal per-
formance tests as bases for the comparison of group and sub-groups
is obvious. The mental age was retained as a basis for comparison,
as it represents the total score of tests passed in the Binet-Simon
scale. The visual memory span, rather than the auditory, was
chosen because it had been discovered by Murphy that the greatest
differences in memory span between the first4 and fifth grade chil-
dren were in visual memory span. By the time the child reaches
the fifth grade the visual span is pretty consistently one more than
the auditory span and it was thought that the visual memory span
might bear some relationship to what we are designating "relative
intellectual efficiency." Actually the difference between the aver-
age visual and the average auditory spans was found to be 1.16 for
group I; 1.18 for group II; and 1.08 for group III. The median
visual memory span for each group is 7 and the median auditory
span is 6.
The best means of comparing the groups with respect to homo-
geneity is to examine the values of sigma and of the coefficient of
3 The writer wishes to express his appreciation to Dr. Morris S. Yiteles
of the Department of Psychology of the University of Pennsylvania, for
valued suggestions given as to the statistical treatment of results.
4 Easby-Grave, Charlotte, Tests and Norms at the Six Year Old Per-
formance Level. Psychological Clinic, 1924, 15, 261?300.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 5
variation. Garrett 5 states that the sigma is of value when the
highest reliability is desired and when due weight must be given
to extreme deviations. Employing these measures as criteria, we
Jo find an increasing homogeneity from group I, through group II,
to group III, in the case of I.Q. and of the Witmer Cylinders. The
sigma values for I.Q. are respectively 16.8, 12.8, and 11.5. The
values of the coefficient of variation are respectively 16.9, 12.7, and
11.1. With the Witmer Cylinders the elimination of variability is
somewhat less evident. These measures appear in Tables I and Y.
In the case of mental age, visual memory span, the Witmer Form-
board, and the Dearborn Formboard, an increase in homogeneity is
either absent or negligible. In tables I to IV, at the third grade
level, we meet with similarly negative results. The method of
forming the groups, it will be remembered, is analogous to that
employed for the fifth grade groups.
On the basis of sigma and of the coefficient of variation, possi-
bly we might infer that our derived groups are more homogeneous
than is the whole group with respect to I.Q., and test scores at the
^Vitmer Cylinders, at the fifth grade level. At the third grade
level, the derived groups may be slightly more homogeneous with
respect to I.Q. and scores at the Witmer Formboard.
In order to examine more critically such differences as are
found, further recourse was had to statistical treatment, as we are
here concerned with the reliability of the obtained measures. We
must investigate the reliability of the obtained means; their prob-
able divergence from the true mean which we should get if we could
test all fifth grade children. The P.E. of the average serves as an
index of reliability of the obtained mean. These obtained indices
appear in the tables. Next we are interested in the reliability
?f the difference between the obtained means which is secured by
the use of other formulae. Since we are concerned with the differ-
ence between the means of a whole group and sub-groups, the fol-
lowing complex formula was used instead of the usual formula
employed when quite diverse groups are involved:
ffy 77 2n\ n(M - m)2
" Jiff- = \"n + - ~ N / ~ N(N ? n)2
5 Garrett, Henry E., Statistics in Psychology and Education. New York:
Longmans, Green and Co. 1926.
6 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Yi = standard deviation of the total group.
N = number of cases of the total group.
a = standard deviation of the sub-group.
n = number of cases of the sub-group.
M = average of the total group.
m = average of the sub-group.
The sigma differences are shown in the tables. To determine the
chances that the obtained difference between the means of the
group and of the sub-groups under consideration represents a true
difference greater than zero, the obtained difference is divided by
? , difference (means)
the sigma difference, employing the formula ?: 777=
sigma difference
Hereby is secured a value which we shall call "2"?an index of
significance. By means of a special table 6 we can read off the
number of chances in 100 that the true difference between the
group and the sub-groups is greater than zero. To be certain, 100
chances in 100, the product?"2"?of this division must be at least
3. The tables show the "2's" for each sub-group.
Only in the case of I.Q. and of mental age do we secure or
approach the required degree of certainty. There are 99.8 chances
in 100 that there is a real difference with respect to I.Q. between
the whole group and group II. The index of significance was 2.9.
In the case of group III, with an age range of six months, we
secure a "2" of 3.5, indicating complete reliability of the obtained
difference, as indicative of a true difference greater than zero,
between this sub-group and the whole group. In regard to mental
age: the chances are 96 in 100 in the case of group II ("2" equals
1.7) and 99 in 100 ("z" equals 2.38) in the case of group III
that there is a true difference between group and sub-group. For
the Cylinder test, the chances are 82 in 100 and 88 in 100 respec-
tively in the cases of groups II and III of a true difference greater
than zero between group and sub-groups. The "2's" are .92 and
1.23. It was mentioned that, at the third grade level, there is
some suggestion of an increase in homogeneity in I.Q. and scores at
the AVitmer Formboard in the case of the derived groups. How-
ever, we cannot be certain of the reliability of the obtained differ-
ences as indicative of a true difference.
At this point reference may be made to a report of Fernberger 7
6 Garrett, op. cit., p. 134.
7 Fernberger, S. W., Statistical and Non-Statistical Interpretation of Test
Results. Psychological Clinic, 1922, 14, 68-72.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 7
in which he attempted to determine the degree of statistical validity
in regard to some of the findings of Learning 8 in her study of the
fifteen-year-old level. In spite of the fact that she found rather
marked differences between the averages of different groups in some
the tests, Fernberger, using statistical formulae analogous to
those here employed, found none of her differences to be statistically
significant. His explanation of this is that inasmuch as in each of
the distributions there is found a wide variation in test results, the
probable errors of the differences become so great that a large "2"
cannot be obtained. He concludes that mental tests show such a
degree of variability within a relatively homogeneous group that
the differences between the groups do not have statistical sig-
nificance. In our tables, it is shown that the sigma difference,
corresponding to Fernberger's P.E. difference, is frequently large,
especially in the case of the performance tests. In other cases we
do obtain a value of 112" nearly or quite as great as the required 3.
It. is possible that by the use of the formula employed in our study,
a higher value for "2" may be obtained, in which case it is possible
that some factors are omitted of which cognizance should be taken.
At any rate, it is felt that if our conclusions must ultimately be
based upon inspection of the actually obtained differences between
the averages of group and sub-groups, and upon inspection of the
decile tables, we should not be inclined to infer more significance
to these differences than the "reliability" formulae would warrant.
Reference to the tables will show how little the obtained measures
for the first three groups vary.
Summary
To sum up the findings thus far, it may be said that by cutting
down the ranges in chronological age of the children of the fifth
and of the third grades which had been tested, we do not get a more
homogeneous group except in respect to I.Q. and perhaps in mental
age, at the fifth grade level. Inasmuch as the I.Q. is regarded as
a measure of intellectual proficiency, we should expect to find a
relationship between constancy in academic standing and constancy
in respect to I.Q. By "constancy in academic standing" refer-
ence is made to the fact that we are dealing with children of
approximately the same age and of the same level of intellectual
proficiency as measured by grade in school. Greater constancy
51 Learning, R. E., Tests and Norms for Vocational Guidance at the Fifteen
Year Old Performance Level. Psychological Clinic, 1922, 14, 193-220.
8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
with respect to I.Q. is shown by the lessened values of the sigmas
and of the coefficients of variation, in the case of groups II and III.
That there is a real difference in I.Q. between groups I and III has
been established. Since mental age is a concept so hard to define,
it may be well to leave it out of our consideration at this time. As
far as these three groups are concerned, there does not appear to be
a discernible difference in proficiency at the performance tests.
So it seems permissible to draw this conclusion as a result of the
work done in this part of our investigation: for practical purposes
essentially the same results would be secured as norms for fifth
grade children if those composing the middle 40 per cent in the
range of chronological age were tested as were secured by testing
the larger number. Nearly the same norms would be secured by
testing the middle 40 per cent of these, or approximately the middle
20 per cent of the total group. This is not true of I.Q. It is inter-
esting that with this increase in homogeneity from group I, through
group II, to group III with respect to I.Q., there is a rise in average
I.Q. from 98.9 for group I to 101.3 for group II to 103.1 for group
III. These sub-groups do not appear to be superior in the non-
verbal performance tests. Apparently this conclusion would be
true also of third grade children.
The reverse of this conclusion is the inference that in so far as
the children tested are representative of fifth and of third grade
children, these norms which are used in the Psychological Clinic
of the University of Pennsylvania are adequate standards for what
should be expected of children within the fifth and third grades,
particularly of those whose chronological ages lie within the middle
40 per cent median-modal group.
At this point attention should be drawn to two problems which
presented themselves for consideration. Some of the curves are
extremely skewed; especially those for the Cylinders and for the
Dearborn Formboard. This is caused by the fact that the mean,
median, and modal scores fall well toward the low end of the range
of scores and by the failures which are found. The second problem
was how to treat the failures. Being unable to find in the literature
any precedent as to the treatment of failures in the assembling of
statistical data, it was decided to make two sets of calculations;
one omitting failures and the other retaining the failures but
regarding them as occurring within the step-interval next above the
highest step-interval within the range of successful scores. Where
two sets of numbers appear in the tables for a given statistical
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 9
measure, the numbers representing the measure "without failures"
are printed in italics.
Part II
A Comparison of Three More Sub-groups, with the Total Group, in
Terms of the Verbal Test Scores
In the ease of groups II and III we were concerned with chil-
dren of approximately the same age, the ranges being respectively
fifteen and six months. The intellectual level of the 500 fifth grade
children tested may be regarded as having been raised to a certain
level of achievement by the fact of inclusion within the fifth grade.
All of the children successfully doing the work of the fifth grade
have attained this level as measured by grade. However, our
whole group of fifth grade children, ranging in age from eight
years and eleven months to seventeen years and three months, must
include many children considerably accelerated and many con-
siderably retarded for grade. Some of them may have required
a period of time twice as long as that required by others to reach
this level. Regarding progress through the grades as a demon-
strated proficiency in terms of "surpassing intellectual levels,'
the amount of acceleration or of retardation for grade would seem
to furnish one index of relative intellectual efficiency. If we are
interested in the relative intellectual efficiency of groups of chil-
dren within the fifth grade, we must consider two factors which are
involved. The constant factor is grade standing; chronological
a?e is the variable. The ratio of the higher chronological ages of
the retarded children to this grade level will differ from the ratio
?f the lower chronological ages of the accelerated children to this
same level. In terms of this ratio the retarded children may be
Regarded as relatively lacking in intellectual efficiency and the
accelerated children as relatively high in intellectual efficiency.
Reference is made to this ratio when the phrase "relative intellec-
tual efficiency" is employed. It may at first appear that the words
proficiency'' and '1 efficiency'' as employed in this investigation are
really synonymous. It seems possible, however, to discern a shade
?f difference in meaning whereby the word "efficiency" is pref-
erable when referring to the relationship between grade and age.
By "fifth grade proficiency" we mean demonstrated ability to do
fifth grade work. "Efficiency," retaining something of its me-
chanical signification, seems to include also the factor of time and
effort involved in reaching this level of achievement.
10 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Since limitation in the range of chronological ages was found
not to result in a corresponding limitation in the range of test
scores, it is evident, as we should expect, that not the same factors
are contributory to proficiency in each of the tests and to rate of
progress through the grades. It seemed worthwhile, therefore, to
compare the test scores of the accelerated pupils and of the re-
tarded ones; to learn in which, if any, of these test scores a relative
proficiency or deficiency would be found corresponding to the
relative acceleration or retardation for grade as the case might be.
If the accelerated children should be found to be relatively superior
to the retarded children in respect to any test or tests and the re-
tarded children relatively inferior in the same, we might assume
some relationship between the abilities making for acceleration at
school and for proficiency at the particular test or tests. If both
of these groups of children should give very similar results in a
given test, there would seem to be little or no relationship between
the abilities required for progress through the grades and for
relative proficiency in the tests; or else that still other factors
entering in played a dominant role.
In view of the results which were obtained, it seemed advisable
for greater clarity in presentation to treat first the findings in
respect to I.Q., mental age, and visual memory-span; leaving for
later consideration the discussion of the performance test results.
Consequently three more sub-groups were separated out for study.
Group IY consisted at each grade level of the upper thirty per cent
of the chronological age distribution, group V consisted of the lower
thirty per cent of the chronological age distribution, and group VI
consisted of a group specially selected on the basis of reverse
memory span. At the fifth grade level group IV consisted of 148
cases with chronological age ranging from eleven years and seven
months to seventeen years and three months; group V consisted of
137 cases with clu-onological age ranging from eight years and
eleven months to ten years and three months; group VI consisted
of those cases having a reverse memory span of 5 or 6. At the
third grade level group IV consisted of 138 cases with chronological
age ranging from nine years and five months to fourteen years and
eight months; group V consisted of 147 cases with chronological
age ranging from seven years and two months to eight years and
five months; group VI consisted of those cases having a reverse
memory span of 4 or 5.
The raw scores were treated statisticallv in the same manner as
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 11
were those of groups II and III in the first part of this study. The
statistical measures appear in the tables in the columns marked
"IV" and "V." The sigma differences and the "z's," resulting
from the division of the sigma differences into the differences be-
tween the means of group and sub-group, also are shown. In each
case we are comparing the sub-group IV or V with the whole group,
group I.
Group IV
Group IV, which for convenience we shall call the "old" group,
is significantly poorer than the whole group in I.Q., mental age,
and in visual memory span. The average I.Q. at the fifth grade
level is 83.3 and the median is 83. The index of significance?' V'
is far in excess of the required 3. It is true that this "old"
group is overweighted in chronological age, which would tend to
lower the I.Q. The average mental age also is four months below
that of the whole group and the "2" of 4 denotes reliability. In
visual memory span also, this group is inferior and there is a real
difference. The average and median audito-vocal forward spans also
are lower for this group. If memory span is indicative of com-
plexity of mental organization,0 or of native ability to organize
knowledge, we are not surprised to find a correspondence between
relative intellectual deficiency in terms of school progress and rela-
tive deficiency in visual memory span. At the third grade level
We find group IV, again the "old" group, significantly inferior in
I.Q., apparently inferior in visual memory span, and slightly al-
though not significantly superior in mental age. This slight superi-
ority in mental age would appear to be an anomaly. The thought
is suggested that the tests of the Binet-Simon scale up to and
including the nine-year level?a mental age of nine years being
roughly the mean and median for third grade children?are not
yet of a sufficiently intellectual nature to weed out the non-intel-
lectuals. The separation of the sheep from the goats by the Binet-
Simon scale appears to be more thorough at the higher age levels.
These results seem to indicate that the retarded children who are
relatively inefficient in intellectual achievement, as we are defining
this concept, are relatively deficient in comparison with the whole
group, in respect to I.Q., mental age, and visual memory span.
This relationship is less definite at the third grade level and does
not hold in respect to mental age.
0 Brotemarkle, R. A., Some Memory Span Problems?An Analytical Study
at the College Adult Level. Psychological Clinic, 1924, 15, 229-258.
12 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Group V
This group, called for convenience the "young" group, is com-
posed of 137 cases ranging in chronological age from eight years
and eleven months to ten years and three months, representing the
lower 30 per cent in age of the whole group at the fifth grade level.
This group is significantly better than the whole group in I.Q. and
visual memory span and slightly better, apparently, in mental age.
This group appears to be relatively homogeneous with respect to
I.Q. The standard deviation and the coefficient of variation are
relatively low as compared with the whole group. However the
range in I.Q. is from 71 to 156. A superiority in respect to mental
age is probable, although not statistically certain. The median
mental age of the group is eleven months in excess of the median
chronological age of ten years. The average chronological age is
nine years and ten months. Jones 10 in her study of 120 superior
children states that her group shows a median acceleration of five
years in mental age over chronological age. Our "young" group
is significantly better than the whole group in visual memory span.
At the third grade level group V, ranging in chronological age
from seven years and two months to eight years and five months,
proves to significantly better in I.Q. and slightly, although not
significantly, better in visual memory span. The mental age is again
anomalous. The "young" group appears to be slightly, although
not significantly, inferior to group I and to the "old" group. Is
there again an evidence that the Binet-Simon scale at the lower year
levels is not very discriminative of intellectual differences?
The "young" group, therefore, gives us a positive relationship
between relative intellectual efficiency and relative proficiency in
respect to I.Q. and visual memory span. In the case of the "old"
group there was a relative deficiency in I.Q., mental age, and
visual memory span at the fifth grade level. Jones states that in
all forms of the memory span used, the median of her superior
group was that of the high school level. That our "young" ac-
celerated group is superior in visual memory span suggests, apart
from the pedagogical acceleration of the group, that we are here
concerned with children possessing some measure of intellectual
superiority.
Jones, Alice M., An Analytical Study of One Hundred Twenty Superior
Children. Psychological Clinic, 1925, 1G, 19-76.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 13
Group VI
Since we are interested in the relationship of relative intel-
lectual efficiency and of relative proficiency in I.Q., mental age,
and in visual memory span, a sixth group was selected from the
cases making up group I. Group VI is composed of 72 fifth grade
children having reverse spans of 5 or 6. Group VI, at the third
grade level, consists of 171 cases having a reverse span of 4 or 5.
Both Starr 11 and McCaulley 12 have stressed the diagnostic value
of the reverse memory span and this claim was influential in the
decision to make high reverse memory span a criterion for the
selection of this sub-group. Our presupposition was that this
would prove to be a superior group. The tables show that such
is the case. However, as the age range for this group is from nine
years and one month to thirteen years and eleven months, and as a
reverse span of 5 is not nearly so good in the case of a child nearly
fourteen years old as it is for a ten-year-old child, differences in
whatever abilities the reverse span measures will be included within
this group.
The average I.Q. is nearly three points higher than that of the
"young" group, which is the next highest group with respect to
I Q. The median I.Q. of group VI is nearly five points higher
than that of the "young" group. In passing it may be mentioned
that the average I.Q. of 143 cases within group I having a reverse
sPan of 2 or 3 was 90.6. Since the I.Q.'s of group VI are not
mfluenced to as great an extent by lowness of chronological age
as are those of the "young" group, the superiority of group VI
in respect to I.Q. may be especially significant. This group is by
far the best of the groups with respect to visual memory span. As
compared with the whole group the index of significance is 7.09.
The average visual memory span is 7.8 and alone of the groups the
median is 8. This group is also relatively superior to the other
groups in audito-vocal forward span. The average is about one
digit higher than that of the other groups. The median mental
age of this group is fourteen months higher than that of the total
group and the difference is significant.
The criterion for the selection of a corresponding group at the
11 Starr, A. S., The Diagnostic Value of the Audito-Yoeal Digit Memory
Span. Psychological Clinic, 1923, 15, Nos. 3-4.
McCaulley, Selinda, A Study of the Relative Values of the Audito-Vocal
Forward Memory Span and the Reverse Span as Diagnostic Tests. Psycho-
logical Clinic, 1928, 16, 277-291.
14 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
third grade level seemed to be a reverse span of 4 or 5. At this
level also group VI is significantly superior to the whole group in
I.Q., mental age, and in visual memory span.
Group VI may be said to resemble the "young" group in
respect to the factors making for success in the tests now under
consideration. Both sub-groups are relatively superior in these
respects but the superiority of group VI appears to be more pro-
nounced. Inspection of both the charts and of the tables for the
third and fifth grade levels will make this clear. Thus it would
appear that a high reverse memory span is a better criterion of
intellectual superiority than is acceleration for grade. The high
diagnostic value of the reverse span is confirmed. In spite of the
fact that the median chronological age of group VI is six months
higher than that of group V, which would have an influence upon
the I.Q., the median I.Q. of group VI is five points higher than that
of the "young" group. Should it be objected that the very fact
of a high reverse span would tend to raise the I.Q. of group VI, we
have still the higher visual span to consider.
To the positive relationship obtained between relative pro-
ficiency or deficiency in school progress (which we are calling
"relative intellectual efficiency") and relative proficiency or de-
ficiency in I.Q., visual memory span, and perhaps mental age, we
now may add a positive relationship between these and the reverse
memory span. To serve as a check upon this conclusion inter-
correlations were made between I.Q., visual memory span and
reverse memory span, at the fifth grade level. The "Product-
Moment" method devised by Pearson was employed. The follow-
ing r's were obtained: reverse memory span with I.Q., .436 ? .025;
reverse memory span with visual memory span, .442 ? .023; I.Q.
with visual memory span, .40 ? .025.
Since an "r" of -j- .40 may be regarded as indicative of a degree
of correspondence analogous to that found to exist between siblings,
these correlations although not high may be regarded as fitting in
with the interrelationships otherwise obtained. The r's are ap-
proximately sixteen times their probable errors and the number
of cases (500) is large. Therefore the conclusion may be drawn
that a relationship exists between visual and reverse memory span,
I.Q., perhaps mental age, and the factors making for success at
school.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 15
Part III
A Study of Groups IV, V, and VI with Regard to Relative Pro-
ficiency at the Non-verbal Performance Tests
If general competency may be defined as the ability "to succeed
in the competitive events of a lifetime" or as the ability to make
successful adaptations, we must think of it as an entity not entirely
measurable but as involving an estimate based in part upon demon-
strated proficiencies and upon other considerations not subject to
measurement. The proficiencies which we have been considering,
and between which Ave have found a relationship, are only some
?f the different proficiencies which can be demonstrated. It hap-
pens that they have a relationship to relative intellectual pro-
ficiency as we have defined it. Other proficiencies are required for
success in the competitive events of a lifetime and it is with this in
mind that observations and measurements are made of a number of
test performances in the Psychological Clinic of the University of
Pennsylvania. The three non-verbal performance tests most fre-
quently emploj'ed are the Witmer Formboard, the Witmer Cyl-
inders, and the Dearborn Formboard No. 1C. Reference is here
made to the various "abilities" or competencies exhibited in the
Avay the child manipulates concrete objects, comprehends the prob-
lem and carries it through to completion. Since it is of value in
making an analytical diagnosis and an estimate of competency to
discern as fully as possible the factors involved at different levels
in the successful completion of a test, it seemed worth while to
compare again groups IV, V, and VI, this time with reference to
relative proficiency at these three performance tests. Since these
groups vary in relative intellectual efficiency, a corresponding rela-
tive proficiency or deficiencj' in scores for any test would seem to
imply that the problems presented by the test were intellectual in
character. The absence of variation between groups would seem
to indicate that quite other factors are dominant in successful per-
formance or else that the test is too easy at that particular level.
In this case it becomes an efficiency test at the given level. The
assumption is made that relative proficiency in time scores cor-
responds to a greater development, refinement, or use of whatever
abilities are involved in the performance of the test. Easby-Grave's
study of first grade children would seem to negative this assump-
tion at that level.
16 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The Witmer Formboard
Considering first the statistical results obtained from treatment
of test scores at the fifth grade level, we find that as between group
and sub-group the differences are so slight as to be negligible. In
no one of the groups does either the mean or median score vary
as much as one second from that of the whole group. The sigmas
and coefficients of variation are very similar and the obtained
differences can in no instance be regarded as indicative of a true
difference greater than zero between group and sub-group. At the
third grade level the differences are slightly greater. The "old"
group is possibly, not certainly, better and the "young" group is
possibly poorer than the whole group. The "z's" are respectively
1.8 and 2.37. From this it appears that, except in cases of extreme
deficiency, to give the Witmer Formboard as a test at the fifth grade
level is superfluous. For the normal child within the fifth grade,
this is merely a test of efficiency, as no real problem exists. Murph}r,
in the discussion of his results obtained at the fifth grade level,
points out that the solution of the Witmer Formboard at this level
is a display of efficiency rather than of intelligence. The present
study further shows that it makes no distinction between the ac-
celerated and the retarded children at this level. It may be
slightly selective at the third grade level. The "young" and the
"old" groups tend to rate respectively a little poorer and a little
better quantitatively in its solution.
The Witmer Cylinder Test
This test is described by Paschal.13 Inspection of results shows
that the differences between the whole group and the sub-groups in
average and median scores are not significant. In no case does the
average score of any sub-group vary from the average of the whole
group by as much as six seconds. This is true both when the fail-
ures are omitted and when they are included. In part I of this
study it was indicated that groups II and III appear to be slightly
better than the whole group in average score but that the differ-
ences are not statistically significant. When we examine the aver-
age and median scores of the accelerated and of the retarded
groups, the latter appears to be slightly superior and the former
slightly inferior in this test. Statistical treatment of these results
indicates that there are 84 chances in 100 ("2" equals 1.02) that
13 Paschal, F. C., The Witmer Cylinders. Hersliey Press, Hersliey, Pa.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 17
there is a true difference greater than zero between the whole group
and our "young" group. It is then possible, although not certain,
that the young accelerated children within the fifth grade are
relatively inferior in the performance of this test. At the third
grade level inferiority 011 the part of the young accelerated children
at the "Witmer Formboard was found. Our "old" group IV, at
the fifth grade level, shows seven failures at the Cylinder test as
against five failures for the "young" group, but the decile ratings
are poorer for the "young" group. Greater differences between
the whole group and the sub-groups appear at the third grade level.
The mean and median scores, both omitting and including failures,
are better for the "old" group than for the whole group. The
median is 30 seconds better in the case of the "old" group when we
include failures. The mean score of the "young" group is about
20 seconds poorer than that of the whole group. The inclusion of
failures accentuates the differences. While 16 out of 138 cases
fail this test at the first trial, 39 out of 147 within the "young"
group fail. The "2's" (table IV) show that the "old" group is
significantly better and the "young" group significantly poorer
than the whole group at the third grade level. The real differences
found at this level may be expressed in another form. Murphy
states that at the fifth grade level 70.6 per cent accomplish the test
Jn less than two minutes. If we apply the two-minute time limit
to the "old" and "young" groups at this level it is found that 78
Per cent of the former group succeed in performing the test within
two minutes and that 76 per cent of the latter group succeed within
that time limit; a difference of no significance. At the third grade
level the following results were obtained: 72 per cent of "old"
group succeed within three minutes; 54 per cent of "young" group
succeed within three minutes. More than four minutes would be
required to obtain 70 per cent of successes for the "young" group.
So we seem to find an inverse relationship between intellectual
efficiency as we have defined it?together with the related pro-
ficiencies in I.Q., mental age, and the memory spans?and relative
proficiency at the Witmer Cylinder test. The same thing may be
true of the Witmer Formboard at the third grade level. Age,
rather than relative intellectual efficiency, seems to make for success
at the Cylinder test. Group VI, which pretty generally ranks
highest in I.Q., mental age, and visual memory span, is not sig-
nificantly different from the whole group in average score at the
Cylinder test. Group VI at the third grade level shows 14 per
18 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
cent of failures at this test, while the ''old" retarded group shows
less than 12 per cent of failures. This is in accord with Paschal,14
who standardized the Witmer Cylinder test. He calls attention to
a continuous decrease in time of the means, quintiles, and medians
with increasing age and finds a decreasing range of distribution
also with increasing age. He regards the cylinders as a satisfactory
test for adults as well as for young children. The findings of this
present study reveal that while the test is selective of abilities of
some sort at the third grade level, it is much less so at the level
represented by the fifth grade. If results at this level have any
significance, the older subjects seem to be superior.
All of this seems to indicate that proficiency ratings at the
Witmer Cylinder test are not very significant at the fifth grade
level. Like the Witmer Formboard it has, although to a less de-
gree, become an efficiency test. This does not mean that the quali-
tative aspects of the performance of children at this level are not
important. At the third grade level, the test is indicative of in-
dividual differences of some kind. The measures noted in the pre-
ceding paragraph and the more than double number of failures
for the "young" as compared with the "old" group suggest that
the differences brought out by this test are dependent upon other
factors as well as upon those of efficiency. Probably the test is
of value at this level, quantitatively as well as qualitatively. Upon
whatever abilities success at this test depends, evidently they are
other than those which characterize relative intellectual efficiency.
The Dearborn Formboard
Learning states that the Dearborn Formboard 15 seems to pro-
vide a real intelligence test for the fifteen-year-old level. More
recent investigations have disclosed that, reducing the time limit
to five minutes, approximately 30 per cent of fifth grade chil-
dren and about 70 per cent of third grade children fail. Clearly
the test is too hard to be of much value at the third grade level,
but it is surely of value at the fifth and probably at the fourth
grade level. Learning and others have indicated the great im-
portance of this test. Because of its complexity "it gives the ex-
14 Paschal, F. C., A Report on the Standardization of the Witmer Cylinder
Test. Psychological Clinic, 1918, 12, 54-59.
is W. F. Dearborn, J. E. Anderson, A. Christiansen, Formboard and Con-
struction Tests of Mental Ability. Journal of Educational Psychology, 1916,
7, 448.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 19
aminer an insight into the way the child sets about solving new
problems." Not only must the child employ the usual abilities
displayed in the successful completion of a performance test, but
the forms must be reconstructed in such a way as to fill up the
empty spaces. Judgment is involved and displayed in the way
that the subject goes about the solution of the problem.
Inspection of table 6 shows the remarkable similarity between
the different results of the whole group and of the two sub-
groups discussed in the first part of this study. When we turn
our attention to groups IV and V we find that the "old" group
(group IV) appears to be a little poorer than the whole group
although statistically the difference is not significant. Ihe 2'
is 1.33. The apparent superiority of the "young" group to the
whole group is about as great as the apparent inferiority of the
"old" group. The differences are more pronounced when we in-
clude failures. With the ten minute time limit for successful per-
formance of the test, 11.5 per cent of the "old" group and 5 per
cent of the "young" group are unsuccessful. When we reduce
the time limit to five minutes, less than 22 per cent of the "young"
group fail while 34 per cent of the "old" group fail to complete
the test. Statistically the superiority of the "young" group is not
quite established. There are 99 chances in 100 ("2" equals 2.3)
?f a true difference greater than zero between the whole group and
this sub-group.
If we now look to the relative proficiency at the Dearborn Form-
hoard of group VI, the group with high reverse memory span, we
find very little difference between the means and medians of the
whole group and sub-group when failures are omitted in the statis-
tical treatment of results. The measures are shown in the tables.
However, when we include failures, treating them as already in-
dicated, the difference is emphasized. The mean of group VI is
29 seconds lower (better) than that of the whole group. The
medians also of the sub-group are better. Making due allowance
for the difference in size of the group and sub-group, failures occur
with three times the frequency within the whole group. When we
reduce the time limit to five minutes, over 27 per cent of the cases
within group VI fail to accomplish this test. Thus while fewer
failures, with the ten minute time limit, are found for this group
with the high reverse span, with the shorter time limit the "young"
group shows the lowest per cent of failures. Perhaps in this young
accelerated group we meet with ji speed factor which takes the
20 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
form in this test of a quicker perception of form relations, analysis
of the problem, and quickness of problem solving ability. Statis-
tically, there are 97 chances in 100 ("z" equals 1.9) that there is a
true difference greater than zero between sub-group VI and the
whole group.
The test scores of the groups which we are now studying at the
third grade level were treated differently. Owing to the large
number of failures which occurred the results are not tabulated.
The per cent of failures for the whole group and for groups II and
III are remarkably close, being 68, 70, and 68 respectively. 60.8
per cent of the "old" group fail and 73.4 per cent of the "young"
group. This is the reverse of the findings at the fifth grade level.
When we recall that the age range of the children composing the
"young" group is from seven years and two months to eight years
and five months, whereas the range for the "old" group is from
nine years and five months to fourteen years and eight months, we
are not surprised that the results are not comparable with those
of similar groups of fifth grade children. Group VI, with the high
reverse span, gives us the lowest per cent of failures among the
third grade children; 58.4 per cent of this group are not successful
at the Dearborn Formboard. However the age range of this group
is from seven years and two months to fourteen years and four
months. In view of these findings it seems proper to leave these
third grade results out of our consideration and to confine our
attention to the fifth grade children.
Finally, group IV, the "old" group, was compared with the
"young" group V and with group VI (high reverse span) to find
the reliability of the difference between these groups in the time
required for performance of the Dearborn Formboard. The
formula for diverse groups was used:
sigma differences = V sigma2 (av. 1) -f~ sigma2 (av. 2)
in which sigma squared (av. 1) refers to the standard error of the
average or mean of one group and sigma squared (av. 2) refers to
the standard error of the average of the group with which it is
compared. When groups IV and V are compared, it is found that
the chances are 98 in 100 ("z" equals 2.1) that the true difference
is greater than zero. When group VI is compared with group IV,
there are 98 chances in 100 ("z" equals 2.1). In each case it is
the "old" group which seems to be inferior. Thus the groups
superior in I.Q. and in visual memory span seem to be superior at
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 21
the Dearborn Formboard?although statistically there is not quite
absolute certainty?to group IV, which is relatively inferior in I.Q.
and in visual memory span. The reference is to children at the
fifth grade level.
Summarizing the findings relative to the proficiencies of the
whole fifth grade group and of the sub-groups, we find that the
"young" group and the group characterized by high reverse span
appear to be superior at this test, although we do not obtain statis-
tical certainty. Leaving failures out of consideration, the "young"
group may prove to be a little quicker in the performance of the
test. With the short time limit, the per cent of failures is lowest
for the "young" group; with the long time limit the per cent of
failures is lowest for group VI. The "old" group is probably
poorer at this test and gives relatively more failures. Relating
these findings to those of part 2, we state that those groups which
proved to be relatively more superior in I.Q., mental age, and visual
memory span, also show relative superiority at the Dearborn Form-
board. Group IV?the "old" group?is relatively deficient in
these factors and at the Dearborn Formboard.
Scores at the three performance tests were then correlated with
'?Q. and reverse memory span, using the "Product-Moment"
method. The following "r's" were obtained:
With Dearborn Formboard
Witmcr Cyl.
Witmer Formboard
Reverse Memory Span with
I.Q. with
+ .137
?.029
+ .227
?.029
+ .026
? .03
+ .095
?.049
+ .012
?.03
Ninety-eight cases within group III were treated as follows,
employing the Otis correlation sheet, and yielded the following r's:
Dearborn Formboard with mental age .206; Witmer Cylinders with
mental age .049.
All of these correlations are low. There is a slightly higher
"r" for the Dearborn Formboard with I.Q. and reverse memory
span than in the case of the other performance tests. Apart from
the correlations, we seem to be justified in drawing the conclusion
that the factors making for relative proficiency at the Dearborn
Formboard are more intellectual in nature than in the case of the
Witmer Formboard and Cylinders.
22 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
General Discussion
At the third grade level, the Cylinder test seems to be selective
of relative superiority or inferiority in whatever abilities are in-
volved in rapid performance of the test. Since the "old" group
is significantly better and the "young" group significantly poorer
than the whole group and since 91 failures occur within the whole
group, the test does seem to present a problem at this level. Ef-
ficiency rather than intelligence on the part of fifth grade children
appears to be involved in success at the Cylinder test. Only 17
failures occur within the whole group and the apparent differences
between the sub-groups are much less pronounced. Proficiency rat-
ings are of little significance except as efficiency indices. There
appears to be no positive relationship between what we have called
"relative intellectual efficiency" and relative proficiency at the
Cylinders. Whatever relationship may exist, appears to be a
negative one. Relative proficiency in terms of this test may exist at
a low intellectual level. Whatever abilities are tested, in the case
of third grade children, are probably more specific in nature, may
have little relationship to each other and certainly are not related
to the group of "intellectual" abilities.10
The complex of abilities involved in relative proficiency at the
Dearborn Formboard includes those which are related to mental
complexity of the kind probably tapped by the memory span tests.
The fact that the "old" group is probably relatively inferior at the
Dearborn test suggests that the relative deficiency of the "old"
group in the factors making for progress at school more than out-
weighs the contribution of more specific abilities also involved in
successful completion of the test.
Conclusions
1. For practical purposes in securing norms for fifth grade
children, essentially the same results would be secured if the chil-
dren composing the middle 40 per cent in chronological age range
were tested as were secured by testing 500 children. Nearly the
same results would be secured by testing the middle 20 per cent
in age range. This is not true of I.Q.
2. A close relationship exists between the abilities represented
in visual and reverse memory span, I.Q., and the factors making
for proficiency in progress through the grades.
Freeman, F. N., Mental Tests. New York: Houghton and Mifflin. 1926.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 23
3. Proficiency ratings at the Witmer Formboard and the Wit-
mer Cylinders are not significant at the fifth grade level except as
efficiency indices.
4. The findings of this study indicate that the visual memory
span is as indicative of intellectual competency as is the reverse
span.
5. The factors making for relative proficiency at the Dearborn
Formboard appear to be of a more "intellectual" nature than those
making for success at the Witmer Formboard or Cylinders.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bkotemarkle, R. A. Some Memory Span Problems?An Analytical Study
at the College Adult Level. Psychological Clinic, 1924, 15, 229?258.
Dearborn, W. F., Anderson, J. E., Christiansen, A. O. Formboard and
Construction Tests of Mental Ability. Journal of Educational Psychol-
ogy, 1916, 7, 445-458.
Easby-Grave, Charlotte. Tests and Norms at the Six Year Old Performance
Level. Psychological Clinic, 1924, 15, 261-300.
Fernberger, S. W. Statistical and Non-Statistical Interpretation of Test
Results. Psychological Clinic, 1922, 14, 68-72.
Freeman, F. N. Mental Tests. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1926.
Garrett, Henry E. Statistics in Psychology and Education. Longmans,
Green and Co. 1926.
Jones, Alice M. An Analytical Study of One Hundred Twenty Superior
Children. Psychological Clinic, 1925, 16, 19-76.
Leaming, R. E. Tests and Norms for Vocational Guidance at the Fifteen
Year Old Performance Level. Psychological Clinic, 1922, 14, 193-220.
McCaulley, Selinda. A Study of the Relative Values of the Audito-Vocal
Forward Memory Span and the Reverse Span as Diagnostic Tests. Psy-
chological Clinic-, 1928, 16, 277-291.
Murphy, Miles. The Ten Year Level of Competency. Psychological Clinic,
1928, 17, 33-60.
Paschal, F. C. The Witmer Cylinders. Hershey Press, Hershey, Pa.
. A Report on the Standardization of the Witmer Cylinder Test. Psycho-
logical Clinic, 1918, 12, 54-59.
Starr, A. S. The Diagnostic Value of the Audito-Vocal Digit Memory Span.
Psychological Clinic, 1923, 15, Nos. 3-4.
Witmer, Ligiitner. Intelligence?A Definition. Psychological Clinic, 1922,
14, 65-67.
-. Psychological Diagnosis and the Psychonomic Orientation in Analytical
Science. Psychological Clinic, 1925, 16, 1-18.
24 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
STATISTICAL TABLES *
Fifth Grade Level
Table I
Intelligence Quotient
Group
Cases
Mean
Sigma
Sk.
P.E.
Mean
Sigma diff.
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
500
215
98
148
137
72
98.9
101.3
103.1
83.3
111.9
114.6
16.8
12.8
11.5
12.4
12.8
16.6
16.9
12.7
11.1
15.0
11.4
14.5
.50
.58
.78
.68
.73
1.3
.813
1.17
.94
1.79
2.9
3.5
17.6
13.8
8.7
Table II
Mental Age
Group
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Cases
500
215
98
148
137
Mean
130.3
131.6
133.4
126.3
132.6
144.5
Sigma
14.9
15.3
14.3
14.0
14.4
16.1
Sk.
11.4
11.6
10.8
11.1
10.8
11.1
P.E.
Mean
.14
.69
.97
.77
.83
1.26
Sigma diff.
.77
1.3
.98
1.10
1.71
1.7
2.38
4.06
2.1
8.3
Table III
Visual Memory Span
Group
Cases
Mean
Sigma
P.E.
Mean
Sigma diff.
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
500
215
98
148
137
72
6.89
6.91
6.87
6.59
7.22
7.8
1.04
.97
.96
1.05
.98
1.06
.38
.29
3.9
4.4
7.09
Table IV
Wither Formboard (First Trial)
Group
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Cases
500
215
98
148
137
72
Mean
20.3
26.9
26.9
26.0
25.7
2.5.8
Sigma
6.3
6.3
6.8
6.89
5.78
5.93
Sk.
23.9
23.2
25.3
25.7
22.5
22.9
P.E.
Mean
Sigma diff.
.32
.605
.45
.42
.65
2.1
.99
.7
1.4
.77
* Notes on the Tables.
The following tables do not include the results for the visual memory
span and the Dearborn Formboard at the third grade level. The decile tables
for group VI are likewise omitted in botli grades. Mental age is shown in
months; time for the performance tests is given in seconds. Unless otherwise
indicated the skewness is positive. In only two cases was it negative; the plus
signs were omitted where the skewness was positive. The numbers in paren-
theses after "F" indicate number of failures.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 25
Table V
Wither Cylinders (First Trial)
Group Cases Mean
1 500 99.7
II
III
215 96.9
91.8
93.5
iv 86-7
IV 148 99.1
v 88.7
V 137 104.5
... 96.8
V1 72 97.0
91.0
Sigma
61.2
48.0
53.4
42.9
53.8
3S.7
66.4
48.6
66.1
53.7
56.1
44-1
Sk.
1.0
.92
.88
.82
.97
.93
1.23
1.13
1.01
.88
.96
.88
61.0
51.8
55.1
46.7
57.6
44.6
67.0
54.8
63.0
59.0
57.8
48.4
P.E.
Mean diff.
1.82
2.43 3.04 .92
3.64 5.04 1.23
3.64 4.42 .13
3.78 4.67 1.02
4.42 10.29 .26
Table VI
Dearborn Formboard (First Trial)
Group Cases Mean
1 500 259.8
., 223.8
11 215 265.2
TTI 226.7
III 9S 257.1
. 225.3
IV 148 275.5
V 137 234.6
v. 214.2
VI 72 230.8
220.0
Sigma
162.2
122.1
168.6
127.2
160.9
125.7
168.6
123.7
140.5
112.1
135.1
120.3
Sk.
62.4
54.5
63.0
56.0
62.2
55.8
61.0
54.0
59.0
52.3
58.5
54.7
P.E. ...
Mean bl?ma dlff-
4.87
7.68 8.43 .64
10.89 14.0 .18
9.27 11.79 1.33
8.04 10.83 2.3
10.65 15.25 l.(
Third Grade Level
Table I
Intelligence Quotient
Group Cases Mean
I 496 99.9
II 211 100.9
III 115 101.2
IV 138 88.1
V 147 109.5
VI 171 106.1
Sigma
14.4
11.5
12.5
13.5
11.1
14.9
Sk.
14.3
11.4
12.3
15.0
10.2
14.0
P E
Mean S'Kma dlff-
.43
.53 .88 1.19
.78 1.06 1.27
.76 .94 12.5
.61 .82 11.7
.76 .88 7.0
Table II
Mental Age
Group Cases Mean
I 496 108.5
II 211 108.6
III 115 108.6
IV 138 109.3
V 147 107.7
VI 171 114.1
Sigma
11.4
11.3
12.5
12.7
10.1
11.4
Sk.
10.5
10.4
11.5
11.6
9.3
9.9
Mean SiKma diff-
.34
.52
.78
.72 .88 .90
.56 .74 1.1
.58 .68 8.1
2G T1IE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Table III
Witmer Formboard (First Trial)
Group
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Cases
496
211
115
138
147
171
Mean
34.8
34.5
33.5
33.4
36.3
35.2
Sigma
9.7
9.0
7.9
10.8
8.9
10.2
Sk.
.64
.24
.16
.54
.62
.90
28.0
26.0
23.5
32.0
24.0
29.0
P.E.
Mean
Sigma diff.
.498
.693
.75
.64
.51
.52
1.8
1.8
2.37
.77
Table IV
Witmer Cylinders (First Trial)
Group
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
496
211
115
138
147
171
Mean
168.1
136.5
171.1
142.9
162.3
138.6
141.8
119.9
188.2
144-8
159.4
133.9
Sigma
87.1
62.2
83.9
61.8
84.7
65.7
81.7
62.lt
87.7
59.5
84.9
60.6
Sk.
.67
.53
.79
47
.76
.74
.87
?94
.55
.63
.69
?41
51.8
45.0
49.0
43.0
52.0
47.0
57.0
52.0
46.0
41.0
53.0
45.0
P.E.
Mean
2.62
2.07
3.88
3.14
5.48
4.4
4.66
3.8
4.85
3.77
4.35
3.36
Sigma diff.
4.53
6.97
6.02
6.02
5.4
.66
.83
4.3
3.3
1.6
DECILE TABLES
Fifth Grade Level
Grow* I
C.A.
%
I.Q.
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
VVtmr.
Fb.I
Wtmr.
Fb. II
Cvl.
I
Cyl.
II
Dbn.
Fb.I
Dbn.
Fb. II
Arith.
17-3
15-2
12-11
12-1
11-6
11-1
10-10
10-7
10-4
10-1
9-10
9-2
8-11
16-0
14-5
12-6
11-9
11-4
10-11
10-8
10-5
10-2
9-10
9-6
8-3
7-3
156.1
137.7
119.9
112.6
107.1
103
99.3
94.9
89.6
84.6
77.2
61.2
54
10
32
39
49
57
64
69
77
87
98
126
183
F
F(17)
24
30
40
45
50
53
57
60
65
71
83
146
F(l)
41
55
96
125
145
174
209
253
304
378
580
F
F(46)
35
38
57
70
83
95
106
126
153
194
264
F
F(14)
100
100
95
90
85
80
70
65
60
50
40
10
0
Group II
C.A.
11-6
11-6
11-4
11-2
11-0
10-11
10-9
10-8
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-4
M.A.
15-6
14-1
12-9
11-10
11-4
11-0
10-8
10-5
10-2
9-11
9-6
8-6
8-3
100
99
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1
0
I.Q.
146.4
133.6
117.8
111.1
105.5
102.4
100
96.8
94.5
89.8
85.8
77.2
71.4
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
Wtmr.
Fb. I
Wtmr.
Fb. II
Cyl.
I
32
42
52
60
65
71
78
90
98
120
158
F
F(5)
Cyl.
II
29
31
42
46
50
53
56
60
63
69
75
156
F(l)
Dbn.
Fb. I
41
52
87
125
149
177
217
263
327
396
F
F
F(22)
Dbn.
Fb. II
37
37
56
70
82
94
105
130
156
206
301
F
F(7)
Aritl).
100
100
95
90
85
75
70
65
60
50
40
10
0
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 27
Group III
C.A.
11
11
10-11
10-11
10-10
10-9
10-8
10-8
10-7
10-7
10-7
M.A.
I.Q.
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
Wtmr.
Fb. I
Wtmr.
Fb. II
Cyl.
I
Cyl.
II
Dbn.
Fb. I
Dbn.
Fb. II
Arith.
15-6
12-8
11-10
11-4
11-1
10-10
10-8
10-5
10-2
9-10
8-9
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
146.4
117.1
109.9
106.2
103.1
100.7
98.4
96.9
95.2
89.8
80.1
32
54
58
64
70
75
87
97
113
155
F (3)
34
43
47
50
53
57
61
65
69
75
156
46
89
127
149
174
209
261
329
372
586
F(8)
37
56
72
85
90
102
128
149
180
303
F(3)
100
95
90
80
75
70
65
60
50
35
0
Group IV
M.A.
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
Wtmr.
Fb. I
Wtmr.
Fb. II
Cyl.
I
Cyl.
II
Dbn.
Fb. I
Dbn.
Fb. II
Aritli.
14-5
13-8
11-11
11-4
10-11
10-8
10-6
10-2
9-10
9-7
9-0
7-3
7-3
100
99
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1
0
117.9
116.1
98.9
92.8
87.7
85.9
83.1
80.6
76.6
72.7
67.1
54
54
35
36
48
54
60
65
68
81
97
127
190
F
F(7)
24
29
37
41
44
49
52
60
62
68
81
282
282
41
66
110
132
150
184
234
273
343
415
F
F
F(17)
36
38
61
71
85
94
105
123
150
180
287
F
F(6)
100
100
95
90
85
80
70
65
60
50
35
10
10
Group V
M.A.
16-0
14-4
12-6
11-11
11-6
11-2
10-10
10-8
10-4
10-0
9-7
7-3
7-3
100
99
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1
0
I.Q.
156.1
151.3
128.7
121.1
117.2
112.5
109
107.3
105.7
101.6
97.5
71.3
71.3
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
Wtmr.
Fb. I
Wtmr.
Fb. II
Cyl.
I
36
42
52
60
66
75
80
88
101
132
205
F
F(5)
Cyl.
II
30
31
44
50
53
56
60
65
71
78
96
134
134
Dbn.
Fb. 1
55
59
102
125
135
162
190
231
275
330
427
F
F(7)
Dbn.
Fb. II
35
38
55
68
82
100
111
125
146
189
223
F
F(l)
Arith.
100
100
100
90
85
80
75
70
60
50
40
25
25
28 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
TniRD Grade Leved
Group I *
C.A.
14-4
12-10
10-2
9-8
9-4
9-0
8-10
8-3
8-1
7-7
7-5
13-9
11-10
10-3
9-8
9-4
9-2
9-0
8-9
8-6
8-3
7-9
7-0
6-6
I.Q.
143.7
137.5
119.2
112.2
107.5
103.9
100.3
96.6
92.8
88.4
81.8
67.5
59.4
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
W.F.B.
I
14
17
24
26
29
30
32
35
37
40
46
90
285
W.F.B.
II
12
16
20
22
24
25
26
28
30
32
37
80
117
Cyl.
I
39
45
70
85
97
120
142
165
198
260
F
F
F
Cyl.
II
32
38
54
60
65
70
77
83
91
109
145
F
F
D.F.B.
I
35
82
158
231
285
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
D.F.B.
II
37
46
84
110
132
160
190
230
300
F
F
F
F
Group II
C.A.
M.A.
I.Q.
%
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
W.F.B.
I
W.F.B.
II
Cyl.
I
Cyl.
II
D.F.B.
I
D.F.B.
II
37
54
91
116
138
168
197
242
F
F
F
F
F(67)
9-4
9-4
9-3
9-2
9-
8-11
8-10
8-6
8-6
12-5
11-5
10-3
9-7
9-3
9?
8-10
8-9
8-4
8-3
7-9
7-
7-
143.7
132
116.3
109.5
105.5
102.9
100
97.2
94.2
91.1
87.7
77.7
75
100
99
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1
0
17
20
25
27
29
30
31
35
37
41
46
190
285
15
16
21
23
24
25
26
28
30
34
40
100
117
50
60
75
90
106
131
148
181
205
273
F
F
F(36)
32
40
54
60
65
72
78
85
95
114
175
F
F(3)
J5
85
158
256
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
I1 (148)
Group III
C.A.
M.A.
I.Q.
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
W.F.B.
I
W.F.B.
II
Cyl.
I
Cyl.
II
D.F.B.
I
D.F.B.
II
9
9-
8-11
8-11
8-10
8-10
8-9
8-9
8-8
8-8
8-8
12-5
11-7
10-5
9-10
9-6
8-6
8-3
8-
7-9
7
7
143.7
132.3
117.5
111.3
106.7
102.7
98.1
95.3
93.3
90.5
87.7
77.7
77.7
100
99
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1
0
17
19
23
27
29
30
31
34
37
40
44
90
90
15
16
21
22
24
25
25
27
30
32
37
117
117
50
60
70
82
97
115
138
171
196
260
F
F
F(16)
32
36
52
58
63
69
75
83
88
111
173
F
F(l)
75
85
154
255
291
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F(79)
46
54
84
111
138
168
197
232
295
F
F
F
F (32)
* This table includes only the first 400 cases of the group to be examined.
STUDY OF TEST RESULTS 29
Group IV
C-A. M.A.
I.Q.
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
W.F.B.
I
W.F.B.
II
Cyl.
I
Cyl.
II
D.F.B.
I
D.F.B.
II
13-9
13-6
10-3
9-6
9-3
9-
9-
5-9
8-6
8-
7-9
6-6
6-6
143.7
140.9
101.5
96.5
93.2
90.2
86.8
83.9
81.8
78.2
71.9
54.5
54.5
100
99
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1
0
5
5
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2(17)
14
16
22
25
26
29
31
33
36
40
46
110
110
39
40
56
67
81
91
120
151
167
215
F
F
F(16)
33
37
48
57
62
65
71
78
87
102
131
F
F(l)
35
62
141
207
237
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F(84)
39
44
77
92
113
145
181
212
284
F
F
F
F(34)
Group V
C-A. M.A.
I.Q.
%
M.S.
Aud.
M.S.
Vis.
M.S.
Rev.
W.F.B.
1
W.F.B.
II
Cyl.
I
Cyl.
II
D.F.B.
I
D.F.B.
II
tr ""I
jf5 10-10
10-1
H 9-3
o 3 9-
8-2 8-9
t 8-6
8-6
7-H 8-3
l~9 7-9
7-2 6-9
7~2 6-9
142.8
139.3
122.9
119.1
114.8
111.2
108.4
105.6
103.9
101
96.9
81
81
100
99
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1
0
21
21
25
29
31
32
35
36
40
43
50
105
105
67
71
84
100
114
146
175
199
259
F
F
F
F(39)
47
47
60
66
75
80
85
96
106
122
164
F
F(l)
95
222
274
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F(108)
69
76
110
129
152
174
214
258
F
F
F
F
F(51)
