Three Case Studies in the Diagnostic Education of Children with Speech Defects
==============================================================================

By T. W. Richards
Formerly Clinic Teacher, Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania
Introduction
One of the common reasons for bringing children to the speech
clinic is a lack of speech, or an extremely slow development of the
speech process. The diagnosis of these defects in speech must
necessarily be based on an understanding of the several causes
which may be responsible for the existing condition. The speech
clinic at the University of Pennsylvania, under the direction of
Dr. Edwin B. Twitmyer, has suggested that there are at least five
specific reasons why a child does not learn to talk. These are (1)
deafness, (2) negativism, (3) amentia, (4) anatomical defect of
the mechanism required to produce speech, and (5) defect due to
brain injury. It will be seen at once that the differential diag-
nosis demands a varied clinical approach. A complete medical
examination is implied in the diagnosis of anatomical defect and
brain injury, partially in the case of deafness, and as providing
valuable supplementary and explanatory data in the diagnoses of
amentia and negativism. The psychological examination and, in
many cases, continued observation must determine the degree of
amentia, and follow-up study must indicate the modifiability of
each factor. During the academic year, 1930-31, three cases were
referred to the department of clinic teaching by the speech clinic
for follow-up observation.
I
Raymond was brought by his parents in November at the age of
seven years and one month. The parents were born in Armenia;
the father was employed as a weaver. Raymond was their first
child. According to the information given by the parents, condi-
tions at his birth were normal; he was breast fed; at five months
he sat up; at nine months he walked and talked and at ten months
he developed satisfactory sphincter control. At about eleven
months the boy fell from his chair and became unconscious; he was
209
210 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
taken to the hospital where he recovered shortly and was returned
to his home.
About a week after this first attack, Raymond suffered another,
while walking about the house. He was taken to the hospital again
where he had three convulsions within six hours. One of the
physicians, who saw the case at this time, suggested cranial pres-
sure as a cause for the convulsions but predicted that within a
few hours the child would fully recover. In despair, however, the
parents took the boy home, still unconscious, and three consultants
were called in. The parents told us that the physicians attending
the case thought the boy as good as dead. After twenty-four hours
of constant attention he moved, opened his eyes and his mouth. It
was found, according to his mother, that he had cut five teeth. His
condition subsequently was very serious, however, for he was blind,
deaf, and partially paralyzed. Constipation developed and it be-
came very difficult to nourish him properly.
For three months Raymond was paralyzed, and it was not until
fifteen months had elapsed that he could stand and walk. He
seemed then to have recovered from the paralysis, except that his
right hand was still weak. Until he was five years of age he was un-
able to hold objects with this hand, and even at present it does not
function well. The spasms continued, the condition seeming to
be intensified by teething. Until he was five years of age he had
seizures at least monthly; often they occurred as frequently as
twelve times per day. The constipation still presented trouble.
When six years old, Raymond had one convulsion. He rarely or
never had them at the time of examination.
A number of physicians saw the child at different times. From
what we could deduce from the reports of the parents, one special-
ist felt that the teething was the cause of the trouble which would
continue until this process was complete, though after that the boy
should be normal. Another physicain, who examined the child a
few months prior to his examination in the speech clinic, was
quite positive in his opinion that the boy would be normal when
teething was completed. Still another physician who saw the boy
later believed that he had suffered from epilepsy due to cerebral
injury, and that this injury accounted for his other abnormalities
as well.
When he was examined in the speech clinic by Dr. Yale S.
Nathanson, Raymond demonstrated symptoms strongly suggesting
amentia. Deafness was counted out as a factor, though it was
CHILDREN WITH SPEECH DEFECTS 211
suggested by the extreme distractibility present. The right hand
and arm showed an abnormal contraction. Throughout the exam-
ination he tired easily and little could be done with him after a
few minutes' application to a specific task. His behavior was
marked by hyperdistractibility and inattention. He was able to
execute a few simple commands, such as to stand, to sit, to move
from one place to another. From a number of toy animals he
chose at command a dog and a cat. He performed both the three-
disc and the three-figure Seguin formboards but the Witmer form-
board was too difficult for him. Lapses in attention made this work
extremely difficult, but it was felt that under proper discipline and
with more time devoted to specific training the boy's ability to
learn?at least to be trained?might be displayed to better ad-
vantage. The diagnosis of amentia might thus be modified to
some extent. Raymond was, therefore, referred for clinic teaching,
in order that the diagnosis of amentia might be modified if it was
deemed necessary.
During the months of March and April Raymond received six
hours of observation and teaching under Miss Margaret Shank.
The work was confined almost solely to the use of the Witmer form-
board in an attempt further to determine the child's trainability
and mental level. He was able to do the Seguin boards as before
but on the first trial of the Witmer board the boy was "totally un-
successful." For two hours the teacher showed Raymond how to
replace the blocks; at the end of this period he iwas able to put
them in their respective recesses without much help, though he was
extremely slow. At the end of the third hour, with a great amount
of persuasion, he completed the task of replacing the blocks in four
minutes, but at the end of the fourth hour with but one suggestion
from his teacher he could complete the board in no less than six
minutes.
In her reports his teacher states that "all of Raymond's per-
formances were by trial and error." He never tried to find the
block for the recess or the recess for the block by observation and
analysis; rather he tried to force each block as he came to it into
every recess, whether or not it was vacant. His discrimination was
very poor, and his teacher never felt that he fully comprehended
the problem. Hyperdistractibility as characterized by attention to
every sound was always evident. Sometimes "he would look as if
he were in a trance with a very blank expression and a remote look
in his eyes. I would motion for him to proceed with his perform-
212 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ance and he would imitate my movement.'' His teacher found this
tendency so common as definitely to suggest echopraxia.
Although his mother had reported to the examiner originally
and to Raymond's teacher that he could "say many short sen-
tences," "mama" and "papa," he was only once heard to speak
while he was in clinic. This was on the occasion of his first visit,
when he shouted a loud "good-bye" as he left the room. His
teacher tried throughout her contact with the boy to elicit a speech
response, occasionally soliciting the assistance of the mother but
with no success.
As the result of clinic teaching in the case of Raymond it was
clear that the boy was feebleminded. Deafness had been ruled out,
and the degree of negativism was not at all abnormal. Medical
examination had indicated no anatomical defect which might ac-
count for the lack of speech, although if we view the possible
epileptic condition and the defective nervous system as basic to a
deficiency in the neural coordination necessary for the speech func-
tion we might well consider such a factor as causal in a primary
way. In view of the indication of normal development up to eleven
months of age followed by retardation in almost every aspect of
behavior with the onset of convulsions, the physical condition was
no doubt basic to the mental status. Yet the recovery of use of
limbs, the gradual return to normal motor function would suggest
that there should be a rehabilitation of the speech function, pro-
vided that other factors were conducive to it. The fact that it had
not developed suggested amentia to be basic.
II
In the case of Sam we find a picture different in many respects
from that of Raymond. His particular defect was not a lack of
speech but a slow development of speech function in addition to
an evident general mental retardation. Sam was born of Russian
parentage, the fourth child in a group of five. The father was em-
ployed as a tailor. Conditions at birth were normal, and the medical
history showed the child to have suffered no diseases during child-
hood except frequent colds. At two years of age Sam walked; at
three years he talked "a little." When brought to the Clinic in
January, at the age of five years and seven months, he had not yet
become entirely clean.
The medical history of Sam's siblings shows that each of the
older children had suffered diphtheria, and the eldest, a boy of
CHILDREN WITH SPEECH DEFECTS 213
nineteen, had had scarlet fever. A girl of seventeen had stopped
school but was not working, while another girl of fifteen was in the
tenth grade in the public school. The only child younger than Sam,
a boy of two and a half years, showed many of the behavior symp-
toms demonstrated by Sam, which we shall describe later.
Observations made at the time of Sam's examination in the
Clinic indicate that he presented an abnormal picture generally.
Definitely low motor competency was manifest in his shuffling,
ambling gait, in his manner in playing with toys on the table, in
the way he stood before the examiner. He drooled during the
examination. He did not know how to hold a toy gun nor how to
cock it. Presented with the Witmer formboard, he simply removed
the blocks carelessly and placed them on a toy chair which rested
on the table before him. He was very distractible, proceeding from
one toy to another, asking for each only to discard it as he became,
after a moment, interested in another. His speech was incessant
though unintelligible. We learned from his sister who accompanied
the boy to the Clinic that occasionally he dressed himself, but that
he could not button his clothes. He was able, however, to put on
and lace his shoes. When asked if he were a boy or girl he imme-
diately said, "a girl," demonstrating here an echolalia which the
examiner felt to be evident also in the audito-vocal memory span of
four and five. In attempting to sit upon the small toy "kiddie-car"
he demonstrated the same lack of discrimination and sense of pro-
portion which was shown in his manner of handling the forms in
the formboard test.
Since Sam was referred by a community center having a super-
vised nursery school group which he had attended we had some
report of his social behavior. He did not get along at all well with
other children. He seemed to this institution "very individual-
istic." His delight was to take toys from other children, to knock
the children down if they resisted, to maltreat his younger brother
(who reciprocated in much the same manner).
The results of the psychological examination as well as the his-
tory of the case, particularly those aspects which had to do with the
development of behavior patterns such as walking, talking, and be-
coming clean, at once suggested amentia. A high degree of ex-
citability and aggressiveness coupled with lack of emotional con-
trol normal in a child of five indicated that the prognosis for
normal behavior development was not good. Dr. Twitmyer felt
214 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
that the mechanism for normal behavior as well as for speech had
somehow been damaged, and that Sam was "a very decided ament."
Clinic teaching for the purpose of continued observation was
recommended. Sam was, therefore, placed for teaching with Mr.
Bernard Gekoski, a student teacher, and received during the spring
term eight hours of teaching.
Sam's teacher reports that the outstanding characteristic of the
case was extreme distractibility. The boy paid no attention to com-
mands, and the same shift of interest which had marked the psy-
chological examination was manifest in the first hours of teaching.
His speech defect seemed much less serious than his mental de-
ficiency. The "shuh" for shoe which was given in the psychologi-
cal examination soon became 11 shoe''; the '' bur'' for four was
corrected. "Bife" continued for jive, as did "bish" for fish. His
teacher thought the boy's speech was not unintelligible, although it
was very defective.
Regular work with performance material, including the Seguin
and Witmer boards, proved to some extent effective, but the boy's
performance was constantly hampered by his distractibility. Al-
though he never managed throughout the whole period of teaching
to perform successfully the Witmer cylinder test he did show
marked improvement under coaching. "His failures," writes the
teacher, "can be attributed only to lack of persistent attention and
desire to proceed."
On the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon test Sam was
given an intelligence quotient of 56. Young's Maze A proved too
difficult: "He simply slid the shoe back and forth in the groove.
The command to 'take the shoe to the boy' he did not understand,
as was evidenced by his attempt to pick out the shoe and place it
down again by the boy. He had no ability at all to look ahead and
avoid the blind alleys; it was evident that he had not even any
conception of what was required of him."
Sam was able to recognize all the numbers through nineteen
except four, which he called a bridge. His ability to name the fig-
ures on the blackboard seemed to vary from day to day, but on
the last day he named them successfully, even including his bug-
bear, the four.
Disciplinary measures became increasingly necessary as the
teaching proceeded. Excitability and obstinacy increased, as did
resistance to authority. It was evident that coupled with the
problem of low mentality was one of emotional instability, or de-
CHILDREN WITH SPEECH DEFECTS 215
ficiency in emotional control. Further observation of the family,
particularly of the mother and sister who accompanied the child
to the clinic, led to the belief that each of these factors had its share
of hereditary predisposition. The extreme lack of control which
characterized his behavior was infantile, far inferior to that normal
in children of five and six. His teacher believed, however, that the
boy had never demonstrated all of which he was capable. The
evidence of trainability could not be denied and the prognosis, par-
ticularly for speech development, seemed not at all poor though
much more teaching was necessary; at worst a middle grade imbe-
cile the boy needed training in manual work and in social behavior.
Whether or not the emotional twist can be modified to the extent
that the boy will develop a useful place in the world cannot be
determined as yet.
It will be seen at once that the problem in the case of Sam is
one of low grade mentality coupled with emotional instability. The
factors which provide for the retardation in development of speech
rest in this general incompetence, but the ways in which the de-
ficiency makes itself manifest are not confined to the sphere of
speech defect. Curiously, the prognosis for the development of
speech is better than is that for normal behavior development, yet
it was because of "speech defect" that the case was brought to us.
Although the case of Sam differs in many ways from that of Ray-
mond, they have in common a general retardation as explanatory
of the speech retardation. In this respect both of these cases differ
from the third one, Albert, whose general deficiency was believed,
finally, to rest on a specific sensory defect.
Ill
Albert came to us at the age of five years and seven months,
brought by an agency for family work because of a problem in re-
gard to placement in school, and for advice as to speech training.
A medical examination preceding the general mental examination
in the clinic revealed a condition of otitis media, purulent and
bilateral. The physician stated that both drums were practically
destroyed, and that the prognosis for hearing was extremely poor.
We were able to learn but little of the history of the case. Al-
bert was the child of parents who had separated. The father was
a Roumanian by birth and the mother was American born. The
mother brought Albert up with his younger brother and an in-
fant daughter who died, until Albert was five years old, when she
216 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
deserted the family entirely. Nothing was learned in regard to
her whereabouts at the time Albert was examined. From scraps of
information gathered from the family organization we were told
that the children originally had not been wanted, and that the en-
vironmental conditions which surrounded them until the mother
left were poor.
Conditions at the birth of Albert were reported normal. At
nine months he had suffered severely from double pneumonia, from
which the running ears developed. At eleven months he walked,
however; at sixteen months he "jabbered," or first used speech of
any kind. At two years he was clean. When he was about three
and a half, tonsils and adenoids were removed, and at some later
time, the boy had three abscessed teeth removed; perhaps this
operation was connected in some way with the fact that in one of
his tussles with the younger brother he had two of his incisors
"knocked out."
On the disappearance of the mother, a grandmother of the chil-
dren took the younger boy into her home, but Albert she refused
to provide for because he was "different." He was accordingly
placed with a child helping agency, and subsequently, in a foster
home of good standing. Here he "caused much trouble?showed
terrific fear, was stubborn, whined, cried, spit at visitors, broke all
toys, etc. He was afraid of the dark, afraid to go to bed, to bathe,
or to go to the toilet. When he was thus terrified he masturbated
(but) this condition cleared up. He showed no affection for any-
one, spit at anyone who tried to kiss him. He ran into the street
deliberately, annoyed children by pushing sticks into their veloci-
pedes." He threw toys at visitors (including one from the social
agency), threw objects at a lamp until he broke it, scratched furni-
ture with his finger nails, and destroyed pictures on the wall. All
this was reported by the social worker who placed the child. We
had reason later to believe that although Albert misbehaved fre-
quently while in his first foster home, he was particularly bad when
this individual was near him. Perhaps the vivid account of his
misdeeds was penned by her originally. An attempt at placing
Albert in a second foster home was for a time unsuccessful but in
a short time in this home his behavior underwent a complete
transformation. He "showed no fear of anything in the house,
played normally with other children, exhibited nothing but an
extremely amiable disposition, was much embarrassed if he broke
anything by accident, and learned to talk." Up to the time when
CHILDREN WITH SPEECH DEFECTS 217
he left the first foster home he had 110 speech. All the above ob-
servations on the child were made by the new foster mother, who
brought Albert to the Clinic. She stated as evidence of improve-
ment that he could be sent to the store and would bring home an
order. In her opinion the problem was one of deafness more than
anything else.
Albert was first examined in the Psychological Clinic by Dr.
Arthur Phillips, as a mental case. The speech defect quite nat-
urally hindered a maximum performance on material such as the
Binet-Simon, but he received an intelligence quotient of 62. He
gave a forward memory span of three, but he could give neither a
reverse nor a visual span. He was unable to name the primary
colors, but matched them and handed the properly colored block to
the examiner when asked for it. On the Witmer formboard he was
inferior on first trial to only twenty per cent of first grade chil-
dren, though he dropped to inferior to seventy per cent on the
second. He failed the Witmer cylinders. Albert had had, of
course, no schooling, but he counted readily to four. Physical
measurements indicated nothing abnormal.
The recorder writes in regard to the child's appearance and
personality: '' The little boy though not at first exceptionally pre-
possessing, was not hard to like. When we tried to take him away
from (his foster mother) he refused to go and began to cry and
resist. He finally was taken into the office, and there the sobs in-
creased in frequency and volume. One of the female examiners was
then put in charge of bringing order out of chaos, and after a final
expenditure of energy Albert was taken on her lap, and the sobs
gradually diminished. . . . From then on be became quite willing
to work and very cheerful, ... a very likeable boy."
As the result of his examination Dr. Phillips placed the boy
intellectually in the lowest decile of children of his age, and marked
the special disabilities in hearing and in speech. Recommendation
was made for examination in the speech clinic, and for training if
examination should indicate its advisability.
It was not until six weeks after the mental examination that
Albert was brought to the Clinic for speech examination. In this
instance he was examined by Dr. Twitmyer. As the result of this
examination, it was evident that Albert has sufficient hearing to
warrant speech training. He '' responded exceptionally well to com-
mands given with the mouth of the speaker hidden from his view.
The intonation of the boy's voice certainly did not suggest total
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
deafness. In clinic he seemed very well oriented socially, played
normally with the toys by putting the shoe on the doll and on the
right foot and buttoning it. He reacted well to the personnel in
the examination room."
As the result of the speech examination it was recommended
that the child receive "clinic teaching for a few weeks to deter-
mine whether of not to recommend the special class for the hard of
hearing in the public schools.''
Albert received about five hours of teaching under Miss Mar-
garet Shank, the student teacher who taught Raymond, our first
case. A re-examination in May with the use of only the Binet-
Simon examination indicated the boy's intelligence quotient to be
67, but slight improvement over that given in January. In regard
to this examination the teacher reports, "I think he has a mental
capacity higher than that indicated by an intelligence quotient of
67." She attempted during the hours of her contact with Albert
to teach him to say a few words correctly. A meagre apperceptive
background in language, exceedingly poor familiarity with words,
due in some measure, no doubt, to deficient hearing, contributed
toward a general inability to understand language even when he
could hear it. When told that A-L-B-E-R-T spelled his name, he
learned to make the letters himself on stimulus, but he did not
know what name meant. His comprehension seemed poor, yet al-
ready he had developed some proficiency in lip-reading, using his
visual discrimination in place of the auditory, which quite nat-
urally was defective. The teacher concluded in regard to the child's
speech that the bi-lingual situation in the home of his early years
contributed in some measure to the language handicap.
The notes made by Albert's teacher in respect to his behavior
during her contact with him are interesting. She felt him to be
efficient, to some slight degree intelligent, well motivated and un-
expectedly cooperative and persistent. "In clinic his behavior is
quite normal. He is curious, and proud of his notebook and pencil,
and he tries hard to learn. When I give him a new word to learn
he sticks to it; later when I ask him for it he does not always under-
stand put persists until he gets it or I give him a hint. He is not
in the least apathetic or negativistic toward his work. From what
I have seen of Albert he is more trainable than educable." It
seemed after even this short contact with Albert that he was in no
way feebleminded, and that placement in a class for the hard of
hearing was the logical course to pursue.
CHILDREN WITH SPEECH DEFECTS 219
Our plan was to continue observation with Albert, until we
might achieve some definite data on his ability to learn words in
speech, and thereby recommend the best course in education for
him. Our findings at the end of the term suggested that deafness
was the outstanding problem in this case and that the antisocial
behavior in response to the first home situation, as well as the gen-
eral behavior retardation manifest in his response to test situations
of various types might be explained on the basis of this deficiency.
Certainly he was intellectually deficient, but it was believed that
he was capable of sufficient schooling (of an expert sort, of course)
to remedy this situation in large measure.
The purpose in presenting these three cases is not in any sense
to give a complete picture of the child who is brought to the speech
clinic and referred for continued observation in clinic teaching.
We have taken three clinical pictures and sought to trace out the
differential aspects of each. The first, Raymond, was a child ob-
viously retarded because of infection or cerebral injury, for
whom the prognosis was poor. The second case, Sam, was born
into a family handicapped mentally and emotionally, whose re-
tardation was complicated, and for whom prognosis was uncertain.
The third case, Albert, came to us because of a general retardation
and because his educational future was complicated by extremely
deficient hearing. We did not feel at the end of the term that we
could properly recommend a course for Albert at that time, unless
it was for further teaching in the clinic. The prognosis for his
case was, therefore, uncertain, though we felt it to be better than
for either of the other cases presented here.
