An Investigation of the Adjustment of the Feebleminded in the Community
=========================================================================

By Clara Harrison Town, Ph.D.
Director, Dept. of Psychology, Children's Aid Society, Buffalo, N. Y.
The problems of "what it is best to do for the feebleminded''
and "how best to do it" have been commanding public attention
since, in the early years of the nineteenth century, a difference of
opinion between two eminent physicians brought them into prominence.
The difference of opinion concerned the diagnosis of a wild
boy found roaming in a forest in France. One physician, Pinel,
diagnosed the boy as feebleminded; another, Itard, diagnosed him
as normally endowed mentally, but wild as the result of deprivation of human contacts. On the ground of this belief Itard attempted to educate the boy. He succeeded in teaching him much,
and in the process he discovered two facts: first, that the boy was
really an idiot, and second (and this fact amazed all concerned),
that even though an idiot, he could, to a certain degree, be educated.
The training which was successful up to a certain point met a
barrier?the barrier of idiocy?and Itard found it impossible to
push mental development further. The boy was never trained to
a level which made life with people outside an institution possible.
Itard's pedagogical success led to a more and more extensive
effort to educate the feebleminded. The movement gradually
spread throughout Europe and the United States, and by the time
one hundred years had passed, at the dawn of the twentieth century, the accumulated knowledge concerning the feebleminded began to formulate itself into analytic definitions of feeblemindedness.
These definitions, with which we are all familiar, agree in
recognizing in feeblemindedness of all degrees a social inefficiency
resulting from a mental insufficiency, and they all stress the permanency of the condition. The experience of a century of work led
to the clearly formulated conclusion that the feebleminded are
incapable of self-directed lives.
At this time began the attempt to ascertain the incidence of
feebleminded persons in the population. This attempt is still in
process. The first authentic facts were published by a British
42
ADJUSTMENT OF FEEBLEMINDED 43
Royal Commission in 1908, which placed the proportion of feebleminded in Great Britain at 3.28 to each one thousand of the population, or a little more than three-tenths of one per cent. The latest
authentic figures also come from Great Britain in a study published in 1929, entitled, "Investigation to Ascertain the Number of
Feebleminded. Report of Mental Deficiency Committee, Being a
Joint Committee of the Board of Education and the Board of Control." This is a thoroughly standardized study, including both
adults and children, of six typical areas, each containing approximately one hundred thousand persons. The study was conducted
with the utmost care, and has been very fully and clearly reported.
It finds that the incidence of feeblemindedness for the areas studied
is 8.56 for one thousand of the population, or between eight-tenths
and nine-tenths of one per cent. In the United States estimates
based on the examination of the enlisted men during the war placed
the incidence of feeblemindedness at ten per cent or more. The
much smaller proportion found in Great Britain confirms our
former impression that the conditions under which the mental
testing in the Army was necessarily made resulted in the failure
to do justice to the illiterate and the non-English-speaking men,
and thus tended to exaggerate the proportion of feebleminded individuals in this country.
It is recognized that the advance in diagnostic methods has
resulted in the detection of higher and higher types of feeblemindedness, and the hope has grown that perhaps the accepted definitions are faulty, and that the high grades of feeblemindedness
may be not as incapable of being trained to social adequacy as the
definitions imply.
The Replacement of Feebleminded into the Community
As a result, schools in all parts of the country are segregating
their feebleminded children in small groups and by individual
methods striving to develop them to the limit of their capacity.
Also, many institutions for the feebleminded are replacing their
charges in the community after longer and shorter periods of institutional training. Dr. Fernald was one of the first sponsors of
this replacing plan, but his favorable opinion of community replacements was always formulated subject to two provisos?previous
long and adequate training and subsequent continual supervision.
In 1924 he stated that he "believed it had been demonstrated that
many defectives who had no innately vicious character defects and
44 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
had been given habits of obedience, protected from evil companions,
and taught to Avork during the formative periods of their lives,
usually behave well if they are given continuous, friendly supervision."
Dr. Bernstein, of Rome, favors a more liberal policy of replacement, advocating a much more rapid stabilization process and much
less close supervision. His parole system is virtually a system of
trial replacement made after shorter or longer periods of residence.
Dr. Bernstein is of the opinion that this method has resulted in a
fair amount of success.
As replacement in the community without close supervision after
long or short stabilization periods in institutions is now the New
York State policy, since it is a radical departure from all former
policies, and as it deeply affects the lives and happiness of a most
unfortunate class, and through them the lives and happiness of
many others, it seems clear that positive knowledge of the results
of its application should be available. Such knowledge should
include the actual details of the lives after discharge of an unselected group of consecutive discharges. In order to secure such
information to use as a guide in our work with the feebleminded,
the study described in this article was undertaken.
Do the Feebleminded Succeed in the Community?
The study was made possible through the cooperation of Dr.
Bernstein, the Superintendent of the Rome State School, and Mr.
Pollock, the Commissioner of the Department of Public Welfare of
Erie County. Through the latter we secured the names of all the
commitments to the Rome State School, and through the former we
secured data concerning reasons and dates of admissions and discharges, early history, etc.
We endeavored from the collated results to discover the proportion of the total group of feebleminded replaced into the community which proved capable either wholly or in part of adaptation
to community life. To judge the degree of adaptation we used
three criteria:
1. Ability to support self.
2. Ability to regulate life without assistance either financial or
supervisory from family or from agency.
3. Ability to live without infringing upon the law to the extent of
arrest or commitment to some type of correctional institution.
ADJUSTMENT OF FEEBLEMINDED 45
We avoided too high or too low standards of adaptability by
recognizing grades within the criteria chosen. For example, under
ability to support self, we differentiated self-support during a six
months period and during the total time of discharge, self-support
with supervision by family or by agency, self-support without
supervision and partial self-support. Under ability to live without
arrest or commitment we differentiated between commitment and
arrest without commitment and between types of institutions to
which committed. We were thus able to substitute for a rigid
division into successful and unsuccessful various degrees of adaptation to community conditions.
The group is made up largely of American born individuals. Of
the total group, including 136 males and females, 120 were born in
the United States. The parentage, however, is not so largely
American; 49 of the American born are of foreign parentage, and
23 are of mixed American and foreign parentage. Only 47 of the
American born are of American born parents.
The Influence of Sex and Marital Status upon Adjustment
The first grouping of our individuals shows that the men far
outnumber the women (88 to 48). This is interesting as it may
indicate a greater tendency to replace feebleminded men in the community than to replace women. Dr. Fernald was of the opinion
that the replacement of men was more successful.
The sub-grouping of the men and women into unmarried and
married also brings out an interesting fact. Of the 88 men only 9,
or 10.02 per cent, married. Of the 48 women, 28, or 58.03 per cent,
married. The nine married men earned from $16 to $24 per week.
None of the 28 married women were self-supporting before marriage. It would seem that inability to support self leads towards
marriage in the case of feebleminded women and away from it in
the case of feebleminded men.
It, is also of interest to note that the sex life of the women who
married is much more irregular than the sex life of the women who
did not marry. In the group of 20 unmarried women, we find
venereal disease noted in 4, sex offenses in 7 and 1 illegitimate child.
In the group of 28 married women we find venereal disease noted
in 16, sex offenses in 18, prostitution in 4, 8 illegitimate children
and 7 separations. Furthermore, in the unmarried women group
we find but 2 court records and one term in a correctional institution ; while among the married group we have 8 court records and
6 prison records.
46 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
It seems clear from our records that the women who married are
of a more unstable type than the women who did not marry.
Twelve of our unstable women were apparently stabilized by marriage, though not in every case by a first marriage. Thirteen of
the unstable women remained unstable in spite of marriage.
All of the married men were of unstable type and only one was
stabilized by marriage.
Incidence of Complete Self-Support and Self-Supervision
Considering the group as a whole, men, women?married and
unmarried?we find that at the time of the investigation only 22
individuals (16.17 per cent of the total group) were succeeding in
maintaining themselves financially without supervision and without
material aid, and had done so during periods varying from 6
months to 15 years. The group includes 13 unmarried men, 5
married men and 4 unmarried women. Seven of these 22 individuals who met our economic standards did not meet our ethical
standards; 5 had criminal records, one had served a prison term,
and one had borne an illegitimate child. Ten of the 22 in the
successful group had been economically successful during the whole
period since discharge. Two of the 10 had not been ethically successful, one had a prison record, and one is a sex pervert. Thus
there remain 8 individuals (or 5.88 per cent of the entire group)
who, during the whole period of discharge, met our three highest
criteria of adaptation. These are all men and only one is married.
This finding is startling and makes us wonder at the easy credulity of those who believe that because such hosts of feebleminded
are returned to the community it is the part of wisdom that they
should be.
We have closely studied the data concerning these 8 men, hoping to discover some common reason for their successful adaptation,
which is so conspicuous in contrast to the partial or non-adaptation
of the other 128 feebleminded returned to the community.
"We thought there might be a correlation between the time spent
in Home and success, but one of the 8 had spent but 2 months there,
another but 7 months.
We thought that they might have been especially selected by the
superintendent as being potentially able to make good in the community, but we found that 3 ran away, 3 were placed on parole and
only 2 discharged at the time of leaving Rome.
There was a possibility that they were emotionally stable inADJUSTMENT OF FEEBLEMINDED 47
dividuals who had never given trouble by behavior, but we found
that 6 had been serious behavior problems before their commitment
to Rome.
It seemed possible that the environmental conditions to which
they Avere returned might have been particularly favorable, but
only one man returned to a really stabilizing environment (he entered the United States Army, and has served almost continuously
ever since; he has had three honorable discharges and is now a first
class private), 4 lived with parents or relatives under very poor
conditions, the others lived in rooms or on farms.
Type of employment is varied and only 4 of the 8 are steady
workers. Three work just enough to supply themselves with necessary money, and change their jobs at frequent intervals.
We cannot explain the success by the level of mental development. We have mental ages for only 5 of the 8 men, and all 5
are morons, grading mentally from eight to eleven years. This
cannot be interpreted to mean more than that those with a mentality
below eight were not successful, as the same mental ages occur in
the partially successful and non-successful groups.
The amount of schooling gives no common factor, as third,
fourth, fifth and seventh grades are all represented.
In fact, from a survey of the experiences of these 8 men we
find no common element which explains their success, and we are
inclined to think the successful adaptation is due to a combination
of fortuitous circumstances.
Partial Self-Support and Self-Supervision
Nine persons, all single men, and all but one living with their
families, were found to be self-supporting under supervision. Their
earnings vary from $6 to $26 per week, and they are all steady
workers under constant spurring and supervision.
Three of these men have criminal records (disorderly conduct,
stealing and assault) and 4 more have given offense by sexual practices. Only 2 of this group have fully met the ethical standards
set by our study.
Eighteen persons, 10 single men and 8 married women, were
found to be partly self-supporting. Not one of the 10 men has been
a constant or steady worker. "When working their wages ranged
from $6 to $22 per week. Six were in prison at the time of the
investigation. The 8 married women, at some time since their
discharge, have contributed from $3 to $13 per week towards the
48 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
family income. Three are now separated from their husbands.
One is in prison, not for the first or second time. Her offenses were
stealing and sexual immorality. Only one of the 8 women meets
our behavior requirements.
To sum up, the independently self-supporting, the self-supporting under supervision and the partly self-supporting number in
all 49, or 36.06 per cent of the total group. Deducting from the 49
the flagrant behavior problems, we have 19 individuals or 14 per
cent of the entire group ivho have been wholly or partially selfsupporting and who have met our ethical standards.
The Totally Unsuccessful Group
Eighty-seven individuals, or 63.04 per cent of the entire group,
have been absolute failures from an economic point of vieiv.
Twenty-three failed so entirely of readjustment that they have been
recommitted to institutions. Six of these had criminal records.
Four had prison records and 3 had served terms in correctional
institutions before recommitted (the offenses were disorderly conduct, stealing, assault and sex offenses). Eleven were sent to
institutions for the feebleminded, 6 to hospitals for the insane, 4
to institutions for defective delinquents and 2 to sheltering institutions.
Thirty-five of the not self-supporting live at home and contribute
nothing toward their own support; 26 of these are single men, 8
are single women and one is a married woman. Of the 26 single
men, 6 have had temporary institutional care of various sorts, 7
have criminal records (offenses including disorderly conduct,
alcoholism, vagrancy and sex offenses). Five men, 2 single and 3
married, live away from home and are totally dependent. Two of
these men were in prison at the time of the investigation, 2 others
had served terms in the Erie County Penitentiary.
Twelve of the group are married women. Of these, 3 have
criminal records, 7 are sexually immoral, 5 have venereal disease,
one is divorced, one is married to a criminal and one is married to
an alcoholic. Four are prostitutes, all suffering from lues; one has
been twice married, one is divorced, 2 have served prison terms, one
has several children, legitimate and illegitimate, and one other has
one child.
Eight of the group are at present lost to us. Four of the 8 have
criminal records (vagrancy, sex offenses, disorderly conduct), one
ADJUSTMENT OF FEEBLEMINDED 49
has served a term in prison and 2 have served terms in correctional
institutions.
Relation Between Length of Residence in the Institution and
Adjustment in the Community
Just as we studied the data concerning the eight successful men,
we studied the data concerning the whole group, to ascertain the
relation between the degree of economic success: independent selfsupport, self-support with supervision, partial self-support and
economic failure, with the length of time spent in Rome. The
results show practically no correlation. The percentage of economic failures for the various periods of residence is as follows:
6 months or less  72 per cent of 32 individuals
6 to 12 months  50 per cent of 22 individuals
1 to 2 years  60 per cent of 33 individuals
2 to 3 years  70 per cent of 10 individuals
3 to 4 years  72 per cent of 18 individuals
4 to 5 years  66 per cent of 3 individuals
5 to 6 years  60 per cent of 4 individuals
6 to 7 years.     50 per cent of 4 individuals
7 to 8 years 100 per cent of 4 individuals
8 to 9 years 100 per cent of 1 individual
10 to 13 years  40 per cent of 5 individuals
The Influence of Mental Age upon Community Adjustment
We also studied mental age in relation to degree of economic
adaptation and found the following results:
Number
of Cases
Total
Number
of Cases
Mental Age
Recorded
Mental
Age
Extremes
Mental
Age
Median
Independently Self-Supporting
Self-Supporting with Supervision . . .
Partially Self-Supporting
Not Self-Supporting. .
Kecommitted to Institutions
Whereabouts unknown
Prostitutes
Housewives, not earning
22
9
18
40
23
8
4
12
16
7
16
23
18
7
4
9
7-10
7-10
7-11
2-10
2-11
9-11
6- 8
7-12
Further Data on Sex and Marital Status
We further sub-divided our data into four groups: the mimarried men, the unmarried women, the married men and the
married women.
50 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
In the group of 79 unmarried men we found that 22 were supporting themselves either with or without supervision, that 10
were partially supporting themselves, and that 48 were economic
failures. The ages of these men varied from 11 to 43 years, their
mental ages varied from 2 to 13 years. Their wages ranged from
$7.50 to $26 per week, with the exception of one man who makes
$35 per week as a railroad fireman.
Of the 22 self-supporting men, 6 have criminal records, 6 have
given offense by their sexual practices and one lias a prison record.
Of the 10 partially self-supporting men, 6 are now in prison and
one other has a prison record.
Of the non-self-supporting, 16 have criminal records and 5 have
prison records.
Of the 9 married men, 5 were found to be supporting their
families and 4 not supporting them. Two have criminal records,
one a prison record, one is known to be a sex pervert. The men
make from $16 to $24 a week and in the various families there are
10 illegitimate children.
Of the 20 unmarried women, 4 are independently self-supporting, 16 are not self-supporting; 8 of these have been recommitted.
The ages of the group vary from 7 to 48. The wages of the four
wage earners vary from $10 to $16 per week. Two have criminal
records, one is an alcoholic, one has an illegitimate child.
Of the group of 28 married women, ranging in age from 21 to
55 years, and in mental age from 6 to 12 years, 8 have been able to
contribute more or less toward their own support. None of the 28
has ever been totally self-supporting, either before or after marriage. Eight have criminal records, 6 prison records, 4 are prostitutes, 16 have venereal disease. Three have been married more
than once and 7 have been separated.
This group has produced 22 legitimate children and 8 illegitimate chilren. The same group produced, before commitment to
Rome, 10 legitimate children and 5 illegitimate children. Eighteen
of the group had given trouble by sexual conduct before commitment to Rome, and 18 have given trouble by sexual conduct since
discharge from Rome. Five had practised prostitution before commitment to Rome and 4 have practised it since discharge from
Rome.
ADJUSTMENT OF FEEBLEMINDED 51
Why Replacement into the Community Fails
The one hundred and thirty-six persons have now told their
story and it is not a cheering one. We, the responsible members of
the community, accepted the role of protector and guide, and our
success seems to be summed up in 8 satisfactory and 11 fairly satisfactory, though partially dependent lives; our failures in 43 lives
Marred by criminal records, 20 lives marred by prison terms, many
miserable and poverty-stricken lives and 4 lives of prostitution.
Could we have done better, or is failure due to the fact that
there is for the feebleminded no alternative to miserable living in
the community but permanent institutional care?
We think there may be an alternative, but that it lies in a training and supervisory program radically different from any that has
as yet been attempted. The training of the feebleminded dates
back over a century, and therefore has reached a higher level of
efficiency than has the supervision of the feebleminded in the community. At present this supervision differs little in type from the
supervision given delinquents or normal individuals needing temporary guidance and care. To be effective, both the training and
the supervision of the feebleminded must differ from the training
and the supervision of normal persons as fundamentally as the
feebleminded and their requirements differ from normal persons
and their requirements.
Both training and supervision must be based upon and built up
in harmony with certain fundamental limitations and assets which
are inseparable from the feebleminded condition. These may be
briefly summarized as follows:?every feebleminded person reaches
?t some point in his mental development an. impenetrable barrier
which serves the idtimatum, "thus far shalt thou go, and no
furtherThis barrier is always reached at some stage before the
ability to judge of his actions and to control them by preconceived
ideas is attained. The result is an inability to build up forceful
motives and guiding ideas. This inability brings with it a compensatory quality, which, under a good educational regime, is a decided
asset. Not being governed nor guided by dominating ideas the
feebleminded person responds easily to the appeal of the present,
and is easily led by any proposal lying within the scope of his comprehension. In other words, he is supremely suggestible.
Moreover, not only are the ideas of the feebleminded lacking in
controlling force, they are limited in number and vai'iety, and this
limitation also has a mental compensation which is a practical asset.
52 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The lively play of imagination of a normal person brings before
him many possible ways of spending his time, he wishes to try
them out, grows tired and restive when held down to a monotonous
routine. The feebleminded person, on the contrary, does not rebel
against monotony, but against change. He grows restive when
expected to make effort to overcome new obstacles which he cannot
easily comprehend. He works best and most happily when working automatically, when doing something he has become habituated
to doing, when he is conscious of doing well and knows he will be
appreciated. Such are the basic mental limitations and the compensatory mental assets which are common to the feebleminded.
An Alternative Program
The realization of these limitations and assets is invaluable in
planning and putting into effect both a training and a supervisory
program. Such a system recognizes the futility of striving for a
development of power of judgment and self-guidance, and substitutes a training through habit forming.
There are many things that the feebleminded can be taught to
make and to make well?hammocks, lace, knitted and crocheted
articles, cake, bread, muffins, pies, candy, and much they enjoy the
praise success brings to them.
It is possible by a slow and patient method consisting of much
repetition, producing greater and greater accuracy, to train a feebleminded child to do some one of these things supremely well, to
produce a really well-made, saleable article. Such success builds
up in the child a belief in self and a joy, which can be attained in
no other way. The habits of regular and careful work developed
in the process of reaching the final skill remain permanent possessions.
Such a program differs entirely from one which allows the child
to diversify in many kinds of handwork. Its virtue lies in specialization and supremely good work through repetition of process.
Such a training program is the foundation from which a new supervisory program could be built.
At the present time there is an approach to such a training program in the special classes of the public schools, not usually so
specialized a training, but at least a training in making certain
things. When the child leaves the public school, however, there is
no place for him to put into practice what he has learned at school,
he is much in the position that a trained typist would be in a city
ADJUSTMENT OF FEEBLEMINDED 53
without typewriters. He perhaps knows how to make reed baskets,
brooms or brushes, but 110 one will employ him to make them. The
Poor child, deprived of the school regime, and with nothing else to
turn to, and lacking the initiative to make new adaptations, idles
away his time and gets into difficulties.
What is needed seems to be an Industrial Plant into which those
trained in the special classes could be graduated, where those who
had learned to make good rugs, baskets, toys, cake, candies or what
not, could continue to make them, only now on a paid basis. Such
a plant might be an integral part of the public school system or it
might be under separate jurisdiction. In either case its industries
would have to match or grow out of those taught in the schools. Fortunately for such a plan, the industries taught in the schools (all
those above mentioned and more are at present taught in one or
another special school) are vocational in character. The plant, of
course, would have to be directed by persons experienced in dealing
with the feebleminded.
Many of the more capable feebleminded would by such a plan
be kept usefully and gainfully employed, and be made happy by
the fact that they were self-supporting. Moreover, they would be
kept out of harm's way during the major part of every day. Those
who had good homes could return to them at night and those who
had not could live in a colony home in which their earnings would
probably pay their way.
Such a plant and colony is a suggestion of a type of supervision
which might well prove successful with many of the school-trained,
high-grade feebleminded of our cities. Such a supervision would
not be a supervision imposed over and above the routine events of
the individual life, but a supervision integral in school and vocational training, and later in industrial work. It would grow out
of the day's events, the day's business and behavior, and would
therefore be more intimately and immediately related to it than the
closest supervision by a visitor.
Such a plant and colony would be in reality the creation of a
community for feebleminded within the community rather than an
adaptation of the feebleminded to life under existent conditions.
However, it would be far from institutional segregation and would
result in changing many of the high-grade feebleminded who now
lead altogether miserable, wholly or partially dependent lives into
useful, self-supporting, self-respecting individuals.
The idea of an industrial plant for the feebleminded is not en54 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tirely new. For some years London has successfully conducted
an industrial institution. The London institutions for the feebleminded are distinctly differentiated in regard to intake and
function; there is a receiving institution for the younger children,
a custodial institution for the lower grade of feebleminded and an
industrial institution for those capable of productive work. The
London industrial institution differs from the plant which we propose in being residential and in being entirely dissociated from the
work of the London day schools for mental defectives.
Our idea is to make the industrial plant the crown of the public
school work for mental defectives, the place to which the special
schools would graduate their capable workers. It would make
necessary in the special schools intensive work along one line of
industry with each child. Each child would be trained to make
one article supremely well. Among industries now successfully
taught in special schools are weaving of many sorts, hammock and
net making, chair caning and repairing, basketry, brush making,
toy making, sewing, embroidery, lace making, knitting and crocheting, bread and cake baking, preserving, candy making and fine
laundering. All of these and more might find place in the industrial plant.
Industrial shops for blind workers have long been in existence.
Industrial shops for cripples have also proved most successful.
We are inclined to predict that a trial would prove such a plant
for the feebleminded a practical, humane, economical alternate to
either institutionalization or to replacement into the general community of the higher grade feebleminded.
