Clinical Problems in the Vocational Guidance of the Mentally Deficient 1
==========================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1931, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XX, No. 2 April, 1931
By Morris S. Viteles, Ph.D.
University of Pennsylvania
It is to a playwright and a poet, the inimitable W. S. Gilbert, to
whom we must go for the simplest resolution of the clinical problems
involved in the vocational guidance of the mentally deficient.
"I often think it comical," he says,
"That every boy and every gal,
That's born into the world alive,
Is either a little liberal
Or else a little conservative."
?"Iolanthe," W. S. Gilbert.
In these few lines, Gilbert has pithily expressed a prevalent
attitude not only toward liberalism and conservatism but toward
normality and mental deficiency. Not only the layman, but many
among those technically trained in psychology and in the allied
sciences seem still to be obsessed with a belief in the specific unit
character of mental deficiency. There is still more than a marked
tendency to look upon the mentally deficient as a group set apart by
birth from the normal and differing from them in every essential
mental characteristic. The acceptance of this point of view carries
"with it, in the vocational guidance of the mentally deficient, the
assumptions that this group can be treated as a whole, that there is
little need for making within this group the fine differentiations,
the clear cut discriminations of mental make-up which are required
m the vocational guidance of the normal.
1 Read at the annual meeting of the National Vocational Guidance As-
sociation?joint meeting with the staff of the Vineland Training School,
"V inoland, New Jersey, February 22, 1930.
34 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Individual Differences Among the Mentally Deficient
As a matter of fact, the outstanding clinical problem in the voca-
tional guidance of the mentally deficient, as in the vocational
guidance of the normal, is that of determining the respects in which
each mentally deficient differs from others and to make these dif-
ferences, as in the case of the normal, the basic factors in giving
aid in selecting, preparing for, entering upon, and progressing in
a career.
The situation with respect to individual differences within the
mentally deficient group has been well stated by Wallin.2
"From these and other considerations we reach the conclusion
that feeblemindedness, instead of being a simple classificatory
(nosological) entity due to a constant specific cause with definitely
restricted and invariable symptoms (such as is diphtheria or
typhoid fever), is a highly complex condition, complex in respect
to the fact that it may affect in unequal degree various functions,
physical, intellectual, instinctive, volitional, emotional, social, and
moral; in that it may cover a wide range of defect from profound
idiocy to high-grade feeblemindedness; in that it may be caused
by a great variety of etiological factors, hereditary and acquired,
and in that the underlying brain defect (pathology) may differ
greatly.
"Let us remember that there are pronounced differences in
physique, disposition, attitude, emotivity, energy, application, and
in social and moral traits between feebleminded children even of
the same grade of intelligence or degree of impairment, just as
there are similarly pronounced differences between normal chil-
dren of the same age, maturity, or intelligence level. No two idiots
are exactly alike: some are apathetic, others excitable; some have
more of one trait, others more of another. The 'typical imbecile
face' of established tradition is largely mythical. Some imbecile
faces are pleasant, others repulsive; some are beautiful, others ugly;
some look intelligent, others vacuous; some are mobile, others im-
mobile. Few characterizations apply to the whole class of the
feebleminded, and fewer still to every feebleminded individual.
Between feebleminded, as between normal individuals, diversity,
unevenness, and variation are the rule and not uniformity, sym-
metry, and sameness. Hence descriptions of the feebleminded
must be largely restricted to generalizations respecting the average
2 J. E. Wallace "Wallin, The Education of Handicapped Children, Ilough-
ton Mifflin Co., 1924, 58-59.
GUIDANCE OF MENTALLY DEFICIENT 35
or most frequent representatives of the different grades or physical
types. Owing to the demonstrated existence of 'individual differ-
ences,' in the mode of origin (pathogenesis), in the underlying
brain defect (pathology), and in the manifestations (symptoma-
tology), there is no simple, single, or infallible test of feebleminded-
ness such as demanded by the assumption that it is due to the
absence of a unit trait."
Case Studies from the Psychological Clinic op the University
of Pennsylvania
The significance of these differences among the mentally de-
ficient, particularly as they affect vocational guidance, may be
illustrated by a brief reference to two or three cases examined in
the Psychological Clinic within the course of a single month.
The first is a girl (Rose), fourteen years of age, brought to the
Clinic for educational and vocational guidance. In appearance she
exemplifies the danger of a pre-analytic diagnosis on the basis of
general appearance. She has a pretty face which lights up ex-
pressively as she speaks. She responds very acceptably to the de-
mands of an everyday, casual conversation. Socially she has proven
acceptable to girls of her age. She has a cheerful, helpful disposi-
tion,?evidenced in her readiness to do any of the tasks assigned
to her in the household and in the school.
From her appearance and from a casual conversation with her,
not even a practiced clinician would surmise that after more than
six years of school training she has not achieved first grade pro-
ficiency in school subjects. As a matter of fact, an examination of
school proficiency showed that she had exactly 1A proficiency in
reading, writing and arithmetic. Approximately twenty hours of
individual instruction, extended over a period of weeks, under the
guidance of a trained teacher in the Psychological Clinic resulted in
no noticeable improvement in her ability to read, although it did
lead to the conclusion that she could probably advance to a greater
Proficiency in the field of arithmetic.
A review of the data obtained in the course of the psychological
examination reveals an Intelligence Quotient of 58. The forward
niemory span is four. In the course of the first examination, it was
impossible to obtain a reverse span, partly because of the difficulty
in interesting her in attempting this task, partly because of the
difficulty she apparently experienced in comprehending the direc-
36 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tions. After some instruction at a later date she managed to give
a reverse span of two digits.
An analytic study over a period of weeks brought into focus the
high degree of distractibility,?distractibility which, however,
seemed to be associated with an unwillingness to concentrate atten-
tion upon a task in which the girl expects failure. In tasks of a
non-intellectual nature which she deemed herself capable of doing
Rose showed none of the symptoms of distractibility observed in
connection with the intellectual task. The analytic study of im-
agery also led to the conclusion that the girl's chief difficulty lay
in an inability to recall visual images of the abstract type. As a
matter of fact, this defect was so marked, so characteristic of lier
performances, that it led to a suspicion, at least, of true word blind-
ness.
The defect in imagery does not, however, extend to concrete ma-
terial. The girl seems entirely capable of formulating clear images
of this type and of recording them. In addition, in so far as motor
traits are concerned, as measured by a series of performance tests,
the girl exhibited a degree of ability that would seem remarkable
to one who is willing to accept an Intelligence Quotient of 58 as
indicative of feeblemindedness, but which has been found to be
not at all uncommon among those who are intellectually deficient.
The presence of these "practical" abilities was evidenced not
only in the Clinic, but in the samples of sewing and embroidery
brought by the mother and in the account of the household duties
which she has proved capable of doing.
The clinical picture in this case is definitely one of mental
deficiency on the intellectual scale, that is, with respect to the ability
to profit from instruction on the three R's. On the scale of socio-
economic competency, this girl cannot be described as being men-
tally deficient, or even as being markedly handicapped by mental
deficiency. One needs to think only of the service occupations such
as manicuring, waiting on table, etc., to find one in which she will be
perfectly capable of self-support with a minimum of outside super-
vision.
In contrast with Rose is another girl (Miriam) sixteen years
of age. In this case the dwarfed stature, the small head, the un-
healthy hue of the skin combined to give an impression of mental
deficiency which was readily confirmed in the Psychological Clinic.
Not only is Miriam's appearance in distinct contrast with that
of the girl described above, but her facial expression extends as far
GUIDANCE OF MENTALLY DEFICIENT 37
in the direction of dullness as that of Rose extends in the direction
?f liveliness. The same differences are present with respect to
Personality. It is difficult to engage her in conversation. She is
not disagreeable in a positive sense, but there is a total absence of
the attempt to be agreeable. Her reactions in the Clinic, and the
school and family history show an absence of initiative. The gen-
eral picture of personality is one of infantilism.
The school history of this girl is more favorable than that of
Rose. She entered school at the age of six, but was forced to leave on
account of illness which lasted over two years. Returning to school
at eight years of age, she failed to make normal progress, repeating
the second, fourth, fifth and sixth grades. Had she returned to
school in June 1929 it would have been necessary for her to repeat
the sixth grade a third time. Her school work was always poor,
her conduct good. Her present proficiency in reading, writing and
arithmetic is at about the fourth grade level.
On the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon test, Miriam ob-
tains an Intelligence Quotient of 64.5, somewhat above that of Rose.
The forward memory span is seven, and the reverse span is four.
On the performance tests used in the course of the examination
the results are consistently well below the average of children of
her age. Neither on the performance tests nor in her responses at
home and in school does she reveal any of the specialized abilities
which have been shown to exist in the case of the other girl. From
the point of view of intellectual status the two girls resemble each
?ther, but in the case of the latter girl there is no compensation in
tlip way of specialized abilities of the sort which will make it
Possible for the first girl to adjust herself at a self-sustaining level,
with a minimum of supervision, outside of an institution. More-
over, she has not. the advantages of good health, of vitality, which,
in addition to the specialized abilities and the favorable qualities of
Personality will favor social adjustment in the case of Rose. Both
are intellectually deficient, but with a socio-economic criterion of
feeblemindedness, a criterion of social competency, the first cannot
he described as feebleminded, the second must be so designated.
From the viewpoint of individual differences the variation be-
tween these two is in no sense different in character and in extent
from that found in samples of so-called normal human beings.
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Factors to be Considered in Guidance
The purpose in presenting these cases is not only to illustrate
the significance of individual differences among the mentally de-
ficient, but also to lead on to the discussion of the second clinical
problem in the vocational guidance of the mentally deficient to be
discussed in this paper. This problem is that of weighting with the
data on the individual mental make-up of the mentally deficient
the other factors which are of importance in determining vocational
success and failure. As in the case of the normal, the problem of
vocational guidance for the mentally deficient is that of determin-
ing not only the nature and extent of mental difference, but of
building up a complete picture of the total situation in which the
individual finds himself, a picture which constitutes the sole sound
basis of adequate guidance.
It is impossible to undertake a lengthy discussion of this par-
ticular problem. What has been said elsewhere, by the author,3
concerning the importance of health, social and economic circum-
stances, appearance of individual, etc., in the guidance of the
normal is applicable in the discussion of the guidance of the men-
tally deficient. Another case from the records of the Psychological
Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania may serve to bring into
relief this particular problem.
The subject, in this case, is a boy thirteen years of age at the
time of the original examination, fifteen years of age at the time
of the second examination. A detailed statement of school history,
social history, etc., will be omitted. It is sufficient to state that at
the time of the last examination his school proficiency was at the
fifth grade level.
At the time of the original examination his Intelligence Quotient
was 71, at the time of the re-examination 72.6.
A strict adherence to the Terman classification favors, of course,
a diagnosis of feeblemindedness. The boy's auditory forward
memory span was five and the reverse span three, confirming the
picture of intellectual deficiency shown in the Intelligence Quotient.
In contrast to this the results on the performance tests were
uniformly good,?sufficiently good, as a matter of fact, to suggest
that the boy is sufficiently endowed with the elements of motor
ability to be able to earn his living at one of a number of semi-
skilled trades, in spite of his low intellectual level. In addition
3 Viteles, Morris S., The Clinical Approach in Vocational Guidance, Voc.
Guid. Mag., Vol. VII, No. 1, October, 1928, pp. 1-8.
GUIDANCE OF MENTALLY DEFICIENT 39
lie has been uniformly conformed in his behavior. These qualities,
combined with the judgment he has exhibited in his daily life in
school and in the home, suggest that he will also be capable of super-
vising his own conduct. However, in spite of these advantages,
it is extremely unlikely that this boy will ever be able to maintain
himself as a self-supporting member of the community, not by
virtue of the intellectual status itself, but because a damaged heart
makes it impossible for him to develop the energy necessary for
Maintaining production standards on the type of semi-skilled job on
which he will have to be employed. In other words, in this case,
the competency which he possesses to maintain himself in a semi-
skilled occupation cannot be put to use because of the health condi-
tion. If he could earn his living through the exercise of intellec-
tual competency the health condition would be a minor considera-
tion, but under the circumstances which do exist, it becomes a major
item in the situation and will make self-support practically im-
possible.
The Limitations of Mental Age
There is just one more phase of the problem to which a brief
reference must be made before bringing this paper to a close. It
is an aspect of the problem which is touched upon, by implication,
in the discussion of individual differences among the mentally
deficient in an early section of this paper, but which, perhaps, de-
serves special mention outside of this setting. This is the much dis-
cussed question of the significance of mental age per se in vocational
guidance in the case of the mentally deficient. There is a marked
tendency to assume that mental age is the predominant factor, in-
sofar as mental ability itself is concerned, in determining vocational
success and failure. This belief has led, in a number of cases, to
a formulation, ofttimes on merely a priori grounds, of levels of
mtelligence necessa^ for certain occupations. It has been as-
sumed that general intelligence level constitutes a final criterion in
Predicting vocational competency. So, for example, Laird has
submitted an outline of what he describes as "mental quali-
fications for many common tasks" in terms of mental ages ranging
from those of editors, lawyers, business executives, etc., at the 18
year level to factory laborer and domestic servant at the 11 to 12.9
year level and unskilled laborers at the 8 year level. According to
this author, in respect to vocational labor at least "with a mental
age rating obtained" it is safe to advise the use of the table as a
guide for employees selection.
40 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The fallacy of such conclusions concerning mental age has been
demonstrated in a number of experimental investigations. Even a
limited experience in the application of clinical methods in voca-
tional guidance will reveal the impracticability and invalidity of
such a criterion of vocational success in the guidance of even a
mentally deficient.
There are other numerous problems which deserve discussion in
this connection. Much can be said about the importance of job
analysis as a preliminary in the guidance of the mentally defective.
The ears of school administrators could be made to burn with a
recital of the school's failures in providing suitable training for
borderline deficients, for the mentally deficients with specialized
skills so necessary in supplementing the guidance process. How-
ever, the limitation of space permits only a few more words in the
nature of a summary of what is perhaps the essential problem raised
in this discussion.
The Psychologist as "Prophet"
In their final analysis, the clinical problems in the vocational
guidance of the mentally deficient, as in the guidance of the normal,
resolve themselves into a single problem, that of making an analytic
diagnosis and a prediction of future success or failure in a single
case. Statistical studies of group data furnish general principles
with which a clinician can work. The problem of clinical psy-
chology is essentially that of balancing these principles, of determin-
ing how far they apply in a particular instance, and whether they
do apply. His point of orientation must always be the individual
and his future, an individual who is completely lost whenever
massed data are the subject of treatment. In the case of this in-
dividual, he must exercise all the judgment he possesses to balance
the facts and to arrive at what is not only a statement of present
status, but of a prophecy of future status in this complex world of
ours. It is not strange if, as a prophet, he falls into error and ac-
tually is forced to be as pessimistic about his accomplishments as
Job himself.
During such pessimistic moments the clinical examiner may raise
many questions concerning his own competency as a prophet, not
only facing, but, perhaps, magnifying the difficulties involved. At
other times, perhaps, he is too prone to fall back on the note with
which Mr. Underbill of the United States House of Representatives
GUIDANCE OF MENTALLY DEFICIENT 41
ended a debate on a Bill providing for the psychologist in the
Juvenile Court in the District of Columbia.
The author quotes from the Congressional Record 1921, Vol. 61,
Part 8, Pages 7670-7687.
"Mr. King. I see that this bill provides for the appointment
of a psychologist at a salary of $2,000 per annum. Would the
gentleman, as a matter of information, answer one oi two questions
in reference to that ? Who determines who the psychologist shall
be, and what training does the psychologist have to have?
"Mr. King. A psychologist is, in other words, a social worker.
Such a worker can go into the home; will advise in any case, whether
be that of disease or mental trouble or even financial trouble.
'Mr. King. Psychology is the study of the soul, is it not?
'Mr. Underbill. Let us not get into these technicalities."
