The Remedial Treatment of a Case of Defective Speech due to Deafness
=====================================================================

By M. LaVinia Warner, Pn.D.
State Bureau of Juvenile Research, Columbus, Ohio 5""
At the age of twelve a boy, whom we shall call Karl, was
brought to the James Whitccmb Riley Hospital for Children, In-
dianapolis, by his sister, with the complaint that he had defective
speech. The sister mentioned casually that the boy was hard-of-
hearing. She did not consider this of great importance.
The physical and psychological examinations made at the Hos-
pital showed that Karl was in good health and of bright intelligence.
The medical history gave nothing significant. However, the physi-
cians concluded that he had defective neurological hearing due to
middle ear involvement, but with some residual hearing. The psy-
chologist concluded that Karl's defective speech was due to deaf-
ness. It was recommended that he be given lessons in speech either
in a school for the deaf or in the Psychological Clinic of Indiana
University.
The parents chose to place Karl under the direction of the
Psychological Clinic where his condition could be further analyzed
and where he could be given individual instruction, both in speech
and in academic school work.
Karl was a very good looking boy of fair complexion. His per-
sonality was pleasing and he was well poised. He had entered the
first grade of the regular grade school when he was six years of age
and had been promoted into the next higher grade every year. At
the time that he came to the Indiana University Hospital, he was in
the seventh grade. The teachers at school recognized his defect in
oral speech and also his inability to express himself in written lan-
guage, but, perhaps because of his eagerness and willingness to co-
operate, they did not recognize that he was totally deaf and that he
was in need of any special instruction.
Because Karl presented a striking problem in the psychology of
learning and in clinical psychology, he was accepted by the writer
for special study and treatment. He remained at the Psychological
Clinic for nine months. At least an hour a day and sometimes two
or three hours a day were spent in individual work. The remaining
85
86 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
time "was spent in the public schools in a room with sixth grade chil-
dren where he participated in group activities, such as art, shop,
arithmetic-computation, gymnasium and auditorium work.
Various hearing tests given in the Clinic proved Karl to be
totally deaf. There was found practically no residual hearing.
Several standardized educational and intelligence tests were
given to Karl at the beginning of this study in order, first, to com-
pare him with hearing children according to the standards and
norms for these particular tests; second, to serve as aids in analyz-
ing his abilities and disabilities; third, to discover how much he had
learned up to the present time; and fourth, to determine what he
had not learned and why he had not learned what others of his abil-
ity and age usually learn. These tests and other individual tests
which were especially devised to meet Karl's particular needs were
used to aid in determining what techniques he employed and which
ones could be used as foundations upon which to build others. The
tests used were chosen because of their national popularity at that
time; because the standards and norms were well worked out for
each test, thus enabling Karl to be compared with other children on
these tests; and because it was believed that the tests would lend
themselves fairly well to the conditions in this study. These tests
were not standardized for deaf children, however.
The tests used were the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon
Test; Otis Self-Administering Tests of Mental Ability, Intermediate
Examination, Form A; Stanford Achievement Test, Advanced Ex-
amination, Form B; Haggerty Reading Examination, Sigma 1;
National Intelligence Tests, Scale A, Form 1 and Form 2; " Gettys-
burg Edition" of the Ayres' Measuring Scale for Handwriting;
and other individual tests.
The same tests were given again at the close of the nine months
of instruction. This was done in order to compare the results ob-
tained after he had received the special help with those obtained be-
fore he had received any special instruction, and thus to determine
whether he had improved during his nine months of special work.
The tests revealed the fact that Karl could do only first and
second grade work in the different academic subjects at the begin-
ning of this study, although he had been in the regular public
schools for six years and had at this time been promoted to the
seventh grade.
Language was Karl's greatest difficulty. He could not interpret
the simple sentences in the tests and he understood but very little of
the vocabulary of the tests. His highest score on any educational
TREATMENT OF A CASE OF DEFECTIVE SPEECH 87
test was in "arithmetic-computation." Language was not involved
in this. In "arithmetic-reasoning" tests, his scores averaged the
same as those in any other test involving language. On non-verbal
tests, Karl ranked between the eightieth and eighty-fifth per-
centile. He received a perfect score 011 the non-verbal sections
of the National Intelligence Test. It was evident that his ability
was not lower than the eightieth percentile.
Karl's vocabulary was very limited. This was due to the fact
that he had never heard language and that it had never been prop-
erly taught to him. He had to depend almost wholly upon lip-
reading for his verbal language impressions. His lip-reading, ac-
cording to tests devised by the clinician and given to him at the be-
ginning of this clinical study, was inadequate to serve him as a
satisfactory basis upon which to build a useful language. He had
not been taught to read from books; consequently he could not in-
crease his vocabulary through reading.
Before Karl was given the special instruction, it was almost im-
possible for him to make himself understood through oral language.
His written and oral language was in " parts-of-sentences," that is,
he either expressed himself in the key words or by partly describing
what he wanted to say. He did not know how to use conjunctions,
articles, etc., which help to make sentences complete. He would
have the main idea in his mind but could not put the parts of speech
together which would form complete sentences about it. Conse-
quently, he spoke in fragments of sentences, stressing the names of
the main objects 01* the words describing them or the words express-
ing the main actions.
Karl seemed to think and to learn things as pictures only, having
meaning but no names. This made it impossible for him to write or
speak what was actually in his mind. He had more visual images
than he had speaking ability. If this is true of all deaf people, then
it is not necessary to wait for speech in teaching them to read.
Karl realized many facts which he could not express. He knew
that cats, dogs, ponies, etc., were pets, but he had no idea of what
the word '' animal'' meant.
Karl did not know many things which would be learned nat-
urally by the young hearing child. This was due to the fact that
he did not hear the language spoken by those around him. Hearing
is essential in learning most things unless special methods of educa-
tion are provided. Karl was almost entirely dependent upon
visual, kinaesthetic, and tactile senses for material for perceptions.
Because of this he could give the use of objects, but could not name
88 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
them. He thought in terms of use, form, structure, position, and
location.
It was Karl's mother who had taught him to talk as well as he
did before he came to the Psychological Clinic. She had never
recognized him as a totally deaf child, yet she could not help seeing
his difficulty in language and pronunciation. She worked with him
until she had succeeded in getting him to respond orally. Much
credit is due the mother for her untiring efforts in getting this much
accomplished with him. It was a result of her teaching that Karl
could pronounce some few words so that they could be understood.
These served as a basis for his teaching.
What could Karl do in the regular grade school ? He could play
actively on the playground and on the gymnasium floor; he could
take a part in the drawing lessons; he could copy, in a very good
handwriting, written work from the blackboard or from a book; he
could solve simple problems in arithmetic if they did not involve
language; and he could make a noise as though reading orally in a
defective speech when confronted with a book for oral reading.
Karl would take his turn in "reading" orally from books in
school whenever asked to do so by the teachers. He was not read-
ing, but was simply making a noise as though reading. This oral
noise which he produced was interpreted by the teachers at school
and by his family at home as real reading. His pronunciation of
the words in the reading was not understandable, but they believed
it due to defective speech which was beyond their power to correct
and they did not know but that he understood what he was appar-
ently reading. The noise was simply the result of the operation of
a recitation organization which had been built up partly through
his observation of the other children when they read from books at
school. He had learned to try to pronounce symbols and words
which conveyed no thought to him. He had learned to pronounce
the names of the letters of the alphabet fairly well. When con-
fronted with a selection for oral reading in school or at home, he
simply pronounced the names of the letters in the alphabet and in
some cases single words and syllables which he had learned to pro-
nounce. This resembled oral reading, although he was only pro-
ducing a noise. The reading material had no more thought content
for him than did the alphabet when he tried to pronounce it.
When the clinician handed Karl a French book he "read" it
orally as freely and with as much assurance as he did the English
books she had previously handed him. In the same way he "read"
books printed in Spanish, Russian, Greek, Hebrew and Chinese.
TREATMENT OF A CASE OF DEFECTIVE SPEECH 89
Karl was not trying to deceive the clinician in his "reading" of
these books. He had been "reading" all his school life and not
getting much thought from it. In his apparent reading of these
foreign language books, he was simply continuing to respond to a
printed book as he had been in the habit of doing. When he ob-
served others reading from a book he did not realize that they were
getting thought from their reading.
Karl had been taught to react to a printed page by making oral
sounds. When he was confronted with the foreign languages, he
did exactly as he had been taught. To him reading was to look at a
Printed page and make enough noises to satisfy people about him.
How could he be expected to know otherwise when this kind of
performance had been accepted during his entire school life? In
all correct learning there must be a stimulus which will bring out
the desired reaction. The stimulus in the regular grade school situ-
ation had not been the correct one for him as a deaf person in learn-
ing to read. The teachers understood to some extent his handicap,
yet apparently not knowing what to do for it, they did the best they
could and passed him to the next higher grade.
According to the results of standardized educational tests, Karl
was retarded at least five years in reading and language ability
when the clinician began the diagnostic study of him, and he was
retarded three years in arithmetic-computation and four years in
arithmetic-reasoning. According to the results of the Stanford-
Achievement Test, he was retarded three years and seven months in
educational age.
What could the schools have done for Karl 1 The regular grade
teacher, trained to teach the regular academic subjects to hearing
children, is not prepared to teach a deaf child such as Karl. If
there had been a special class for deaf children, taught by a teacher
trained especially to teach deaf children, and if Karl had been
placed in it as soon as he was of school age, he could have been
taught to read lips so that he could understand what others were
saying; he could have learned to speak so that he could have been,
at least, fairly well understood; and he could have learned to ex-
press himself in complete sentences. His advancement might not
have been quite as rapid as the hearing child's in the regular grades.
Much of his time would have had to be spent in learning to lip-read,
to pronounce correctly, and to learn the language which the hearing
child naturally learns through hearing language spoken. There-
fore, he probably would have been one or two grades retarded in
the regular school subjects. If he could have had the advantage of
90 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
a special class for deaf children, no doubt by the age of twelve lie
would have been efficient enough in language, speaking, and in read-
ing lips to enter the regular high school, and to compete in the
school work with the hearing children.
According to the results of the Stanford-Achievement Test given
at the close of the nine months of special instruction, Karl advanced
at least eleven months in all academic subjects and as much as four
grades in one. If he had enough ability to learn so rapidly at the
age of twelve, he would have been able to conquer a grade a year
from the moment he entered school had he been properly instructed.
It is usually advised that deaf children enter the course of training
at an earlier age than the hearing children because of the special
speech and lip-reading training which they require. If this could
have been done for Karl, he would have advanced more rapidly than
the average deaf child because he rated above the average mentality.
The deafness did not make Karl as he was, but it was the kind of
training and the lack of appropriate training which he had received,
plus his deafness. He had not had appropriate instructions to meet
his needs as a deaf child. His reaction organizations were perfectly
normal for the type of instruction which he had received.
In the nine months of special instruction, Karl learned to talk so
that any one could understand him. He learned to speak and write
in simple complete sentences. He learned to say readily practically
all the sounds in the English language. He had learned the use of
the diacritical marks and the dictionary. He could pronounce dia-
critically any English word from the dictionary himself, so that he
was almost independent in the pronunciation of new words.
He advanced not less than one school grade in all, and as much
as four school grades in some academic subjects during the nine
months of special instruction. Thus Karl advanced during one
school year of special individual instruction as much as he had in
six school years in regular grade school instruction and in some
subjects more. This certainly proves that specialized instruction is
needed for deaf children such as Karl. If they can actually learn
as much as he did during the nine months of special instruction, and
if they can use what they learn, it is certainly uneconomical for the
public schools not to provide the training which children such as
these require.
When Karl came to the Psychological Clinic he was twelve years
of age; he was unable to talk or write so that he could be under-
stood ; and he was retarded about five grades in school work achieve-
ment. What could yet be done for him by the schools ?
TREATMENT OF A CASE OF DEFECTIVE SPEECH 91
He could be instructed individually by a trained teacher, or
Placed in a special class with children of his own ability and of his
own level of achievement, or in a special class where individual in-
struction and not group instruction is provided. Individual in-
struction is no doubt the best plan for a child of his age, ability and
level of achievement. It is hardly likely that a group of children
of his age and stage of development would be located closely enough
together, except in a large city, so that they could be assembled for
group instruction. Karl lived in a small city of eight thousand in-
habitants. He enjoyed his own home life and his family and it was
yery difficult for him, his neighbors, friends, and the members of
his family to become reconciled to his going away for special in-
struction. If a special class for deaf children could be organized in
his home city or county where he could be taught individually by a
teacher trained to teach deaf children, his speech could be trained so
that he could be well understood; he could be taught all the practi-
eal school subjects; and in three or four years probably could com-
pete on equal grounds with hearing persons. He should be able to
complete the regular high school curriculum and enter a university
Provided for hearing persons. He could be trained so that he
could enter a desirable vocation in which total deafness does not
interfere.
There is certainly a need for more and larger medical depart-
ments and psychological clinics connected with the public schools so
that handicapped and problem children could be discovered, clin-
ically studied, and proper provisions devised. Various types of
special classes should be organized so that all types of exceptional
children could be properly graded and instructed in the public
schools of their own city. If a city is too small and does not con-
tain a sufficient number of children suffering from the same handi-
cap to make up a special class, the county could be used as a unit
and all the children of the county brought together in a central
location for a special class.
Karl was an undetected problem child when he was attending
the public schools. He was a pseudo-successful child. He was
recognized as having a speech defect but was not considered to be
totally deaf. There are many other neglected children in our
schools, and every effort should be made to establish Psychological
and Educational Guidance Clinics to aid our teachers in discover-
ing these children and to aid the schools in training them when
they are discovered.
