Our Knowledge of Other Minds
=============================

REVIEWS
W. Wylie Spencer: 
Yale University Press,
New Haven, 1930. 145 pp.
The success of any attempt to evaluate the grounds of our belief in the
existence of other minds is, as Mr. Spencer confesses, dependent upon some-
thing approximating to a clear definition of mind, to the extent that without
this the problem cannot even be formulated intelligently; our criticism of
the present attempt may then be leveled at the characteristics by which mind
is here described. These are nine in number: Association with a body,
consciousness, mental process, emotion, elasticity, attachment, detachment,
coactivity, and valuation; and this reviewer fears that if he were not already
familiar with some of the senses in which the term "mind" is commonly
employed he would be little enlightened by these characteristics and their
definition. We come out finally with the definition of mind as "a substantial
8elf, in so far as it lives through a conscious history, normally with a con-
ception of itself as having a body, purposes, and objective causes with which
it is intimately allied." Though exception might be taken to this definition
upon a number of points, we are inclined particularly to quarrel with the
characterization of mind as necessarily conscious, especially because of the
meaning this term has for Mr. Spencer. For he insists upon it, though he
says: "The characteristic of awareness can certainly not be defined, either in
terms of anything else or by description All that can be done to show
that the characteristic of awareness is understood is to display the ability to
tell when entities possess and when they do not possess it." It would be
interesting to know just how to go about proving the existence of such an
ability.
A discussion of the argument from analogy leads to the conclusion
that as heretofore stated it cannot be regarded as conclusive proof of the ex-
istence of other minds, though with certain amendments it might be given a
status of high probability; but this is not insisted upon.
Consideration of certain "specific criteria" of mind brings us to the
opinion that in several instances the question as to whether or not an in-
dividual conforms to the criteria is truly experimental?for example, in the
cases of valuation with respect to truth, beauty, and humor. Thus, laughter
in comic situations (and seriousness, we might add, in situations which are
not comic) is evidence of the humor of the event having been comprehended.
296 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Many of the characteristics above mentioned may be so verified; and the
question is naturally raised in the mind of the reader: Why is there no at-
tempt made to define awareness in a similar manner, that it might be equally
capable of objective investigation? Instead, the possibility of determining
objectively the presence or absence of these several other characteristics is
taken in a vague way as establishing a presumption in favor of the existence
of consciousness where these other have been shown to exist; which does not
seem to follow.
The final chapter contains a psychological explanation of the belief in
other minds, with the adequacy of which we are not here concerned. But
if, as we are told, we come to this belief because we find in our dealings
with other beings a "response" or "reciprocity," how still can this be consid-
ered evidence of their possession of awareness in Mr. Spencer's use of the
term? This difficulty is by no means overlooked, but the solution of it by the
invocation of a new type of knowledge, which of itself seems to be as problem-
atic in nature as the difficulty with which we started, is palpably weak and
close to begging the question. Perhaps the "taking account" of another's
emotional and intellectual activity insofar as it is objectively displayed,
which Mr. Spencer believes to lead us by means of a kind of intuition to
knowledge of that other's mind, is itself the only knowledge we are capable of
in that direction; and if so, we need no longer seek it in the dim regions of an
indefinable and indescribable awareness.
Francis W. Irwin
