Case Studies in Diagnostic Education
=====================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1931, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XX, No. 6 November, 1931

By Arthur Phillips, Ph.D.
Formerly Executive Officer, Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania
I. Robert, a Case of Aprosexia
Robert, aged nine years and five months, was brought to the
Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania because of
poor reading and spelling and was examined by Dr. Murphy in
June, 1929.
He is the oldest of three children. His father is a physician,
busy and prosperous, in a suburban town. The home background
is one of culture and economic stability. The family is socially
prominent in the community, which is considerably above the aver-
age in educational and social standards.
Robert's birth was instrumental. His general health was not
good until he was five years of age. He had pyloric stenosis. He
did not sit up alone until he was a year old. At two and a half his
tonsils and adenoids were removed. He has suffered from abscesses
in his ears since he was six months old and at five years had a
mastoid operation. He was again threatened with mastoid trouble
in the summer of 1929.
His school life began at five and a half years when he entered
the first grade. He repeated the second grade and at the time of
his examination he was in the third grade. His work was very
poor in reading and spelling. He was considered good in arith-
metic and geography according to his mother. There was a ques-
tion as to the advisability of his being promoted.
In the psychological tests he obtained a Binet-Simon Intelligence
Quotient of 112. His Basal Age was nine. He passed all tests
at the ten-year level except the vocabulary where his score was 28.
At the twelve-year level he passed the ball and field (superior
plan), fables, and picture interpretation. His memory span was:
161
162 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
auditory, 5; visual, 6; reverse, 4. His work on the performance
tests?the Witmer formboard and cylinders, the Dearborn form-
board?was superior to fifty per cent of ten-year old boys. His
performance on the Dearborn was slightly better than his per-
formance on the cylinders. The tester remarked that he made a
"fair" analysis of this problem and demonstrated good native in-
telligence. "While his work showed indications of carelessness, his
enthusiasm for the performance tests contrasted with his bore-
dom with the Binet-Simon.
Dr. Murphy diagnosed him as of normal mentality with com-
petency superior to seventy-five per cent of boys his own age.
The recommendations were: (1) That he be promoted to the
fourth grade; (2) That he have an eye examination; (3) That he
have clinic teaching in the fall of 1929.
On November 18, 1929, Robert reported for clinic teaching and
has received thirty-four hours of clinic instruction. In neither
reading nor spelling did he have good 2B proficiency when he first
came. He was behind grade at least one year in both of these sub-
jects. The recommendation that he be promoted into the fourth
grade was based upon the boy's general competency and the ex-
pectation that with clinic teaching he would be brought up to
grade. His clinic teacher reported that Robert was unable to spell
such simple words as "wave," "cheer," and "sail." He paid no
attention to sounds and made no attempt at phonic analysis. His
reading was slow and inaccurate. He had no drill in synthesis.
He looked at a word and guessed from its general formation as to
what it was. He read "nailed," "sailed." His comprehension
of reading material confirmed the report of his teacher that Robert
was good in "solid" reading. The method employed in teaching
Robert to read up to this time had been the word and sentence
method. Consequently, the boy was without any knowledge of the
phonic concepts. He showed the usual symptoms of those who have
been taught by this method and have failed to profit by it. He
knew difficult words but failed on small ones. His analytic dis-
crimination for small differences had not been trained. During the
first eleven weeks the progress made was not great. Some progress
was made in the development of the fundamental concepts of read-
ing and spelling but the judgment of his teachers was that he
needed much drill in phonics and word analysis if his reading and
spelling were to improve sufficiently to allow him to succeed in the
higher grades.
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 163
The greatest difficulty experienced with Robert was due to his
lack of motivation. He scored low on effort. His persistence was
poor; it was difficult to keep him continually at his task. He gave
all the appearance of the boy who had never been held down to a
specific task. During the second semester the teaching was con-
tinued. It was thought advisable to place Robert, on account of
disciplinary aspects of the case, under a teacher who would show
decided firmness. His teacher gave Robert at the beginning of
the semester in February, 1930, a 3A proficiency test in spelling
and reading. He was now in the fourth grade.
Types of errors which Robert made in reading were character-
ized by his teacher as follows: (1) Careless errors: these accounted
for at least a third of his poor reading: A few typical ones were:
reading '' through'' for '' thought," '' build'' for '' built," " know''
for "known," "nearly" for "early," "brought" for "bought,"
"he" for "we," "the" for "a," "it" for "at." That these errors
were pure carelessness was demonstrated by the fact that at the
teacher's question, "What?" without further hint or suggestion,
Robert, looked more carefully at the word and pronounced it cor-
rectly. (2) Errors of omission: in his rapid reading for content,
Robert left out words entirely, both small and large, and sometimes
letters. Plurals were read as singulars. (3) Guessing: in meeting
an unfamiliar word, Robert made guesses that usually were very
intelligent. He read "rapidly" for "sharply," "greeted" for
"cheer," "journey" for "travel," "arrow" for "bow," "wig-
wam" for "village." This intelligent guessing has gained for
Robert the reputation of being a good "solid" reader. He can
read a paragraph and retell the meaning of it quite accurately but
it is quite obvious that while he is able in this way to get the con-
tent of a story, before advancing in school he will have to learn to
make analysis and synthesis of each new word. Unless he does
this he will never become an independent reader nor use reading
as a tool for the acquirement of information and knowledge.
An attack was made upon his problem by giving him phonic
analysis. In doing so it was discovered that Robert had good
auditory and kinaesthetic imagery but that his visual imagery was
deficient in the finer points of discrimination. Words that he could
not recognize at sight by spelling aloud he could readily pronounce.
He is the type of child who has difficulty in learning to read by the
word and sentence method. With his good imaginal endowment
in the kinaesthetic and auditory field and with the substitution of
164 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
reading aloud for silent reading and phonic analysis for the context
method, there is no reason why from the intellectual standpoint
Robert should not make rapid progress in learning to read.
In his spelling it was discovered that there was no reason why
Robert, with his splendid kinaesthetic and auditory imagery and
retention, could not learn to spell. The only cause for a failure
was lack of effort. If he were held down to a specific list of words,
made to write them and pronounce the letters as he wrote them,
and, finally, the whole word when he had finished, in fifteen min-
utes he could master his school lesson for the day. He showed good
trainability and retention. The diagnosis of his poor spelling work
was simple?lack of interest and general laziness. His lack of in-
terest was shown in the fact that when he came to the clinic, in-
stead of bringing a spelling book he would bring by mistake an-
other book. Frequently he also forgot to wear the glasses pro-
vided for him. During the lesson period he was inattentive, and
displayed lack of concentration. Robert was always playing, so
much so that his teacher came to refer to him familiarly as the
"play-boy." He would play with the chalk, the eraser, ruler,
knife, anything within reach. He would spell aloud in an af-
fected soprano voice; write on the board, now large, now small,
now very illegibly. He was not defiant but he was persistent in
his foolishness. The best word to characterize his general attitude
is to say that Robert is flippant. During a Binet-Simon test
given by his teacher in February, he made a miserable showing on
the ball and field test at which he had succeeded in June, 1929.
His teacher asked him, "Suppose you hadn't found the ball yet?"
Robert replied, "Well, I wouldn't worry about it; I'd go home and
get another one." And yet this boy in school received an "E"
in his deportment. His mother, commenting upon this significant
fact, said to his clinic teacher, "So, you see, he is a good boy in
school.'' But as Robert and his mother left the clinic room
Robert called out to his teacher, "Now, are you going to be a good
boy?" His mother did not reprove him for this exhibition of bad
manners. The truth is, Robert is an easy-going, likeable chap. He
is a favorite with his teachers. They have permitted him to get
away with behavior that would not be tolerated in other children.
His mother, apparently, considers his flippancy a mark of superior-
ity. Neither at home nor at school has obedience been exacted.
When the mother was asked if Robert had any specific tasks
to do around home she replied, "Yes, he has certain chores to
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 165
do on Saturday and they are usually completed." But, recently
when she made an investigation of the progress of the work as-
signed for a certain day she found Robert leisurely sitting by and
watching his companions doing his assigned task. A mark of in-
telligence, perhaps, but certainly more distinctly a mark of a boy
who has used his intelligence to escape effort and herein lies Rob-
ert's chief difficulty. He is an inattentive, poorly-disciplined boy
who has never had to do anything that he did not want to do. His
pleasing disposition, his happy-go-lucky ways made him a favor-
ite with teachers and parents who have loved him not wisely.
Robert's failure to learn reading is on a par with his sitting on a
log while his companions sawed his wood for him. Only, in this
case there was no one to saw the wood. He is a case of aprosexia.
He has learned inattention; he has been taught it by his parents
and teachers.
Robert's ambition is to follow in the footsteps of his father
and become a physician. He has native ability sufficient, as proved
by our tests, to carry him through high school and college, but de-
spite an adequate I.Q. and co-discernment span, despite intelligence,
which so far has been sufficient to outwit both teachers and parents
in their task of getting him to learn academic subjects and to ac-
quire a tool by means of which information and knowledge may
be acquired, Robert stands small chance of reaching his coveted
goal unless the problem of a personality spoiled by indulgence and
sentimental kindness is solved. Robert needs alertness exercises.
He needs to learn persistent concentration of attention so that the
abilities that he possesses may be harnessed to a task that is worth-
while. Otherwise, all that he is will be like steam evaporating in
the air, instead of steam under pressure and forced to do work.
The conclusion of the clinic teaching department is, therefore,
that this boy has failed to learn because he has used a highgrade
intelligence to beat his teachers at the game which every child plays.
The game of the teacher is to teach reading; the game of the boy
is to escape learning to read. So far Robert has been successful.
The recommendation is that this boy be transferred from the pub-
lic school system in a community where his family is influential
to a private school where he will be under strict discipline and
one of a group, instead of an exception.
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
II. Precocity and Infantilism in a Polyglandular Case
Jacob was seven years and seven months old when he was first
examined by Dr. Lightner Witmer at the Psychological Clinic,
November 20, 1928. He was brought to the clinic by his mother
because of his failure to make passing grades at school?a failure
apparently due to lack of concentration. He had been promoted
each year, and was now in the third grade. His work was unsatis-
factory. The school that he attended was organized on the Dalton
plan, which is presumed to leave large room for the play of indi-
vidual initiative. Jacob, however, was showing little interest in
the projects assigned to him. What initiative he possessed was ex-
hausted at play. There he appeared to have a considerable quan-
tum. Not a fraction of it was available for study. He refused to
accept responsibility and to put forth such reasonable effort as
would carry his work through to success. Instead of holding his
attention to the task at hand, he interested himself in whatever
was going on in the class room. The picture was clear: the teach-
ers credited him with ability which he refused to harness to a task.
Examined in the Psychological Clinic, he obtained a Binet-
Simon Intelligence Quotient of 163, which ranked him as very su-
perior on this scale. His mental age was twelve years and four
months; his basal age, ten. His memory span, audito-vocal, was
5; visual, 7; and reverse, 4. His visual and reverse spans rated
him in the highest decile of boys his age. His audito-vocal span
was not consistent with his high I.Q. or other spans. Repeated
efforts to get him to give back six digits resulted in failure.
In the psycho-motor tests, his performances were both quanti-
tatively and qualitatively excellent. Despite defective eyesight
which made him inspect the formboard tests closely, his score in
the Witmer Formboard and Witmer Cylinders placed him in the
highest decile, on first trial. His second trials on both tests were
inferior to his first, his time actually increasing. This may have
been due to boredom, as the problems presented were scarcely in-
telligence tests to him. Or it may have been due to a lack of effi-
ciency or of a willingness and desire to be made efficient. On the
Dearborn Formboard No. lc, there was a challenge to Jacob's in-
telligence. He met it, obtaining a score on first and second trials
superior to fifty per cent of ten-year-old boys. He lessened his
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 167
time on second trial, though not sufficiently to improve his rating,
indicating, perhaps, a lowered efficiency. His approach to this test
was analytical. He made few false moves, and showed excellent
ability to reason in manipulating concrete material.
Given the school proficiency tests, Jacob proved to have almost
3A proficiency in spelling and arithmetic. In these subjects, his
school record for the term was unsatisfactory. He could read all
the words in the fourth reader, but skipped lines due to his defec-
tive vision. In the Stanford Achievement Tests, given at school,
his score was average in spelling, above average in reading, and
superior in arithmetic. The tests in the clinic and at school, there-
fore, demonstrated a competency to do the work in which he was
failing.
Despite a superior I.Q. and a demonstrated competency in both
the verbal and non-verbal tests, he was presenting a picture of fail-
ure to achieve even satisfactory school standing for his grade. A
study of environmental, physical and emotional factors is demanded
to cast light upon the situation.
Jacob is the second child of a prosperous merchant in a sub-
urban town. His social and economic background is good. His
sister, about two years older than he, does excellent work in school,
and always stands at or near the head of her class. The parents
are in good health, and there is no significant medical history in
the family. Conditions at birth were normal. The boy walked
when he was fifteen months old, said single words at nine months
and talked in sentences at seventeen months. He was not clean
until he was two years old?a fact that his mother attributes to his
excessive weight. The child had bronchitis, chicken-pox, tonsillitis,
measles and mumps between his third and fifth year. At three and
one half years, his tonsils were removed.
The three most noticeable physical characteristics of the boy are
his excessive blondness, adiposity, and defective eyesight. In
height, he was at the median for twelve years; in weight, at the
median for fourteen. He has internal strabismus of the left eye,
lacking binocular vision. This strabismus had not been noticed by
his parents until after the tonsillectomy was performed. A brief
acquaintance with Jacob reveals his excessive nervousness. He is
in constant motion, never relaxed or still. He chews his fingers,
makes grimaces, shifts his position, twitches in some way. The
168 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
parents report that he has night terrors. During his clinical ex-
amination, he rose from his chair time and again, and walked about
the room as though unable to remain seated. An oculist whom the
family consulted attributed the nervousness to his eye defect and
advised a surgical operation which was advised against by a spe-
cialist. Several physicians referred his eye weakness to his exces-
sive blondness, which approaches albinism.
In spite of apparent intellectual precocity, Jacob is infantile in
other respects. A preliminary medical examination revealed that
only one testicle had descended. He does not play normally with
boys his age. In his play he is more like a girl than a boy. He is
slow in dressing. Dr. Witmer recommended that a complete and
coordinated physical examination be made at the Graduate Hos-
pital of the University with emphasis on his glandular disturbance
and lack of binocular vision. It was further advised that an at-
tempt be made to have Jacob excused from school temporarily so
that every effort could be concentrated on improving his physical
condition.
A report from the optometrist under whose care the boy had
been was secured by the Social Worker of the Clinic. This report
stated: 11 The left eye converges and is amblyopic, which was caused
by non-use. The nystagmus is much less than when I first saw him.
Both eyes are highly hyperopic with hyperopic astigmatism." It
was his judgment that with his present prescription, Jacob was
able to continue with his regular class room work.
The report of the pediatrician follows: "He has a pluriglandu-
lar disturbance. His hypothyroidism does not seem very marked.
His basal metabolism is minus 19. The X-ray report is negative.
Other ailments present are intestinal indigestion, obesity, pavor
nocturnus, undescended testicle and strabismus. His blood chem-
istry is normal, but his blood count shows a mild secondary anemia.''
It was later reported that Wassermann was negative. Corrective
treatment was prescribed, a modified diet and endocrine therapy
being indicated.
The superintendent of schools cooperated readily with the sug-
gestion that the boy be removed from school activity temporarily.
No educational treatment was given Jacob until February, when
he was admitted to the Clinic Teaching Department of the Psycho-
logical Clinic for observation and instruction.
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 169
Clinic Teaching began February 27, 1929, and continued to the
end of the semester. Jacob received a total of sixteen hours of
teaching, in two one-hour periods per week.
The observational data accumulated during the period of clinic
teaching present the picture of a boy, hyperactive, vivacious,
loquacious, who was unable to direct his energy into productive
channels, but dissipated it in purposeless activities, which soon ex-
hausted him. He was fatigued at the end of an hour's period,
though watched closely and given every opportunity to rest. When
brought to the clinic a distance of ten miles by subway and trolley,
he was tired before the lesson period started. His own activities
on days when he was especially excitable exhausted him without
the expenditure of much effort on his lessons. On such days, it
was utterly impossible to keep him at his tasks. A typical example
of the way in which he would use his energy in a useless fashion
instead of completing his task was to embellish his work with all
sorts of fantastic drawings, drawing circles about numbers or let-
ters, adding dollar marks or question marks, or writing a sentence
with letters of different heights, reproducing the New York sky
line, as he would say, putting flags on the top of some buildings,
designating them as the Woolworth Building and so on. He had
his good moments, and good days, when a new subject was being
presented, or a new device employed in teaching. Then he was all
interest and attention. Here he showed the same tendency as was
noted in repeated trials on the formboard tests. Novelty interests
him, but novelty soon wears off, and then he is plainly bored. He
resists all attempts to make him efficient. Routine spells ennui for
him. This trait was especially noticeable in learning multiplica-
tion tables. He had his own method of finding how much four
times three is,?'' Three and three are six, six and six are twelve.''
No explanation of the inefficiency of his own method and the ef-
fectiveness of knowing the multiplication tables availed until Jacob
discovered for himself that such knowledge was helpful in learning
a new subject, division.
He had also good periods, when concentration seemed to be no
difficulty for him. This was usually in the reading period. Jacob
had very little difficulty with reading. He knew how to use the
context clues, and was familiar with the mechanical reading skills.
He knew the method of analyzing a word into its parts, associating
the proper sounds with the letters, and synthesizing the sounds to
make the word. The accent might be displaced but the syllables
170 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
were correctly sounded. He had good comprehension for what he
read, and read for content.
His oral reading was, however, unintelligible. Only Jacob
knew what he was reading. He was so eager to get on with the
story that he mumbled half the words, his voice dying down to a
whisper at the end of the sentence. Questioned as to what he had
read, he gave a good account. Oral reading also brought to notice
his shallow breathing. Breathing exercises were added to his daily
program. The reading of dialogues was resorted to in an endeavor
to secure better articulation. Under this regime, he made marked
progress. At the end of the semester, he read clearly, with en-
thusiasm and expression, modulating his voice according to the
character speaking in the story, frequently adding comments of
his own. He had learned to read for the edification of a listener,
and had acquired better breathing habits.
In order to improve his writing, he was asked to keep a diary.
The requirements were very simple; day and date, and three or
four sentences recording daily occurrences. The results were highly
satisfactory, showing excellent language ability, good sentence
construction and interesting content. The work of writing it be-
came extremely distasteful to the boy. Two or three hours were
consumed in the process of making three or four entries. Obvi-
ously, the actual writing consumed no such time, but Jacob em-
ployed his usual tactics when confronted with a forbidding task
?he consumed the time in extraneous activities. Only the coopera-
tion of his mother secured a completed diary by the end of the term.
Spelling was taught in connection with writing. In addition to
the diary written at home, Jacob was required to use given words
in sentences to be written on the board. Third grade words pre-
sented no spelling difficulty, but Jacob was fond of using words too
large for him to spell, but which he understood well enough to
use correctly. In these exercises the same ability to frame inter-
esting and well-constructed sentences, noted in his diary, was shown.
While considerable progress was made in the sixteen hours of
clinic teaching, Jacob had not acquired proficiencies warranting
his entering the fourth grade when he would return to school in
the fall. In intellectual ability, the discernment-comprehension
complex, he was found to be distinctly superior. His intelligence
in the sense of his ability to solve what for him is a new problem,
as shown in the psychometric and academic tests, must be rated
high. He is alert and quick in grasping new material, and has a
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 171
penchant for the novel. On the other hand, he resists mechaniza-
tion. His efficiency is greatly lowered by this resistance as well
as by his lack of persistent concentration of attention and his
tendency to waste time and energy in purposeless activities. His
general orientation is infantile and not at all comparable to his
Binet mental age of twelve years and four months. His motiva-
tion for school subjects, reading apart, is inadequate, as well as his
ability to carry through to success a specific task or operation. He
needs constant supervision and abundant encouragement to secure
results that are adequate. Left alone, he is unproductive. His
inefficiency and lack of determination are further complicated by
fatigue. He is deficient in energy.
On January 31, 1931, Jacob returned to the Psychological Clinic
for retesting. Two years and two months had elapsed since the
first examination. On the Binet-Simon test, he obtained an I.Q.
of 153, a decrease of 10 points. An analysis of the test shows that
his basal age had increased from ten to twelve. His vocabulary
had increased from a score of 34 to 58, giving him eight points
beyond the requirement for the fourteen year level. His memory
span, audito-vocal, had increased from 5 to 7; his visual from 7 to
8, and his reverse from 4 to 5.
His time on every trial of three formboard tests, Witmer Form-
board, Witmer Cylinders, Dearborn Formboard, showed a reduc-
tion, with an average reduction of 40 per cent. The qualitative
changes in his performance are more significant. On the Witmer
Formboard he showed an excellent competitive spirit, improving
on each trial until he succeeded on third trial in 15 seconds. On
this trial, he mixed the blocks purposely in order to make the trial
more difficult. This may or may not have been intelligent, but it
indicated his dislike to doing things over and over again in the
same way. The Cylinder test admitted of no such change, and
Jacob's eagerness to improve his time retarded rather than helped
him. The Dearborn Formboard was solved on first trial with only
one false move. For the second trial, he asked for a different set-up,
as doing the problem "the same way made it too easy, as one
learned and remembered just how to do it." Both trials were
quantitatively superior to his previous performances. On third
trial, he cut his time for the first trial in half. Healy Completion
II, which is presumed to test "general adaptive capacity," was
given. He obtained a score of 53, one point under the norm for
the eleventh year. He was left alone in the examining room for
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
twenty minutes during the giving of this test to see how he worked
without supervision. At the end of the period, the test was com-
pleted. This indicates a marked change in the boy, and the pres-
ence of a quality totally lacking two years previously. He can now
work without supervision, direct his energy purposively, carry
through a project to completion.
The picture which Jacob presented after two years shows some
very significant changes. During the two-hour examination he
showed no overt signs of fatigue. Distractibility was noticeably
absent. Instead of needing supervision and urging, he was self-
motivated. His persistence was greatly in evidence, as well as his
determination to complete what he had begun as soon as possible.
The only sign of nervousness was the momentary confusion when
his effort to speed up brought him into difficulty with the Cylinder
test. His efficiency in production had increased, partly as a result
of the elimination of useless motions, and partly as a result of the
appearance of a surpassing motivation, a desire to do better than
he had done.
A conversation with his mother brought out the fact that his
sense of inferiority based probably on his organic inadequacy was
being compensated for by self-assertion and independence of judg-
ment. He feels that his judgment is right, argues for it, and with
difficulty is convinced that his parents' judgment is better. An ex-
ample of this attitude of self-assertion is seen in the fact that when
he was informed he was going to be reexamined at the Psycho-
logical Clinic, he exclaimed, "Did you make that appointment
without consulting me?" Another instance of a developing su-
periority complex was furnished when the boy proudly told the
examiner that in an examination on the Thought Test Readers,
he had earned a "mark of one hundred three times in succession,
and was the champion of his class.'' It was his way of announcing
that the old order had passed away and that he was coming into
his own.
In his social relations, Jacob's problem has not approached so-
lution. His appearance is against him as well as his manners. In
height he is now superior to the median at fourteen, having grown
five inches in two years; in weight, superior to the median at sixteen,
a gain of 27.5 pounds, and 24.9 pounds overweight for his height, as
against 16.5 pounds in November, 1928. He suggests the fat pitui-
tary type. There is excess distribution of fat about the hips. The
general trend of his makeup and manners is towards feminancy.
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 173
His almost white hair, and defective vision make him fair sport of
youths his own age. He refuses to associate with them on equal
terms, and prefers younger children whom he can dominate. With
a companion his own age, he is argumentative. The friendship
soon ceases when Jacob finds he is not able to control his friend.
For rough sport, he has no use. His poor eyesight may be urged
as a good excuse, but the controlling factor would appear to be his
infantilism. Failing to make social contacts, he devotes his time
to reading, drawing, making airships with boards and blocks and
other material. The range of his moods is beyond normal. He
has days when everything goes wrong, and nothing is right; days
when he is better balanced, more equable.
Jacob returned to school in November, 1929. He entered the
third grade and is now in the fourth grade. His marks are now all
"Excellent" and "Good." There is no complaint on the score of
application. His work in arithmetic is not neatly done but it is
accurate. His teachers say he is dependable, frank, honest, con-
scientious. His school proficiency tests taken in the Clinic show
that he has the proficiencies necessary for fourth grade work in
spelling, arithmetic, and reading. His writing is poor, cramped in
style, written with his left hand in small letters. In the finer
coordinations necessary in handwriting, he is wanting. At present,
he is not a school problem, the trouble that brought him originally
to the Clinic having been removed.
The boy remains a medical and social problem. What the fu-
ture may hold for him depends on the success of glandular and
other therapeutic measures, and upon his ability to adjust him-
self to the demands of his social environment. The level at which
he will function will depend on these factors as much as upon his
superior intelligence and intellect.
III. The Educational Treatment op a Handicapped Child
Walking on his toes with a festinating gait, his arms from
shoulder to elbow held close to his body, his forearms bent forward
in Simian fashion, each step taken seeming to indicate that the frail
body would be plunged to the ground, a boy of five years and
seven months entered the Speech Clinic of the University of Penn-
sylvania, May 25, 1928. He had been referred to Dr. E. B. Twit-
myer by a physician, who had had the boy under observation since
he was eighteen months old. At that time, he was markedly under-
nourished and carried very definite stigmata of rickets. He was
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
unable to sit erect. The birth history was not very definite, but
there was evidence of early paralysis, and probable birth trauma.
His speech was unintelligible to strangers. Tonsils and adenoids
were removed without noticeable change. There was apparent loss
of power in the control of the soft palate, with perhaps, some bul-
bar involvement as well. So wrote the physician, ready to co-
operate with an anxious mother seeking not only articulate speech
but education for her handicapped child. Added to this was sus-
ceptibility to respiratory infection. Each winter there had been
attacks of bronchitis and broncho-pneumonia., obliterating the bene-
fits gained during the summer and retarding progress.
Examined by Dr. Twitmyer, Lester obtained a Binet-Simon
I.Q. of 127 which placed him in a group of ten per cent superior to
ninety per cent of six-year-old boys. His discernment span, audito-
vocal was 4; visual, 4; reverse, 3. His first performance on the
Witmer Formboard was superior to thirty per cent of boys his
age, despite the spasticity of his arms and hands. He failed to
comprehend the Witmer Cylinders, a test at his own age level, on
first trial, but after instruction, rendered an excellent performance
qualitatively, and quantitatively superior to seventy per cent. His
observation, discrimination of form and size, and concentration
of attention were good. His muscular control, considering the
spasticity, was above average. During the testing, he was willing
and cooperative, as far as his strength permitted. There were evi-
dent signs of fatigue, particularly in the readiness with which he
slid down into his chair. His speech, as described above, was indis-
tinct, due to lingual paralysis. The situation was further compli-
cated because the child realized his physical defects, and was sensi-
tive to them. Dr. Twitmyer's prognosis was that if the boy could
be built up physically, given speech training and proper educa-
tional treatment, it would be possible to prepare him to be a useful
and relatively happy member of society. It was recommended
that he should spend as much time as possible during the summer
in the open air, and should return to the Clinic in the fall for speech
and academic training.
Lester began his speech and academic training in the Psycho-
logical Clinic, October 10, 1928, and during the academic year re-
ceived thirty-seven hours of training. Owing to the condition of
his health his attendance Avas irregular. Forty per cent of the
time he was absent. Approximately half of the teaching period
was devoted to speech training and reading; the other half to arith-
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 175
metic. The boy fatigued quickly, and could not be taught for any
considerable period without resting. The breathing exercises were
distasteful to him because of respiratory difficulty. "What Lester
did not like, he had learned to avoid doing by the simple device of
saying, "I am tired." The reading situation showed the same
trait. In arithmetic, he was interested, did not resort to his favorite
defence mechanism, and made considerable progress. Before the
end of the year, he had acquired first grade proficiency in this
subject and was ready to take up the work of the second grade.
In reading, the word and sentence method was employed; progress
was slow. The speech difficulty, complicated by lack of motiva-
tion and fatigue resulting from the effort involved, all militated
against success in learning to read. Twenty words, recognized at
sight, was the total reading result for the year. The speech exer-
cises involved in Dr. Twitmyer's corrective speech treatment were
mastered. Excellent cooperation in home practice was furnished
by the mother, and marked progress was made toward articulate
speech.
It was Lester's privilege this year to spend an extra hour each
day he came to the Clinic with the pre-school group of superior
children in their hour of games and handwork. This provided a
valuable socializing agency for the boy who had never played with
other children, and whose sole companions were his mother and
grandmother. He entered with enthusiasm into the games as far
as he was able. In the handwork, he tried hard, worked slowly,
and became more agile. There were times when the sensitive na-
ture of the boy shrank under the gaze of observers, and it was ap-
parent that he was keenly aware of his defects. If an inferiority
complex, so-called, is developed on the basis of organic defect and
in proportion to the number of defects, here, surely, was a case
that provided an exception to the rule. Aside from a supersensi-
tiveness to the looks of visitors and students, which he resented,
he showed no sense of inferiority. His disposition was unspoiled.
His reactions in his own group were normal. He held his own
with those his equal in age, for in general intelligence he was the
equal, if not the superior, of most of them. A remark character-
istic of his general attitude towards inquisitive observers is this
one. "They think because I can't talk that I do not understand
what they say but I do." No sense of inferiority lay behind this
remark, but rather the reverse. If he was aware of his defects,
he was aware also of his ability. Singularly well-balanced was the
personality of this handicapped boy.
176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
His general intelligence was revealed also in his comprehension
of life situations and practical affairs. A boy who could not use
hands or feet efficiently, he was able to describe accurately the
movements that one makes in driving an automobile. His compre-
hension with all the associative processes involved functioned well
in all situations where a six-year-old child of superior intelligence
may be presumed to take interest. He was a fine bit of mecha-
nism with a very specific damage to the neural background involv-
ing hands, legs, tongue. Beyond this, his mentality was normal,
surely above average.
Lester was making such progress in his speech without over-
taxing his strength, that Dr. Twitmyer advised the mother not to
enter him in public school in the fall of 1929, but to bring him
back to the Clinic for another year. October of that year found
the boy beginning his second year of training in the Clinic Teach-
ing Department of the Psychological Clinic. His teaching hours
were the same as during the preceding term, and his attendance
about as irregular. The progress in arithmetic during the year
was notable. In June, 1930, he had attained 3A proficiency in all
the mechanical operations and problems; in addition and subtrac-
tion, his proficiency was 3B. In this branch, he was competent to
take up 3B work in the public schools, being only one semester be-
hind grade. In reading he had attained only 1A proficiency; in
spelling IB. Three semesters' work had been covered in arithmetic;
but one in reading.
The relation between seen, heard and spoken language in the
case of this boy became a subject of study. Hard c and g, k, q, v,
f, the sibilants s, z, sh, ch, th were the most difficult consonants for
Lester to master. Final t, d, f, were invariably sloughed off. The
sibilant sounds involving the closing of the teeth or jaws were
attacked first and yielded to treatment. The greatest difficulty
was experienced with sounds involving the posterior part of the
tongue and palate. The training here was most tedious and diffi-
cult, requiring a great deal of patience on the part of the teacher
and pupil, as well as persistent and intelligent effort. The unruly
tongue had to be trained to take and keep a position long enough
to produce the desired sound. This work was carried on in direct
relation to the reading problem. Syllables were used comparable
in some respects to the Ebbinghaus nonsense syllables containing
the difficult consonants and practice carried on both in the clinic
and at home. Care was taken in the choice of syllables to obtain
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 177
those that could be used later in the reading situation. It was drill
work in phonic analysis as well as training in speech. Lester ac-
quired the habit of attacking a word by syllables, patiently striv-
ing for the correct position of the tongue in utterance. Correct
articulation and a fundamental reading skill, the ability to sense
the component letter and sound parts of a word, were developed
simultaneously.
Lester's difficulty appeared to be that while he had a correct
auditory image of the word, e.g., kind, and understood its meaning,
his kinaesthetic imagery was faulty, for he had never been able to
send to the memorial area the correct motor image of the letter k.
He was thrown into such mental confusion when called upon to
make the difficult sound that all the other sounds in the syllable or
word were pronounced incorrectly. He understood the meaning
of the word girl when it was pronounced correctly but if he were
asked, "What is a dirlf", girl being pronounced as he pronounced
it, he would not understand and would say, "1 do not know."
This was tried on the lad again and again where there was not the
slightest suspicion apparently that you were trying to trick him
or make sport of him.
It became apparent in the first year that the boy could not be
taught to read by relying upon his visual imagery even in the case
of words that he was capable of pronouncing. Drill by means of
the family method was equally futile as Lester learned to know
the word in association with its siblings in the family but was un-
able to recognize it in his reading lesson. Progress was made and
success obtained only by corrective speech work plus the develop-
ment of reading skills. Considering the difficulties involved, to
acquire a proficiency of a half grade in the eighteen hours of speech
and reading work, was a considerable achievement. The prog-
nosis for this boy's education depends, then, upon the success of
the corrective speech work. He can not learn to read by methods
which rely for the most part on visual imagery. He cannot learn
to read by the auditory method of phonic analysis. Though his
auditory imagery is good, and his imaginal endowment is of this
type, his auditory and kinaesthetic imagery, especially of sounds
involving the posterior part of the tongue and palate, are in con-
flict. The difficulty involved throws the boy into mental confusion,
and has lessened his motivation for reading. The method adopted
which combined corrective speech work and the development of
reading skills seems to hold promise for the future.
178 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The problem of correct walking was also approached. Appro-
priate exercises were prescribed and a part of each play-hour de-
voted to practice in stamping out old habits that persisted since
the early years of his life, and in developing correct habits.
Marked improvement was noted in a short time. There is but a
faint resemblance to his former method of walking, which always
provoked strangers to catch him lest he fall forward on his face,
in his present gait, which is by no means perfect, but is always
much better when his attention is called and he is summoned to
do his best.
From October, 1930, to the following June, Lester studied under
a private tutor, coming to the Psychological Clinic once a day for
speech training. With his superior intelligence, good social ad-
justment, excellent reasoning ability and the evidence of improve-
ment in his speech, there is every reason to conclude that Dr. Twit-
myer's prognosis that Lester will become a good and useful citizen
has been justified.
IV. From Mental Deficiency to Normality
From mental deficiency to normality condenses the story of a
child who has been under the professional care and guidance of
Dr. E. B. Twitmyer at the Psychological Clinic. This child
of four years and nine months was brought to the Clinic, Feb-
ruary 11, 1927. "A total loss" bluntly expresses her condition at
that date. In three years and three months, through orthogenic
speech and academic training, she had acquired speech sufficiently
clear to be intelligible, and proficiency in school subjects that war-
ranted her taking her place among her equals in age in the public
schools. Whether she will be able to take her place in the com-
petitions of life, the future will decide.
A speech defect was the immediate reason that brought Jane
to the Psychological Clinic. She had a cleft palate. The palate
had been repaired at fourteen months, the repair being pronounced
seventy-five per cent successful. Her speech was not only that
characteristic of cleft palate cases but so indistinct as to be barely
intelligible. Her mother understood her, but her clinic teachers
needed not only auditory acuity but considerable familiarity with
the little girl before they could translate her speech into language
for the benefit of those who asked, "What is she saying?" It
seemed another child who stood up before a large audience at the
Speech Clinic Demonstration, March, 1931, and recited a poem
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 179
clearly and distinctly so that it was heard and understood by all
her auditors.
Significant as was the cleft palate, it was but a part of the pic-
ture. The bulging, glassy eyes, restricted vision, constant neces-
sity, due to myopia, for bending over to see things, told the story
of a second congenital defect?glaucoma. Expert optical attention
was required and supplied: glasses were provided and from time
to time changed. The future of our little girl, her social compe-
tency, would seem to hang at present upon the issue of this eye
condition which is almost as obscure as its etiology.
Add to these, another condition?glandular dystrophy. She had
a bad start in life. In addition to her congenital defects, there was
the difficulty of adjusting a defective organism to extra-uterine
conditions of living. When she was six weeks old she weighed but
four pounds, but gained steadily after that time. Glandular treat-
ment was given for one year, but discontinued by the mother of
her own accord. Jane was two years under normal weight and
height at the age of six. Her physical appearance was every thing
but attractive. A large head suggested hydrocephaly, which judg-
ment was afterwards confirmed by X-ray examination. A flat nose
with a malformed bridge nestled between exophthalmic orbs. Her
posture was bad, her shoulders stooped. The frail organism failed
to produce enough energy for normal child life.
Congenital cleft palate, congenital glaucoma, congenital glandu-
lar dystrophy?was it any wonder that she came to the Psycholog-
ical Clinic from a hospital with the diagnosis of congenital mental
deficiency? Without normal speech, sight, glandular functioning,
physical growth, or mental development there appeared small hope
for this child of four years. Owing to her excessive distractibility
and negativism no psychological examination was attempted at
her initial appearance at the clinic. On the Witmer formboard, a
test at her own age level, her score fell in the lowest decile. Her
form discrimination and distribution of attention, however, were
good. Upon this single thread Dr. Twitmyer hung his hope that
something could be done for this child. Possibly, too, there was
another reason. It must not be supposed that Jane was absolutely
without charm. She was a great conversationalist, dramatic in
her recital of events and incidents that interested her. What she
was narrating was a mystery to the hearers, but there was no mis-
taking the interest, enthusiasm, and, perhaps, intelligence of the
child. At. the conclusion of her speech examination, she was ad-
mitted to the speech training class of the Clinic.
180 TEE PSYCEOLOG1CAL CLINIC
Her teacher, a student in. Dr. Twitmyer's course in Orthogenics,
noted temperament traits which were to make the task of speech
training exceedingly difficult. She was highly distractible and
obstinate. She refused to do the lingual tests or to produce on de-
mand the vowel sounds called for in the speech exercises until
forced to do so by her mother. She showed herself to be a fluent
talker, always ready to tell of some happening, never ready to do
what she was required to do. She was obviously in need of strict
discipline. In February, 1928, the question of entrance upon school
education was considered, and Dr. Twitmyer recommended that
she be admitted to the Clinic Teaching Department of the Psycho-
logical Clinic for academic instruction. Her Intelligence Quotient
on the Binet-Simon scale was 88. Her chronological age was five
years and ten months; her mental age, five years and two months.
Her memory span, audito-vocal was 5.
Jane attended the clinic for instruction from March to June,
but only very irregularly. Her teacher found her a problem both
in attention and retention. She learned slowly and retained but
little. Her achievements at the end of the semester may be summed
up as follows: she knew the alphabet, was able to spell ten three-
syllable words and four four-syllable words, to count and to write
numbers up to twelve.
In May, at Dr. Twitmyer's recommendation, she was examined
at the Pediatric and the Nose and Throat Clinics of the Graduate
Hospital. The report of the Pediatric Clinic follows: "X-ray of
the skull: Sella Turcica within normal limits as to size and con-
tour. Clinoid processes clearly intact. No direct or indirect evi-
dences of neoplastic process either cranial or intracranial. General
contour of skull with rarified thinning appearance indicates mod-
erate hydrocephalic tendency. Wasserman?negative." The re-
port of the Nose and Throat Clinic was hypertrophied tonsils and
adenoids. Tonsils and adenoids were removed in the summer of
1928. Her eyes were refracted and glasses provided.
During the college year, October, 1928, to June, 1929, Jane re-
ceived fifty hours of clinic teaching; during the year, October, 1929,
to October, 1930, one hundred fourteen hours in academic subjects.
For the major part of the time she had the privilege of attending
the recreation hour of the pre-school group of superior children.
Association with this group was invaluable as a socializing agency
for Jane, as all her contacts had been with adults. She had never
played with children. The shy, timid Jane, two years undersize
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 181
and underweight, with her stooping shoulders, bad posture, bulg-
ing eyes, nasal voice, and awkward movements, was in striking
contrast to the members of the pre-school group with their alert
minds, active bodies, independent and original ways. The ego-cen-
tricity of child nature saved her from self-consciousness, but as she
grew older, there were moments when it appeared that she realized
that "she did not belong."
The reports of her teachers from October, 1928, to January,
1929, show that the main task of the year was to teach this child
to attend. Her attention, as was to be expected, was in inverse re-
lation to her fatigue. The frail organism did not manufacture
enough energy for even a minimum of productive work. In addi-
tion to this, her sleeping hours were bad. She stayed up with her
parents to a late hour and often arrived at the clinic weary before
her lesson began. Her motivation for the distasteful work of learn-
ing letters and numbers was at the zero point. She was not only
indifferent but hostile. She yawned, fidgeted, twisted her dress,
turned her body in a tortuous fashion. Streams of conversation
poured forth at most unexpected moments. This was her favorite
method of '' stalling.''
The word and object method was employed without result in
teaching reading. The analytical method was then tried. Jane
proved to have poor visual discrimination of letters, especially
those of similar forms as & and d, h and k. She made some progress
during the year in phonics, her auditory discrimination being
slightly better than the visual. Phonograms were taught as far
as possible in the reading situation, but a great deal of drill work,
wasteful as it is ordinarily, had to be resorted to; in fact, teaching
resolved itself into repetitive drill, because retention was exceed-
ingly poor.
Jane learned to recite numbers in rote fashion, but number re-
lations were beyond her. Combinations she could memorize, and
repeat glibly enough if sufficiently mechanized. Subtraction
seemed to be beyond her understanding. Weeks passed before she
grasped the idea that 3 minus 3 equals 0. The results were meager
here as in reading. Her greatest advance was in the matter of
control. She became in a measure habituated to classroom instruc-
tion. She had learned what the concept of "school" meant.
On January 28, 1929, her I.Q. was 88. Her chronological age
was six years, eight months; her mental age, five years, ten months.
As far as the abilities tested by this scale are concerned, Jane had
182 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
suffered no loss during the year. She was holding her own. Her
memory span remained unchanged?5. She had learned to read
numbers, and her visual span was equal to her audito-vocal. She
could reverse two numbers. The visual and reverse spans indicate
some profit from her clinic instruction, a beginning of organiza-
tion of perceptions.
In October, 1929, Dr. Twitmyer increased her hours of instruc-
tion from two to four per week. At the opening of the semester,
her teacher found that she had forgotten practically all her arith-
metic, and could spell only the simplest words. Beginning with
the simplest arithmetical operations, Jane advanced until at the
end of the term she had acquired first grade proficiency. Her pro-
ficiency in spelling was of the same level. In reading she had com-
pleted the Elson Primer and about fifty pages in the Browne sec-
ond reader. In spelling, reading and arithmetic, she had acquired
a second grade competency. Her attention was variable; her moti-
vation showed considerable improvement. She had become adept
in the use of methods for evading tasks she did not like; what
intelligence she displayed was manifested in this direction. How-
ever, with the sense of achievement, and the gradual awakening of
the perception of relations, she found satisfaction and acquired
some pride in her new-found power to do.
Her speech showed considerable improvement. Her new glasses
were proving much better than the ones originally provided. She
did not stoop so low over her reading. The prognosis for future
development was hopeful, but hinged largely on continued devel-
opment of her powers of attention.
In June, 1930, after another semester of teaching, her school
proficiency in reading was good second grade. She was reading
the third reader. Her work in spelling was on a par with her read-
ing while in arithmetic she had 3A proficiency in all the funda-
mental operations. She was competent, certainly, to do third-
grade work in all subjects if individual instruction could be
provided. On June 2, 1930, her Binet-Simon Intelligence Quotient
was 106. Her chronological age was eight years, one month; her
mental age, eight years, seven months. Her I.Q. had advanced 18
points. Her memory span was audito-vocal, 6; reverse, 3. In
height and weight, she was superior to the mean at seven years.
Since the removal of her tonsils, her physical condition had stead-
ily improved.
At the end of the semester, Dr. Twitmyer advised entering her
CASE STUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 183
in the public schools. Owing to the difficulty Jane had in making
adjustments to new situations, her peculiar tempermental traits,
her physical handicaps, it was thought advisable to recommend
placement in the second grade. She was accordingly so entered
in October, 1930. In February, 1931, she was advanced to 2B,
and is making a successful adjustment to the school situation. It
wras further recommended that she should continue to come to the
Clinic for speech training, in order to perfect her enunciation.
Here, for the present, we leave this interesting child. Orthogenics
has brought her far on the road from congenital mental deficiency
to normality as judged by the Intelligence Quotient and ability to
make progress in school. The prognosis, weighted as it is with fac-
tors which make for uncertainty, is in the main favorable.
