The Vocational Adjustment of Mental Defectives
=================================================

By Emily T. Burr, Ph.D.
Vocational Adjustment Bureau for Girls, New York City
The study of the minds, emotions, physical equipment, heredity
and personal history of unfit, ill-adapted and anti-social human
beings is engaging the attention of a growing army of psycholo-
gists, alienists and criminologists, and numerous statistics have been
Published based upon the results of mental tests administered by
Psychologists, psychiatrists and professors of pediatrics.
The correlation of the results of these tests with a plan for the
industrial life of the individual, however, has received markedly
kittle attention. There seems still to be a tendency to announce the
mental age, or the I. Q. of a mental defective, as if the de-
termination of his mental status were an end in itself?instead of
an index to a capacity which perhaps may be developed through
training.
Difficulties in the Guidance of the Feebleminded
Vocational Guidance is not an exact science even when used to
direct the activities of perfectly normal human beings. It is com-
plicated in large centers of population by the over-supply of so-
called 1'white collar" workers for the available "white collar" jobs.
Among workers of average intelligence there is a disposition to
secure employment without the help of a vocational counselor.
There is also the fact that the worker has the resource of being able
to fill acceptably a score of jobs differing more or less in technique
and character. If, therefore, the normal boy or girl cannot find
employment at the occupation for which each is particularly fitted
there is always the alternative of engaging in another occupation,
sometimes even in an uncongenial and distasteful occupation, for
be must needs go whom the devil drives."
When it comes to guiding mental defectives in the choice of an
occupation the task is much more difficult than when the placement
of normal workers is to be effected. More guidance is required and
less vocations are open. For a hundred jobs open to workers of
average intelligence, there are only a quarter of that number suit-
able and within the ability of workers of inferior intelligence.
55
56 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Another difficulty is that, although the counselor may have
accurately gauged the mechanical ability of the applicant whom he
sends to a power-press job, let us say, and may have studied as well
the anomalies of her character and temperament, there are always
unexpected factors which operate to render the mental defective
utilizable in one job and unutilizable in another, though both jobs
may be identical in character and requirements. There is much
in the saying "you can lead a horse to water, but you cannot make
him drink." There is also food for reflection in the fact that,
despite the wisdom of the maxim that beggars cannot be choosers,
beggars do choose, or at least refuse that which has been chosen
for them.
One of the most important things to obtain from a mental de-
fective seeking a job is the abandonment of her own mistaken
preferences and the concurrence in the judgment of the counselor
that this preference is unjustified and impossible of realization.
It is comparatively easy to place a worker with no fixed idea as to
her capability, but next to impossible to place, and keep employed
after placement, a mental defective who is under the delusion that
some other more agreeable and more remunerative job is within her
powers.
Experiments in Vocational Adjustment
In Rochester and in Des Moines, and several other cities, boys
from ungraded classes are trained to become shoe repairers. They
mend the shoes of the poor free of charge, thus gaining experience
which later fits them to assist in commercial shoe-repairing con-
cerns. As garage attendants, they may continue their school drill
for the position of mechanics' assistants.
In Newark, under Dr. Meta Anderson, training courses in
vocational values are successful in establishing work habits and in
making what might be termed "personality adjustments."
Efficient as are all these institutions, they do not begin to pro-
vide for the many who are in need of occupational training.
Dr. Edgar A. Doll, director of research of the Training School
at Vineland, New Jersey, estimates that only one-tenth of the
feebleminded of the country are being taken care of by state in-
stitutions, and that the vast majority of the feebleminded are at
large in the community.
The salvaging of the mentally defective is no longer a theory.
It has been demonstrated again and again that there are plenty of
moron jobs; plenty of repetitive and monotonous occupations
ADJUSTMENT OF MENTAL DEFECTIVES 57
created by the automatization of industry that are within the
limited capacity of moron brains. All that remains to be done is
the fitting of moron brains to moron jobs. Dr. Frankwood Wil-
liams, formerly medical director of the National Committee for
Mental Hygiene, has been quoted to the effect that the world could
not go on without the feebleminded. "A great deal of the world's
work," says Dr. Williams, "is cut out for them."
In New York City, the Vocational Adjustment Bureau for Girls,
which has now been in operation for ten years, is attempting to fit
the worker to her work. Many of its applicants are mental defec-
tives. The Bureau is almost entirely supported by private funds.
Under the leadership of its founder and president, Mrs. Ilenry Ittle-
s?n, it has grown from a small committee functioning under a branch
of the Big Sister Organization to an incorporated, non-sectarian
social agency serving in its capacity of vocational counseling and
placement some 300 different welfare groups.
It has been found that one of the first steps in vocational guid-
ance is the possession by the vocational counselor of a knowledge
?f the demands, both physical and mental, made upon the worker
by the occupation. Before directing a worker to a job, the voca-
tional counselor should know what capacities are needed for a
satisfactory filling of the job. The other requisite, the knowledge
of the ability possessed by the worker, comes after.
The Significance of Mental Age in Occupational Adjustment
In 1929, with the financial assistance of the New York Founda-
tion, the Vocational Adjustment Bureau made a survey to de-
termine the minimum degree of mental effort requisite for adequate
work in each of two thousand jobs. The idea was to ascertain the
minimum mental age level required in each occupation. This study
occupied many months and involved the job analyses of forty-one
different forms of occupation. Some two thousand and forty-nine
jobs were studied. It was found that in nineteen of these occupa-
tions girls measuring as low as six years mentally possessed
adequate ability to secure and retain employment. It was ascer-
tained that the occupations of Assembling, Packing, Miscellaneous
Light Factory Jobs of various sorts, Examining, Pasting, Cutting,
Folding, Handsewing, Press Machine Operating, Garment Machine
Operating, and Stock Work could employ usefully girls measuring
less than twelve years mentally.
Girls with a mental age of six years can acquit themselves satis-
58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
factorily in Packing, and in simple factory work. At a mental
age of seven, they can hold their own in the assembling of parts,
as errand girls, and in jobs examining and pasting.
Girls of the minimum age of eight years were found employed
in garment machine operating, cutting, and folding. At the nine
year mental level, girls were working at handsewing, press operat-
ing, simple numerical or alphabetical filing, and stock work. The
mental age of ten is the minimum clerical level, while an eleven
year mental age seems to be the minimum for success in selling.
It is assumed, in working out these conclusions, that the task
to be performed by these girls is not complicated by disturbing
factors such as excessive noise, too rapid tempo of machinery, or
irritability on the part of foreman or shop manager. It is also
essential that, in the application of the suggestions made in this
survey, the counselor should not rely wholly upon the results of the
mental tests, but take into account the total situation surrounding
each individual child. It is important that a battery of tests be
given to discover special aptitudes. Some idea of his probable
mental level is always, however, a pre-requisite to the satisfactory
placement of a feebleminded individual.
In arriving at our minimum age levels, we considered the mental
age levels obtained by Miss Vanuxem at Laurelton Village as fur-
nishing the lower rungs of an ascending ladder of possible jobs for
the feebleminded, but realized that girls who have lived in a re-
stricted environment in which discrepancies are overlooked are not
comparable to girls working in outside jobs where no leniency is
shown and where distractions are more frequent.
The employer cannot afford to be sentimental in his own factory
or workshop. He is concerned with the productivity of his em-
ployees, not with their peace of mind. The laborer must be worthy
of his hire, and when mental or physical impediments are such as
to preclude his giving value received, it is idle to invoke humani-
tarian reasons for his retention in employment. The employer
who would give these exclusive consideration would quickly find
himself at a disadvantage in competition with the employer who is
moved solely with the idea of low cost and the avoidance of waste.
Factors in Individual Adjustment
The Vocational Adjustment Bureau for Girls proceeds on the
theory that mal-adjustment is the underlying cause of most of the
failures encountered in the placement of girls of subnormal in-
ADJUSTMENT OF MENTAL DEFECTIVES 59
telligence, psychopathic tendencies, and inadequate social behavior.
In order to readjust these workers to tasks within their limited
capacities, they are studied individually from three distinct angles:
Physical, psychological and social. The first is a constant and the
other two, variables in the equation which results in adjustment or
wal-adjustment.
Ten years of experience have taught us that mental tests are
not sufficient in determining economic adaptability. Every girl
who applies or is sent to the Bureau for placement is subjected to
ft series of psychometric, eye-and-hand, and manual dexterity tests,
to reveal as much as possible the anomalies of character and the
peculiarities of temperament that set her apart from normal girls
of her age and heredity. In the analysis of these girls, another
factor of the utmost importance is the emotional factor.
In the examination of applicants at the Bureau, the physical
characteristics of the girl are first appraised. Her height, her
Weight, the condition of her feet and hands are noted. The state
?f her wearing apparel is even taken into consideration.
The next matter to engage the attention of the interviewer is
the social situation of the girl. It is necessary to go below the
surface and to form an appraisal of all the factors that go to the
making of what is called "personality." An attempt is made to
discover the secret urge of each applicant, the thing she wants to
do most. This may sometimes be ascertained by asking the girl
what her earliest memories are, the first event in her life that she
remembers. She may also be asked to formulate three wishes,
state the three things she wants most. Quite frequently the an-
swers to this questionnaire give a clue to the thing in which she is
interested or likely to become interested. It sometimes throws
light upon apparent anomalies and enables one to discern the under-
lying difficulties in the way of the girl's success and what has im-
peded her proper adjustment.
In addition to these self-analyses, the girl is asked to write a
letter such as she would write to a friend long without news of
her. When necessarj- she is prompted by questions about what
she does when she returns home from school or from work; what
she is particularly interested in; who her closest companions are,
whether or not she has a boy-friend, whether she concentrates upon
?ne boy or divides her time among several, whether she has one
girl-friend, or many.
In an effort to have the girl express herself freely, the last
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
question reads: '' Tell me more about yourself, anything that occurs
to you," to which one girl replied, "Nothing has occurred to me
yet, thank God!"
It is quite obvious that the value of these various ways of test-
ing and of analyzing responses depends upon their interpretation.
Tales of persecution at home, of jealousy between brothers and
sisters, of preferment by one or the other parent may not always
be accepted as gospel. It becomes necessary for the investigator
to distinguish between the vivid imagination of a neurotic or of an
ego-centric with an instinct for the dramatic and the truthful
revelation of a passive and non-imaginative subject whose griev-
ances are justified.
It is easier to describe methods for measuring the physical and
intellectual limitations of these girls than it is to set forth ways for
measuring their emotional reactions.
Tests Employed in Measuring the Vocational Aptitudes of the
Feebleminded
Having established the fact that frequently high manual dex-
terity can be possessed by individuals lacking so-called general
intelligence, all the applicants at the Bureau are subjected to
several mechanical and trade tests which yield fairly accurate and
very valuable information.
Since the Terman Revision of the Binet-Simon test offers a
well-standardized form of appraisal, this test may be used as a
basis for a general testing program. Among other points on this
scale it is important to note the ability to comprehend instructions,
the memory span, the facility for making change, reading or copy-
ing a model. No matter how slightly one type of response may
excel another in testing the feebleminded the fact should be noted,
for in making suggestions as to training or work, every positive clue
as to a girl's capacity should be sought and given due emphasis.
Sometimes a fair sense of size and form may be discerned in an
otherwise quite dull and colorless series of reactions. Then, if the
girl can sew or has some degree of manual dexterity, she may be
placed where copying of a model is an essential part of her work.
The most important of the trade tests is the Toop's Girls'
Mechanical Assembly Test which for vocational purposes is divided
into five, groups of tests including: simple assembling, hard as-
sembling, pasting, sewing and the trimming test. Each one of
these eleven operations, regardless of its difficulty, is evaluated at
ADJUSTMENT OF MENTAL DEFECTIVES 61
ten points. A score of fifty out of a possible one hundred and ten
Points is approximately the minimum score upon which placement
in an industrial job can be safely recommended. Girls obtaining
lower scores than fifty may, with training, become sufficiently
skilled to hold a job in which the work is not too exacting. Limit-
ing the girl to the forty-five minute time-limit has been found im-
practicable at the Bureau and the girl is allowed to work until she
has completed, or attempted, the entire set of tests. It would be
desirable to time each of the single tests, separately, but this would
require more supervision during the test period than it is usually
practicable to give.
The Porteus Maze and the two Treat Machine Operating tests,
which consist of the paper folding tests, a trimming test and a more
difficult set which comprises an electrical device that determines
varying degrees of motor control, are of vocational value. I lie
second test is a help in prognosticating the innate ability that a girl
niay possess for handling the finer grades of machine operating.
The MacQuarrie Test for Mechanical Ability includes three tests
which are valuable in determining the visual acuity and motor
control of subjects of low grade intelligence. The Army Perform-
ance Scale is very helpful when administered to persons who do
not speak English.
The Thurstone Clerical and Tj7ping Tests may often be of
assistance in a negative fashion, as an aid in convincing parents who
have determined' that a feebleminded daughter shall go in for
office work, that such a career is not suitable for her. An ob-
jective illustration of what is entailed in office procedure and the
errors that the poor daughter has made will frequently have greater
effect upon the parent than a prolonged discussion.
Industrial Opportunities for the Feebleminded
The mechanizing of industry has opened many fields to the
feebleminded which hitherto had been open only to skilled me-
chanics. It is not hard to remember when the operating of an
elevator demanded a sure hand, a certain amount of robustness,
eye-hand co-ordination, and the exercise of good judgment. This
occupation is now quite within the powers of an operator measur-
lng ten years mentally.
Many of our sociologists have expressed alarm over the growing
Use of machinery and the gradual elimination of hand labor.
What Julius Klein, Assistant Secretary of Commerce, calls "tech-
62 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
nological unemployment" would be alarming if our modern age
did not find new employment for the workers displaced by ma-
chinery. In a middle-western state, there is today a huge plant
which is filled by what is really a single machine. It turns out
complete automobile frames, almost untouched by human hands.
At the beginning of the world war, one factory operator in the
American Razor Blade Industry was turning out, in a given period
of time, five hundred blades. Now, in the same time, he turns out
thirty-two thousand blades. The hourly output of four ounce
bottles used to be seventy-seven; now it is three thousand. In
1925, one hundred men produced as many automobiles as were
produced by two hundred seventy-two in 1914, refined as much
petroleum as was refined by one hundred sixty-one, and as much
iron and steel as one hundred fifty-nine men. The situation is
not as alarming as would at first appear, however, since science has,
until now, created new needs and new occupations for those which
it has eliminated. The pay-roll last year in the most recently
developed of our industries, the radio industry, was more than two
hundred million dollars, and it is not surprising to hear that many
mental defectives are rendering perfectly satisfactoiy service in
this new field of endeavor.
Another serious factor in the placement of workers, whether
normal or subnormal, is the seasonal quality of many of the occupa-
tions which are open to them. Partly because of this, the place-
ment of mental defectives is seldom definite, and is a continual
repetition.
In an attempt to overcome the difficulties which seasonality
entails, the workers at the Bureau have compiled an industrial
calendar showing the fluctuations in those industries in which many
of its applicants are placed. Reference to the calendar makes it
possible to direct into active industries workers no longer utilizable
in industries which have suddenly become inactive.
The Problem of Emotional Instability
The emotionally unstable mental defective is always a most
serious and difficult problem. From this group is recruited the
delinquent, the shiftless, the gangster's tool, the hobo and the
ne'er-do-well. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance that an
effort be made to stabilize, through trade training and the super-
vised job, the members of this group. Only work involving the use
ADJUSTMENT OF MENTAL DEFECTIVES 63
of the large muscles, work that offers variety and little restriction
of body movement, will satisfy them.
Boys of this type may be more easily placed in jobs that offer
variety and movement than girls. They may be placed as helpers
on trucks, as plumbers' and carpenters' and farmers' assistants,
as delivery and errand boys, busboj's, bootblacks and as general
helpers in a large number of occupations.
For the unstable subnormal girl, unfortunately, there are few
occupations available. Housework has long been considered a job
for tlie moron, and it does fulfill the specifications that have been
outlined as essential for the unstable mentally defective girl, but
applicants at the Bureau usually refuse to enter the field. House-
work in all its phases, and this includes waitress and chamberwork
as well as tlie tasks of a general liouseworker, is shunned. Social
opprobrium has been unjustly attached to this form of service, and
even the feebleminded seem to be aware of it. "Looking after a
child," comes within the capacity of subnormal girls, and often
they are eager to secure such work, but no emotionally unstable
mental defective should ever be entrusted with the responsibility
that this task involves.
Errand girl jobs offer freedom of movement, but only the very
young girl js jn demand for such openings. Some of the operations
a laundry are within the scope of a girl of this type, but out-of-
door work such as is easily obtainable for the boy cannot be
secured for girls. For this reason, better success may be expected
when the placement work of emotionally unstable defective boys is
compared with that of girls of like caliber.
Occupational Training for the Feebleminded
About a year ago, the Bureau obtained the cooperation of tlie
ljoard of Education of New York City, who placed at its disposal
several teachers and fifteen class rooms in the Harlem Continua-
tion School. There an effort is made to create work habits, and
develop manual skill in girls of working age who have proved un-
receptive to the fixed school curriculum dealt out to normal chil-
dren. In a number of cases these girls, who have attained the age
of sixteen and do not reach an average mental age of eleven, can
eventually be fitted for profitable employment through intensive
training in one single industrial operation. The interesting fact
which may be observed is that in almost every instance improve-
ment grows out of repetition. The mental defective has a definite
64 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
economic value and this value can be developed and increased
through patient training of the feet and fingers, if not of the mind.
Incidentally, as Froebel and Montessori have demonstrated, physi-
cal training involves mental training. The concept of attention is
a state of perseverance. The difference between a normal and
subnormal worker feeding a belt-conveyor, for instance, is not
always to the disadvantage of the subnormal. Power Machine
Operating, Sample Mounting, Handsewing, the assembling of radio
and electric light parts, have proved the most successful types of
training in these unit courses as far as placement of the girls is
concerned. Courses are also being given in foot-press operating,
labeling, lamp shade work, wrapping, packing, and folding large
garments. The folding of small articles demands more speed than
this group can attain.
The greatest difficulty is experienced in getting the girls to begin
their work quickly. They "fuss around" interminably, and it
requires infinite patience over a consecutive period finally to instill
in some of them a sense of responsibility to their supervisor. Voli-
tionally, they are weak, often careless and so lacking in persistence
that only through constant and tireless effort can satisfactory work
habits be established.
Frequently the counselors at the Bureau have found that girls
were discharged after a few hours' trial because they were too
slow to learn the process on the job. Sometimes they were fright-
tened by their surroundings, at the clatter of speeded-up ma-
chinery, or perhaps by instructions given them by a stranger in
what, to them, was a terrifying tone. Fear grips them and they
become incapable of making even their comparatively poor "best
effort." Teaching the girl of this type quietly in an environment
resembling a factory, but at a slower rhythm, removes this element
of bewilderment. Though these unit courses are a relatively recent
development the results achieved are very encouraging.
