Institute for Child Guidance Studies
=====================================

edited by Lawson G. Lowrey,
M.D. The Commonwealth Fund. 1931. viii + 290 pp. $1.50.
In this volume an attempt has been made to give a picture of the work
of the Institute for Child Guidance by presenting a symposium of various
papers which have appeared from time to time in scientific and professional
journals, each written by a past or present member of the staff at that Insti-
tute. There are, in all, sixteen papers; six of these are contributions in the
social field; six in the field of the medical approach; and two each in the fields
of psychology and of child training. Five of the papers are written by the
editor, Dr. Lawson G. Lowrey, Director of the Institute; two each are written
by Curt Rosenow, Statistician, and Dr. H. M. Tiebout, Psychiatrist. The
remaining contributions have been made by Dr. David M. Levy, Chief of
Staff, Christine C. Eobb, Chief of Social Service, Charlotte Towle, Psychiatric
Social Worker, Bertha C. Reynolds, Research Assistant in Social Service,
Katharine Moore, Psychiatric Social Worker, Mary Coburn, Librarian, Dr.
222 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Hyman S. Lippman, formerly Pediatrician at the Institute, and Samuel J.
Beck, formerly Commonwealth Fund Fellow in Psychology.
Much may be said in favor of the volume, for it presents a general survey
of the work characteristic of the Institute, and perhaps of Mental Hygiene
as a movement. The papers devoted to social work are informative, dis-
cursive, and stimulating. Miss Towle's article, Certain Changes in the
Philosophy of Social Worlc, deserves especial mention as a well-presented
historical survey of the development in attitude observed within this field.
In the medical section, which, in general, is a mediocre treatise of the
psychiatric approach to child problems, the paper Fingersucking and Accessory
Movements in Early Infancy is easily superior to the others. It represents a
rather careful statistical study of this behavior, and suggests rather definitely
that habits of finger- and thumbsucking are the result of insufficient lip-
movements, or "incompleteness of the sucking phase in the feeding act. . . .
Of 122 unselected infants and children, the 28 fingersuckers in contrast with
the rest have less opportunity for sucking movements. . . . Insufficient food
appeared as a sole factor in the development of fingersucking in relatively few
cases." In our opinion this study deserves attention. It first appeared in
1928, in the American Journal of Psychiatry. (Vol. 7, pp. 881-918.)
Of the two psychological contributions, Beck's The Rorschach Test and
Personality Diagnosis represents an attempt to investigate the use of Ror-
schach's ink blot test with a group of feebleminded. Eighty-seven feeble-
minded individuals were tested, but the results of only 69 cases were used
in the analysis. The author feels that '' The Eorschach test offers possibilities
of an excellent instrument for diagnosis of personality in both the intellectual
and affective functionings," though he rightly adds that the "norms are at
present inadequate and further experimental work is necessary to make them
satisfactory. ..." Certainly further experimentation should include the use
of more satisfactory criteria in standardization than are described in this
article. This paper, also, was first printed in the American Journal of Psy-
chiatry, in 1930. (Vol. 10, pp. 19-52.)
Of the two papers devoted to the approach in child training, neither de-
serves unusual consideration. They are general in treatment, and should have
informative value for parents and laymen, criticisms which might be made
of the volume as a whole.
With the exception of the studies by Beck and by Levy, mentioned above,
Eosenow's The Incidence of First-torn among Problem Children represents
the only experimental study. His work was done with 397 children selected
from those appearing at the Cleveland demonstration clinic and 255 children
from the clinic in Philadelphia. Conclusions are indefinite, except that
"first-born children from small families present problems to child guidance
clinics more frequently than do other children from such families." The fact
that the first born child is older, and has therefore had more time to become
a "problem-child," is admitted.
This group of studies should very well portray the approach and work
of the Institute for Child Guidance, and of the Mental Hygiene movement. It
should be informative for parents, social workers, visiting teachers and others
interested in the problems of childhood. The fact that only three of the six-
teen studies are of distinctly experimental character should indicate the atti-
tude, desirable or not, of this movement.
T. W. Richards
