Experiences of an Asylum Doctor with Suggestions for Asylum and Lunacy Law Reform
==================================================================================

:Author: Book Reviews.
:Auhtor: Montague Lomax
M.R.C.S. (Lond.), George Allen and
Unwin. 1921. Pp.256. 12s. 6d.

This remarkable book which has been pub-
ished during this year, apparently contains a
tailed description of the life experienced by
f:Judical officer in one of our asylums. That
j*e book has given much food for thought,
here can be no denial, but before accepting
j*e lurid details?for in many ways indeed
, ey are morbidly lurid?we would like to
how the credentials of the writer and also the
rue motive for such a deliberate indictment
of asylum administration. Dr. Lomax states
hat he dedicates the book to all the "insane
Poor in sympathy with their sufferings and in
he hope of alleviating their hardships."
?^nis book is so inscribed by the author, but
reading it through we notice that very
tie is mentioned with regard to any protest
?h the part of Dr. Lomax by reporting any
^vils and abuses to the authorities during his
ehure of office, which apparently dates back
o those dark days of the Great War. It is
obvious that during those trying times, when
Very few if any organisations could have
successfully withstood the scrutiny of an over-
^ealous critic, although Dr. Lomax was pain-
ty aware of all these alleged facts, it seems
a great pity he did not take an earlier oppor-
tunity of openly protesting and publishing
r?ad his criticisms and suggestions for re-
?rm. we accept the statement that Dr.
0rQax has been a lifelong student of Psychol-
?gy 5 but one must remember that theory with-
out the leavening effect of matured experience,
more often than not enters into conflict with
actual practice and it is extremely fortunate
hat this indictment is not made by a medical
*han of matured asylum experience, for Dr.
Fornax frankly confesses that his experience
institutional work covers a short period of
"out two years. This condemnatory attack
?ft asylum administration is of so bold a char-
acter that after reading the book we are left
111 a state of wonderment as to whether such
a state of affairs so gloomily described can
actually exist at the present day, as in various
passages the descriptions of the conditions
savour of medieval prison life.

The book contains an Introduction with
twelve chapters and very fully covers the
ground necessary for a detailed and critical
survey in support of his views. We notice
with pleasure that the writer pins great faith
to the teachings of the late Dr. Charles
Mercier, whom we always acknowledge as
having been a brilliant psychologist, a master
of logic, and a prominent and shining light in
the field of psychological medicine. In these
twelve chapters, Dr. Lomax in an honest and
frank manner describes his experiences and
he does not fear to criticise severely any defect
which in his opinion requires reform. In this
way, everything appertaining to the life of an
individual, whether a member of the staff or a
patient, comes in for its share of critical ob-
servation. The construction of the asylum
building, the unhygienic wards, the lack of
facilities for hospital treatment, the clothing
and comfort of the patients, the weak points
in the medical and nursing administration are
all carefully reviewed by Dr. Lomax and one
would be doing him an injustice by refusing
to accept his interesting and descriptive
account. On the other hand we feel that if
similar unsatisfactory conditions do not exist
generally in other institutions, it is somewhat
unfair on the part of the writer to assume that
the vivid descriptions of his experiences are
typical of those obtaining at other institutions
for the reception and care of the insane.

On carefully reading this book we are con-
fronted with so many problems which require
detailed discussion that it is impossible to
deal with them in a short review. No doubt
those who have been associated with asylum
life for any appreciable length of time, will
realise the difficulties which arise in caring
for and treating large numbers of unfortunate
patients, whose disordered minds and erratic
conduct necessitate somewhat different treat-
ment to that meted out in general hospitals,
and here arises one of the greatest problems for
those who administer the provisions of the
Lunacy Act. It is the inability of those
responsible to indulge patients with greater
individual attention and treatment, owing to
the fact that it would require an enormous
medical and nursing staff to carry out such
generous treatment amongst two or three
thousand patients, who are for the most part,
difficult to handle owing to their varying
moods. The presumably curable patient, we
feel sure, receives every sympathetic consider-
ation, but the patient who is either a menace
to himself or to others, must of necessity be
treated with rigid discipline. In any case,
we are certain that this book which Dr. Lomax
has written, with apparently honest aim, must
receive serious attention, both from the pub-
lic and from the authorities who are respon-
sible. We consider that no stone should be
left unturned in investigating such a serious
charge and we look to the immediate future for
a searching enquiry into the whole question
and the result to be published broadcast. 

We must acknowledge however, that isolated
instances of ill-treatment and neglect have
occurred in institutions, but we know that in
all cases, when possible, the offenders have
been promptly brought to justice. That there
is a need for reform in Lunacy Act administra-
tion, there can be no doubt, but this remodel-
ling must be carried out by those who are
experienced and are well versed with the diffi-
culties and dangers which arise in dealing with
mental patients. There is no branch of medi-
cine into which the emotions enter more
strongly, and it is well known that often singu-
larly unhappy results are brought about by
well-meaning but misguided actions of the
inexperienced enthusiast.

It is a regretable and even lamentable fact
that a certain section of the Press should have
so eagerly selected and published the sensa-
tional element of the story, as it has come to
our knowledge that a considerable amount of
anxiety and unhappiness has arisen in the
mind of those who are unfortunate enough to
possess friends or relatives under care in insti-
tutions for the insane. We must remember
that there are always two sides to every ques-
tion and for the present we are contenting our
minds with a feeling that such evils and abuses
recorded in this book, do not faithfully repre-
sent the actual uncoloured and unvarnished
state of affairs which one usually meets with
in asylum life. Although Dr. Lomax may be
considered iconoclastic in his attack by some
of the older school of administrators, yet most
of us cannot fail to welcome the practical sug-
gestions for the establishment of an "Ideal
Asylum" built and administrated on the
Villa system?a scheme which is by no means
new and which has, for some time, been
actual practice abroad. We feel it must be
the wish of all those concerned with the wel-
fare of the insane, to see antiquated buildings
and archaical methods of administration
swept away and if Dr. Lomax's book will even
stir the feelings of those responsible for the
carrying out of such reform, it will indeed have
achieved some object.

RECENT AMERICAN TESTS.
-------------------------

(1) The Terman Group Test of Mental
Ability, Specimen Set, London.
G. Harrap & Co., 2s. nett.
(2) The Otis Group Intelligence Scale,
Specimen Set, London. G. G. Harrap
& Co., 3s. 6d. nett.
(3) Specimen Set of the Courtis Standard
Practice Tests, London. G. G-
Harrap & Co., 5s. nett.

A large amount of literature concerned with
mental testing is now reaching this country
from America. During the recent European
War, the scheme for examining, by psycho-
logical methods applied on a large scale, re-
cruits for the American Army gave an enor-
mous stimulus to work in this direction. To
test large masses of men upon a uniform basis
it was necessary to construct tests of ability
which could be applied to the examinees, not
orally and individually, but by means of
written examination papers to large numbers
working simultaneously in groups. Hitherto,
most tests of intelligence, as for example the
Binet Simon scale, have been applicable to
one individual only at a time. It was, we
believe, the work in this country, at Oxford
and at Liverpool, that first showed, by care-
fully obtained co-efficients of correlation, that
group testing could be quite as efficient and
trustworthy as individual testing.
Somewhat upon the lines of the earlier
Army Tests the "National Scale" was con-
structed for use in American schools; and noW
the "Terman" and "Otis" "Group Tests"
have been drawn up and published. 

Here again the type of problem and of material
adopted for the tests is very largely identical
111 its general nature with that previously
used for testing American recruits.
. The Terman series is designed in the first
^stance for use in the upper classes of primary
schools and beyond. A brief set of directions
f?r giving the tests and scoring the results
accompanies the test sheets.

No tables of normal standards of perform-
ances are given. The writer states that
what the teacher and principal most need to
know is how the pupils of a given school or
class differ from one another. The test gives
Us this information without reference to
norms."

The Otis Group Intelligence Scale contains
a primary as well as an advanced examination.
The former consists mainly of pictures, and is
suitable for use with illiterate adults, or with
children so young or backward that they
cannot read.

The Courtis Tests have a different object.
Both in England and America scientific
testing of arithmetic has shown that, particu-
larly among older pupils, there is an unex-
pected amount of inaccuracy in the fundamen-
tals of calculation?in simple adding, sub-
tracting, multiplying, and dividing. To im-
prove both speed and accuracy of simple
Calculation, a course of intensive drill, care-
fully adjusted in amount, nature, and diffi-
culty to the capacities of individual children,
ls the simplest and most important means.
% the aid of such drill the Courtis Tests claim
to enable the teacher to bring the backward
Pupil up to the standard in the several opera-
tions in a minimum amount of time.

All three schemes of testing are American in
f?rm and origin. The wording, indeed, has
evidently been revised to render the tests
aPplicable as far as possible for use in Eng-
land; but such revision and re-standardisa-
tion requires months, and even years, of care-
ful statistical investigation, before it can be
accepted as satisfactory. In the Otis Manual
some of the tables are still given in terms of
American "grades," instead of English
"standards"; and it is hardly likely that age-
n?rms obtained in America can hold good
without considerable adjustment to children
Working in British schools. Here, therefore,
ls a fruitful field for research in this country.

*t would be interesting, for example, to
discover how far, and with what modifica-
tions, the simpler or primary examination
contained in such test manuals would be use-
ful in the hands of teachers in England for a
first rough diagnosis of backward or defective
children. C.B.

"Abnormal Psychology and its Educa-
tional Applications." By Frank
Watts, M.A. Published by George Allen
& Unwin, Ltd. 7s. 6d. net. pp. 191
One of the main difficulties met with by the
teacher,?especially the young teacher?to-
day is undoubtedly to be found in the attempt
to establish a clear relationship between the
findings of modern psychology and the prac-
tice of the classroom. Only too often the
question "What use can we make of all this
knowledge?" meets with no adequate answer
with the result that classroom practice suffers
in spite of the best intentions.

This fact is in itself sufficient to make Mr.
Watts' book "Abnormal Psychology and its
Educational Applications" a very welcome
addition to educational literature, and the
welcome becomes the warmer as we realise the
admirable way in which the task is fulfilled.
Taking the modern study of abnormal psychol-
ogy under three of its main aspects, viz.,?
the psychology of the crowd, psychopathology
and the development of personality, and the
psychology of the defective mind?Mr. Watts
shows in a clear and concise way how the main
facts revealed by them can be applied to the
teaching of children?both normal and abnor-
mal?in school.

A brief historical survey of the literature on
each point affords suggestions for further
reading on the subject, while of special
interest to the teacher of the defective will be
the sound criticism of the Montessori method
and the many practical suggestions for train-
ing subnormals to be found in the last chapter.
The book is undoubtedly one which should
be read by all teachers. It is short, admirably
clear, and most valuable in its suggestions.

L.G.F.
"Abnormal Psychology." By Isador H.
Coriat. Kegan, Paul. 10s. 6d. net.
The dramatic character of the war neuroses
and the frequency of those tragic cases, mis-
94 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
named "shell-shock," aroused a strong curio-
sity among the intelligent public in the whole
question of Abnormal Psychology. Dr.
Coriat's book is not one of the many written
in answer to this demand for it dates from
1910. Much of his material is consequently
out of date?(the case of the multiple person-
ality, Miss Beauchamp, has for example been
presented ad nauseam in the last fifteen years)
?and some valuable recent work was of course
not available to him.

The work is a study of "dissociation or the
splitting of the mind," and an attempt is
made to explain all abnormal mental pheno-
mena from this standpoint. The first part
deals mainly with investigation of the sub-
conscious by means of studies of well-known
?indeed hackneyed?examples of automatic
writing, multiple personality, lost memory
and dreams; the second part with diseases of
the subconscious, e.g., hysteria, psyclias-
thenia, neurasthenia, etc. The scheme is
quite a good one and indeed a certain amount
of useful information is conveyed, but mainly,
one notes, by means of copious quotations
from famous authorities such as Janet,
Macdougal, James, Freud, Putnam. The
author's own style is so vague and turgid and
his use of scientific terms so slovenly that it is
often difficult to make out his meaning. "The
student of diseased conditions," he writes,
"looks upon the subconscious as a derange-
ment of certain functions of the nervous
system; to one interested in the functions
themselves, the subconscious means an in-
ability to reproduce at will the images of past
experiences." The bewilderment induced by
this passage deepens as one reads on.

A word must be said on the author's treat-
ment of psycho-analysis as he is expressly
claimed as an expert in the publishers' notice
on the wrapper. The subject is certainly
often mentioned in the text but it is impossible
to imagine that the author has ever read his
own quotations from Freud. The Freudian
theories of the development of the emotions,
and the importance of the affections of the
child are practically ignored and appear un-
known to the author. His treatment of
dreams is farcical. Further, Dr. Coriat's
so-called analyses of his own patients (by free
association, hypnosis or dreams), end where a
real analyst would begin, for he is triumphant
and satisfied if he discovers some incident
associated with a symptom, and regards it as
the root cause of the whole disease. Thus a
very severe case of hysteria is attributed to the
fact that the young woman patient one night
heard her sisters quarreling in the next room*
Three days later her fits began! This lS
magnificent but it is not psycho-analysis and
we feel that the publishers owe the public an
apology for that wrapper.

For the lay reader who wishes to have a clear
understanding of the abnormal mind Dr?
Bernard Hart's lucid and simple little book
on the "Psychology of Insanity," and M ss
Barbara Low's "Psycho-Analysis," are still
without rivals. L .D .F.

Psyche. A Quarterly Review of Psychology
in relation to Education, Psycho-Analy*
sis, Industry, Religion, Social and Per-
sonal Relationships, Aesthetics, Psychi-
cal Research, etc. (Incorporating The
Psyche Research Quarterly). Kegan,
Paul, Trench & Trubner & Co., Ltd.
Price 5s. net.

If the first numbers of the new series of this
magazine is an indication of what we may
look for in the future, there can be no doubt
that it will cover a very large field, and it
should therefore appeal to a wide public.
The first number includes articles on The
Interpretation of Dreams, The Psychology of
Exploration, Scientists and Psychical Re-
search, The Homing Instincts in Dogs, Sleep,
The National Institute of Industrial Psychol-
ogy, First Steps in Psychology and?which
the readers of our paper will probably find the
most interesting?on Criminal Responsibility
by Dr. E. Prideaux. This suggestive and
thoughtful contribution, deals with a parti-
cularly difficult subject involving as it does
the psychological, medical and legal aspects
of crime, and indicating the lines on which a
solution of some of our present difficulties
may be arrived at, thus giving us hope for
the future.

It may be objected that the wide range of
subjects covered in this publication tend to
make the treatment of some of them very
slight, but for the person who has no time for
reading the more highly specialised periodicals
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 95
ere is considerable interest to be derived
getting a bird's eye view of many aspects
the important psychological problems which
are to-day receiving so much attention.
Dreams and Day Dreams of a Delin-
quent Girl. By Cyril Burt.

These are two papers specially reprinted
?m ' 'The Journal of Experimental Pedagogy
and Training College Record." They con-
^lst> as the title indicates, of a detailed
account of the writer's analysis of a concrete
?ase "which is recorded for the purpose o
ustrating the nature of the technique of
Psycho-analysis, and drawing attention to
e chief generalisations which its use has
Suggested.

The case described is one specially chosen on
acc?unt of its comparative simplicity and the
^ay it exemplifies, within a narrow compass,
most of the commoner facts and crucial
inferences upon which psycho-analysis is
The subject of the analysis?a girl of 16?
^as brought to the writer with the supposition
^ lat her unsatisfactory behaviour must be due
Cental abnormality. She was a domestic
^ervant and her alleged delinquencies included
sleeping out, pilfering and persistent
0venliness in her work. Her mother was a
*espectable woman, but the father was said to
e dishonest and a heavy drinker, and had not
J^ed with the family for years. Although
?re was a record of backwardness at school,
billet Simon Test revealed a mental age of
JO ?

? j and in certain practical tests she
aPpeared distinctly above the average of her
s?cial class. It was therefore at once made
Manifest that her delinquent behaviour could
n?t be attributed to "menta deficiency"
Properly so-called, and that it was her
T^racter and not her intelligence that
landed psychological examination.

the first paper two dreams and their
a^alysis are recorded in detail. The shortness
this notice precludes any account of the
Process; suffice it to say that it involved the
Reconstruction largely by the patient herself?
0 her early emotional history and the origin
? her later aberrations of conduct, this in its
ri1 resulting in the furnishing of a working
exPSanation of those aberrations, revealing
them as the "irrational outcome of thwarted
emotional tendencies" dating back to earliest
childhood and common to all mankind.

"With her dreams thus analysed and her
past thus reconstructed the girl herself came
to understand as she had never before under-
stood, or troubled to understand, the real aim
and origin of her caprices." What then the
writer asks, here touching the vital issue of
the matter, was the effect upon the child?
The answer is of profound interest and shall be
quoted in full:?

"The main delinquency?namely, pilfer-
ing, together with the general attitude
behind it of antagonism to society, dis-
appeared entirely. From the date on which
these dreams were finally analysed she never,
so far as I have been able to ascertain, stole,
or was suspected of stealing. In other
respects, indeed, as I shall note in another
connection, her conduct was not entirely satis-
fying. Nor do I believe that the analysis
and its immediate consequences were by any
means the sole factors contributory to this
partial reform. Yet one fact seems sure.
Before the analysis her misdemeanours seemed
inexplicable, alike to those who knew the
girl and to the girl herself. After the analysis
they became intelligible, and suddenly and
finally ceased."

The second paper contains an analysis of a
characteristic "step-mother" day dream of
the same patient, which is then discussed as an
illustrative type of the persistent fantasies of
childhood. This paper should be of special
interest to teachers as it throws light upon
certain problems of mentality and behaviour
which are met with in every class room.
The writer concludes with a reference to the
analogy between the "step-mother" type of
fantasy with which he has dealt and the
traditional myths and legends embodied in
popular fairy tales, "the day dreams of a
people." Upon this aspect of the subject he
proposes to concentrate in a subsequent paper.

"School Hygiene." A Quarterly Review
for Educationalists and Doctors. Adlard
& Son & West Newman, Ltd., 23,
Bartholomew Close, E.C.I. Price 1/6
per copy.

The August number of "School Hygiene"
96 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
contains an interesting article by Dr. F. C.
Shrubsall, Medical Officer to the London
County Council Education Committee, on
"The Ascertainment of Mental Defect." It
describes in some detail, for the guidance of
School Medical Officers, the factors which
should be taken into account in examining a
child alleged to be mentally defective, and the
Mental Tests which experience has proved to
be of most value for the purpose.

The subject of classification is dealt with
and various illustrative tables are given.
The writer concludes with a timely re-
minder to the Certifying Officer of the influ-
ence of environment which must, he urges, in
cases of moral delinquency always be taken
into account, and "unless he feels that under
a similar environment and with a similar
upbringing he would have acted very different-
ly he will be slow in assessing the responsi-
bility of his fellows."

The paper has been reprinted as a separate
pamphlet and copies can be obtained from the
publishers of the review.

The October number of "The British
Journal of Inebriety" (Balliere, Tindall &
Cox, 2s. 6d. net.) contains two articles of
special interest to workers amongst mental
defectives, viz.: "Alcoholism and Mental
Defect" by W. A. Potts, M.A., M.D., and
' 'Conclusions based on Results of a Statistical
Inquiry on the Prevalence of Alcoholic Intem-
perance in the families of Mentally Defective
School Children," by Robert Hughes, M.B.,
M.P.C., School Medical Officer, Stoke-on-
Trent .
