The Younger Generation and the "Almosts"
==========================================

By Dr. Helen MacMurchy,
Chief, Child Welfare Division, Department of Health, Ottawa, Canada.
The reformer is always trying to open the school-room door. To the younger
generation our eyes are always turning. If we are going to help in the task of
making the world safe for democracy, we shall accomplish the greater part of our
task by and through the younger generation.
Let us t y to take an airman's view of our task. We fail to realise that all our
troubles, so far as the outward and elementary struggles and tasks of Government
and Democracy are concerned, come from a small group of persons. Out of every
thousand Britishers the number who give the Government and the people anxious
thought, expense, or trouble is surprisingly small. It is probably not more than
ten out of every thousand citizens?one per cent.
There are certain reasons why we might think this a fairly correct estimate.
It is a well-known fact that the curve of ability tends to rise slowly at first, then
more rapidly, then maintain a "plateau" and finally repeat in its fall or decline,
almost the same curve which characterized its rise. In other words, the number
of those possessing somewhat marked mental ability and usefulness approximates
to the number of those possessing somewhat marked mental disability and useless-
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 59
ness. Instinct, intellect, intuition?however much of these we have?combined
with that long-known "character ability" that psychologists are beginning to
talk about?this total gives us our place.
There is some reason to think that really first-class human beings are not
much more numerous than they were at the dawn of history. At least, certain
records, such as Gideon's reduction of his volunteer army from thirty and two
thousand men down to three hundred men who were found not only ' 'fit to fight
and ready to die," but who had their wits about them and who apparently
possessed marked ability of some kind, would seem to support such a theory.
Three hundred is perilously near one per cent of thirty and two thousand.
That one per cent, is the hope of democracy. Democracy needs leaders.
But we need also the power of caring for and making the best of that other one
per cent. Of these about three in every thousand are mentally defective. About
three in every thousand are mentally diseased. And about three in every thou-
sand are what we call criminals or unemployables, or else they are incurable or
derelict in some other way. Surely the other ninety and nine can take care of the
one wanderer out of the hundred.
But this will not be an easy task. It may mean a good deal of ' 'scrapping."
It will certainly mean educational reform. For the mentally defective child, the
school should furnish special help and training and the school, being a National
School, should be the place where the Nation can begin to deal wisely with the
problem, and work towards a solution.
The experience of the United States in the war?when psycho-neurological
units were formed to assist in the medical examination of recruits for the army
and these military psycho-neurologists found an appalling percentage of the
recruits, according to their tests, showing signs of mental defect?has shed a flood
of light on the subject.
We should remember that mentally defective persons, especially children
who are mentally defective, differ among themselves as much as normal persons
do. The real question which must be answered by the School Medical Officer, in
consultation with the Medical Expert in mental defect and with the principal
teachers, parents and everyone else who can afford information or ' 'give evidence,'
so to speak, about the school child who is not getting on, or very backward, is
not so much whether the child can do this test or that, but whether he shows signs
of being able to "make his way." Can he really fill a place in the Community ?
Can it be reasonably expected that he can make, or help to make a home? Or is
he going to be a "destructive social force." Perhaps he is a destructive social
force already.
Mentally defective children not infrequently ruin the home financially and
otherwise. They weight the scale on the wrong side and the weight is a heavy
one.
There seems to be no alternative at present, at least, to the conclusion that
when, after every proper precaution has been taken, the school authorities
find that mental defect is present, the nation should appoint some guardian or
supervisory power in the national interest and in the interest of the mentally
defective child or adult person. Revision and re-examination are of course,
necessary.
This means educational reform on a grand scale, for it shows that means and
methods must be found to make the best of all those children whose mental gifts
are so inadequate that they cannot take up the duties of citizenship. The im-
portant thing is to remember that they have gifts and to discover these and give
them development and encouragement.
