Legal Notes
============

60 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY1.

High Court Decision in Cases of Berkshire County Council v. Reading
County Borough Council and London County Council.
In our January number we gave a report of legal proceedings in determining the
place of residence under the Mental Deficiency Act of the cases of two mentally
defective girls in the Cumnor Rise Home for the Feeble-minded, Cumnor, Berks...
when the Petty Sessional Court at Abingdon decided that in both cases the liability
for maintenance rested with the Berkshire Local Authority.
The facts may be recapitulated briefly as follows:?
One patient had been in the Home since 1907, her poor law settlement at the
time of admission being in Reading; the other had also been in the Home for some
years, her poor law settlement having previously been in a London Union. In
1920 petitions were presented by an officer of the Board of Control for orders for the
detention of both these cases under the Mental Deficiency Act, when the judicial
authority who heard the petitions took the view that the patients "resided"
respectively in the areas of the County Borough of Reading and the County of
London, and made orders imposing responsibility for maintenance upon these two
authorities who thereupon caused application to be made under section 44 (3) of
the Mental Deficiency Act for orders transferring the liability in each case to the
Berkshire County Council. At the Petty Sessional Court held at Abingdon on
5th November, 1920, the Justices by a majority decided that such orders should
be made, as both defectives resided in Berkshire.
The Berkshire County Council appealed from this decision and the Justices
stated a case for the High Court.
The appeal was heard on 14th April, 1921 (K.B. Div., Darling, Avory and
Salter, J.J.) with the result that the decision of the Justices was upheld on the
ground that "residence" for the purpose of sections 43 and 44 of the Mental
Deficiency Act means physical residence, and that the "case of doubt" referred
to in Section 44 (4), as giving occasion for reference to poor law settlement to
determine responsibility for maintenance, must be a case of doubt as to physical
residence and not as to residence in any technical sense.
Arguments of counsel were directed to the points that the residence of these
mentally defective girls in the Cumnor Rise Home was not ' 'residence" within the
meaning of the Act because (i) they were not capable of volition and ( ii) in any
case they had been detained in the Home irrespective of any choice they
might be capable of making. Both these points were brushed aside in
the judgment, so that (as was pointed out by Mr. Justice Salter) it follows either
that volition is not necessary to "residing" under the Mental Deficiency Act, or
that persons mentally defective may be capable of such volition as is essential to
such "residing."
Jurisdiction of Petty Sessional Court, on Appeal from a Decision as to
Residence of a Judicial Authority.
A judicial authority at Worthing on 24th August, 1920, made an order on
petition sending a mentally defective girl to a certified institution and imposing
responsibility for her maintenance on the local authority for London. The local
authority for London was not satisfied with the finding of the judicial authority
as to the place of residence of the defective and therefore caused application to be
made to the petty sessional court at Worthing for two summonses, under sectino
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 61
44 (3) of the Act, one against the County Council for West Sussex and the other
against the local authority for Sheffield. These were returnable on 10th Novem-
ber, 1920, when Counsel appearing for the West Sussex County Council took a
preliminary objection that the Court had no jurisdiction to hear the summons,
arguing that section 44 (3) was applicable only to proceedings under the other
sub-sections of section 44, viz., in the case of an order made in respect of a person
found guilty of an offence or of an order made by the Secretary of State. He
contended that the Act made no provision for appeal from a decision as to residence
by a judicial authority. The bench accepted this view and declined to hear the
summonses.
In view of the very important question of principle involved, application was
made on behalf of the local authority for London to the Divisional Court for a
rule nisi directed to the justices of the petty sessional court to show cause why they
should not hear and determine the summons. The application was heard on 28th
April, 1921, (Darling, Avory and Greer, J.J.). The rule was made absolute, on
the ground that sub-section (3) of section 44 deals with the whole question of
determination of residence and is not limited to the particular instances dealt
with in the earlier part of the section: the summonses therefore are referred back
to the justices for hearing. Mr. Justice Greer pointed out that it would not be
just to leave to a judicial authority, without possibility of appeal, the determina-
tion of responsibility for maintenance of a defective.
