Psychology of the Normal and Subnormal
=======================================

Book Reviews.
, by Henry Herbert Goddard, A.M.,
Ph.D. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner
and Co., Ltd. 25s.

Most psychologists would agree with Dr.
Goddard when in his introduction he refers to
the limitations of simple introspection, and
when in his second chapter he lays stress on
the fact that 'psychology has been compelled
always to go somewhat beyond the limits of
consciousness in attempting to explain mental
phenomena,' but such statements invite en-
quiry into his selection of an alternative or
supplementary basis of investigation.

Attempts to supplant or supplement the in-
trospective method fall roughly into three
groups, one of which takes leave of psycho-
logy as a self-supporting science with its own
data, laws and concepts, in favour of what is
really a special province of physiology,
while the behaviouristic and the psycho-
analytic groups seek respectively to supplant
introspection by a study of the external re-
actions of living organisms or to re-inforce it
by a special technique. Dr. Goddard's choice
is distributed between a frank switching over
into the subject matter of physiology and re-
liance on the data has been obtained from a
close study of the behaviour reactions of sub-
jects under his care. Since his book is
mainly concerned with an organically deter-
mined group of mental conditions the excel-
lent and lucid account he gives of the
neurological aspects of these conditions can-
not fail to be of considerable use to the stu-
dent, but has clearly no claim to be styled
psychology, and the critic has a right to
grumble when a book with this title is not
only packed with neurological data but con-
sistently interprets in neurological terms thie
writer's valuable psychological experience.
It is a further indictment of the use of such
a title to point out that the writer ignores the
important contributions of the psychoana-
lytic school to the elucidation of both normal
andrabnormal psychology. It is conceivable
that when writers on these subjects have come
to grips with this new body of knowledge
there will b(* less temptation to fill large gaps
in their psychological discourse with borrow-
ings from other science as when the writer
explicates thought with the help of the
physiological conception of neurochyme.

That the writer is out of touch with these
important trends in modern psychology is
further shewn by statements such as 'intellect-
ual life controls to some degree emotional life
and probably is capable of complete control
of action no matter what the condition of the
emotion.' The compulsive action of the highly
intellectual compulsion neurotic offers the
most striking contradiction of a statement
which psychoanalysis has shown to be also un-
true of the actions of everyday life.

When his book is regarded not as the
psychological treatise the title leads vis to
expect, but as an expert and practical contri-
bution to the study of Mental Deficiency; the
mood of critic sm is replaced by one of
appreciation of the writer's unique practical
experience and his success in attaining the
ideal of clearness in presentation which he
prescribes for himself in his introduction.
Students of Mental Deficiency will find his
discussion of mental testing valuable, although
designedly elementary. The critical reader
finds his optimism on this subject better based
when he applies it to his findings within the
limits of mental defect than when he extends
it to a comprehensive sorting out of the com-
munity at large. In spite of notable advances
it is still true that, as Dr. Wells reminds us,
"Better reasons can now be given for regard-
ing a boy John as defective than for saying
that James will do best as a teacher, lawyer,
or business man."

By far the most valuable section of the book
is that devoted to the pedagogy of the Men-
tally Defective which should be read by
everyone who has any personal dealings with
members of this class. One could wish that
his discussion of punishment could find a
wider circle of readers.

James Glover, M.B,
Intelligence and Social Valuation. R-
A. Berry, M.D., & S.D. Porteus. De-
partment of Research, the Training School
Vinelands, New Jersey, 1920. P. 100.
Any methods which will add to the arma-
mentarium of those who have to diagnose or
care for the defective are sure of a ready
welcome. At one time physical examination
played a predominant part, but it gradually
lost ground when it appeared that only a
minority of defectives belonged to special
types. Estimation of the size of the head,
useful as a guide in certain instances, fell into
disuse when it was shown in the mass to shew
little correlation to general intelligence.
Prof. Berry, of Melbourne, sets out in the
first part of this volume the results of thou-
sands of measurements of the head with
calculations of the cranial capacity by the
use of the formula devised by Miss Alice Lee.
He adopts the method of percentile tables for
each age so that an individual may be readily
compared in his own age group. He finds
the average capacity of the head of defectives
is less than that of normals, but testing
samples from each percentile range he has
established that children in the lowest ten
percentile group present about 50% at dull
or feeble-minded levels with only 5% above
normal, while of the 90 percentile group
14% were subnormal and 25% supernormal-
The existence of defectives in the higher
groups in excess of those in intermediate
capacity groups is due to the fact that the
size of the head may be increased by over-
growth of non-nervous tissues in Hhe brain.

Some help in diagnosis may be obtained by
noting the capacity of the head in a subject
and noting the percentile group in which it
would come, though the general adoption
of this method with reasonable certainty
would involve the working out of similar
percentile tables in each country.
A study of the grip and of the vital capacity
of this large group of children shewed that the
defectives had a marked inferiority in psycho-
physical development.

A study on the Porteus maze tests investi-
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 23
gates characters of prudence, forethought,
capacity to learn from practice, and adapt-
ability to new situations not so fully tested by
the Binet Simon method. The correlation
?f the results by the two scales is high and
justifies the use of these tests, but as the
author points out rather for purposes of supple-
menting than of replacing existing methods of
testing. It must be appreciated that there
are no mental tests of the simplicity of the
reactions in chemical analysis; they serve as
indications, but diagnosis rests on the experi-
ence of the observer. This volume should be
widely read from its suggestive and critical
nature and for its extensive summary of the
literature of the topics discussed.
F.C.S.
