A Method of Personality Diagnosis and Evaluation With Provision for Social Service Propaganda
===============================================================================================

:Author: Guy G. Fernald 
A.M., M.D., 
Massachusetts Reformatory, Concord, U.S.A.

In the comparatively rapid advancement made in recent years in that branch of
Social Psychiatry known as the study of the Feeble-minded and of its subsidiary,
the study of the Defective Delinquent, a most important and significant develop-
ment has been the increased attention directed to the observation of the quality of
mentality which we call character in contrast with the degree of mentality which
we call intelligence. The various investigators in this field have used each his
own laboratory methods and avenues of approach and the nomenclature is by no
means uniform: but that the trend of the more progressive investigators is in the
direction of a more nearly adequate observation of character traits is shown by
their employment of terms which discriminate between "Mentality" on the one
hand and "Intelligence" and other mentality components on the other and by the
appearance in recent literature of such terms as "Behavior Disorders," "Conduct
Anomalies," "Personality Studies," "Personality Ratings," "Characterial
Deviations," etc.

26 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 

The mental organisation or system which eventuates in action is quite as
significant as an index of personality efficiency as is the mental organisation
which eventuates in thought and its expression. A clear recognition of this fact
shifts the investigator's viewpoint to one whence the potentiality of characterial
mental factors is seen.

In actual daily usage, as well as in juridical procedure, each personality is
held accountable for behavior or action, the product of character essentially;
but is not held responsible for thought, the produce of intelligence chiefly, which
does not eventuate in action. ' 'A man may think whatever he pleases so long as
his actions do not contravene established legal or social forms."* Any basis of
fact then, on which to assess a valuation of personality can not consistently
ignore the ascertainable facts to be connoted under characterial deviations or
rectitude.

That 110 method has been advanced of directly testing and numerically
scoring the quality and quantity of the characterial deviations and rectitude
determining behavior need not discourage effort to discover such or to devise
other methods of case presentation which serve the various administrative or
scientific purposes demanding them. Psychiatrical studies of personality have
depended upon scientific observation and description rather than upon numerical
scoring for clarity in such presentations quite successfully and have been greatly
aided by the various categories devised.

It may be helpful in the present state of our knowledge of this developing
speciality of personality evaluation to consider in turn the findings in these three
fields of investigation: (1) Mental disease, (2) Intelligence, (3) Character.
Few personalities present symptoms of mental disease, but all personalities
present observable variations in kinds and degrees of mental activity in both the
field of intelligence and in that of character. Moreover efficiency is determined by
the kinds and degrees of these activities.

It may be suggested that temperament is a mental organisation influencing
conduct and efficiency and it may well be that temperament and the instincts and
possibly other mental organisations should be investigated in a given case; but
until it is shown that in personality studies these or other organisations should be
regarded as separate fields of investigation, they may be given appropriate atten-
tion under character without being regarded as major headings.

We submit the following tentative scheme of case groups noting that the
list of possible diagnoses is susceptible of expansion and of statistical and cross-
reference treatment and that any given case, categorized as an entity may still
present symptoms or indications tending to modify classification which no com-
plete investigation may ignore. For instance, it is conceivable that an imbecile
may be found to present the symptoms of a dementing psychosis or a congenital
syphilitic may be an epileptic also, or a sex psychopath may be of adult mentality
or a moron or an imbecile.

Character vs. Intelligence in Personality Studies," by the author. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, Vol. XV., No. 1, April, 1920.

STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 27

TENTATIVE CLASSIFICATION OF BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS
PSYCHOPATHIC LABORATORY MASS. REFORMATORY CONCORD, MASS.
----------------------------------------------------------

Imbecilc
Moron ?/I Subnormal
Behavior Limited < Psychoneuroses
Disorders J ? Con'1 Psychopathies
^Aberrations Neuro'l Disorders
Endocrenopathies
v Entire Habits of Action Characterial Devi-
ations or rectitude

GRADES OF EFFICIENCY.
---------------------
DIAGNOSES
----------

Super-
Normal
Normal
or adult
Sub-
normal
Institu-
tional
Psychoses
Recoverable
Recurrent
Ch. without deterioration
Ch. with deterioration
Traumatic
Alcoholic
Syphilitic
Senile
Arteriosclerotic.
Brain Tumors
Myxedematous, etc.
Epilepsies
Grand Mai
Petit Mai
Jacksonian
Masked, etc.
Intelligence Defects
Idiot
Imbecile
Moron
Subnormal
Psychoneuroses
Hysteria
Psychasthenia
Neurasthenia
Paranoid Personality
Con's'l. Psychopathies
Co-ordination Psychopath
Sex Psychopath
Neurological Disorders
Neurosyphilitic
Tremors, tics, chorea
Endocrenopathies
Characterial Deviations*

?Specified in case notes and there associated, contrasted and illustrated. Certain observed
deviations of frequent occurrence are the following, viz.: Too egocentric, lacks self respect, sex
conflict, lacks definite ambition, acquisitiveness uncontrolled, lacks foresight, sordid tastes
unchecked, too labile emotionally, too suggestible, misanthropy uncontrolled, too tenacious,
unamenable to reason or authority, etc. ad lib.

28 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.

No form of case presentation is complete which does not recognise the limita-
tions of categorization. Our classification deals with the functional content of
mental organisations or complexes and is an aid to analysis. It can not alter the
fact that many elements enter into every problem of personality evaluation; but
should aid in making all the facts clear without confusing the issues by conducing
to an increased breadth of view which discovers factors in the problem not dis-
closed by a narrower outlook. No categorical scheme can replace a scientific
presentation of all the findings; but the former may supplement the latter and
aid in the process of preparation thereof.

Cross-reference treatment of such a syllabus as that suggested, introducing
three or more grades of mental efficiency would tend to meet the objection that a
category can not state all the facts, but does not eliminate the objection; since
use of the cross-reference device still leaves us under the necessity of recourse to
scientific description for an approach to completeness. This emphasises the
observation that any scheme of categorization is only an aid, a means
to the end of adequate presentation and is not to be regarded as compassing the
end. Its chief value when rightly used is in its capacity to extend the investi-
gator's vision and as a statistical device. Its place is in summarising and pre-
paring for case and statistical presentation and not in the search for material
facts at the time of the examination. Obviously use of the category should not
narrow the investigator's search for facts, only facilitate his collection and
presentation thereof. The employment of any scheme which limits or prejudices
the search for truth is a misuse. To the extent our outline of a method of evaluat-
ing the whole personality conduces to correct evaluation it is of value; but it is
valueless to the extent it is an attempt to justify a method.

The importance of ascertaining the intelligence age level is not to be mini-
mised, but the fact remains that in determining intelligence age level the investi-
gator is canvassing only one portion of the area to be investigated in personality
evaluation. Factors of personality quite as significant in the determination of
efficicncy or inefficiency are to be found in the field of character.

It is in the character of the individual that search is made for the strength
of will needed for the overcoming of tendencies to sloth which may defeat success
in those of high as well as those of low intelligence age level. The ability to plan
a judicious course of self-training for efficiency resides pre-eminently with those of a
superior intelligence; but the ability to continue to deny oneself pleasure in
order to succeed is less an attribute of intelligence and more one of character;
since one may know full well that continued self-denial is necessary and still be
unwilling to compass the sacrifice involved. Failure, sociologically and econo-
mically is at least as often due to mediocrity of ability to continue to pursue a
well selected purpose as to paucity of academic knowledge of the course to pursue.

We know a young man of superior intelligence who has spent about five
years in prison for repeated thefts. He knows the disaster consequent upon
stealing; but he is weak in his ability to resist the temptation to steal, the tempta-
tion consisting of his wish.for money to spend with expensive associates.
We know two imbeciles incapable of self-determination. The one lives
happily on a farm and drives cows, milks, etc., always under supervision, but
trusted within limits. The other, of no lower order of intelligence will not work,
but will beg. He is a tramp in pleasant weather and does not hesitate to pilfer
or falsify to gain his little ends. The actions of the one measure up well with his
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 2&
intelligence rating; while the actions of the other do not correspond with his
roughly equal academic knowledge. The one does as well as he knows how to do;
but the other does not do as well as he could. The essential differences in the two
personalities are in the field of character.

The hope for the sociologic improvement of those of defective mentality and
for the raising of the standard of community efficiency lies along the lines of
conserving and developing character values where possible, as well as in educating
technically. To conserve and upbuild character values in defectives, these values
or the want thereof must be recognised early and advantage be taken of the
possibilities of habit formation.

Therefore we would point out that the personality investigator who seeks to
make a complete presentation should approach his problem in the spirit of the
scientist determined to thoroughly know his material. One method is to first
determine whether mental disease is to be excluded. If it is excluded then the
mental capacities and incapacities of the reactant may be investigated by deter*
mining the intelligence age level and by determining the characterial deviations
and rectitude. All the facts may then be considered and the reactant's place be
found in some scheme providing for statistical treatment, filing convenience or
what not; but no scheme of tabulating or filing for group treatment should be
substituted for a full case summary which will present all the essential facts some
of which cannot appear in a tabulation or a bare diagnosis.

The following abstract of that portion of a psychopathic note from our files
which deals with the characterial reactions related to habitual lying is rewritten
only to eliminate the abbreviations and elisions incident to the actual running
account of occurrences as they are noted during the interview which in this case
lasted more than two hours, in two sessions. The length of this partial quotation,
though not unusual precludes the submission of others. This case is selected as it
illustrates the method of search for characterial deviation data and also the
attempt to constructively aid the reactant, obviously our social service oppor-
tunity. Besides the notes the cases on file contain the field investigator's
calendar of information which is very full and informing, and the physical
information sheet. On the basis of the latter this reactant was instructed again
in sex hygiene, this time on the deleterious effects, intellectual and moral
especially, of masturbation, and proved a very appreciative listener. The
questions he asked were well chosen and such as to create the suspicion that the
information was appropriately given. He was not asked to commit himself,
however. Sex hygiene information on the very best way to avoid the contraction of
venereal diseases, it should be explained, is given at the time of the physical
examination, i.e., on arrival. With selected cases the following points are
frequently made, viz.: that solitary sex indulgence must be stopped by one who is
to reform himself, that on cessation of indulgence one's returning self-respect is
a great aid in the struggle for self-mastery in other ways, that this is a form of
temptation to be met before leaving the reformatory and that one may test himself
and his capacity for resisting temptation from day to day, that every man can
stop the habit and that one who does not do so, should hardly expect to succeed
in other really worthy undertakings. These points were made late in the inter-
view with the reactant whose case abstract is given, viz.:

30 STUDIES IN MENTAt INEFFICIENCY.

SPECIMEN ABSTRACT FROM A PSYCHIATRICAL NOTE.
---------------------------------------------

No  (Name) 20 (age). Date
Ethical Discrimination Test :* .56.

(A judgment and observation test, standardised with nine others, this one employ-
ing 10 offences as units to be arranged in a series from least to greatest
in the order of their gravity from top to bottom. Stimulus given by
reactant's reading it aloud).

Stimulus repeated as a question beginning, "If you arrange these offences,
ctc.; where will you place the least offence when you find it ? " ' 'At the bottom.''
No. Question repeated. "In the middle." Manner almost insolent. Atti-
tude toward test rebellious. "Why do you give that answer ? . . . Such an
unexpected answer as that has sonic reason back of it. What is it?" "It is
foolish. Why do you ask me such foolish questions?" Is told tliat so far from
being foolish it serves its purpose well and its value has been favourably reported
upon by experts, that it helps to show how one's mind works, whether ill or well,
that to find whether a man can control himself or not we must know how his mind
works, that the Parole Board can not tell whether a man is worthy of parole or
not till they know something about the kind of a mind he has. Is then asked
whether the test or his reply to my question is foolish. He sulkily replies, "The
test" and pushes the apparatus away. Asked again the reason in his mind when
he replied that the least offence should go in the middle, he hesitates, then says,
"The Parole Board hasn't got anything on me but smoking in the morning"
(out of hours). Is told that that docs not answer my question and he hazards,
"Then they want to know about an abscess I had in my ear when I was 1.3 or 14-
years old." Is told sharply that docs not answer the question put, that no
evasion will be acceptcd, that his manner is offensive, almost insolent, that if he
allows himself to be insolent the interview will be terminated and the report
made on that basis. He smiled in some embarrassment and thenceforward his
manner was inoffensive and he exerted his best effort to meet the requirements.
Requested to arrange the offences as directed he set about doing so with the above
indicated score. Asked why he replied that the least offence should be placed in
the middle, he replied, "I didn't stop to think." He again attempted to justify
or exculpate when asked whether his life had been more one of failure or success;
but finally admitted to his discredit.

' 'Are you a sane man and responsible for all you do and say or not ? " "I am
sane." "Did you ever tell a lie ?" . . . "Yes." "Now look back into your
life of the past few years and see whether or not you find you have gradually
got into the habit of giving the answer j^ou thought you could get by on whether
true or not." . . ."Yes, I have." "Those are disagreeable questions to
ariswer. You have stopped trying to impose on me and have made yourself stop
and think before answering and you have met the disagreeable issues presented.

What is the reason I put these disagreeable questions and raise these unpleasant
issues and stimulate you to answer truthfully ?" ' 'Because you have a good
reason to." ' 'What good reason would I have ? " . . . "You want to help me
?Monograph review by Prof. L. Jacobsohn-Lask, "Uber die Fernald'ehe Methode zur
Prufung des Sittlichen Fuhlens und iiber ihre weiters Ausgestaltung." Beihefte zur Zeitschrift
fur angewandte Psychologie Herausgegeben von William Stern und Otto Lipmann. 24. Leip-
zig, 1920. Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth, Dorrienstr. 16.
Also "The Defective Delinquent Class: Differentiating Tests," by the author. Am.
Journ. Insanity, Vol. XLVIII., No. 4, April, 1912. Second Edition, 1917.
'A0Nai3i^aMi ivxmhk ni saianxs 31
along . . . and to make a better man of myself." It is explained that
while I might wish him to be always at his best, no one but himself could really
do that, that my reason for asking the disagreeable questions and stimulating him
to answer truthfully was to discover especially to him a certain weakness in his
character, i.e., that of being willing to let a wrong impression obtain when it
seemed to him expedient. He reluctantly admitted the weakness- In making
this point, however, the expression was used as an illustration?"The bluffing
of parents or teachers or a policemen" He at once volunteered "I never lied
before I came here," then recalling his admission above, apparently, "I never
lied to a policeman." Asked if his statements are not good illustrations of the
point just made and do not show clearly how thoroughly fixed his habit is of
conveying a wrong impression when tempted, he smiled sheepishly and averted
his eyes.

"Has your self management experiment, since you broke away from home
and school restraint and training been good or bad? . . . Now there is
another disagreeable issue to face." "It has been good." "You ought not to
"fall down on" that after the lesson I've given you on the wisdom of telling the
truth." . . . "It's been bad, I guess . . . I've done nothing worse than
smoking in the morning here.''

Epilepsy eliminated, also insanity. No evidence of neurological disorder
nor of psychoneurosis. The tests for intelligence age level are given at this point.
The age level by the Terman tests falls at 10-2 years. Blood Wassermann is
negative.
' '3/8 plus 5/16 ? " ' '8/24." "17ft. 8in. equal how many inches ?'' Asks if
he shall multiply by 12. Makes a mistake in multiplying and is shown that his
incorrect answer is due to that error. Had studied "Interest" in school.
Headaches denied. "Only sick headaches when young . . . too much
sweet stuff." Did your parents favour your eating as much sweet stuff as you
did, or did they advise your eating less ? "They didn't say nothing." "Sothey
let you eat all you wanted to ? " ' 'No, they told me not to." ' 'Your answers are
not very consistent. Why didn't you do as they told you ? " ' 'Too young
7 or 8." "Then you weren't taught to mind and were disobedient and are now
paying the price.''
' 'Look back over your actions and see what they show you wanted most in
life. The merchant wants success in his business and his actions show it. The
teacher wants to do his best as a teacher as shown by his actions. He works hard
for small pay. A brick-layer working on his own house works hard and long and
does thorough work; but the hired brick-layer might work slowly or carelessly;
if he were a timeserver. Now, what do your actions show you wanted most in
life ? " ' 'Success." ' 'But you haven't succeeded . . . why not ?" "I was
all right till I got in with the crowd." "Don't try to shift the responsibility.

You lived your own life. That doesn't answer my question." ....
' 'Because I didn't get enough school in the first place." ' 'Are you sure you wanted
to succeed most of anything ? " "Yes." ' 'What kind of success did you have in
mind ? " ' 'In a factory?(rubber)?rising, to be foreman." ' 'But you are not a
foreman. Why not?" . . . Question repeated. ... Is still sure he
worked for success. Admits he did not study evenings and that he left after a
year and a half without notice to take a vacation in summer and that on his return
he was told another had his place. ' 'Do not your actions show that you really
wanted a good time more than you wanted success ?'' "Yes.'' (With conviction,
32 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
apparently). "I've been reformed since I've been here." "Oh, no! You are
not yet reformed, . . . not in this short time. You need to change yourself
over in your habits of thinking and acting, to really make a man of yourself. It is
a long, hard job to restrain oneself, knock off all the old habits and become a real
hustler. You have all that to do for yourself, now that you have cut loose from
home and school and have been idle and disorderly so long. Instead of being
reformed you are only sorry you are here. Now if you were going to really under-
take a job like that how would you go about it ? Your being sorry you are here is
only the first step. That is good as far as it goes." "And sorry for what I've
done." ' 'That is one of the best things you 've said yet. I've no doubt you are.
Now when one is sorry what is the next step toward better acting and living?"
"Have a good ambition." "Yes, that is good too, or have good intentions.
The ambitions come a little later. Is anyone reformed who has good intentions ?''
' 'No, the task is to be done." "I suppose everyone in this reformatory is sorry and
intends to do better when he is at his best . . . and don't you think so ?"
' 'I don't know. Some are not, I guess." ' 'Oh, I think when they are alone and
think it all over, when they are at their best, they intend to do better; but they
forget their good intentions. You are now at your best, trying your best to
think and understand and plan. At the first of the talk you were not at your best.
You didn't try to do the best you could." At one point he volunteerd he must
plan to stop stealing as well as lying.

''Now what next. . . after good intentions, for the man who really wants
to reform himself ? " ' 'Go ahead and do it." "No not yet. Suppose I have the
good intention to build a house. What next ? " ' 'Do it." ' 'No, not without a
plan, would I ? " ' 'No." ' 'Well, then the man who is to reform himself, make
himself over in habits and manner of work and study must plan carefully and well
or he will fail." Here follow directions for writing out his plan for at least five
years of work by day and study in classes in the evenings, involving the learning of a
trade and the judicious use of time and money, the rewriting of the plan many
times, scores of times with the view that he will plan for success without counting
the sacrifice. The point is made that he can't reform in the reformatory, the time
is too short (he hopes for release in less than five years, his sentence) and we can't
bring the temptations he will meet outside in here for him to practise with. He
must wait till he goes out to meet them there. This is a very good place in which
to prepare for the reformation which lie is to try outside, as the High School
is a good place in which to prepare for the college course. His plan is part of his
preparation. A good one will be the best protection against yielding to tempta-
tion when he goes out that he can provide himself.

' 'After the plan is so nearly done that you begin to feel some pride in it and
begin to see that if you live up to it, your life will be a worthy one; what next,
if you are really to reform yourself ? " ' 'Do it, right off, before I could forget it."
(earnestly.) "No, you overlook a short but very important step. Before I build
my house, after the plans and specifications are all ready, what must I do before
building ? " "I don't know of anything else." ' 'Why, I must decide whether I
can pay the costs, mustn't I? And I must determine I will pay them. I must
decide to draw my money from the bank and must determine I will have the
house; even though it costs so much." ' 'Yes." ' 'Well, I've told you something
about how much it will cost you to reform yourself at this late day. You are
almost at the end of the formative period of life. No one learns a trade or reforms
after 25. Habits are fixed by that time.

STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 33
Now your work is outlined and you know something of the difficulties ahead
of you; but you also know something about how to go to work on your own re-
building. No matter how hard you work on your plan you will be no more than
ready to leave this place when the time comes. You can't be too well prepared for
the five years struggle that is to begin when you leave. Better not really take
the fourth step, the deciding and determining one, till the day you leave this
place.'' He is given a brochure on ' 'Reformation as an Undertaking'' and another
on "Reformation and Masturbation."

With a handgrasp and a spontaneous, if somewhat mumbled word of appre-
ciation and thanks, he departs, glancing back furtively, with an expression we
obviously could not interpret; but doubtless an expression of his mixed feelings.
It is frequently suggested to reactants whose educational advantages have
been improved by them that they write out for themselves i.e., not to be vised,
their notes on what they regard as the good points brought out in the interview as
a basis for their effort to commit their plan to writing.

Too much space would be required to present our search in other directions
for characterial data in this case; but his slothfulness, self indulgence, the poverty
and perverseness of his filial reactions, failure to use his will power, and to exert
a correct influence on others, his unchecked yielding to selfish impulses, his ignor-
ing the rights of others and his too great tenacity of his own opinions were all
admitted by him. He was credited with sufficient will power, if it were only
rightly directed, and with feeling keenly his disgrace and with the intent to achieve
success and he was taught how to utilize these and other good qualities in his
strife for success.

Following is a copy of an abstract of his case from our case files, viz.:
MASSACHUSETTS REFORMATORY PSYCHOPATHIC LABORATORY
Case Abstract
Summary
No  19 (age) Date
Intelligence Age Level: 10-2 years I.Q. .65
Category: Middle Grade Moron
Characterial Deviations: These are wide. He cast loose from home and school
restraints too early and has been a pleasure seeker since, often in vicious
surroundings. Falsifies easily and habitually. Has been damaged
especially in self respect by vicious sex indulgence. Is too easily grouchy
and offensive. Unpractised in self control.
Sociologic Maladjustment: Thief and unreliable.
Physical Health: Free from disease, well nourished. Sexual excesses have
damaged him somewhat.
Laboratory Classification: Characterial Deviate.
Mental Disease: None.

The card for the index file contains in addition to identification data, notation
of the intelligence age level and I. Q., and the symptoms; if a neuropathic,
neurosyphilitic or psychiatric case, or one of the like kind presents, the character-
ial deviations, the laboratory classification and a private code sign indicating
the grade of efficiency. Findings of social maladjustment, sanity, physical
handicaps and our recommendations are not included in the card index. They
are included in abstracts, however, as these are of administrative importance
and of special interest to the Board of Parole,

84 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.

The plan of laboratory procedure outlined and partly illustrated which
serves fairly well the scientific and practical needs of our clientele would almost
certainly require adaptation on transplantation. Any procedure, however,
which proves on use to be other than scientifically exacting, inclusive and con-
structive, will also be found to be inadequate.

In conclusion, success in personality diagnosis and evaluation is less a
matter of method than of manner. The method must be adapted to the personnel
in any event. Binet tests are adapted to childhood ages; but not to the adult
minded. Given a good working method then, whenever it is applied scientific-
ally and the investigation adequately covers the whole area presented by men-
tality, a step forward will have been taken toward the further development and
standardization of this advancing psychiatrical and sociologic speciality.
