Reports of Local Voluntary Associations
========================================

The Annual Reports of the Local Voluntary Associations, most of which have
now been received by the C.A.M.D., present a picture of steady work carried on
under increasingly difficult conditions.

The continued lack of institutional accommodation, due to the financial
restrictions now imposed upon Authorities, is frequently referred to. The
Warwickshire Association records with regret the enforced abandonment of a
scheme for the opening of a County Certified Institution at Southam, whilst
Buckinghamshire has to report the failure of the Local Education Authority to
realise their hope of establishing a Residential School for feeble minded girls at
Pragnell. The Birmingham After Care Committee notes a decrease in the
number of cases provided for in Institutions, which is particularly deplorable in
view of the increased need for institutional care resulting from the prevalence of
unemployment. In some areas the certification of local workhouses has afforded
a slight relief to the congested situation, but Devon is the only Association which
is able to report the accessibility of increased accommodation in institutions other
than Poor Law. The Somerset Association and the four Lancashire Associations,
however, are hoping for an early solution of their difficulties with the opening in
their respective areas of new Certified Institutions at Sandhill Park and Whalley.
Discouraging as the situation has been however with regard to the problem
of institutional accommodation, the reports show that, as a general rule, activity
in other directions has been unabated.

Five Associations?Essex, Ipswich, Portsmouth, West Lancashire and
Somerset?have now established Occupation Centres for low-grade defectives,
whilst two independent ones are also available for the London area. Three are
open every week-day, the others on either two or three days. It is felt generally
that such Centres fully justify their existence, although the smallness of the
average attendance, due to difficulties of transit, is frequently commented upon
m the reports. One of the London Centres solves this problem by the provision
of ' 'guides'' to escort the children backwards and forwards, but this of course
involves additional expense and trouble. Two other Associations?Oxford,
and Willesden?hope to be able to start Centres during the next
few months. The Wiltshire Association also had got plans in train for
one at Salisbury which was to be run in co-operation with the Local
Education Authority; unfortunately however, its opening has had to be indefin-
itely postponed owing to technical difficulties imposed by the Board of Educa-
tion's Regulations.

The Association for Central Lancashire has recently started at Blackburn a
very successful Class for ex-Special School girls who are unable to find work, and
hope to follow it up with the opening of a workshop for boys. The Leeds Volun-
tary Committee also note in their report a similar proposal.
That some such provision is urgently and increasingly needed is indicated by
the reports of the Leeds Committee and the Birmingham After-Care Committee,
both of whom keep careful and detailed records with regard to employment.
Their returns in each case compare unfavourably with those of the preceding
year, showing a decrease in the number of ex-Special School Children able to
obtain remunerative work.

The problem of the "Borderline" case is as far as ever from solution,
although several Associations?undaunted by the present lack of facilities?have
made heroic efforts to deal with the individual cases referred to them. The report
of the West Lancashire Association contains some interesting observations on the
type of home from which their ' 'Borderline '' girls came, but the numbers are of
course too small to enable any scientifically valuable conclusions to be based upon
them. The East Sussex Association has regretfully to record the closing of its
Training Home at Kemp Town, owing to financial difficulties, but efforts to raise
enough money to re-start it have not been abandoned. During the fifteen months
of its existence nine girls have passed through it, of whom four are now in service,
two are undergoing further training, one has returned home improved, and two
have been certified. The London Association continues to arrange systematic
medical examinations and reports a total of 53 cases seen by its honorary medical
advisers during the year.

Sound work has been done by several Associations in connection with crim-
inal defectives, and the reports show that the services of Dr. Potts in arousing
public interest in the subject have been freely taken advantage of. 

In Warwick-shire, as a result of a meeting to which the County Justices and medical officers
appointed under the M.D. Act, were invited, the magistrates have been empower-
ed to engage a mental expert to examine any specific case where doubt as to mental
condition exists. The Yorkshire Association records that in its area all Police
Court Cases in which mental deficiency is suspected are referred to them for
enquiry. If the necessary evidence is forthcoming, the case is then examined by
the Medical Officer of the M.D. Committee, in order that action under Section 8
may, if necessary, be taken. This arrangement has worked smoothly and has
effected an economy of time for the M.O. by ensuring that only cases in which
certification is likely to follow are sent to him. A somewhat similar arrangement,
with equally good results, is in force in the area of the Essex Association, where
the services of a specially appointed mental expert are available in all the Petty
Sessional Divisions. Several other Associations have made special efforts to
emphasise the importance of the question, and have directed the attention of the
authorities to the need of appointing mental experts in connection with the
Courts.

In spite of the exigencies of national and local finance it is encouraging to
note that six Associations report an increase in the amount received from grants
from official bodies.

Other interesting developments mentioned in the reports such as the organ-
isation of "Wolf-cub packs" by the Cambridge Association, and the London
Association's extension of work in connection with the Education (Choice of
Employment) Act, have already been recorded in these columns.
