Vocational Tests for Mental Defectives
=======================================

:Author: Elizabeth L. S. Ross, M.A., B.Ed
Carnegie Research Scholar, Edinburgh1^" M f\(tp
University. | '' F! I I *,v v v

A visit to any good Special School or Institution will convince even the most"
casual observer that, whatever be the limitations of mental defectives where the
more 'literary' subjects of the school curriculum are concerned, in practical
ability they seem to approach normal. The tests for twelve years and upwards
on the Terman Revision of the Binet Scale involve almost exclusively language
ability, rote memory, appropriateness, clearness and adequacy of detail in
imagery, power of conceptual thought and reasoning, those peculiarly human
qualities of mind which mark off, from the defective or immature, the normal
completely developed intelligence. On the other hand experiments on animal
learning have shown what a high degree of practical ability may exist in the
entire absence of any conceptual thought and with very inferior powers of mani-
pulation and exploration.

Proceeding down the scale from normal individuals of adult intelligence
level, we should expect to find among the subnormal group a large number who
can be trained to produce very efficient practical work involving little or no
abstract thought, but only relatively simple problems concretely presented. A
still smaller group will be fit only for work involving sensori-motor habits of
various degrees of precision, complexity and speed, while any adapta-
tions necessary are made by others more intelligent. A few others, if suitable
provision is made, can do mechanical work involving only some simple
movement such as turning a handle or pushing a barrow while directed by others.
Thes: groups, however, can never be marked off sharply from each other unless
in a very arbitrary way, but the usual occupations provided for defectives, such
as Gobbling, brushmaking, gardening and especial'y domestic work in its various
branches, give ample opportunity for each individual to be engaged in work
demanding the maximum of which his intelligence is capable. As Dr. Turner
pointed out in a recent article in this journal, this is one very strong argument
in favour of the large institution with all grades of cases.

Unfortunately there is another circumstance which makes the problem of
vocational guidance more complex, for we have to reckon, not with a certain flat
level of mental development in each individual as represented by the Mental
Age, but with a very uneven development in many cases, that is, with ' 'special
abilities and disabilities." We now admit that it is of little use to say of any
individual that he ' 'has a good memory," or ' 'good power of concentration;''
without definitely stating what specific kind and direction of memory or atten-
tion is being referred to, excellence of one form being no guarantee of a corres-
ponding degree of excellence in another. Also, in some one restricted field a
defective may be capable of "practical judgment" or even of conceptual thought,
while showing a low degree of intelligence in others.

The ordinary Intelligence Scales are helpful within very wide limits
as a basis for vocational guidance, but taken alone they are quite inadequate.

Neither can the present "trial and error" method of choosing employment
be considered at all satisfactory. We provide usually a more or less generalised
course of handwork for our defectives up to about the age of 11 or 12, where we
are fortunate enough to get them admitted to our special schools much before that
age. Beyond this stage, where we can, we give some form of workshop instruc-
tion in perhaps two branches, and as time goes on, try to arrange that each pupil
will take up as his lifework that for which he has shown greatest aptitude. In
many cases no doubt this plan may appear to work quite well, but it is far from
ideal, and mistakes may be made more frequently than we know. To begin
with, it assumes that the field of choice ought to be only among the various forms
of manual work, and this view holds, not merely for defectives, but for most of our
industrial and reformatory school cases, with the result that the child who seems
fairly intelligent and yet makes little progress in practical work has very often
rather an unhappy time. Secondly, circumstances may prevent our being able
to try the individual at just that form of industrial work for which he is physi-
cally and psychologically best fitted, and he may thus be compelled to pass his
life as a square peg in a round hole. Thirdly, the trial and error process itself
often entails a great waste of time and energy on the part both of teachers and
taught, and the training of defectives is under the best of conditions an expensive
process. Fourthly, we frequently have to admit to our schools cases considerably
over 12 years of age concerning which there can be obtained no reliable
information such as would guide in choice of employment, and we cannot afford
to lose any time in deciding what will be the most profitable form of training.

And apart from this, the economic side of the question, careful vocational guid-
ance will do so much towards the happiness of these defectives. We ought to
have fewer disciplinary cases since much of the laziness and rebellion showing
itself from time to time in certain individuals is probably but the reaction follow-
ing on a period of work really unsuitable ini ts nature. As a class, these defec-
tives have such poor understanding of their own characteristics and
abilities, and express themselves so badly, that many of the docile type will be
working at much less than their maximum of efficiency and remain undiscovered.
We have yet to find some type of work suitable for those defectives who,
while ranking as high-grade in intelligence, seem to have no aptitude for any
form of manual work nor interest in concrete problems though they may have
good rote memory and language ability and have made fair progress on the
literary side of the school curriculum. Fortunately these cases are not very
frequent, yet we do meet them and they may be a continual source of annoyance
to a whole workshop if they are compelled to attend there.

We wish then to be able to sort out, with a fair degree of accuracy, between
the ages of 11 and 14 if possible, those defectives that will never be of
much use in manual work, whether because of low intelligence or a special dis-
ability. Then in the case of each pupil remaining we should like, as a result of
careful observation and a study of his reactions to suitable psychological tests,
to be able to say within certain limits what type of manual work would be best for
him, due regard having been paid to physical capacity, level of intelligence and
temperament.

"Practical Ability," as Ballard* has pointed out, is a complex product,
and is dependent on many separate factors each of which may be present in varying
degree, determining the qualitative as well as the quantitative character of the
total 'ability.' Degree of sensory acuteness or defect is an important basic
condition, and similarly with strength and speed of motor ability. A certain
minimum of efficiency along these directions is a pre-condition to the presence
of any degree of practical ability worth noting. Of great importance also ?rc the
capacity to build up sensori-motor habits of various degrees of complexity,
speed and precision, and the capacity for practical judgment in the various
types of concrete situations. That there are many defectives capable of fairly
complex reasoning in the solution of concrete problems is quite to be expected since
all the elements involved are either present in space at the moment, so clear and
stable in consciousness, or else the images necessary are closely associated with
these present elements and, therefore, easily aroused and probably fairly distinct
and detailed because of their gradual formation in the course of repeated experience
and manipulation. It is in this sense largely that manual training is mind
training, giving as it does some of the most favourable conditions for the forma-
tion of concepts.

We come then to the consideration of what seem to be the most suitable
tests to use in the case of defectives. (1) We must assume that an adequate
medical examination will have supplied information as to the existence of any
sensory or motor defects likely to impair general or special efficiency. (2)
We shall require one or more sensori-motor tests to estimate, either together or in
isolation, the degree of precision, speed and complexity of co-ordinations that
can reasonably be expected from the individual and, if possible, the effect of
practice on his original efficiency. (3) We must present a few typical concrete
problems to test power of practical judgment by observation of the individual's
method of procedure and degree of success. (4) Either by observation of behaviour
in the above tests or by means of specially devised methods we should find out
whether or not the individual possesses those '' temperamental characteristics''
essential to success in manual work considered as a vocation.

Several good sensori-motor tests are already available, for example, the
tapping test in the form used by Healy, various forms of card-sorting, and the
'plunger' test devised by McDougall. The various form-board tests used by
Healy, Pintner and others help us in estimating ability to solve problems con-
cretely presented. These and similar tests are probably too short in duration,
* "Mental Tests" chap. XI
and the conditions of work too unlike the day to day realities of the workshop or
kitchen, for us to be able to obtain from them any more then a rather unreliable
cross-section view of the subject's emotional attitude to the different types of
industrial work and his habitual method of response. Probably the only tests
we have as yet for the express purpose of investigating those "temperamental
characteristics" bound up with industrial success are the graded maze tests
devised by Porteus.

Early in 1920 the writer tried out a few of these tests on a small group of
defective children of mental age ranging from about five-and-a-half years to nine-
and-a-half, and chronologically ten to sixteen years old. For purposes of com-
parison the same set of tests was given to a group of normal children of approxi-
mately the same range of mental age. The results obtained are of some interest
though for several reasons they cannot be considered as conclusive. Here we
shall deal only with Healy's Tapping Test, the three Form Board Tests also used
extensively by him, and the Porteus Tests, though one or two other tests were
employed in the investigation. The class teachers gave an estimate of the
"handwork" ability of each pupil on a five-point scale: Very Superior, Superior,
Medium, Poor, Very Poor; and in addition a simple memory drawing test was
given to each and the results ranked similarly.

I. Tapping Test: The subject is given a paper marked off by heavy
black lines into 150 half-inch squares arranged in rows of ten. Using a pencil he
is to tap once in each square as rapidly as possible for 30 seconds, taking care
not to miss a square, touch a line, or tap more than oncc in each square. Two
trials are given, and, in this experiment, the better of the two was taken as the
score after correction had been made for errors. Healy claims that this test
gives an estimate of co-ordination of motor and visual-perceptive powers, both
for accuracy and rapidity.

II. The Form Board Tests:
(a) Introductory?"Mare and Foal" Picture Form Boaid: A certain
number of pieces have been cut out following the natural lines of the objects in
the picture, and also four pieces from the 'sky' portion of the picture. Two
of these latter are right angled triangles together filling a triangular space, and
the other two which approximate to diamond shape resemble each other rather
closely but are not interchangeable. All these pieces are arranged in quite
haphazard fashion beside the board and the child has to put them in their correct
places as quickly as possible. A record is kept of the total number of moves and
the time taken. Notes are made as to method of procedure, whether the moves
seem planned, trial and error, or chance. A failure is recorded if the test is not
completed within five minutes. (Healy allows ten minutes).

(b) Construction Test A: This is employed as an alternative test for year
ten in the Stanford Revision of the Binet Scale and is illustrated in the handbook.
The procedure followed was similar to that described above in the case of the
Picture Board Form, and not Prof. Terman's.

(c) Construction Test B: This board contains six separate spaces into
which eleven variously shaped pieces have to be fitted, thus presenting a problem
slightly more difficult than Construction Test A. The procedure was similar
to that for the other boards.
III. The Porteus Tests: The original series of mazes was used, as described
and illustrated in the "Journal of Experimental Pedagogy," June, 1915,^but
only as far as the twelve year test, Porteus has since revised the scale, adding a
fourteen year test, substituting two new ones for years six and seven, omitting
the four year test, and grading the five and six year tests one year lower. (See
Monograph published by the Department of Research, Vineland, September.

1919, "Porteus Tests?the Vineland Revision.")
The results obtained may be briefly summarised but it must be kept in mind
that the number of cases examined was small and the basis of estimation of prac-
tical ability rather meagre.

I. Tapping Test : It is probable that in the form used this test will give
an index of adaptability to this type of situation, rather than of sensori-motor
ability, unless fuller opportunity is given for practice. In the present instance
it gave a correlation of -60 (P.E. = *08) with rank order in handwork, while the
Binet rating (Terman revision) gave a correlation of ? 69 (P .E.=? 08) with handwork.
In any case, the score in this test will never by itself be of very much value but
only when balanced by the findings of other tests.

II. Form Board Tests:
(1) Of three defectives successful with all the Form Boards, two ranked
"Superior" in both drawing and handwork.
(2) Of six successful with two Form Boards, two ranked "Superior" in both
drawing and handwork, while four were "Medium" in handwork, and
two "Medium" and two "Poor" in drawing.
(.3) None of those five who were unsuccessful in all the three Form Boards
ranked above "Medium" in drawing, while three ranked "Very Poor";
in handwork, one ranked "Superior," two "Medium" and two "Very
Poor."

The following correlations found are interesting:
Form Boards with Handwork?64 P.E. ? 08
Form Boards with Porteus Age? 60 P .E. ? 08
Form Boards with Mental Age? 45 P .E. * 11
One rather strange case was that of a girl aged 11 years with an I.Q. of 71
who failed in all three of the Tests even when shown the correct placing and given
a second trial. Yet 'he same child passed the Porteus Test for year XII and
ranked about medium in tapping, and a little below medium in handwork.
III. Porteus Tests : As pointed out in the Monograph already mentioned
and also in Part II of "Intelligence and Social Valuation," by Berry and Porteus
(published by the Vineland Training School, May, 1920), from which we shall
quote (pp. 66 seq.), these tests fulfil the chief requirements of one of our purposes.
"They supplement the Binet examination by examining capacities which the
latter does not test sufficiently," namely, "foresight, prudence, and the ability
to profit by experience." They test these in a simple situation involving "no
highly specialised manual dexterity" or "special memory." "The test is new
to the child's experience so that the influence of previous practice is eliminated."
They form a homogeneous series, and "in working through the whole of the mazes
from six years to thirteen, the individual is confronted with a similar prob-
lem upwards of forty times so that, if he has any capacity to profit by experience, he
has excellent opportunities for displaying it," and for readjusting his methods.
In the writer's investigation already noted, when the original series was
employed and only as far as the year twelve test, the following correlations were
found.

Porteus Age with Mental Age?79 P.E. -05
Porteus Age with Handwork?76 P.E. -06
with which may be compared
Mental Age with Handwork? 69 P .E. ? 08

Recently, in connection with another investigation, the writer has tried out
the Revised Scale of Porteus Tests on about thirty cases. The conditions were
much better than in the previous experiment for all were institution cases with
good opportunity for industrial training as well as the usual educational hand-
work. The grade of achievement of most of them was well known throughout a
considerable period of training and the industrial rating was the result of the
independent judgments of several competent people. All the cases were put
through the Stanford Revision of the Binet Scale within about a month of their
doing the maze tests. The following correlations were obtained:?

Porteus (Vineland Revision) with Binet?71 P.E. *06
Porteus (Vineland Revision) with Industrial Rating?81 P.E. *04
Average of Porteus and Binet Ages with Industrial Rating?87 P.E. *03
Binet Age with Industrial Rating? 81 P .E. ? 04
These results, though the cases are so few in number, certainly seem to bear
out what Porteus claims: that when the Binet and the Proteus test ages are
combined and the average taken, we obtain a better index of industrial ability.
It is to be noted that with regard to his own series of tests, he considers failure
as of more significance than success, since the capacity for self-restraint and the
habit of pre-consideration are being tested only in a simple situation of very
average difficulty. This, too, is born out by a detailed study of the individual
cases. But it was in cases where the Binet rating alone might have given quite
a false impression of practical ability that the Porteus finding seemed most
interesting, notably in the case of two boys having mental ages of 8f and 6f
respectively (I.Q's. 64 and 59), yet ranking 13| and 13 on the Porteus scale.
Both these boys were handicapped in the intelligence tests by having specially
poor rote memory. Though restless and inattentive in ordinary lesson work,
they both do exceptionally good manual work.

There is much room for investigation work on this subject of vocational tests
for defectives. The field is narrower than in the case of normal individuals,
and the findings here should throw light on the wider problem. The procedure
may seem to be over-elaborate, but when we have determined the best possible,
set of tests they need to be applied only once to each case, say about the chrono-
logical age of 12?14 years, and probably only to those reaching a certain I.Q.
Only thus will we be able to say which of our high grade defectives can safely be
eft at large even under guardianship, and only thus can we ensure that each of the
others will find his most appropriate niche in the industrial colony of the future.
"There's not a pair of legs so thin, there's not a head so thick,
There's not a hand so weak and white, nor yet a heart so sick,
But it can find some needful job that's crying to be done,
For the Glory of the Garden glorifieth every one.''
