Feeblemindedness in Children of School Age
===========================================

:Author:  C. Paget Lapage,

M.D.,M.R.C.P. 2nd edition. Manchester.
Pp. xv 309 with xiv plates, 1920.
10/6 net.
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 45
Book Reviews.

This book is published by the Manchester
University Press, as No. XII in their "Med-
ical Series." It is not easy to deal with it,
lnasniuch as it is not clear for what class of
readers it is intended. The author, in his
Preface to the first edition, stated that the
book was suitable for school medical officers,
teachers, and social workers. It seems to us
that the book is too superficial for the former
category, and too elaborate for the two latter.

The first edition was published in 1910, and
the author very truly remarks in his preface
t? the present edition that very great advances
have been made during the past ten years.
*-et the bibliography contains references to
but one book and six articles published since
1914, There is no reference to Terman's
hook "The Measurement of Intelligence";
aud no mention of his revision of the Binet
tests, although this scale is now being very
widely used. Nor is there any notice of W.
"ealy's monumental work "The Individual
?^elinqUent.'
'
The estimates of the number of mental
defectives given before the Royal Commission
are repeated here, although they were made
at a time when no definite standard had been
Set up. The estimate that from 10 to 20 per
Cent. of prisoners are mentally defective
Avould not be made to-day in the face of the
present legal definition of that class.

One main defect in the book is the treatment
?f the vexed subject of moral defect. The
author states, on page <S1, that moral defect
ls generally associated with some slight limit -
ation of intellect, and that moral defectives
?f the feeble-minded class are often mentally
Very little below the average child. This
surely implies the existence of a "moral
sense" as apart from the intellect.
 
The admission of such a position, and its corollary
the certification and segregation of defectives
on conduct, alone, would have very far-reach-
ing results, and would end in measures which
would be greatly in advance of present public
opinion.

The oft-made statement that mental defec-
tives arc abnormally prolific is again re-
peated. There has never been any satisfac-
tory statistical proof given for this statement.
And it is inconsistent with the position that
defectives are lacking in vitality, and tend to
die early.

If a chapter 011 "stigmata" is to be given,
the Wildermuth ear, in which the antihelix
is more prominent than the helix, should be
mentioned. It is of far more import than
many of the described deformities.

On page 140 the author states that the men-
tal degeneration in epilepsy depends on the
frequency and severity of the fits. The first
of these conditions is of vastly more impor-
tance than the second.

The author well emphasises the absolute
necessity for life-long care and control of
defectives. And he points out that scholastic
education is the least important part of their
treatment.

An appendix contains a description of the
daily routine, diet, etc., in vogue at the
Sandlebridge Colony. It is written by Miss
Mary Dendy, and will be useful to those who
arc concerned with the administration of
similar institutions.

M. Hamblin Smith, M.D.
The Psychology of Phantasy. By Dr.
Constance Long. Ballierc, Tindall and
Cox. 10/6.
Dr. Constance Long's book "The Psychol-
ogy of Phantasy" consists of a most interest-
ing series of papers on Psycho-Analysis, or as
she prefers to call it Analytical Psychology,
dealing with both from the medical and the
teaching point of view. The authoress, in
the preface, disarms criticism as regards the
title, repetition and want of cohesion of the
whole. She says moreover that it is open to
readers to skip passages. This advice must
be followed with care or strange theories may
appear, such as:?

46 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.

' 'A child with only one or two parents is
a mistake."
The context shows that this refers to school-
teachers and others who act as "parent-dep-
uties.''

A debatable point which is touched upon
is the question as to whether the unconscious
is educable or not. Dr. Long dissents from
this view. The argument however is not very
clear, and it would be important and valuable
if it could be elaborated in some future con-
tribution by one so well qualified to judge
from her own work and her knowledge of the
literature of the subject; she says:?

"The unconscious has the appearance of
being educable because it reflects the pro-
gress, or the reverse, in the conscious.
Analysis by revealing the meaning of sym-
bols in dreams provides a view which is com-
pensatory to the conscious. This is en-
lightening, and when assimilated brings
about a change in consciousness, which leads
to an improved situation. This improvement
is in turn reflected in subsequent dreams
which represent the new psychological
state. The real work is done in conscious-
ness, . .
True?but does not this modification of the
unconscious action in dreams mean something
like education? An alteration of action due
ultimately to conscious thought is suspici-
ously like an educated result, but a definition
of what is meant by education is needed. For
example, John Stuart Mill included under it
everything which "helps to shape the human
being." Does this not tend to shape the
unconscious of a human being ?

Dr. Long's criticism of the action of a head-
master who broke windows to stop an epi-
demic of window breaking in the school, will
appeal to everyone's commonsense. As also
does the wisdom of the following:?

"In consideration that life is one whole,
and that childhood is but a preparation for
maturity , I would submit that we. should
allow children to handle fear. What is
bad for them is that fear should handle
them.

The papers dealing with children have much
that is illuminating and fascinating in them-
To the remark:?

"It does not do to be a Saint and Martyr,
in the conscious and a were-wolf in the un-
conscious .''

It might well be countered, that it is better
than to be a were-wolf in both!
The views held by Dr. Long on certain sex
offences will not be universally endorsed.
The book altogether is clear, readable and
interesting.

Helen Boyle, M.D*
Problems of Sub normality. By J. K.
Wallace Wallin. Director of the Psycho-
Educational Clinic, Board of Education,
St. Louis. World Book Company.

In this work, the author has proved himself
an accurate and careful investigator, making
use of the opportunities for research that his
position in St. Louis affords him, as well ?s
his experience in all sections of school-work
with the normal and subnormal child. The
volume is large and comprehensive, and the
statistics are numerous but we cannot afford
to neglect the careful study of any part of it>
or the recommendations he gives to meet each
problem.

The outstanding problem discussed, is the
"Diagnosis of the Subnormal Child." "On
the accuracy of this diagnosis depends the
fundamental success of the Special Schools,'
and ' 'the obsolete system of amateur examin-
ation must be abolished'' says the writer. It
is due to each candidate for examination that
the Trained Psychologist and the Trained
Physician be the examiners, (1) deciding the
decree and character of the deficiency of the
child; (2) where he must be placed and (3)
giving suggestions for his training. Dr.
Wallin is very decided in his discussion of the
place of Tests of Intelligence in the certifi-
cation : ' 'they are standardized tools by which
the Psychologist may skilfully aid his work,
and on no occasion to be used by an untrained
examiner."

It is 'Dr. Tredgold' who says the "social
life of the child is. the criterion" in certification, and 
Dr. Wallin himself requires that the
^acher presenting the pupil have skill
e^ough to fill in the necessary form with
scientific accuracy in order to give assistance
to the Medical Officer.

Having determined the "degree of defect"
next problem is that of Instruction,
whether in "backward class or Special
School. This is not met by increased amounts
drill, individual attention, and assistance,
ut such differentiated types of work as will
Uleet the peculiar requirements and capabil-
rties of the different pupils," and to complete
solution of this problem the author says,
Special-Class Teachers require special trailing 
not merely in differentiation or remedial
Pedagogy of the subnormal, but also in educa-
tional psychology, and the psychology of the
abnormal, and where this is required the
Problem of shortage of teachers arises in
s?rne localities.
"
Very pathetic reading is the chapter on
ppilepsy. The epileptic requires appropriate
tygienic and medical treatment not merely
lor defects, and Dr. Wallin recommends a
School or colony on the Cottage Plan for the
Various grades of such children.

The great problem of After-Care is a social
0fte, and Dr. Wallin acknowledges it, as such,
stating that, "all students of social problems,
)VlU, at least concede that Mental Deficiency
ls one of the fundamental causes of our numer-
ous social ills" and last but by no means
?ast, is the 'Prevention,' by the Hygiene of
Eugenics and Euthenics. A. H. Martin .
