News and Notes
===============

Seventh Annual Report of Board of Control.
-------------------------------------------

In their Report recently issued it is stated that the total number of defectives
under care on 1st January 1921, was 12,026 (State Institutions, 276; Certified
Institutions, 7,421; Section 37 Institutions, 3,434; Certified Houses, 288;
Approved Homes, 256; in single care, 351), an increase of 1,897 as compared
with the previous year; it is pointed out however, that this increase must be
regarded as insignificant in view of the numbers that still remain to be dealt with.
With the cessation of war conditions an effort was made to encourage Local
Authorities to frame schemes for increased institutional accommodation, and a
good many responded to this appeal. Unfortunately however, the increasing
need for economy soon led to renewed restrictions of expenditure and the conse-
quent refusal of the Minister of Health to consider any further schemes of the kind.
On December 31st 1920, there were in State Institutions 276 patients, of
whom 92 were at Farmfield and 184 at Rampton. Authority has been obtained to
extend the existing accommodation for female patients at the latter Institution,
and the Board had contemplated the closing of Farmfield with a view to providing
for all their patients in one institution. It is feared, however, that this latter
part of the scheme will have to be postponed for the present.

It is interesting to note that the Board has closely concerned itself with the
question of the best methods of treatment of this class of defective and with the
whole problem of the nature of moral imbecility. Are these inmates of State
Institutions, it has asked itself, all true congenital defectives? Or are some of
them not defective at all, but ordinary criminals who have deliberately chosen to
take the risks of their anti-social conduct ?

In the hope that some light may be thrown on this question the Board arranged
a conference of mental experts at Rampton, when a full discussion took place and
illustrative cases were examined. The meeting confirmed the Board in their view
as to the wisdom of their policy of granting trial on licence or transfer to other
84 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
institutions in the case of patients who after a period of care, re-act normally, and
it was of such help that it is proposed to hold others at short intervals.
With regard to ordinary Certified Institutions the report records the opening
of six new ones during the period under review, making a total number of 65
available at the end of 1920, containing 7,421 patients. It expresses satisfaction
at the progress made in regard to the general management and training given in the
majority of Institutions, but urges upon managers not to rest content with their
efforts but to use the present pause to perfect their methods, more especially as
regards the selection of suitable staff?a matter of supreme importance?and the
provision of adequate occupation and recreation for the patients under their care.

During the year, 31 new Poor Law Institutions were approved under Section
37 of the Mental Deficiency Act, making a total of 142, and negotiations were
entered into with regard to 26 others. In view of the existing situation the Board
advocate the still further extension of this method of providing accommodation,
which, if care is taken to give the patients suitable occupation and amusement,
need not be considered to involve any hardship, particularly if regarded as a
purely temporary expedient. The weaving established at the Trowbridge and
Melksham Poor Law Institutions* is cited as an instance of what can be done in
this direction.

The difficulty of securing accommodation for low grade children receives
special emphasis in the Report, and the Board have pressed the Minister of
Health to sanction the approval of certain specially selected Poor Law Institu-
tions to be set aside for the purpose. The Minister is reluctant to take this step
as it is contrary to his general policy with regard to children in Poor Law Institu-
tions, but it has been pointed out to him that the case of the low grade defective
whose chief need is nursing care, is not on a par with that of the normal, healthy
child.

Whilst necessarily enforcing a restricted administration of the Mental Defi-
ciency Act at the present time, the Board emphasise the great importance of the
work, as will be seen from the following paragraph from the report:?
"The Board deeply regret the necessity of postponing the provision for
defectives, especially as during a time of poverty and unemployment the evils
which arise from the neglect of the mentally defective are always more acute.

When employment is restricted it is naturally the feeble and inefficient who are
first out of work, and the cessation of regular work is often with the mentally
deficient the first step towards anti-social behaviour and crime. Everyone must
recognise that the present is a time when any additional expense to the already
over-burdened ratepayers is serious, but it must never be forgotten that the birth
and maintenance of the illegitimate children of the feeble-minded involve an
increase of expense in the future, and until further provision is made this charge on
the community cannot be decreased. Moreover, at the close of a great war it is
much to be feared that the presence of a large number of unprotected feeble-
minded women in the country will materially add to the spread of disease. It is
for these weighty reasons that the Board have urged Local Authorities to make full
use of the accommodation already in existence, and to do their utmost to be ready
to embrace the first opportunity of providing further institutional care the moment
the financial restrictions are removed.''

Copies of the Report (price Is. 6d.) can be obtained from H.M. Stationery
Office, Kingsway, W.C.2.

Report of the General Board of Control for Scotland.
------------------------------------------------------

In the Seventh Annual Report of the General Board of Control for Scotland,
which has recently been issued, the Commissioners state that they have been im See p. 89.
STUDIES IN MENTAI, INEFFICIENCY. 85
pressed with the growing desire manifesting itself for a reform of the Lunacy Acts
at the earliest possible date, and a section is devoted to the question.
Among the reforms advocated are the abolition of the terms "lunatic" and
"asylum" and particularly of the application of the word "pauper" to patients
who are compelled to resort to treatment in public asylums; the establishment of
Psychiatric Clinics; and that the provision for "voluntary boarders" should be
extended to patients who are unable to pay for their own maintenance.

No new institutions for defectives have been opened during the year though
some temporary provision in Poor Law and other Institutions has been made for a
limited number of urgent cases, whilst 145 (of whom 38 were children) have been
placed under Guardianship.

At the present time there are in Scotland nine Certified Institutions providing
for 1,477 defectives, and the Commissioners express the opinion that no great
advance in the operation of the Mental Deficiencey Act can be made until it
becomes possible for Local Authorities to provide new institutional accommoda-
tion.

New Special Schools.
--------------------

The Board of Education have recently issued a revised list of Special Schools
in England and Wales. Since the publication of the previous list in 1920, four
new Day Special (M.D.) Schools have been opened?at Enfield, Rugby, Harrogate
and Wrexham?and one new Residential School at Dinsdale Park, Durham.
Sandwell Hall is now no longer certified by the Board of Education.
In this connection we may also record that the Monyhull Residential School
has now obtained the sanction of the Board of Education for the admission of cases
sent by Education Authorities other than the City of Birmingham.

C .A .M .D. Council Meeting.
----------------------------

At the meeting of the Council of the C.A.M.D. held on July 18th 1921, the
following Resolution was carried:?
"That the name of the Association be changed from the 'Central Associa-
tion for the Care of the Mentally Defective' to the 'Central Association for
Mental Welfare.

The Resolution will be submitted to the Annual Meeting of the Association on
October 20th, and we shall refer to it at greater length in our January number.
The question of a change of air for defectives in small Homes was discussed by
the Council, and it was agreed that the Hon. Secretary should make preliminary
enquiries among the Committees of such small homes as to the possibility of com-
bination for the purpose of providing holidays for the girls under their care.

Another important matter before the meeting was the position arising as a
result of the Resolution passed at the Conference of November 1920, urging the
withdrawal of the legal obstacle which prevents the combination of Local Authori-
ties under the Mental Deficiency Act and Local Education Authorities in providing
Joint Institutions. To this we refer below.

Provision of Joint Institutions by Local Authorities under the Mental
Deficiency Act and Local Education Authorities.

It will be remembered that at the Conference on Mental Deficiency held in
London in November 1920, Mrs. Hume Pinsent (Commissioner of the Board of
Control) read a paper in which she stated that it had been recently ascertained
from the Law Officers of the Crown that it would be illegal for Local Authorities
under the Mental Deficiency Act and Local Education Authorities to combine for
the purpose of providing a Joint Institutiion. The following Resolution was then
carried:?

86 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
' 'This Conference is of opinion that there should be no legal obstacle to a
combination between Local Education Authorities and Local Authorities
under the Mental Deficiency Act for the purpose of providing joint institu-
tions certified by both the Board of Control and by the Board of Education
for all grades and types of defectives, and asks H .M. Government to introduce
any necessary legislation.

This Resolution was forwarded to the various Government Departments con-
cerned and the position arising therefrom was considered at the last meeting of the
Council of the C.A.M.D. when it was reported that on March 16th 1921, the
chairman, (Mr. Leslie Scott), had received a copy of a letter which had been sent
by the Treasury to the President of the Board of Education on the question raised
by the Resolution. The opinion expressed therein was to the effect that it would
be undesirable to introduce the legislation advocated as it would be likely to give
rise to the controversial problems underlying the whole situation which could not
be conveniently dealt with at the present time. There would moreover, it was
considered, be serious parental objections to any proposal to send educable
children to Institutions certified under the Mental Deficiency Act, and in any
case, owing to the improbability of constructive work on a large scale in connec-
tion with new institutions being undertaken during the next few years, the
matter was not one of immediate concern.

Strong opposition to the opinions expressed in this letter was voiced at the
meeting, and several members present who had intimate connection with existing
institutions certified both by the Board of Control and by the Board of Education,
showed that practical experience did not bear out Mr. Fisher's contention as to the
parental objection likely to be felt to Joint Institutions of the kind proposed.
It was finally agreed:?

"That Mr. Leslie Scott, supported by such members of the Council with
practical experience of the advantages and of the difficulties of joint institu-
tions as he may consider necessary, see the Minister of Education on the
subject of the Conference Resolution, and report to the Council."
A letter has accordingly been forwarded by Mr. Leslie Scott to Mr. Fisher
stating the case afresh in detail and asking him to consent to receive a deputation
on the question of introducing the legislation desired.

Lilian Greg Centre. Second Annual Report.
-----------------------------------------

The second Annual Report of this Centre is interesting reading, showing, as
it does, how much can be achieved where enthusiasm and determination are great
enough.

The scope of its activities has considerably widened, and its aims now include,
in addition to the maintenance of the Occupation Centre:?

(a) The provision of holiday camps, treats and convalescent treatment
for defectives of all grades living in Islington and Finsbury.
(b) The provision of workers willing to deal with defectives as secre-
taries or workers on Care Committees on the seven M.D. Schools of the
district, or as helpers at play centres or clubs for such children.

The report shows to what a large extent it has been possible to realise these
aims.

"There are 25 children on the books of the Occupation Centre, and there has
been a regular average attendance of 21. This number might be increased to 30,
if it were not for the expense of guides to take the children to and fro. In many
cases the parents find great difficulty in being free to do so themselves."
"The Committee have this year shared a teacher with the Centre running at
Toynbee Hall, paying ?150 of the salary and Toynbee Hall Committee paying
STUDIES IN MENTAI, INEFFICIENCY. 87
?50. The number of children attending the Tovnbee Hall Centre is 15, so that the
cost of the teacher works out at ?5 per annum per child.''

"The children who have attended the Lilian Greg Centre for some time can
now speak clearly and intelligibly, obey directions, dance and do simple hand-
work easily. They are able to carry out in the holidays and in their own time,
work begun at the Centre.''

' 'Two boys who were almost unmanageable, and who it was feared would have
to be excluded, have settled down into obedient and reliable members of the
community, and it is hoped have really learnt that self-control which will enable
them to remain at home under the supervision of their parents."

In addition to the Occupation Centre it has been found possible to run one
Happy Evening Class at Bath Street School and only the inability to secure other
rent free accommodation prevented the establishment of similar classes at other
schools. This class is attended by 10 boys of from 12 to 14, who do painting,
play games and make toys in winter, and play cricket or football in the nearest
park in the summer. These boys very much need the education of we 11-employed
leisure. Two are under probation of the Court, and all are apt to get into mis-
chief from their lack of intelligence and inability to employ themselves. In
several cases, where the mother is dead or in an Asylum, this out-of-school train-
ing in employing their free time is especially valuable.

A very successful holiday camp attended by 60 of the elder boys from one of the
Islington Special Schools was held for a fortnight at Whitstable, the camp being
lent by the Shaftesbury Society. The boys paid 10s. a head themselves and the
Special Schools Committee of the London County Council contributed ?37 towards
the expenses. The results were extraordinarily good, the boys deriving not only
enjoyment at the time, but lasting physical and mental benefit. This success was
undoubtedly due to the efforts of the Head Master and his staff who made careful
and detailed arrangements for excursions, walks, lectures and amusements.

Convalescent treatment was provided for 16 boys and girls attending school
and over school age. In three cases of elder boys a complete breakdown in health
which would have ended in their being permanently unemployable, was arrested
by this means, and all three have been in work ever since. Five of the ineducab e
children were sent away with their mothers to relations in the country for a short
holiday.

The children connected with the Centre have in addition had several "treats"
arranged for them and no less than 784 have been taken in small parties for outings
on Hampstead Heath or to the Zoo.
The Centre has been able to supply voluntary workers for the Care Committees
of seven M .D. Schools in its area and works in close touch with the London County
Council District Organiser.

It has also been largely used by students training for work in connection with
the mentally defective and has received many visits from interested persons,
including several from abroad who have expressed their desire to start a similar
venture in their own countries.

The Centre is however faced with serious financial difficulties as it is entirely
dependant on voluntary contributions, and the Report expresses a fear that unless
new subscribers are forthcoming its activities may have to be curtailed instead of
increased. "With more funds" it concludes, "we could run a really interesting
and thorough piece of work; we now know our material and the need, and every
penny is spent with knowledge and for the children's benefit. We cannot too urgent-
ly appeal to those who realise their duties towards these little ones so handicapped
in the race of life, to give liberally themselves and to strive to interest others in
what we are doing.''

Visitors to the Centre?St. Jude's School, Britannia Street, King's Cross?
88 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
are always welcome any morning between 9-30 and 12; and any enquiries sent to
the above address will be gladly attended to by the Honorary Secretary, Miss
Elfrida Rathbone.

Holiday Camp for Special School Girls.
---------------------------------------

This is a recent experiment of the Lilian Greg Centre Committee and the
following account has been sent to us by one of the helpers in charge:?
"On August 20th, a party of thirty girls left Victoria in the charge of four
adults to spend a week at Seaford in Sussex. The girls came from two L.C.C.
Special Schools and their ages ranged from eleven to sixteen. For themajority
this was their first experience of a seaside holiday, and many of them looked badly
in need of one.

The promoters of the camp had rented a boarding-school consisting of one
large house and an annexe, the gardens of which sloped down to the sea-front.
The gymnasium, a large light room facing the sea, was used for meals, and as a
play-room. The large garden was a great asset, as the girls could play freely
there within sight and sound of the sea, a possibility previously unknown to most
of them.

The bedrooms were large enough to hold five single beds and the idea of each
girl having a bed to herself appealed to the children immensely. They all made
their own beds and tidied their bedrooms, which were inspected every morning.
Breakfast was at 8-30, dinner at 1-0, while tea and supper were moveable
feasts, according to the programme of the day. All the catering was done by the
housekeeper, and a few girls helped each day with washing-up, clearing the tables
and so on.

A gramaphone provided music for dancing indoors or on the lawn, and on
occasions when the children could not go out, they were kept happy and occupied
with puzzles, paints, books, and fancy needlework.

A very jolly sports afternoon was spent one day in the garden. The pro-
gramme consisted of races of all kinds including egg and spoon, bob-apple,
needle-threading and obstacle races, and small prizes chosen by the girls them-
selves were given for each event.

The sea always appealed to the girls, paddling and bathing being thoroughly
enjoyed by all. It was found wise to restrict the number of bathers, so that each
adult did not have to be responsible for more than four children.
The Downs were within easy walking distance, and many afternoons were
spent rambling over the hills.

The girls proved quite good at organising their own games, and on the whole
played together very well. It was soon discovered that it was a wise plan to play
some quiet indoor game before going to bed, as if the girls were allowed to romp
in the garden until bed-time they did not settle down as quickly or quietly as was
desirable.

Many of the girls showed a marked improvement in spirits and initiative by
the end of the week, while the sunburnt faces of all showed the beneficial effect of
fresh air, regular meals and a proper amount of rest.

The cost of the holiday was roughly 28s. per child, and no one who saw the
children when they returned after their wonderful week, would deny that the
money had been well spent.''

We understand that it is hoped next year to provide such a holiday for a
much larger number of children, although limiting each batoh sent at a time to not
more than thirty.

Hull's New Institution.
-----------------------
On August 6th, the Hull Mental Deficiency Committee opened their new
Institution, Tilworth Grange, Sutton-on-Hull, a house with large grounds which
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 89
will accommodate 50 feeble-minded girls and women. The lower grade cases will
be housed on the ground floor and will be kept quite separate from the higher grade.
The patients are to be occupied in gardening (under the supervision of a
specially qualified woman gardener), housework and laundry work, needlework,
rug-making, soft toy-making, etc., and ample provision has been made for
recreation, both indoors and out.

The grounds include a large kitchen-garden, a paddock and three fields, and
the purchasing price paid by the Local Authority was ?6,500, in addition to an
estimated cost of ?800 for alterations.

Cambridge Association. Change of Name
--------------------------------------

At the sixth Annual General Meeting of the Cambridgeshire Voluntary
Association for the Care of the Mentally Defective, held on April 30th, 1921, the
name of the Association was altered to the ' 'Cambridgeshire Voluntary Association
for Mental Welfare.''

It was decided to enlarge the scope of the work, so as to enable the Associa-
tion to deal with cases of incipient insanity requiring expert medical advice or
treatment, and to undertake supervision of certain cases discharged from Mental
Hospitals.

The Association will work in close co-operation with the Psychological
Clinic at Addenbrooke's Hospital, and with the Medical Superintendent at the
Mental Hospital, Fulbourn.
As this extension of the work involves additional expenditure, the Associa-
tion has issued a special appeal for funds.
We hope to refer at greater length to this new development in a subsequent
issue.

Establishment of Spinning and Weaving Industry at Semington (Sec 37)
Institution, Wilts.
Miss E. J. Blake, Inspector to the Wiltshire Committee for the Care of the Men-
tally Defective and Secretary of the Wiltshire Voluntary Association, has sent us
the following account of this interesting development of the work. She will be glad
to answer any enquiries for further information if addressed to her at the County
Offices, Trowbridge:?

*' The Wilts. Statutory Committee as soon as they had succeeded in winning the
co-operation of the Boards of Guardians and had placed patients in Institutions
certified under Section 37 turned their attention to the question of providing
profitable employment for these patients.
It was decided that Spinning and Weaving would be the most suitable indus-
try for various reasons, but the whole scheme was delayed owing to difficulties
consequent on the War.

Spinning and Weaving were chosen because Trowbridge is still a centre for
cloth manufacture and therefore much interest and help could be obtained locally.
The Head of one of the cloth mills has helped the work enormously ever since it
became a practical possibility.

The Guardians at Semington very generously adapted a room which makes
an excellent work-room and when we were ready to begin appointed an assistant
attendant with the stipulation that she should learn the Industry so as to be able
to instruct and supervise the patients.

We secured 6 secondhand spinning wheels and then found an Instructress
who came up and stayed a fortnight in the village, and taught the attendant and
the patients at the same time; the defectives picked up the Spinning very quickly.
I ought perhaps to explain that they do not spin from the fleece, but from
90 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
"tops" supplied to us from the Mill. We decided that it would be far too diffi-
cult to start from the fleece, though that may come later on.
The defectives continued to spin for some months until we could get our
looms, the wool thus spun was used in the Mill and we were not charged for it.

We next got two secondhand looms, which a local carpenter set up for us and
completed, and then we found an old hand-weaver of 80 years old who was willing
to go out to instruct and help whenever he was wanted.

The first piece of stuff was finished before Christmas and since then we have
kept working steadily with one loom. Several of the defectives are now quite
good at weaving and when work is resumed after the holidays both looms will be
in use as we have plenty of orders to go on with.
The defectives are interested in the work and certainly find it a change from
the monotony of housework.

The experiment has been financed entirely by the County Counci' and the
Board of Control, but before Jong it ought to be paying its own way.
Of course Trowbridge is an ideal place for the experiment and we could never
have carried it through unless our kind friend at the Mill had helped us by taking
back the material after it is woven to scour and finish for us."
The Care of Tubercular Mentally Deficient Girls.

The Sisters of the Most Holy Crown of our Lord (a Church of England com-
munity which is being formed under the Wardenship of the Rev. A. H. Baver-
stock, Rector of Hinton Martel, for prayer and work amongst all types of mental
invalids), are hoping to open a small sanatorium for the reception of mentally
deficient girls who are tubercular.

The Earl of Shaftesbury has most generously offered a very attractive site at a
nominal rent. The land lies on the edge of a wide stretch of moorland which
merges in the distance into the New Forest. It is ten acres in extent, and emin-
ently suited to the purpose.

The Sisters hope to be ready to receive patients in the spring of next year, they
propose to begin the work in temporary buildings, and probably they and the
patients will sleep in open air shelters commonly used for the purpose. The first
patients will probably be of the working class, no objection will be raised to the
reception of advanced cases.

As the Sisters will not draw salaries, it is supposed that the institutions will
be self-supporting if a fee of 20s. to 25s. is charged per week for each patient; but
funds will be needed to meet initial expenses (buildings, furniture, etc.)
Any information will be gladly given, and donations accepted by Sister Mary
Frances, Frith stow, West Moors, Dorset.
Howard League for Penal Reform.

The Howard League for Penal Reform (created by the amalgamation of the
Howard Association and the Penal Reform League), has published this month the
first number of a new annual Review "The Howard Journal" which describes
itself as a ' 'review of modern methods for the prevention and treatment of crime
and juvenile delinquency," and announces its editorial policy as being one "in
favour of drastic reform and a new and wider outlook on the problems of penology.'
The question of criminal defectives receives attention in a symposium on
"The Clinical Treatment of Defective Offenders," by S. E. Short, J.P., Dr. W.
A. Potts and Dr. M. Hamblin Smith, and the journal promises to be of great inter-
est and value to all those who are engaged in work for "inefBcients."
Copies can be obtained (post free 2s. lOd.) from the HoAvard League for Penal
Reform, 43, Devonshire Chambers, Bishopsgate, E.C.2.
