The Work of Local Voluntary Associations and Possible Future Developments
==========================================================================

:Author: Aphra L. Hargrove

STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
Organising Secretary, S .E. Lancashire Association.
Editorial Note.

It might be advisable, to set out more fully, by way of preface to this
article, the constitution and functions of Local Associations, for the benefit of
those readers who are not familiar with their work.

The first Associations, of which there are now forty-nine in existence, were formed
almost directly after the Mental Deficiency Act came into force in 1914. One of
their main objects was the co-ordination of all public and voluntary work under-
taken for defectives in their own homes, throughout the area, covered by a Local
Authority under the Mental Deficiency Act, i.e., a County or County Borough.

The Constitution of these Associations varies according to Local conditions but
they all have certain features in common. They consist of Representatives of
Public Bodies in the area, dealing with defectives, such as the County or County
Borough Mental Deficiency Committee, the Education Committees, and Boards
of Guardians; of Voluntary Homes and Institutions for Defectives; and of any
Societies and Organisations which come into touch, either directly or indirectly,
with defectives. They are therefore most representative in character, and in this
way are able to be in touch with all defectives who are living in the district.
These Associations, at the request of their Local Statutory Authority, under-
take all or some of the following duties for it, under the Mental Deficiency Act.

Under Section 30 of this Act, it is the duty of the Local Authority to ascertain
what persons in the area are defective and subject to be dealt with under the Act.

By being in touch with all defectives in their own homes, these Associations are
particularly well fitted to assist in this duty, and to supply full information to
the Local Authority, as to any cases which should be dealt with, and where the
parents or relatives of the defective are anxious to secure help.

The Local Authority has also the duty of providing supervision in their own
homes for any defectives subject to be dealth with, and when this supervision is
inadequate to send the defective to an institution or place him under guardianship.

Local Associations, undertake the supervision of such cases, and by having a
visitor constantly in touch with these defectives are able, not only to give advice
and help as to their care and training, but also to report at once when home care
becomes inadequate. They also find vacancies in Institutions for those defectives
who require institution care, and secure guardians. In some areas the Secretary
of the Association prepares all the papers for and presents the petition to the
Judicial Authority committing a defective to an Institution. Again when there
is a question of a defective being discharged from an Institution, these Associa-
tions are particularly well fitted to make a report to the Visiting Committee of
the Institution as to what care and supervision will be available if the defective
is discharged.

8 STUDIES IN MENTAl, INEFFICIENCY.

Where desired by Education Committees, these Associations also act as a
Care Committee for those educable mentally defective children between the ages
of seven and sixteen who are under the care of the Education Committee, and
attending a Special School. Where no such school exists they visit those children
who would be in a Special School if there were one. They also often act as After
Care Committees for children who have left the special schools. They also assist
Poor Law Guardians in various ways, for example, by visiting the "ins and outs"
of the workhouse who are not certifiable under the Act, but need help and friendly
supervision.

The above are the various ways in which Local Associations co-operate with
Public Bodies. There are however a large number of defectives, who are in need
of help and advice, but for whom no Authority is responsible. The care of these
is one of the chief "Raisons d'etre" of these Associations. It is unnecessary to
enumerate these as that branch of the work is dealt with fully in the article.
Though voluntary help in visiting, etc., is made use of to a large extent, it
is practically essential for most Associations to have a paid Secretary with especial
knowledge of defectives, to be responsible for the organisation of the work in the
area. In some of the larger associations an assistant is also necessary. There
are also travelling and office and other incidental expenses to be met, which vary
considerably according to the, locality. The question of finance, therefore, is an
important one.

Section 48 of the Mental Deficiency Act runs as follows: "Where a Society
has undertaken the duty of assisting or supervising defectives whilst not in
Institutions under this Act, there may be paid to the Society out of money pro-
vided by Parliament towards the expenses of the Society in connection with such
persons, such sums and on such conditions as the Secretary of State with the
approval of the Treasury may recommend.''

These Associations therefore receive grants of varying amounts, according
to the population of the Area, direct from the Treasury, through the Board of
Control. In addition the Local Statutory Committee make a grant in respect
of assistance given to it in the discharge of its duties of the Mental Deficiecny Act.

The Treasury refunds to the Local Statutory Committee half the amount of any
grant so made, In many cases the Education Committees and Boards of Guardian
make grants, and there are also private subscriptions. Several of these
Associations have now been working a sufficiently long time amply to justify the
very high hopes that were expected of them and to prove that they are both a
highly efficient and economical means of securing adequate care for defectives.

The Board of Control in its last annual report lays great stress on their usefulness.

Present Work of the Associations.
-----------------------------------

The chief functions of Voluntary Associations at the present time are as
follows:?

(1) To assist Local Authorities to carry out certain of the duties laid upon them
by the Mental Deficiency Act.
(2) To befriend and assist defectives who, as a result of the limited scope of the
Act do not come under it.
(3) To give advice and assistance in ' 'borderland'' cases which are not certifiable.
(4) To arouse and educate public opinion and
(5) Generally to act as a link between the different Authorities concerned with
defectives and so to ensure some co-ordination in the work.

9TUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 9

The proportion of an Association's time which is devoted to the first of these
functions, i.e., to "Statutory" work, depends upon the particular method of
organisation used by its Local Authority, and upon the degree of vigour with
which the Act is administered. Thus in some areas, Associations are employed
officially for "supervision," and perhaps "ascertainment," only; in others they
are asked in addition to undertake the investigation of all new cases notified to
the Local Authority, the finding of vacancies in Institutions and the escorting of
cases thereto, and the finding of ' 'guardians": whilst in others again, the Secretary
of the Association is also the Executive Officer of the Local Authority and has
consequently to devote the greater part of her time to Statutory work.

But an effort should always be made not to allow the second function enumer-
ated above?that of befriending defectives who are outside the provisions of the
Act?to be thrust into the background, for in it lies perhaps what is the chief raison
d'etre of a Voluntary Association's existence.

None of the following classes of defectives can be touched by a Local
Authority:?
(a) Young children under seven, who cannot be deemed to be "neglected."
(b) "Educable" defectives between the ages of seven and sixteen for whom, by
reason of the present dearth of Special Schools, no educational provision can
be made.
(c) Children leaving Special Schools who cannot be notified by the Education
Authority under Section 2 (2) (b) of the Act by reason of the present limitation
of this clause to defectives who need institutional care or guardianship.
(d) Adult defectives amenable to control and living in good surroundings, and
those who though of immoral or criminal tendencies, are for the time being,
self-supporting.
(e) "Borderland" cases who?though certifiable under neither the Lunacy Act
nor the Mental Deficiency Act?are subnormal or unstable and in need of
advice or treatment.

The visiting and befriending of classes (a), (c) and (d), in order that help may
be at hand when any emergency arises, thus forms an important part of a Volun-
tary Association's work, and the service it is able to render in advising the mothers
of young children as to methods of "home-training" is one that is of particularly
lar-reaching value. As regards class (d) every Association could give instances
where the parents of a defective have been weighed down by the dread as to
what will happen to him, should they die or not be able to look after him. In
these cases the existence of an Association and the consequent knowledge that there
is a friend to turn to in any emergency is a very great relief.

Another great service these Associations can render is by being prepared to
help middle-class parents of defective children. Such parents are often
urgently in need of advice and assistance but would not normally apply
direct to a Public Authority. In these cases an Association does very valuable
work, by putting them into touch with the right Authority where financial help
is needed, or?where parents themselves can afford to send the child to a school
or Home?by advising as to what Home would be most suitable and securing a
vacancy, or again, by making suggestions as to how Training can be given at home.
Feeble-minded children between seven and sixteen come of course within
the province of the Local Education Authority but in some areas?more especially
in scattered rural ones?Associations undertake their supervision by special
arrangement with the Authority in question.

The problem presented by the "borderland" class of case is at present?
owing to lack of facilities both for diagnosis and treatment?only too far from
solution but here and there tentative efforts are being made to deal with it and
some Associations are able to record a certain measure of succcss in individual
cases.

IO STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.

The work of educating public opinion is one that Associations carry on side
by side with that for individual defectives and is of equal value to the community.
Much of the alleged failure of the Mental Deficiency Act is due to ignorance of the
powers given by it?the power to deal with criminal defectives (Section 8),
being a case in point?and in the dispelling of this ignorance a Voluntary Associa-
tion plays an important part. One hears too much complaint about the slack-
ness with which the Act is administered, but that much of this slackness is due
to the lack of any pressure in the shape of public opinion is shown by the fact
that in areas where such opinion has been aroused either by active Voluntary
Associations or by some other means, administration is almost without excep-
tion speeded up.

The establishment of "Occupation Centres"*?chiefly for children excluded
from school?has been added by a few Associations to the normal routine activi-
ties outlined above, but this is a phase of the work which is at present still in its
infancy.

Possible Future Developements.
-------------------------------

What now of the future of Voluntary Associations? Is their importance
likely to diminish with the completion of that preliminary spade work which
now forms such a large part of their activities ? Or if not what new opportunities
of service are likely to present themselves, and how are they likely to be used?
I have said that a large part of the present activities of Voluntary Associa-
tions are in the nature of spade work. By that I mean that they are due to the
fact that the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, and the Elementary Education (Defec-
tive and Epileptic Children) Act, 1914, have only been in operation a short time,
to the almost insurmountable difficulties that have stood in the way of their
being put into active operation, and to their inherent imperfections which could
only be revealed by practical experience.

But let us for a moment project ourselves into the future and conceive a
state of things in which there is no defective over seven who has not been "as-
certained "; in which every ' 'edueable'' defective child between seven and
sixteen is provided for in a Special School with the certainty of being sent on, if
necessary, to an institution; in which no difficult or undesirable "ex-
cluded" imbecile is left in his own home, and in which?in cases of mentally
defective delinquents?Section 8 of the Act is the first and not the last remedy
resorted to. All this will involve the release of those energies of Voluntary
Associations which have now to be devoted to the anxious supervision of cases
which ought to be in institutions, to the weary search for "vacancies" and to the
laborious enquiry into the "early history" of adult defectives who have only
recently been "ascertained."

It should be noted that these developments are not likely to reduce the
number of cases to be dealt with by Associations, for although many of the low-
grades with whom they are now so largely occupied will have been taken out of
their hands, the number of high-grades will be considerably increased. And
this for two reasons.

First, one of the suggested amendments to the Mental Deficiency Act is
to the effect that a Local Education Authority shall be empowered (under Section
2 (2) (b)) to notify a child leaving a Special School, for "supervision" as well as
* See article on "The Lilian Greg Centre" in "Studies in Mental Inefficiency" October, 1920.
for institutional care. This in itself will add greatly to the number of cases under
Statutory supervision. Secondly, with the general establishment of Special
Schools and the perfected methods of diagnosis that are likely to result many
cases of mental defect that now escape notice will be detected and referred ulti-
mately to Voluntary Associations.

STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. II

And it is then that the problem of how to supervise will have to be faced in
earnest, and a part of the released energy to which I have referred will surely be
deviated to the tackling of this very difficult problem. No longer shall we be
satisfied with that "quarterly visit and report" which so often under present
conditions is what we mean by "supervision," we shall begin to ask what con-
structive work we can do for our feeble-minded cases, and particularly for those:

(1) who are quite amenable to discipline and capable of work, but who are
living under unsatisfactory conditions.
(2) who have good homes but who are unable to hold their own in the open
labour market.

For the first type of case Voluntary Associations may consider the possibility
of opening?as an experiment?hostels where defectives may receive skilled
supervision and guidance, but from which they may go out daily to work and
to the support of which they may therefore largely contribute. Such Hostels
would thus constitute a sort of half way house between the artificially restricted
life of an institution and the complete freedom of an ordinary home and would
at the same time afford a testing place for cases in which there is a doubt as to
whether or not removal to an Institution is necessary, and conversely for cases in
which there is doubt as to the wisdom of releasing from an institution.

For the second type of case a reverse need seems to exist, viz.: the provision
of suitable work, no change in their home surroundings being necessary, and the
Voluntary Associations of the future may well consider the question of opening
an Industrial Centre?on the model of the workshops at Darenth and other Institu-
tions?to which defectives can go daily and be happily and usefully occupied,
perhaps in some cases earning small wages in return for their work. An Occupa-
tion Centre for lower grade cases?mention of which has been made above?
might be combined with such a venture and the two run together, and one can
think of various other activities to which it might give rise.

For those defectives living in rural scattered areas where attendance at an
industrial or Occupation Centre is impossible, some other means of providing
training will have to be devised. Would it not be possible for an Association
to employ a peripatetic teacher, as is done by some Blind Societies, who would
herself visit these defectives at regular intervals and give them and those respon-
sible for their care, definite teaching and training, and also give instruction to the
voluntary visitors as to the best means of training the individual cases they are
visiting? For the higher grade defectives, capable of being taught some simple
manual occupation, I think it should be possible to secure the co-operation of
Women's Institutes in the different villages, and obtain volunteers from their
members to provide training in some handicraft.

Such experiments may reasonably be expected to be assisted financially
by the Authorities?Local or Central?but it is not to "Authorities" we look
for the initiating of them. Experimental work?in this country at any rate?
essentially belongs to the field of voluntary effort.
The other important development in the work of Voluntary Associations
for which we may look, is in connection with ' 'borderland'' cases.

? ' r *?.. -   I ?
12 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.

Whereas, up to a comparatively short time ago, such cases were only recog-
nised to exist by a few medical and psychological experts, the experience gained
in the War has now brought the problem into the arena of practical politics,
and within the last two or three months the inclusion of a Clause dealing with the
treatment of incipient mental disorder in the Ministry of Health (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Bill has shewn that the subject is receiving the earnest attention
of the Government Departments concerned.

The establishment of Psychiatric Clinics?such as already exist here and
there?in every large centre will lead to the detection of large numbers of "border-
land '' cases at present unrevealed and in response to the new need facilities for
meeting it will not fail to come into being. Information as to the patients'
home surroundings, as to the way in which the treatment prescribed is being
carried out and as to the progress of those who have returned from treatment
away from home will be needed by the clinics. Voluntary Associations,
who have had considerable experience in dealing with these borderline cases,
should, it seems to me, be able to do a good deal of such social work in connection
with these clinics, and should, therefore be able to train their workers to have
some understanding of these difficult cases.

It is moreover virtually certain that to such clinics will be brought?in
hope of cure?cases of actual mental defect already known to the Associations,
and it will thus prevent much overlapping and duplication of visiting if it is to
them that the "following up" of all suitable cases attending is entrusted. *
Such a development as this will of course bring with it the need for a higher
degree of expert knowledge than is at present possessed by the average secretaries
and workers of our Associations. But "Short Courses"?on the model of those
already provided by the C.A.M.D. for other sections of workers?would probably
meet this need once the demand is great enough.

On some such lines as these then would seem to lie the chief possibilities of
expansion for Voluntary Associations. From their present inevitable pre-
occupation with the legacy left by the neglect of the past, and with the struggle
to overcome the tremendous obstacles with which the war has strewn the way of
progress; they will evolve into bodies of enthusiastic experts ever seeking to
devise new methods of dealing with their problem as a whole and of giving a
fuller life to the individual defective under their care, and always ready to be
used in the cause of the promotion of mental health. It may be said that
I have painted a too rosy picture of a future that will never be realised^ and I am
aware that its complete realisation is as yet far off. But "where there is no
vision the people perish" and it is only by continually reminding themselves of
the possibilities that may lie before them that Associations will be able to pre-
serve their individuality and prevent themselves from becoming mere cogs in the
wheel of the machinery of Local Authorities.

Opportunity may not yet come, but when it does come let us not fail to use
it because the conception of our destiny has been too low.
* The greatest obstacle in the way of this development would seem to lie in the name of
Voluntary Associations for the Care of the Mentally Defective and a change may have to be
made in it to suit new conditions.
