For The Insane in France
========================

(?rtgtiial Communications.
notes of a recent visit to several provincial asylums

:Author: John WebsteeE, M.D., F.E.S., FELLOW OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS,
CONSULTING PHYSICIAN TO ST. GEOEGE AND ST. JAMES'S DISPENSABY, ETC.
(Continued from page 540 of No. XII. for October, 1850.)
Asylum at Le Mans.

In the sketches given of the four asylums referred to in previous pages, whilst there
was much to approve, still some points merited criticism, if not condemnation. The
remarks I considered it necessary to make during my narrative, may perhaps seem
severe; but as nothing was stated excepting from personal observation, and as I felt more
anxious to communicate facts than opinions, even should the statements produce
Unfavourable impressions respecting some of the institutions described, the fault was
Dot mine, seeing my chief object was to be a faithful reporter. Respecting the
asylum which I now propose passing under review, it becomes a very agreeable duty
to state, by way of preface, that of all the public establishments for the insane I have
recently visited in France, that of Le Mans has certainly given me the most satis-
faction. But as this seems like pronouncing a verdict before taking evidence, I will
therefore proceed, as in similar cases, to give the data which bear out the above con-
clusion.

This public asylum is situated close to the banks of the river Huisne, near Le
Mans?formerly the capital of the province of Maine, and now the chief town of the
department of La Sarthe. Its position is somewhat low, but agreeable, open, airy, and
apparently salubrious. Like other newly-established departmental lunatic asylums, it is
under the authority of the prefet of the department, as also the minister of the interior,
and has a local commission of surveillance, composed of five members, whose orders are
administered by a resident Director, and hence dissimilar, in several respects, from some of
the establishments to which attention has been hitherto directed. The Le Mans Asylum,
in consequence of having been constructed expressly for the reception of lunatics,
and under good medical advice, is consequently devoid of many of the defects
often inherent to other institutions. The court-yards are spacious, airy, and quite
distinct, although of easy communication. The dormitories are cheerful, well lighted,
properly ventilated, and of scrupulous cleanliness. The chapel, offices, kitchen, and
principal appendages of the establishment, are in the centre; the court-yards for
female being on one side, and tliose for male patients on the other. But without
entering into every particular, I have no hesitation in saying, that the whole arrange-
ments of this institution for lunatics, are the best adapted for the objects proposed, of
any I have seen elsewhere; and visiting English justices, or architects, before drawing
plans for new asylums, might examine the entire structure with profit and advantage, as
well in reference to the accommodation for lunatics, as to relieve the pockets of
grumbling county ratepayers.

During the year 1849, the following table exhibits the movement of patients at the
Le Mans Asylum.

Admitted Males, 41   Females, 33  Total, 74.
Discharged, cured Males, 15   Females, 20   Total, 35.
Died  Males, 8   Females, 8  Total, l(i.
In reference to the mortality here reported amongst the lunatics, it is instructive to
mention that, unlike the other four asylums previously described, not a single fatal
case of cholera occurred throughout the whole twelve months; diseases of the
chest, on the other hand, being frequently the apparent cause of death amongst the
inmates.

On the day I visited this departmental asylum, the total number of lunatics
amounted to 258; of whom, 124 were'males, and 134 females ; the indigent patients
being 84 males, and 103 females; thus leaving 40 men and 31 women, or a total
of 71 individuals, who paid for their treatment and maintenance, sums varying from
400 to 2,000 francs per annum.

There is only one physician attached to this institution, who, however, constantly
resides within its precincts, and also gives his time and exertions exclusively to
official duties. This officer, Dr Etoc-Demazy, is well known for his professional
attainments, and as the author of " Researches on Suicide." One interne resides
likewise in the asylum; so that, should the physician happen to be absent, medical
assistance may be always procured in case of any emergency. Besides these two
resident medical gentlemen, a surgeon is officially attached to the establishment;
whilst the minor details, in reference to patients, are superintended by several benevo-
lent sisters of charity belonging to the order of Evron.

Respecting the all-important subject of restraint, I may state that, on the day of my
visit to the asylum, three men and four women had on strait-waistcoats ; although some
were merely placed under such restraint for a very short period; and no individual was
then in the cells, or in any other way confined. One male and two female patients, I
also observed, were sitting in arm-chairs to inhale the fresh air in their respective court-
yards, who were slightly attached to their seats by a loose band ; but neither case must
be reckoned as examples of mechanical coercion, seeing the occupants were paralytic
and could not move, the belt alluded to being merely to keep them from falling.
Occupations of various descriptions are carried forward with much zeal by the
authorities of this institution; indeed, to engage the lunatics in some employment
seemed to be the great object pursued. Thus, when going over the gardens and adjoin-
ing fields, I saw many inmates busily occupied in gardening, cutting firewood, and
preparing foundations for new buildings. At another part, a gang of upwards of
a dozen lunatics were finishing a long tunnel they had made under the public highway,
in order to connect a field, recently purchased, with the present farm. Other patients,
again, were lowering a slope where a washing-house was to be constructed. Through-
out the farm?consisting of about fifteen acres, various individuals appeared engaged
like ordinary work-people; whilst the industry and orderly conduct then prevailing
out of doors gratified me much; as also oil noticing, that the labourers always
saluted their physician respectfully as soon as he approached, and conversed about
their occupations as if they were not insane. Hence, judging only from outward
appearances, it seemed as if we were quietly perambulating some agricultural
establishment, not the precincts of a madhouse.

Within doors, the same aspect of quietude and occupation prevailed; the female
patients being engaged in spinning, sewing, making clothes, washing, knittin", or in the
kitchen and laundry. In short, the insane inmates performed much of the household
work of the establishment. By these means, the expenses of the institution are not
only diminished, the inmates much benefited in their bodily health and mental condi-
tion, but they also gain a little money; which adds to their comfort in the meantime,
and gives them something besides when they leave the institution.

The labour department is so well organized, and so great is the desire often felt,
especially by the male patients, to be sent into the fields and gardens to work, that
?Dr Etoc-Demazv mentioned, it was even considered a punishment by many of the
poor lunatics, when not allowed to join as usual their fellow-workmen. Judging
from the empty appearance of the court-yards and dormitories, I had previously visited,
this information was fully confirmed, seeing all these localities were nearly without
occupants, whilst few patients seemed either idle or unemployed.

. Amongst the inmates, paralytic cases were numerous; but few were classed as
idiots, or epileptic patients. As in other similar establishments, a number of cases
^ere considered incurable, their disease being of long continuance. Nevertheless,
looking at the ratio of cures, compared with the admissions, the benefits effected
seem to have been considerable.

As additional accommodation will soon be completed for indigent patients, and as
several new cottages, with gardens, are also about being erected, to receive insane per-
sons who pay for their maintenance, the asylum will then have sufficient space to
accommodate 310 inmates. Even now, the dormitories are by no means so overcrowded
as_I have elsewhere seen, from deficient accommodation; and as none of the wards in
this asylum contain more than 12 beds, whilst several have only 8 ; and farther, as
there are generally windows on each side of the apartments, the dormitories appear
cheerful, better ventilated, and are consequently, I think, more salubrious, than in many
other institutions.

Comparisons are often odious, even if just; still, the authorities of this asylum, both
Medical and lay, deserve great praise for the unwearied and successful efforts tliey con-
stantly make, to alleviate the severe afflictions of those unfortunate victims of mental
alienation committed to their charge. The facts narrated in this brief notice, and the
impressions I received during my recent visit, made me form a very high estimate of
the " Asile de la Sarthe;" which appeared at the time, as afterwards, one of the best
constructed aud most judiciously-managed lunatic institutions, I have anywhere had an
opportunity of examining; especially in reference to employing the insane inmates.^
When accompanying the zealous resident physician through the various divisions of
this establishment, whose efforts have contributed so materially towards its present
excellent condition, I said as much to him personally; and although not of much
value, I have again much pleasure in also publicly expressing the same sincere opinion,
?through the medium of Dr Winslow's Psychological Journal.

Asylum at Blois.
------------------

Similar to the institution at St. Gemmes, this asylum is not yet completed; many of
}he court yards and appurtenances being still in progress. The building was commenced
in 1841; and when all the dormitories are erected, will afford accommodation for 350
lunatic patients. The situation is well chosen, being opeu and airy besides possess-
ing an extensive prospect of the neighbouring country, especially over the southern
hank of the Loire; aud although in the vicinity of Blois, the establishment is nearly as
secluded from observation as if many miles distant. Similar to many other French
lunatic asylums, the supply of water is at present defective; but this want of so essen-
tial an element will be effectually remedied, should the contemplated improvements for
supplying the city of Blois with that most necessary article, for domestic and other
purposes, be actually carried forward by the municipality.

The general plan of this institution bears some resemblance to the asylum at Le
Mans; the court-yards are judiciously arranged, aud decidedly more cheerful than
"many earlier constructed erections. Already, parterres of flowers have been formed ill
the enclosures; and when all the dormitories, with other conveniences, are finished,
I feel assured this public asylum, intended for the reception of lunatics especially
belonging to the department of the Loir and Cher, will merit inspection, and obtain
approval.

During the year 1849, the following statement shows the movement of patients; but
for the reasons just stated, and its limited extent, the table does not possess the same
importance as the reports received from other institutions.
Admitted Males, 2G  Females, CO  Total 80.
Discharged, cured . Males, 13   Females, 10 ... .?. Total 23.
Died   Males, 8  Females, 7 ... Total 10.
Amongst the deaths, several arose from cholera, and chiefly during August; but none
after the 27th of that month. Again, in reference to the present population, its amount
may be reported as almost now in a state of transition; seeing sixty new patients arc
expected to arrive very shortly, tlie dormitories being already prepared for their recep-
tion. However, on the day of my visit, the actual number in the asylum was 121
inmates; consisting of 40 male, and 78 female lunatics. Amongst the other peculiari-
ties noticed at this institution, and similar to those mentioned when describing St.
Gemmes, the resident physician also combines the attributes of director. This arrange-
ment has certainly advantages in an asylum like the present, where many new works
are in progress; as the eye of a medical practitioner, conversant with insanity,is better
able to direct the proposed improvements, and necessary alterations in the building*
than any other individual. Nevertheless, there are many serious objections to the
junction of two such important and distinct offices as resident-physician and director
in a lunatic asylum, especially where the patients are numerous. However, on this
subject I shall speak more fully, in a subsequent paragraph.

Dr Billod?an accomplished physician, and well known for liis medical works?now
occupies the responsible offices of director and resident medical officer of the Blois
asylum. That he performs the various duties of these appointments well and satisfac-
torily, cannot be better illustrated, than by the statements I shall have the gratification of
soon making, as the result of my own inquiries and observation at this institution.
Besides the physician, one interne is also attached to this institution; but at present that
officer is absent, for the purpose of accompanying to the asylum a party of the lunatic
patients, whose arrival, as already mentioned, is daily expected. The interne's duties
are, however, performed in the interval by an insane patient resident in the asylum?
?who was formerly a medical practitioner. This unfortunate individual accompanied Dr.
Billod and myself, the morning I went round the wards with that gentleman ; and it is
interesting to state, that he wrote down all the orders of the physician, and otherwise
conducted himself as if he had been the real "locum tenens."

Having referred to the acting deputy-interne being a lunatic, I ought also to mention,
as illustrations of the benefit, and even safety, of sometimes employing insane persons
in various duties; and farther, of giving them official occupations?of course, where
such proceedings are considered safe and judicious,?that the present secretary of the
asylum is a lunatic; a patient also superintends the horse employed in driving the
machine, for pumping water to the various reservoirs; another insane patient takes care
of the same horse in the stable; the dairy woman, now in charge of the cows, is insane,
and likewise the gardener; a carpenter, who acts as foreman, a shoemaker, employed
to teach others, and the person who is at present under-bailifF, having several other
lunatic labourers to superintend, are all " noil compotes mentis." Further, and which
ought not to be forgotten, one of the male attendants, who accompanied Dr Billod,
myself, and the insane interne already mentioned, through the epileptic ward, was
likewise a lunatic. These important facts are highly interesting; and I have been thus
particular in now recording all the circumstances, as they admirably illustrate the system
constantly pursued at this institution; namely, of giving work and employment to
every lunatic inmate, wherever practicable.

A recent regulation in the management of the Blois Asylum was subsequently com-
municated, which I must specially record, as it is both useful and deserving of imitation;
namely, the authorities now receive no new attendants into the establishment, unless
they understand some trade or handicraft; so that every subordinate official and servant
may be qualified to teach patients the requisite occupations. This excellent system
not only proves beneficial to the institution in pecuniary respects, but it encourages
labour amongst the lunatics, which is highly advantageous, and improves their bodily
health, as well as mental condition; whilst they thereby may also gain some money for
present comforts and future contingencies.

As might be expected, various occupations are carried forward in this asylum,
especially out-of-door employments. In the adjoining farm?which contains at present
about fifteen acres, but will soon be augmented to twenty-five by a new purchase?
agricultural and horticultural employments are pursued most zealously. When I
walked over the enclosure, several labourers were engaged in excavating the founda-
tions of a new court-yard for the agitated patients, and others were carrying the earth
from different sites in wheelbarrows, wherewith to form a large mount"in the centre
of one of the fields, in order that the residents might have a fine and extensive pano-
ramic view of the neighbouring country. Various inmates were also trimming walks in
the garden, and so forth. In fact, every person out of doors seemed busy; and the
general aspect of the place looked very unlike a lunatic establishment. Again, within-
doors two weavers were busy at their loom; also, carpenters and a shoemaker. Many
female patients?some of whom were also engaged in the fields, as is often seen iO"
France?were busily occupied in sewing, in knitting, in tlie kitclien, or in household
""jork; and others in preparing clothing for tbe inmates, which essential articles were
a|l made npon the premises. Bodily occupation for the mind diseased being here con-
sidered a great adjuvant in the treatment of lunatics, it was carried out to the utmost
limit; aud Dr Billod stated, that at least four-fifths of the whole residents were usually
employed.

In corroboration of the beneficial effects produced upon the insane by bodily labour,
this gentleman also informed me that he had frequently remarked the patients did
Dot sleep so soundly, and the dormitories were often more noisy during Sunday nights
than any other period of the week; and this effect he ascribed to the circumstance,
that on Sundays the various occupations being interrupted, the whole day was passed
by the inmates in comparative idleness. Dr Billod has made this observation so fre-
quently, from visiting the dormitories on purpose during different nights, that he had
no doubt upon the subject; and now communicated the fact as the result of repeated
observation and experience, which well deserves the special notice of other psycho-^
legists.

As might be anticipated from the details previously reported, mechanical restraint
is very little employed at this institution, compared with other places in France; and
?u the day of my visit not a single male patient was in any way confined. Three
female lunatics were, however, in strait waistcoats, one being also tied to her bed, and
m a great state of excitement; another of the above had her legs also tied together;
but the third female patient was merely in demi-camisole, her hands being quite free.
No other lunatic was restrained in any way, and the cells were all empty. I saw no
lron bars in the windows; and altogether the general appearance of the patients in this
asylum was satisfactory; the women, with the above exceptions, being even quiet
and orderly.

Many of the inmates were incurable; some being idiots, a few cretins, and a con-
siderable number of epileptics, with homicidal tendencies. Besides the above formi-
dable varieties of mental disease, three patients were affected with general paralysis,
one of whom was a female. Recently, M. Billod bad a paralytic patient, who, amongst
his other ideas of grandeur?so peculiar to this complaint?at one time considered
himself to be a general in chief commanding the army in Italy; then he became
Froudbon; afterwards Blanqui; subsequently, Pierre Leroux; Louis Blanc; President
of all the Clubs; Secretary of Ledru-Rollin; and latterly, when the physician refused to
open the doors of the asylum to allow him to depart, he appointed himself director,
having first, in imagination, dismissed that gentleman from both the offices he holds in
the institution. Seeing this form of mental, as well as physical disease has become of
late more common than formerly, and often baffles every kind of treatment employed,
it therefore seems peculiarly interesting to mention, that one of the male attendants
at present on duty had been affected with this serious malady, and seems now appa-
rently cured, although the symptoms, at one time, were of an unfavourable character,
as shown by the following outline of the case, given in the words of M. Billod. The
patient was 33 years of age, of a nervo-sariguineous temperament, and has a mild,
open, and intelligent-looking countenance. The symptoms at first were those of acute
mania in the most decided form, with extreme agitation and general delirium; the pre-
dominant ideas having reference to politics and ambition. He believed the other
patients in the asylum were all members of a political club, to whom he often addressed
speeches. He desired to regenerate society, and to make every person rich, whilst
he believed his own fortune incalculable. There was great excitation of his intelli-
gence, of sensibility, and of will; with such constant wakefulness, that he scarcely ever
slept. His speech was embarrassed, tongue tremulous, the muscles of his face being
often affected by spasmodic contractions; whilst his gait was vacillating, although
generally in movement. The disease continued unabated till the night between the
18th and 19th of last August, when this patient was attacked by cholera?then pre-
valent in the asylum?whereupon the delirium seemed alleviated. Ultimately, the
other symptoms became less pronounced, and in a few days he was able again to
resume labour in the fields, which proved highly beneficial; and recently he has been
appointed one of the infirmary attendants.

At the present moment, there are not many private or paying patients in this asylum,
the accommodation being very limited for such inmates. As it is, however, proposed
to erect eight additional apartments, with a private garden, for male patients of the
better class; and a similar number on the female side, an increase may be expected;,
"When the payments will be from COO to 1200 francs annually.

Amongst tlie insane, physicians occasionally find considerable difficulty in inducing
particular patients to take food, when artificial methods become absolutely necessary.
The sound, in many of these cases, is employed for that purpose; although other
mechanical means have likewise been recommended, some of which are very inge-
nious, and are often effectual. Dr Billod having paid great attention to these dis-
tressing cases, has recently invented a species of gag made of metal, which he introduces
into the mouth of the lunatic. By compressing the nostrils, at the same time that food is
conveyed with a spoon through the machine, the patient so treated must swallow what-
ever comes in contact with the pharynx, whilst a valve empties the spoon, and prevents
regurgitation. Dr Billod spoke highly of tlie utility of his instrument; and as it will
soon be made known to the profession, practitioners can then judge of its efficacy.
When alluding to the employment of insane patients in out-of-door labour, men-
tion was made of a mound, then in course of construction, for the purpose of affording
the lunatic inmates an extensive prospect of the adjacent fine country. Wherever
the grounds of an asylum permit, and the view is not restricted by near objects, such an
elevation should be always made; as it has been found both agreeable and beneficial.
A distant view of a beautiful country, presenting a varied prospect, has a tranquillizing
effect upon the mind of many lunatics; besides being an excellent mode, as also an
inducement for patients to take exercise. It has, however, been observed, by prac-
tical physicians, when the mounds are easily overlooked by neighbouring dwellings,
or if strangers outside can be distinctly recognised by the lunatics within, then
injurious consequences may supervene, especially, if erotic passions characterize the
patient's mental malady.

Before taking leave of the asylum at Blois, and of its able physician-director, who
is so zealous and successful an advocate for employing the insane wherever possible,
or compatible with their safety and improvement, it ought to be distinctly mentioned,
that no accident whatever has happened to a single patient at this asylum from any
occupation, although carried forward most perseveringlv. This fact is conclusive;
and, conjoined with others of a similar kind, elsewhere reported, all scepticism on
such points must now give way before knowledge and experience.

This institution being situated in the city of Orleans?the capital of the department
of the Loiret, is so surrounded by houses on almost every side, that, from the upper
windows of several, the court-yards of the patients may be easily seen, and conversa-
tions even held with the inmates. Besides this defect, not having been originally con-
structed as an asylum for lunatics, and some of the recent additional buildings being
injudiciously made within a very limited space, and which it appears impossible to
enlarge or improve, without purchasing many adjoining houses and streets, the faults
inherent to this institution can never be corrected effectually. The only judicious remedy
would be, to remove the establishment altogether to a more open and airy situation.
Such a step seems even more necessary, seeing it is now conjoined with several other
charitable institutions, having thereby a very large aggregate population.

Within the same precincts, and under a common board of administration, the present
general hospital of Orleans comprises?1st, a workhouse, having, the day I visited
this establishment, 310 paupers: 2nd, the Hotel Dieu?or civil hospital, with o00
patients: 3rd, a refuge for orphans, of whom 80 were then in town, besides 819 in
the country: 4th, a receptacle for diseased "filles publiques;" and, Oth, the lunatic
asylum, which then contained 521 patients. The different inmates of all these esta-
blishments, including resident officials, and domestics, augmented the present popula-
tion, I was informed, to .1550 individuals, which require an expenditure of at least
550,000 francs per annum.

Notwithstanding the large number of insane patients constantly resident in the
lunatic division of this establishment, the medical staff is now more limited than in
most other insane institutions of equal magnitude ; seeing one resident physician takes
charge of all the patients, whom he visits daily, without the assistance of any interne;
although there ought to be two, if not three, considering the laborious duties performed.
There is doubtless an adjunct medical officer domiciled in Orleans, who visits periodi-
cally; still the responsibility rests with the resident physician, Dr Chambeyron,
a practitioner of much experience in mental diseases, and who has filled similar ap-
pointments elsewhere. Having upwards of 500 lunatics constantly under surveillance,
and many of these being engaged at a farm attached to the asylum, Dr Chambeyron
has full occupation for his time, which must be dedicated wholly to the inmates, as
he is prevented from engaging in private practice.

During the year 1849, the movement of insane patients was thus reported:?
Admitted Males, 71  Females, CC  Total, 137.
Discharged,cured... Males, 20  Females, 11  Total, 31.
Died    ... Males, 48  Females, 45   Total, 03.
Comprised in the above 93 deaths, it ought to he stated, that 32 persons died by
cholera, 1] being males and 23 females; the greater proportion of which occurred
Hi the month of July, when the recent epidemic prevailed extensively.
Believing a detailed statement of the various diseases assigned as the immediate
cause of death in the total 93 patients now reported may be interesting to profes-
sional readers, I subjoin a classified statement, containing particulars which will,
doubtless, be considered more important, seeing the table illustrates generally, not only
the pathognomonic character of all cases ending fatally, but likewise forms an instruc-
tive exposition of the physical maladies attacking the inmates of a large French luna-
tic asylum, in which the mortality proved considerable.

Classification of the ninety-tlircc deaths recorded in the Lunatic Asylum at
Orleans, during 1849.
Diseases of Head.
Arachnitis
Congestion
Epilepsy
Fracture of skull by a fall ....
Ramollissement of brain
Diseases of Chest.
Asphyxia by strangulation
Inflammation of lungs
Pulmonary apoplexy . .
Pulmonary catarrh . . .
Pulmonary consumption .
Diseases of Abdomen.
Cancer of uterus
Cholera
Dysentery
Inflammation of bowels and stomach . . .
Inflammation of mesentery and peritoneum .
Diseases of uncertain Seat.
Cachexia and decrepitude
Erysipelas
Inanition
Small-pox . . . . ,
Typhus fever . . .
Total of deaths by all causes
Males
1
C
1
9
17
11
48
Fem.
1
21
19 30
45
Total.
1
2
8
1
10
22
13
1
32
2
12
49
9
93

According to the above statement, diseases of tlie abdominal viscera proved, in con-
sequence of the recent epidemic, more fatal than any other class of maladies ; gastritis
and enteritis, after cholera, being in this division the most common cause of death,
12 fatal cases of that description having occurred during the year. Next in point of fre-
quency rank diseases of the head; and in this category 22 deaths are reported, ramollisse-
ment of the brain being the most frequent cause, as shown by the fact, that of this formi-
dable and generally incurable alteration of structure there were eight examples. Epilepsy
constitutes the second most numerous cause, of which the total fatal cases amounted to
eight; and it is instructive to observe, respecting this class of affections, that amongst
the whole 18 deaths from both the above diseases, 15 occurred in male patients?
viz. nine by ramollissement, and six by epilepsy; whereas only three women died
from similar morbid affections. By pectoral complaints only 13 deaths are reported, five
being from pulmonary consumption, and four from inflammation of the lungs. The
fact of not more than five fatal cases of consumption being met with, amongst the
whole 03 deaths reported, forms rather a striking feature, especially, if compared with
the mortality often observed from the same disease, in the lunatic establishments of
Great Britain, where consumption prevails very frequently. For instance, at Bethlem
Hospital, in which lunatic institution 24 deaths occurred during the year 1849,
amongst an average population of 405 insane patients, one-sixth of the whole, or four,
were produced by phthisis; whereas at the Orleans Asylum, the comparative ratio was
only one-eighteenth of the total ninety-three deaths reported. Again, by other diseases,
or those designated of uncertain seat, the proportion of deaths at the Orleans Asylum,
in 1849, was less than in the three previous divisions, there being only nine fatal
cases, of which three were produced by typhus fever, and three, according to the official
return I received, by cachexia and decrepitude, but which would be perhaps denominated
in England, by the antiquated and indefinite phrases?" old age and decay of nature."
With reference also to another interesting point, namely, the period of life when
death supervened in the 93 fatal cases now reported; it is instructive to state, that 14
of the above number occurred in patients under 30 years of age; nearly one-half, or
45, in the prime of life, being then 30 to 50 years old ; 18 from 50 to 00 ; nine from
GO to 70 ; and four from 70 to 80?besides which, three patients?two men and one
woman, were stated to be from 80 to 90 years old at the time of their death; thus
showing that some individuals, although insane, may yet attain great longevity.
Respecting the type or general character of the mental maladies affecting the 521
inmates recently under treatment in this asylum, which then consisted, as reported
in a former paragraph, of 246 male, and 275 female lunatics, I would next direct atten-
tion to the following table, compiled from official documents, as it supplies some rather
interesting, if not instructive information on such points; besides being a good index
of the ordinary forms of insanity usually met with, in a large provincial establishment
for lunatics in France.

Table showing the Type of Mental Disease which affected the 521 Insane
Patients, under Treatment at the Orleans Asylum.
Incurable Patients. I Males
Idiocy and imbecility
Do. do. complicated with epilepsy
Mania complicated with epilepsy ....
Mania of long continuance
Pbobably Incurable Patients.
Inveterate mania
Periodical mania .
Total
Curable Patients.
Acute dementia .
Acutc monomania
Acute mania . .
Total
General Total .
44
22
20
64
Fem.
38
14
20
55
150 1 127
70
2
95
4
4
6
14
24
246
99
16
28
49
275
Total.
82
36
40
119
277
165
6
171
9
22
42
521

From the above data it consequently appears, that only seventy-three patients, or less
ban one-seventh of the entire number, are classed as curable; whilst in the remaining
*8 scarcely any hope of amelioration could be entertained. This fact at once explains
ie small amount of cures effected last year, as also the numerous deaths reported,
-kven to have discharged thirty-one individuals convalescent, was creditable to the phy-
sician, especially, when it is stated, that only sixty-one curable patients were admitted in
-1849(; whilst the locality, with other adverse circumstances alluded to previously, are
at the same time taken into consideration.

Ihe large proportion of epileptic patients, now resident in the Orleans Asylum,
deserves also special notice; the amount being forty-two males and thirty-four females,
taking a total of seventy-six, who are all considered incurable. The number of idiots
and imbecile patients is likewise remarkable; eighty-two cases of this description?con-
sisting of forty-four males and thirty-eight females, beiiig now in the wards. Such a
*arge collection of unfortunate human beings, as the above 158 idiotic and epileptic
Patients, deserves attention, as the amount shows the great frequency of the above forms
?f mental diseases, in this part of France. Indeed, according to report, epilepsy is of
so frequent occurrence amongst the inhabitants, that several quacks, and even priests,
enjpy at present considerable reputation in curing this generally incurable disease;
wbicli always has, and ever will be, a source of gain to charlatans amongst an ignorant
and superstitious population.

This table exhibits, besides, another feature which deserves notice, namely, the large
Dumber of incurable male patients compared with female lunatics in the same con-
dition, although the aggregate amount of insane men in the asylum is less than that
?f the other sex, 150 incurable male lunatics being now on the register, with only 127
females of a similar description.

It likewise deserves especial remark, that the incurable men are not only more
numerous than the insane women of the same category, but the number of curable
male lunatics under treatment does not reach to half the amount of curable females;
seeing twenty-four of the former sex to forty-nine of the other are reported in the
above table. These facts, along with the fewer insane males admitted in 1849, prove
the inveteracy of insanity amongst men, although the disease is less frequent.
General paralysis, as in some other institutions, seems also of rather frequent oc-
currence in this portion of the Republic; the number of lunatics now in the asylum,
affected with this peculiar form of malady, being sixteen male and three female patients);
thus indicating that here, as elsewhere, this disease is always met with in much greater
proportion amongst men than women, although the symptoms are most intractable in
both sexes, and seldom yield to any remedies, unless at the very commencement of so
direful a malady.

When going round the dormitories and various court-yards, the female patients were
then very noisy, and appeared quite as much agitated as in any French asylum I have
ever visited; the men being also a good deal excited, but certainly less violent than the
female lunatics. Further, the proportion of patients under restraint, on the day ad-
verted to, was likewise considerable; as shown by the following enumeration, noted at
the time of my perambulations, in order to avoid exaggeration. Eight male patients
had strait-waistcoats, of whom two were likewise strapped to their beds; and seventeen,
female lunatics were in camisoles, two of these being, besides, tied to their beds; whilst
two were also shut up by themselves in the court appropriated to agitated female
patients.

This division of the asylum stands much in need of improvement, the cells being
badly ventilated, unglazed, having stone walls, and are very comfortless. Indeed, the
entire locality is altogether unfitted for lunatics, and about the worst of the kind I have
ever entered; whilst, from its original defective construction, the faults, as in some
other parts of the building, appear irremediable. Nevertheless, it is only just to the
authorities 19 add, that several of the ordinary court-yards are by 110 means badly com-
struc.ted, having also pretty parterres, with enclosures of flowers; besides which, a new
?dormitory,?recently finished, seems superior to the old, at the same time, that others were
then undergoing improvements.

As might be expected from the above facts, and other causes, very few private or
paying patients are at present under treatment in this asylum. Indeed, the accommo-
dation for such inmates did not appear extensive. Amongst the 521 lunatics now under
treatment, only thirty-two inmates, consisting of eleven male and twenty-one females, aie
?classed as voluntary patients, who pay for their maintenance and lodging from 440 to
2200 francs per annum; the remaining 489 residents being all indigent lunatics,
to employ tlie distinctive French designation, they were insane patients who had been
placed in the asylum, " d'office."

Most of the wards in this institution are not only very confined, but badly ventilated;
and were, at my visit, overcrowded with beds, owing to the limited spaces, as also the very
large number of lunatics now accumulated together. In consequence of the great de-
ficiency of accommodation, a division of the patients now inhabit some old houses
attached to a farm belonging to the hospice, which contains about twenty-five acres,
where the inmates are occupied in agricultural and horticultural employments. Iu
addition to tbe means here afforded, occupations are likewise promoted at the asylum
itself, the females being engaged in household work, sewing, knitting, and other em-
ployments; the males in the gardens, at handicrafts, and various trades adapted to
their situation ; but occupying the lunatics did not seem to be carried out either as
zealously, or to the same extent, in this asylum as I have noticed in other similar esta-
blishments. On this subject one defect may be mentioned, as it chiefly arises from in-
judicious domestic arrangements; viz. no kitchen being specially appropriated for the-
lunatic department, all the food required must be brought from the common cuisine ;
and as the lunatic patients are often sent to carry the provisions, it thus happens, that
they mix with the inmates of otber divisions of the hospital, which is very objection-
able, as I can state from personal observation. Every institution for the insane should
be entirely separated from any otber charitable establishment, proper classification of .
the inmates being also of the highest importance ; and no court-yard should ever over-
look another; still less, should the inmates be seen from neighbouring houses, or be
able, on their part, to converse with tbe occupants of SHch localities.

Believing enough has already been said respecting the Orleans Lunatic Asylum, I will
only now add, that it requires much improvement, if not transference to a separate and
more open situation. Such aproceeding would be highly judicious; and as it is the only
public provincial establishment for insane patients belonging to the three departments
of the Eure and Loir, the Loiret and the Eure, the councils-general of these important
districts of France, ought no longer to rest satisfied with the present condition of this
institution, which seems far inferior, in point of accommodation, to many others in the
country. Should the public authorities, whether local or central, wish to be convinced
respecting this important feature, they need^not go farther to obtain information, or to
observe the beneficial results of experience, than to the neighbouring asylums at
Auxerre, or Blois, and especially the institution at Le Mans, whose excellent example
they might advantageously imitate.

Saint Yon Asylum.
-------------------

This institution derives its name from a M. de Saint Yon, who in 1615 possessed
the property. In 1070, M. De Bois-Dauphin became the proprietor, by whom it was
converted into a monastery for females and a general hospital, still retaining the original
name of Saint Yon.

In 1825, the building was made a receptacle for lunatics, and has continued so till
the present time; being specially appropriated to receive insane patients belonging to
the department of the lower Seine. This asylum is situated in the Fauxbourg of St.
Sever, on the south side of the river, and close to the city of Ilouen, the ancient capital
of Normandy. The position is good, although low, and rather near the neighbouring
houses ; still, the foundation being gravel, and having about twenty acres of gardens-
and fields adjoining, it possesses many advantages not always found in other establish-
ments. The court-yards for female patients are on one side of the domestic offices, and
those for the male lunatics on the other; both being quite separate. The pavilion,,
containing the baths, occupies the centre building; whilst a steam-engine supplies
water to this important appendage in all French asylums, as also to the culinary and
other departments.

Saint Yon is one of the largest provincial lunatic asylums in France, and was also
amongst the first departmental insane institutions established. It is, besides, one of
the best conducted in the country; and contained, at the period of my recent visit, 739
insane inmates, 201 being male, and 408 female patients ; thus giving a considerable
excess of the latter sex over the former, much more so, indeed, than I have noticed
in any of the other asylums previously described. Two physicians are attached to the
institution, having entire charge of the patients, whom they visit daily. Dr De Smyt-
tere takes charge of the male, and Dr Merielle of the female department; but only
one of these physicians now resides in the asylum, namely, Dr De Smyttcre, the other
being a practitioner of repute in Rouen. Each of these gentlemen has two internes
attached to their respective divisions; two of which, very useful medical officers, in.
ery asylum, must he always on the premises, in case of any emergency ; and all the
four being resident in the establishment, the official staff seems adequate for every
Purpose.

Like most provincial public lunatic institutions in France, Saint Yon receives private
or paying patients. The number at present is, however, not considerable; and they
are lodged in separate quarters, the ladies in a building, with their own garden, on the
one side; the gentlemen, who seemed equally well accommodated, occupied another
quarter ; both being quite distinct from the pauper patients. The pensions vary from
1000 to 1500 francs per annum, according to the accommodation, with 750 francs
additional, should the patient desire the services of a special attendant. In reference to
this department, it may be worth mentioning, that the building appropriated for private
?iale patients, was constructed by an English architect, and has a separate garden,
With a bowling parterre for the amusement of the pensioners.

When perambulating the numerous court-yards and dormitories of this large asylum,
the inmates generally seemed much more quiet, compared with those I saw in 1842,
during my previous visit to this institution ; whilst both the male and female patients
now exhibited less excitement than appeared to me at that period. This improvement
"Was especially apparent in reference to the diminished application of the strait-waistcoat,
oompared with former usage; according to my distinct recollection. The total number
of females now mechanically restrained, amongst the whole 4G8 lunatics of that sex,
being seven; whereas of the 2G1 male patients, only three had camisoles; and I saw no
inmate whatever confined in solitary cells, or mechanically restrained in any other
nianner. This report of the restraint now employed differs from my former observa-
tion ; and shows the progress made in a question which is so interesting to every
?Englishman, and also now warmly supported by many French practitioners.

During the year 1819, the movement of insane patients at Saint Yon was as follows :
Admitted Males, 100 Females, 104  Total, 204.
Discharged cured. Males, 39  Females, 37  lotal, (0.
Died Males, 50  Females, 53  Total, 109.

Amongst the above deaths, nearly one-third, or thirty-three individuals, died by
cholera; the sexes being almost equally divided. Besides these casualties, twenty-four
male and fourteen female patients were removed from the asylum, previous to their
cure being effected.

When visiting the various divisions of this institution, along with the attending
physician, I was much pleased with the internal discipline of the entire establishment.
Thus, on the female side, those who are able to leave their dormitories, assemble in the
middle of the court-yards, aud seat themselves on chairs in a circle; so that the physi-
cian can thus minutely examine every individual without much trouble, or the chance
overlooking any patient, which might be the case, were they dispersed over the en-
closure. But in addition to the facility of thus seeing every person, the discipline of
making all the female patients seat themselves in regular order, imposes upon them
some restraint to remain quiet, at least during the physician's daily visit, which thereby
becomes an important aid in their treatment; for if once a lunatic is made to behave
properly, the other means employed by the practitioner will likely prove more efficacious.
Again, on the men's side, the same principle is followed; but with this difference, that
the male patients all stand up in single file, as if at an ordinary military parade; whilst
the physician, accompanied by the interne, and other officers, or any visitor who may
he present, walk along in front, in the way a general officer with his ataff would inspect
a regiment. The same mode of visiting and inspecting the patients is now adopted
in many other lunatic asylums; and considering the large numbers frequently con-
gregated together, the plan is judicious ; whilst those inmates who are unable to
?walk, or may be in bed, or in the infirmary, are, of course, afterwards specially examined
in their different localities.

The female dormitories seemed exceedingly crowded; and great difficulty was con-
sequently experienced, in accommodating all the patients of this class, whom the authori-
ties have been obliged, from necessity, to admit. Every available corner had therefore
an extra bed; and even then, it has been found impossible to admit ever} app i
cant. Notwithstanding this overcrowded population of the female wards genera j so
noisy in France?the agitation was less tlian I have noticed elsewhere; whilst the
male patients were as usual, more quiet than the female.

This institution seemed well managed in all its domestic, culinary, and vestiary
.arrangements; whilst the discipline established by the medical officers, appeared excel
lent. The physicians have almost unlimited or despotic power in this asylum, to regulate
everything respecting the medical treatment of the inmates; and they cannot be inter-
fered with by any concurrent, still less, an inferior jurisdiction. The dietary, clothing*
occupations, amusements, and recreations of every kind, are all directed by the attending
physician; and no attendant whatever is permitted to order anything in reference to
treatment or occupation, out of the usual routine, without his express sanction; nor is
the friend or relative allowed to visit any lunatic, or the patient to leave a particular
division, unless by the specific authority of the medical attendant; besides which the
sisters and all servants must obey every mandate emanating from their superiors,
especially those issued by tbe physician.

The patients appeared well fed and clothed, the women in the habiliments they
usually wear; but the male patients, excepting those of the upper class, were nearly all
clad in an uniform manner. This may suit the French national character, but to my
mind, the plan seems objectionable, being too monotonous, besides having more of a
military appearance than I should consider desirable.

The same uniformity of dress prevails in other establishments, but it is not so
rigidly enforced as at Saint Yon. The system certainly promotes economy; but,
amongst persons affected with mental alienation, the custom of clothing every patient
alike, whatever may have been the previous tastes and occupation, or present state of
mind and feelings of the individual, seems of doubtful utility; and ought not to be
adopted in a limited, but still less, in any large asylum containing indigent lunatic
patients.

Occupying and amusing the insane patients is considered of essential importance
at this institution, where every effort is made to engage the lunatic inmates in some
bodily employment. This object was perseveringly and successfully carried forward
by M. Parchappe, when chief physician of Saint Yon; and the same very useful system
is still pursued by his present able successors. To specify minutely the various trades
and handicrafts in which patients are now engaged, seems superfluous; for to do so
now, would be but to repeat many remarks similar to those already often made, when
speaking of similar establishments. I will therefore at present only say, the asylum at
Eouen need not fear comparison with any other institution.

In consequence of the usually crowded condition of Saint Yon, and the necessity of
having additional sleeping accommodation, with greater space for employing the
lunatics, a new asylum is now in course of construction, near the city, to contain 300
inmates and which will be appropriated exclusively to male patients; when the present
institution will be restricted to insane females. According to report, the contemplated
expense is calculated at 1,000,000 francs; but before the asylum is finished the outlay
will doubtless, as often happens elsewhere, exceed the preliminary estimates.

In order to carry forward agricultural and horticultural labours, to which many psy-
chological physicians in France justly attach great importance, a farm containing about
ninety acres will be attached to the new establishment; and, judging from the plans
kindly exhibited for my inspection, by the authorities, as also from the information
communicated, the new asylum for the Lower Seine will be creditable to the depart-
ment. Having the advantage of being specially projected to promote labour and em-
ployment amongst lunatics?so ably advocated by M.Parchappe?and.being also super-
intended in its construction by the present Director of Saint Yon, Dr De Boutteville,
an able, although now a retired physician, and therefore fully cognizant of the require-
ments for such institutions, my present expectations respecting its beneficial results are
somewhat ssinguine. These anticipations I hope to see realized at some future period,
when able to visit the new asylum, as also to thank again in person MM. De Boutte-
ville, De Smyttere, and Merielle, for the courtesies I experienced during my recent
excursion.

General Remarks.
------------------

When speaking of the medical staff of Saint Yon, I stated that four junior resident
medical officers, called internes, are attached to the asylum, in which they are lodged,
and have rations, besides receiving 400 francs per annum. Each interne may remain
four years in office, but the average period varies from two to three years; and to be
appointed, tlie candidate requires certain qualifications. During tlie time an interne
continues at the asylum, he'has excellent opportunities for obtaining knowledge in the
"fist of all schools,?namely, from practical clinical experience?aided by the informa-
tion also given by the physicians. Not only are the internes thus practically instructed
to become future practitioners, but they in the mean time relieve the superior medical
attendants of much labour and professional details. No asylum should, therefore, be
Without senior resident pupil officers; and having seen the inconvenience accruing
from tbe want of similar officials, in some English as well as French institutions,
I have more than ever become convinced of the great advantage of the above function-,
aries. In very few English asylums are there such appointments; nevertheless, the
Period is" not distant when every asylum for lunatics in the British empire will have
several professional attendants of this description, like the ordinary civil hospitals, which
Oow possess dressers and house surgeons.

Feeling very strongly the importance and advantage of having, not only medical
Pupils, but also resident internes at every asylum for the insane, I must enlarge a
little upon this interesting question, especially, as my early convictions have become
Materially strengthened, by resent observation and experience. From tli%facts re-
corded in previous pages, it will have been noticed as very remarkable, that wherever
internes were officiating in any of the asylums described, restraint was less employed, and
the patients there appeared even more tranquil; besides the great relief from the labo-
rious details, which such an arrangement gives to the attending physician. The daily
experience of those conversant with the insane, and especially of physicians habitually
engaged in teaching, or lecturing to medical pupils in public lunatic institutions, fully
bears out the opinion, that harm very seldom arises from the attendance of students,
if properly regulated, the same as in ordinary hospitals. On this point, the views
entertained by many practitioners of eminence might be quoted: but at present one
reference will suffice, as tbe sentiments expressed are based upon long exjierience, both
from treating insane patients, and in giving lectures on insanity.

The authority now referred to is M. Falret, the distinguished physician of La Salpe-
triere, who observed, in a recent lecture he delivered, " that so far from being detri-
mental to insane patients, tbe attendance of pupils is often adjuvatory to their treat-
ment; whilst clinical instruction might be as safely imparted, as in any ordinary hospital.
Falret likewise made an important remark respecting trench students, which
^ould, I am sure, be equally applicable to Englishmen, under similar circum-
stances, viz. that in his opinion the pupils always conducted themselves in a satisfactory
manner.

Timid and prejudiced objectors have said, no doubt, the practice of giving clinical
instruction in a lunatic asylum would irritate aud wound the feelings of insane
Patients; but this erroneous view is assumed rather from the observation of man in his
sound, than in an abnormal mental condition. Hence the origin of much fallacious
reasoning, by well-meaning and benevolent, but mistaken individuals. If completely
insane, no injury wlfctever is thereby likely to supervene to the patient; although occa-
sionally in certain cases, when approaching convalescence, the presence of pupils, in
tbat particular dormitory, may sometimes do harm. Should this appear, discrimination
then becomes necessary; of which the attending physician being the best judge, would,
therefore, always act accordingly.

Tbe attendance of pupils in the wards of a lunatic asylum, along with the usual
medical attendant, cannot surely have any worse effect than in an ordinary hospital.
Again, eases of interest would be often more minutely inquired into; their history,
symptoms, and treatment investigated with greater care than, perhaps, they might be
under other circumstances; from being thus exposed to the observation of intelligent
students anxious to gain experience. For it is a common remark, that the sick poor
are frequently better attended, and also more assiduously treated, when placed under the
general observation of the profession, than otherwise ; especially when a "chiel" is
taking notes to print them afterwards. Instead of injury, benefit will often follow such
a proceeding; and even should any inconvenience be occasionally the consequence of
placing lunatic upon the same footing as general hospitals, that result cannot be at
all compared in importance, with the many advantages which must then arise to the
profession, the community, and still more, to every victim of insanity under treatment
in public institutions.

Although unwilling to accumulate arguments upon a subject, which appears to all
unprejudiced minds to be now settled satisfactorily, I must still crave the permission of
readers to state, that an experienced professional friend, and resident medical officer of one
of the largest asylums in England, and whose skill and judgment fully justify the high
esteem in which he is held by all his acquaintance, candidly informed a county
magistrate, also a friend of my own, who recently consulted him on the subject of an
approaching medical election at another asylum, that when appointed to his present
office "he previously never had the opportunity of feeling the pulse of a lunatic." I'
is unnecessary to say, that this gentleman is an earnest advocate for the system of
instruction by lectures, respecting the nature and treatment of mental diseases; and has
also materially contributed, by his individual exertions, to lessen that defect in medical
education, which many other practitioners feel, and earnestly desire to see remedied.
When giving in previous pages the various statistical returns obtained from the
eight public institutions mentioned in this communication, I considered it would be
rather out of place to make special remarks upon the movement of patients in particular
asylums, so as thus to avoid repetition ; for these reasons, I purposely abstained from
deducing any inferences, or enunciating general conclusions on such premises, until
all the facts thus collected were placed in juxtaposition; believing that deductions,
based upon an extensive series of facts, are more important, and in a higher degree
conclusive, than if only drawn from a limited number of data; whilst they also give a
more comprehensive outline of the chief phenomena. With this view, the following
tabular statement has been compiled, in order to show the total number of patients
admitted, cured, and died in each asylum during the year 1849, separately and collec-
tively. The amount of inmates under treatment on the day I visited the various insti-
tutions is also stated; and as all the figures were obtained from official documents,
they may be relied upon as accurate.

In regard, also, to a most important question,?namely, the actual number of
patients reported under restraint, I can likewise say, upon that point, there is no ex-
aggeration,as every figure contained in the subsequent table was written down at the time,
from my own personal observation. This record of the amount of mechanical coercion,
noticed in French insane establishments, doubtless will attract the special attention of
British physicians, who generally entertain very difl'erent notions respecting the per-
sonal restraint of lunatics, from many of their brethren resident beyond the English
channel; where great diversity of opinion prevails upon so vital a question, com-
pared with that held ill England. It should however be remembered, that padded
rooms are very rarely met with in any French asylum; and also, that the camisole is
the usual method of employing personal restraint, generally sanctioned by the medical
officers; whilst it is sometimes applied as much for the safety of attendants, as of the
patients'; although some practitioners still think such treatment even beneficial in agitated
cases. Intending again to allude to the important question of restraint, along with
other subjects, I would now request the reader's attention to the following classified
statement of facts and figures, which fully merit careful examination:?
Table showing the movement of Patients in eight French Provincial Asylums, during
1849. Also the total Population of Lunatics, when visited in Aui/ust or September
of 1850, with the number of patients under restraint. Compiled by Dr Webster.
Name of Asylum.

Bon Sauveur
St. Meen .
Nantes . .
St. Gemmes
Le Mans .
Blois . .
Orleans
St. Yon
Movements of Patients in 1849.
Admitted.
Total.
123
91
126
12G
74
86
137
204
Cured.
Total.
72
37
50
71
35
23
31
76
Died.
39! 31
8 8
8 7
48 i 45
Total.
52
49
100
70
16
15
93
109
Total Population in
the Autumn of
1850.
?M.
302
143
181
161
124
46
246
261
F.
390
168
210
179
134
78
275
468
Totals
484; 483 967 208 187 395 1270 234 504
I
1,464
1,902
3,366

According to the preceding summary, it appears, that the number of patients of both
sexes received, during the year 1849, into the above eight provincial asylums for the
insane, was almost identical; 484 lunatic males, and 483 females having been admitted.
More men, however, were cured than women; 208 being of the former, to 187 of the
?latter sex ; whilst the total deaths not only surpassed the aggregate recoveries, in both
categories, but the proportion of fatal cases was greater amongst male than female
Patients; the difference being thirty-six fewer deaths amongst the latter division,
although the gross amount of females under treatment was considerably more than the
male inmates. These statements are interesting, and well deserve the attentive con-
sideration of psychologists.

Indubitably, the great mortality recorded in the above table, was materially augmented
by the recent epidemic cholera; hence, the results now reported, must not be held as
true criteria of the usual annual average; still the ratio of deaths was large, speaking
comparatively. Again, the total cures were almost forty-three per cent, amongst male
Patients, compared with the admissions; but only 38.71 per cent, amongst females,if
similarly calculated. In reference to the amount of mortality, attention should be directed
to that of Le Mans, as it furnishes a good index of the ordinary rate recorded in a
Provincial lunatic asylum, seeing no patient died of cholera at that institution; where,
Jn an average population of at least 250 lunatics, the deaths, by all causes, amounted
?nly to sixteen cases, during the entire year. Thereby making the ratio 6.20 per
Cent.; the number of persons discharged cured being, at the same time, nearly one-
half the amount of admissions. Again, at St. Meen's asylum, if the twenty-one deaths
reported by cholera be subtracted from the total forty-nine fatal cases stated in the
previous table, the mortality, by all other causes, then becomes 9.31 per cent, amongst the
residents. To pursue this limited mode of analysis any farther, at present, is unueces-
Sary; whilst, to consider the total deaths now reported in the various asylums, as indi-
cating ordinary occurrences, would be both unjust and erroneous. Foreigners might
With equal justice assert, " London was a most unhealthy capital," because the
mortality, of the same season, reached far beyond its usual amount; 27,109 persons
having died in the metropolis of Great Britain, from all causes, during July, August,
and September, of last year, instead of 13,503, which occurred in the parallel quarter of
1848; or of only 11,578, reported throughout the same districts, in the similar three
mouths of the year 1850, just terminated.

Another feature in this table also deserves special remark,?namely, that female patients
predominated, in respect of number, over the male lunatics in every asylum, especially
in that at Bon Sauveur, and at Saint Yon; the excess, in the latter, being not less than
'9.30 per cent. Even, if all the 3360 inmates are taken collectively, the difference,
in the two sexes, is still nearly one-third; the numbers being 1464 male to 1902
female lunatics; thus giving 438 more patients of the latter than the former, and
thereby indicating that now, in some districts of France, at least, insanity is a more
frequent malady among women than men; the same, as I have heard, prevails
throughout the whole country, as it is likewise in England; particularly amongst the
metropolitan population. Various reasons are usually assigned for this decidedly
greater liability of females than males to mental disease; but into that interesting
question I will not enter farther, as it would be rather out of place to discuss such a sub-
ject at present; my chief object being to point out, rather than to explain, the above
well-established tendency of mania.

Respecting the amount of mechanical restraint actually noticed in the different
asylums, at the period of my visit during last August and September, the figures I have
given in the table will, doubtless, attract much attention. Taken collectively, the
numbers show, that forty-four male lunatics, out of 1464 then resident, were in
camisole, some being also otherwise restrained; thereby giving one individual in re-
straint to every 33j male inmates; or three per hundred. Amongst the female lunatics,
again, the proportion was somewhat larger; seventy-two persons of that sex, out of the
total 1902 resident patients, being under mechanical coercion; thus making one female
in restraint to every 26i inmates; or at the rate of 3.78 per hundred. In contrast with
this report respecting the above-named French provincial asylums, I would now place an
?official statement of the practice pursued at Betlilem hospital, during the same period.
At this establishment, where formerly the strait-waistcoat, with various kinds of personal
coercion, were in even greater use, than on the other side of the English channel, not
one insane patient, amongst ail average population of 391 lunatics, was under con-
straint of any description, during the five weeks ending the 20th of last September
?when I first revisited that institution, after my return from the continent, and which
embraced the whole time referred to in this narrative.

Whilst describing some of the French lunatic institutions noticed iu previous
pages, allusion was made more than once to the deficient supply of water. This con-
stitutes a serious evil in every public establishment, but especially in an asylum
for lunatics, and contributes very materially to the production of sickness amongst the
patients. Wherever a constant and abundant supply of good water exists, to carry
away all refuse, and to promote personal cleanliness, as also for culinary or other
purposes, then fevers and most zymotic diseases are much less likely to prevail, even
when rife in the adjoining neighbourhood. Of course, other causes must not be
overlooked, as they likewise exert great influence. Still, an abundant supply of water
is essential; wherever large assemblages of human beings are congregated together,
whether mentally sane or otherwise. This truth was remarkably illustrated at Betli-
lem hospital in the autumn of 1849 ; when cholera proved epidemic, and was very fatal iu
the immediate vicinity of that institution. In this large charity, not a single inmate was
attacked by cholera, notwithstanding the hundreds, nay, even thousands, who became
victims to that epidemic malady, within even a short distance of the building. When
alluding to this remarkable exemption of Bethlem hospital from cholera, during the
recent outbreak, and at the very time it proved so fatal in some French asylums for the
insane, I stated in another publication, as an explanation of this phenomena, that here
" there is a most abundant supply of pure water throughout the whole establishment,
alike for baths, washing, and cooking. So copious, indeed, is the quantity, that in
every water-closet, in consequence of a spring being attached to each door, whenever
any person enters, the movement thus made simultaneously opens a valve; connected
with a cistern, from which a torrent of water rushes into the seat; and this operation
is repeated, when the patient retires. Further, through all the drains, water runs con-
stantly ; chloride of lime is also daily and freely used; and as every drain has been
properly trapped, no odour ever prevails. A very deep artesian well?reaching to
below the chalk?supplies the water required in the establishment; which a steam-
engine pumps, at the rate of seventy gallons per minute, into the numerous reservoirs
on the roof of the building, which are frequently cleansed, in order that the water may
not be contaminated; hence, there is never any deficiency of this element, most essen-
tial in all institutions, but especially in asylums for the insane." The French physi-
cians are fully aware of the vital importance of having an abundant supply of water in
every public institution ; and, to prove the existence of this feeling, I might again allude
to the proposed erection of a steam-engine by Dr Le Vincent, to pump water from the
Loire, for the institution of St. Gemmes ; as also to a similar proposal now in con-
templation for the asylum at Blois, where a more copious supply is likewise much
wanted.

Of late years, great progress has been made in France, respecting the nature,
pathology, and medical treatment of mental diseases ; whilst throughout Europe, few
psychological physicians have done more in this important department of medical
science, than several of the distinguished practitioners now attached to the lunatic
establishments of the former country. To prove this assertion, it may be stated, that
as all bodies are examined after death, in the public lunatic asylums of France, the
opportunities for studying the pathology of mental diseases are consequently ample;
of which the medical officers take every advantage, and also register the morbid appear-
ances noticed on dissection.

In reference to another point, it ought, however, to be stated, although the physicians
present regular reports of all proceedings in their respective asylums, to the higher
official and administrative authorities, which contain very frequently much valuable
information, with statistical details, and other data; these reports are, nevertheless,
often lost to the profession, seeing they seldom appear in print, as in this country;
but become buried, like many other public papers, in the archives of the Prefectures, the
minister's bureau, or consigned to unmerited oblivion in some similar receptacle.
Knowing the value of such useful documents in England, I think the Councils-General
of departments in France should follow the system here adopted, as well as in America!
knowing well, if the physicians of every French asylum for the insane published
annually a detailed report of proceedings, the amount of highly useful and practical
information thus supplied to the profession, would be very considerable. The instruc-
tive papers of this description, which MM. Parcliappe, Bouchet, Aubanel, Billod,
Morel, Giraud, Benaudin, and other experienced practitioners have given to the medical
profession, conclusively indicate how much might be thus accomplished. The central
government, -with such excellent examples for tlieir guidance, onglit to sanction, if tliey
id absolutely require, for publication, a detailed official statement from every
public and departmental asylum, throughout their entire jurisdiction.

Before taking leave of the medical officers of institutions for the insane in France,
?f whose zeal, ability, and devotion to the humane cause they have undertaken, it
Would be both easy and gratifying to speak at greater length; I must say unequivo-
cally, the remuneration received is often too small, and by no means adequate to the
?labour performed, or the position they as physicians hold in society. Being in most
cases debarred from engaging in private practice, the sole professional support these
gentlemen have is their annual salary, and an official residence. Undoubtedly, in
-Paris, Rouen, and in some other cities, the physicians of public lunatic asylums are
not always prevented from giving their medical services, and part of their time, to the
public; which, of course often makes a great difference; still to pay some of the dis-
tinguished men I could name, but refrain out of delicacy to their feelings, with only
3000 or even 2400 francs per annum, is very illiberal, and by no means, sufficient re-
muneration; especially, where private paying patients are received into the asylum, of
whom none could ever be attended before or afterwards, by the then resident physicians..
Either the salaries now paid ought to be increased both at first, and afterwards, ac-
cording to length of services; or private practice uniformly permitted, when not inter-
fering with their official duties, which, of course, must always be duly performed. "Wher-
ever bad regulations prevail, they should be reformed; but if laws are good in Paris,
the same become equally applicable to Nantes. Again, if private practice be permit-
ted in Rouen, it cannot be wrong at Orleans. Further, Bon Sauveur with 092 insane
patients, should have at least one resident physician, with four internes; quite as
much as the neighbouring asylum of St. Yon, containing 729 inmates. Lastly, St.
Gemmes Asylum, with 340 lunatics; and especially the Orleans institution, containing
521 insane patients, instead of only one resident medical officer, without, in both cases,
even a single interne,?ought to have, if not two physicians, with two internes, cer-
tainly, three or four of the latter useful officers attached to each establishment.
In French asylums, there is I believe, no matron; or at least, no female attendant
having the attributes of that important personage in English institutions; and which
many consider an advantage in favour of our neighbours. A superior " sceur reli-
gieuse" possessing power over the other female attendants, is, however, not uncom-
mon; whilst in the laundry, and other departments, there are various female officials;
hut the treatment and general management if the patients, whether on the male or
female division, rests solely with the physician. In this respect, I consider the system
pursued in the new French institutions well worthy of imitation, on the English side
of the channel; where the matron sometimes becomes too important, from not being
sufficiently under medical control, according to the opinion of many persons, well
qualified to decide the point, from their own experience.

On the other hand, each departmental asylum has a director, who is a most important
personage; being the chief superintendent of everything appertaining to the lay ad-
ministration of the establishment. In some instances, the resident physician is
likewise director; but in many asylums, the offices are entirely separate; which
arrangement, to my mind, appears altogether the most eligible, as the attributes of
hoth are incompatible, particularly in a large establishment. Under such circum-
stances, it must be allowed, that a physician whose mind is frequently engaged in finan-
cial questions, or if harassed by extensive commissariat duties, will not be able to
find much leisure time for study and science. In an asylum, having a very limited
Dumber of inmates, the duties being in that case of a restricted description, the
junction of the two offices-may be permitted: and as such an arrangement will
augment the remuneration of the physician, generally so underpaid, it has that advantage,
Without being then likely to prove injurious to the patients.

Believing it will be interesting to some English readers, to obtain a few general facts
respecting the extent of accommodation at present available for the treatment of luna-
tics, belonging to the various departments of France; 1 would remark, that the insti-
tutions for insane patients, whether departmental, or those only forming a division of
a general hospice, and lastly, those private establishments which now receive indigent
patients, by arrangement with particular departments, recently amounted to 67; and
?were thus classed. The departmental asylums similar to Le Mans are 37; those
forming only one division of a general hospice, as at Nantes, are eighteen in number;
"whilst twelve private establishments, like Bon Sauveur, now receive insane patients,
by pecuniary agreement with neighbouring departments. Besides the above sixty-
seven establishments for lunatics, there are also the three great public institutions of
Paris; namely, Bicetre, La Salpetriere, and Charenton; thus making seventy asy-
lums for the insane, throughout France, which are now placed more or less under the
surveillance of government.

As might be expected, the total amount of lunatics in the above institutions is very
large; the number being, according to the most accurate accounts I have been able to
obtain, about 22,400 ; the majority.'of which are females. Besides the aggregate num-
ber now mentioned, the inmates of various private lunatic asylums throughout the
country must be also taken into account, before we can correctly estimate the prevalence
of insanity in France; which, although not so common a disease as in England,
in regard to the population, is nevertheless very considerable; especially in the French
metropolis. This is shown by the total admissions of insane patients during 1849, at
Bicetre, Charenton, and La Salpetriere, which are reported to have been 1421 cases,
taken collectively; the sexes being nearly equally divided. Again, in regard to recoveries,
4=74 patients were discharged cured from the above named three institutions, during that
year, 235 being men, and 239 women; whilst the total deaths amounted to 949 indivi-
duals, comprising 334 male and 015 female lunatics. It should however be remembered,
that this very large mortality amongst the insane women arose especially from cholera,
which then prevailed at the Salpetriere like a pestilence; 599 persons having died in
this institution during 1849, by that epidemic.

Another feature in the movement of patients under treatment at these establishments
should be likewise noticed; viz., the uumber of lunatics reported to have escaped from
Bicetre, Charenton, and La Salpetriere during last year, which actually amounted to
35 individuals; 23 being men, and 12 women. In contrast with the above official
statement of escapes effected from the three public lunatic asylums of Paris, it may be
interesting to state, that from Bethlem hospital, during 30 years ending the 31st of
last December, although C952 curable insane patients had been admitted into the insti-
tution?consisting of 2781 men, and 4171 women, only twenty-three lunatics have
?escaped from the hospital, 15 being male, and eight female patients; most of whom,
or twenty individuals, were however speedily brought back to the institution. It is also
curious, if not instructive, to remark, that both in Paris, and at Bethlem, the number
of male patients who effected their escape, was greater than the female; the proportion
being two men to one woman in either instance.

Formerly, when restraint was much more frequently employed in the ordinary
treatment of lunatics, than recently, escapes were then by no means uncommon.
Indeed, the stricter insane patients were confined, and the oftener mechanical coercion,
was employed, escapes then became more numerous. For instance, during twenty
years, ending the 31st December, 1709, when the strait-waistcoat, straw, and even
chains were but too commonly the lot of unfortunate lunatics in this, as in nearly
every asylum; it appears, amongst 3029 patients admitted into Bethlem hospital, fifty-
five individuals escaped, forty-four being men, and only eleven women; thus giving
one escape in every sixty-six admissions. More recently, and particularly when
restraint of any kind is now very rarely employed, and the strait-waistcoat is unknown,
escapes from the above institution have become of very rare occurrence. Thus, during
thirty years, ending the 31st of December, 1849, although 0952 unable insane patients
have been admitted, the whole of whom were recent cases, only twenty-two persons es-
caped, fifteen being male, and seven female lunatics; thereby making one evasion in every
310 admissions. If calculatedin reference to sexes, the results then become very different;
the escapes amongst male lunatics being actually one in every 185 of that sex admitted;
whereas, it is only one in every 595 insane women; and if viewed comparatively, the
proportion thus seems threefold greater, amongst male than female lunatics.
In my opinion, based upon these and other conclusive data, the more insane per-
sons are restrained, the oftener attempts will be made to escape from confinement in
any lunatic asylum; and I feel thoroughly convinced, were coercion less frequently
employed, than unfortunately still prevails in some parts of Europe,' escapes as
well as suicides would not be so numerous. In reference to the fact of self-destruction
being much more common amongst lunatics when mechanically restrained than under
the present very different system, I would mention, as a marked illustration of this
great truth, that in Bethlem hospital, where personal coercion by various means was
so generally employed,?namely, during the same twenty years already quoted, in re-
ference to this subject, or prior to the 1st of January, 1770, at which period escapes
Were also common; eighteen patients actually committed suicide, consisting of six
ttale and twelve female lunatics, wliicli makes one case of self-destruction in every
-^2 admissions. Now, however, (and such a fact should be always remembered,) when
e strait-waistcoat is unknown, and mechanical restraint of any description very
rarely used, suicides, like escapes, have become much more infrequent. In proof of this
?pinion I may state, that during the last thirty years, notwithstanding mechanical
coercion was more employed at the beginning of that period than towards its close,
exactly eight suicides, of whom two were men and six were women, have been re-
corded amongst the whole 0952 curable insane patients under treatment in the hos-
pital; being thus one case in every 809 admissions.

When noticing the peculiar feature exhibited at Bethlem, as also at the three Parisian
Public lunatic asylums, of male patients having much oftener effected their escape than
females, it should be, on the other hand, remarked, that both recently, as also about
'he middle of last century, a greater number of women committed suicide at Bethlem
hospital than insane men; which propensity may be in part explained by the ascer-
tained frequency of suicidal mania in the female oftener than in the male sex?the more
acute feelings of the former, and their less self-command over actions which men
seem in a higher degree able to control. Again, women being more domestic in their
habits and conduct, feel less disposition to escape from their actual place of residence;
whilst men, being comparatively more accustomed to change of place, to varied and active
employments, and to be also much out of doors when in health, have become reconciled
With greater difficulty to confinement in an asylum than women. However difficult it
^ay be to explaiu such peculiarities in the two sexes, the facts now stated respecting
the diversified disposition to escape and to suicide noticed in each sex appear, never-
theless, important; especially as they conclusively demonstrate, that the more frequently
personal coercion of lunatics is employed, independent of many other evil consequences,
So will casualties of the above description more likely supervene.
Notwithstanding it would prove both interesting and instructive to discuss the medical
treatment usually pursued by physicians in the lunatic asylums of France, the length
to which this paper has already extended prevents my now enlarging upon such an im-
portant topic, especially as some readers might consider it unnecessary. Nevertheless,
1 would briefly remark, that in addition to occupying and amusing the patients, great
Utility is attached in every institution to frequent baths, where the apparatus for
hathing is always considerable?as at St. Yon, for instance, in which the bath-house is
well worth examination. The douche does not appear to be so much employed as
formerly at least judging from my own previous observation; and it is only now used
by way of punishment. The cold'affusion seems, however, to be frequently prescribed
in many of the French asylums. Hence, in refractory patients, who refuse to work
when occupation is considered advisable by the physician, this form of bath proves
frequently beneficial; and in many cases, where such cold affusion is employed, the
patients are soon induced to commence the work they had previously refused to under-
take; whereupon the medical attendant immediately stops any further affusion of cold
Water, as it is almost always found, that individuals so treated then keep their promise
to resume employment. An instance of the kind, amongst others, may be here men-
tioned, since it shows the efficacy of a cold affusion-bath in refractory cases of insanity.
Que of the female inmates at St. Meen's Asylum having refused to continue some
Work, upon which she had been engaged the day previous, was ordered by her medical
attendant to have the cold affusion. This remedy was accordingly applied in our
Presence, at the termination of the morning visit; as the order could only be executed,
when the physician or an interne was actually present to watch the effect, and to stop
any unnecessary application. Whilst the second bucket was being poured over this
poor maniac's head?her body being then immersed in an ordinary bath,but so secured,
that she could not escape the stream, or do any injury to herself, either with hands or
limbs, she immediately called out, " Grace, monsieur?-je travaillerai." The further
affusion of cold water was instantly interrupted, a few kind words were spoken to her
hv the interne by way of encouragement, and she was ordered back to the workroom.
Subsequently, that gentleman remarked to me, that he confidently expected this patient
Would again return to her work as readily as three months before, when the cold
affusion-bath was most successfully employed; since which, she had continued tranquil,
snd been diligent during the interval, until yesterday's outbreak. Other cases of a similar
character might be quoted, but I refrain, believing they would be considered
superfluous.

Influenced by the same motive, I do not intend to discuss the various remedies
usually employed in cases of mania, farther than briefly to state, that the principles
acted upon in France differ very little from those pursued by most English practitioners.
Where physical disease prevails in any lunatic, of course the symptoms must be viewed
much in the same light, as if the patient was mentally sane; with this essential caution,
however, that great prudence must be always exercised in the adoption of debilitating
treatment. Formerly, physicians, in their practice, were often disposed to consider
mental diseases to exhibit an inflammatory diathesis. Hence bleeding, lowering the
system, and depressing remedies, were much more frequently employed than at present-
Nutritious food, warm clothing, cleanliness of person, with other prophylactic and
hygienic measures, are, however, now generally considered of most essential importance,
whilst it has been remarked, at the same time, that wherever the inmates of a lunatic
asylum are under-fed, sickness and mortality will abound.

To prove that the sufficiency of food, and its good and nutritious quality, have much
influence on the health of lunatics, I might mention a remarkable illustration which
occurred at Bicetre, during the first revolution, when the constituent assembly ot
France reduced the quantity of bread distributed to the inmates, from a kilogramme
(two lbs. one-fifth oz.) to seven hectogrammes and a half (twenty-four ozs.), whereby
a great number of the old convalescents relapsed into a state of raving madness. This
system of retrenchment having been afterwards carried to a still lower grade, and even
to half a kilogramme, the consequences to the poor maniacs were most disastrous;
seeing that in two months of the fourth year of the Republic, twenty-nine deaths
occurred among the patients; whilst, in the whole of the year Two (that is, when the
allowance of bread was one kilogramme per patient), only twenty-seven deaths were
reported during the entire twelve months. These facts furnish a very instructive
lesson regarding the dietary of insane patients, and they point out the necessity of
attending to the kind and quantity of nutriment, which the inmates of lunatic asylums
ought to receive. For whatever may be the moral or remedial treatment pursued,
unless due attention is paid to such an important point as the food and regimen of
Insane patients, any plan of management, however beneficial it might otherwise prove,
will not be likely to realize the expectations of relatives, or to fulfil the wishes of a con-
scientious practitioner.

To sum up succinctly the principles a practitioner ought to follow in the management
of lunatics, I would say insane patients must be treated as much as possible like
rational beings, consistent with their own safety or that of others; and as the mind of
such persons resembles, in some degree, that of a child, kindness, with decision, regu-
lated by justice, ought to influence the actions of every attendant. No promise should
ever be made to a lunatic which is not strictly kept; the feeble intellect of the afflicted
sufferer must be always treated, as if it were a tender plant, and so kept as much as
possible devoid of every external source of excitement. Subsequently, and wherever
practicable, the patient should be employed in bodily labour; or, at least, an attempt
made to engage the remaining faculties in some amusement or intellectual occupation,
in order thereby to draw the maniac's debilitated mind from its usual morbid channels,
but especially, from those notions and objects which have contributed to produce mental
disease. Experience invariably teaches, wherever the physician is able to divert the
patient's ideas?however feeble these may appear?from previous morbid cogitations
and reminiscences, so as to fix attention upon new subjects of thought or occupation,
any plan of treatment, whether moral or medical, then considered appropriate, will
more likely prove efficacious, and so promote future convalescence.

Although the laws now in force respecting the administration of French lunatic
asylums have conferred great benefits upon the country, and much improved the con-
dition of the inmates, especially in the departmental institutions for the insane
recently constructed, still, like our own lunacy enactments, they are capable of
improvement. Into these important questions it would be rather out of place now to
enter at any length; nevertheless I cannot avoid observing, that here, as in roost
public departments of France, the central government, whilst it exercises general control
over the provincial authorities, and very properly so, in many cases has too much
power in reference to details, and in the appointment of the superior officials. Again*
the local administrations sometimes interfere with the functions of the medical officers,
more than is judicious; whilst these have not always sufficient authority over the non-
medical treatment of the patients, and over their male or female attendants. Further, the
numerous and varied duties required from the physicians are often most laborious,
and frequently seem like the work of a clerk in a banking-house or public office,
1
iather than that of a man of science, whose time and mental energies should be almost
Exclusively dedicated to the cure of disease and his medical studies, instead of to manual
labour.

lhe minister of the interior nominates the physicians to all public asylums, it
hence happens, that occasionally the local authorities are inimical to the nominee
?_f the minister, especially if be be a stranger to the department. It likewise some-
times occurs, that the members of the governing body of a provincial institution wish a
inend of their own to procure the appointment, whereby jealousy, and even dislike, is
.It towards the stranger thrust upon an unwilling council of administration. I might
g'fe instances to illustrate such consequences, hutrefrain, as personalities are objection-
able. Nevertheless, one well-known case might be now mentioned, wherein the
minister exercised his power in reference to a very distinguished individual, which
shows the way the system may be made to work?I allude to the treatment experienced
by my excellent and learned friend M.Foville. This well-known physician and eminent
Physiologist, formerly physician to Saint Yon Asylum, and latterly of Charenton, was
summarily deprived of that valuable and important appointment, about two years and
a half ago, by an ephemeral minister of the day, who had clutched the seals of office for
a time, and then used his temporary power against a long-tried public servant, that
happened to be a friend of, and hence patronized by, the Prince de Joinville.

In a provincial asylum I could name, another minister of the interior having appointed
a resident physician?a man of experience, but still a perfect stranger to the depart-
ment, instead of a local candidate, the new official, so far from meeting with cordial
support in the performance of his duties, was long looked upon with coolness, and con-
sidered an intruder; whilst his professional brethren in the locality never would
associate with the favoured protege sent from head-quarters. At Bon Sauveur, on
the other hand, neither resident physicians nor internes have been appointed, not-
withstanding the size of the asylum, and although the law of 1838 expressly says,
there ought to be at least one resident medical officer. Again, neither at Orleans nor
St. Gemmes are there any internes, who prove, everywhere, very useful officials,
^hy these discrepancies exist it is difficult to explain, nor is it within my province
to say more, than that such anomalies require amendment.

Occasionally, however, interference with the medical officers may be carried too far,
thereby the welfare of the inmates is apt to suffer, of which the following examples
may be given as illustrations. Some time ago the medical attendant of a provincial
asylum, who took much interest in the dietary of his patients, when going round the
Wards, and after tasting the soup and rice then served to a patient, one day said, in the
hearing of the attendants, that " the former was too salt, and the latter not sufficiently
boiled." This remark being reported to a local dignitary, it gave great offence, as he
thought the physician was going out of his province, and accordingly brought the affair
before the council of administration. This led to an investigation and correspondence,
Which was ultimately referred to the central government at Paris, to settle the dis-
puted jurisdiction. The other case of interference happened in my own presence, and
therefore I am able to vouch for its accuracy. When perambulating one of the provincial
asylums, along with the responsible medical officer, on entering a court-yard containing
some excited female lunatics, we were accosted by the nurse in charge of that division
m. tears, who said, that " she had been dismissed, and was then going to leave." The
nature of her fault, or who had turned her off, were alike unknown to the physician, or
^hether any successor had been in the meantime appointed to attend the patients.
There arose plenty of talk in the ward, which we ultimately left for another part of the
building. Very soon afterwards, having occasion to repass through the same court-
yard, I was surprised to see one of the patients removing the camisole from another
inmate, and that all the residents were now left to themselves, without any attendant;
as the party dismissed had actually gone away the moment our backs were turned. So
far from thinking the authority of any resident or attending responsible medical
officer should be restricted, in whatever appertains to the management and treatment
?f the inmates of a lunatic asylum, I consider his power should be almost unlimited ;
the financial and material administrative arrangements being, of course, in other hands.
In most of the newly-constructed departmental institutions the system, in this respect, is
excellent, and, as I have already said, well worthy of imitation by other establishments.
Before concluding the present narrative?now submitted to the readers of Dr Wins-
low's Psychological Journal?I should neither do justice to the many excellent profes-
sional and official persons with whom I had the good fortune to come in contact, during
my recent tour, nor even to my own individual feelings, were the civilities and kindness
which I uniformly experienced passed over in silence, and thus appear as if they were
already forgotten. On the contrary, when now taking a retrospective glance of my
proceedings, and remembering the trouble often given to physicians, officers, and others,
hv my numerous inquiries, I cannot sufficiently thank all the gentlemen, who afforded
me every facility to obtain information. To each, individually, I would again tender
my best acknowledgments for the many courtesies I received; but especially to
MM. Levincent and Chambeyron, of whom I shall always retain the most agreeable
recollections. To my distinguished friend M. Parchappe?one of the inspectors-
general of lunatic establishments in France?I am even more particularly under obli-
gations, as it was through his instrumentality, by kindly furnishing me with a general
letter of introduction to the physicians and directors of every asylum I might choose
to visit, that the advantages alluded to above were so readily procured. Should any of
the criticisms made in reference to some of the institutions described in my Notes
seem somewhat severe, the blame does not, in justice, rest with the medical officers
mentioned; on the contrary, by these gentlemen many of the great improvements
recently accomplished were proposed, besides those still in progress. Nay, I would
again repeat, were every establishment more under the immediate control of the
responsible medical attendant?were these officers more numerous, better paid, and all
liad internes, then truly some of the remarks contained in previous pages would never
have been uttered; or, if expressed, could have rested upon no foundation.

The patience of most readers of these desultory Notes of my recent visit to several
provincial asylums in France being, perhaps, already exhausted, I will now bring the
present rather lengthened communication to a close, by digressing from professional
questions, to notice one or two subjects of general interest to most travellers. The
first relates to passports?that necessary, yet very great nuisance to every Englishman
going abroad. And although much has been recently said upon this matter, in one
cespect the system is even worse than previously, as 1 can state from personal expe-
rience. Thus, during all the former journeys I have made to France?and they are
numerous?whether under the elder Bourbons, the Citizen King, or even the new
Republic, until the present season my passports were always delivered gratis by the
French authorities in London. This year, however, before that still indispensable
document could be obtained,Jive shillings were demanded, and paid to the official, who
said, " Such was the law and custom." That, no doubt, might be so ; but the alter-
ation indicated neither liberality nor reform, about which, of late, there has been fre-
quently much conversation. In financial respects, certainly, the change is advantageous;
and as the number of my recent passport was 3,227, thus upwards of 830Z. had been
already received for permissions to travel in France, thereby making a considerable
item for papers which were formerly given gratuitously. This tax, with other causes,
have, however, materially diminished the crowd of English tourists; as shown by the
fact, that in the same season, and exactly at four days' earlier date, in 1847, during
Louis Philippe's reign, when I also visited Paris, the figures written on my French
ambassadorial passport are 7098 ; or actually more than double the issues during the
current year. These apparently unimportant statistical data, however, merit notice;
and although neither medical nor scientific, I have been induced now to mention
them, as apt illustrations of recent political changes, and their consequences.
But to prove still further, that English travellers are much less frequently met with
in some parts of France than formerly, another circumstance may be also stated, which
appeared at the time, as now, rather remarkable, and constitutes important additional
evidence in support of such an opinion ; whilst it also seems an appropriate con-
cluding paragraph to the present report of my recent excursion. The occurrence
referred to is now related more willingly, seeing the observation differs from that often
made by persons visiting France, at the usual touring season, and maybe thus described:
?From the period of leaving the sea coast, and during the whole of my wanderings in
Normandy, Brittany, on the banks of the Loire, and through several' neighbouring
departments, which extended to nearly eight hundred miles, and occupied some time,
I never met a countryman, spoke a word of English, or saw amj British newspaper,
notwithstanding the whole journey was made by railway, in steam-boats, or the ordi-
nary conveyances; whilst I often frequented cafes, tables-d'hote, with other usual
places of public resort, and was always on the move, or in society. Besides these
opportunities of meeting strangers, I also visited the crowded exchange of Nantes, at
the hour when merchants, besides men of many nations, do congregate, and likewise
passed a day at Blois, formerly a favourite residence for self-expatriated and renegade
Britons, whose object often was, rather to enjoy cheap luxurious living, than to advance
the interests of tbeir native land; although from thence, in the aggregate, they derived
a. large revenue, to be thus expended in a foreign country. Notwithstanding all this,
until my arrival in Paris, subsequent to the visit I have recorded in these pages, the
above rather singular, but, on my part, involuntary, proceedings continued without
interruption. However, when returning from Notre Dame Cathedral, having met an
eminent London physician, a friend and near neighbour, who had, like myself, come to
Pass his holidays on the soil of " La Belle France," the spell which hitherto, figuratively
speaking, seemed to hover round all my varied movements, and even to influence
external events, was at last broken, whereby I now resumed my native language, and
"with that event again became an Englishman.
