Remarks Upon the Morbid Anatomy of the Brain in Insanity
=========================================================

2-30 REMARKS UPON THE MORBID ANATOMY

BY HOLMES COOTE, F. E. COLL. SUEG. ENGLAND, DEMONSTEATOE OF ANATOMY
AT SAINT BAETHOLOMEW's HOSPITAL.
In the examination of tliebodies of thosewho die insane, we find the morbid
appearances most frequent and most strongly marked upon the surface of
the cerebral hemispheres; in those structures where the bloodvessels arrange
themselves in a closely woven net-work before penetrating the cerebral
substance. There is no contrast more marked than that between the
thin, delicate, and transparent membranes covering the perfectly healthy
brain, and the thickened and opaque arachnoid, and the infiltrated pia
mater, which invest the convolutions of the hemispheres of one, whose
cerebral circulation has long been disturbed and excited. But then, con-
sidering that no such morbid appearances are found in the bodies of some,
who, as in the instance of puerperal maniacs, die sometimes shortly after
the manifestation of the malady, we must, I think, conclude that such
.changes of structure are rather to be regarded as the effect of excited cir-
culation, dependent upon, or co-existent with insanity, than as the cause of
the disease itself. For an account of the conditions of the membranes of
the brain, I refer to a preceding report.
The lateral and the third ventricles lined by a ciliated membrane dif-
ferent from the arachnoid, and containing upon their floor the choroid
plexuses, wliich are derived from the vessels of the pia mater, do not com-
municate in the adult brain with the general serous cavity by the fissure of
Bichat. The communication which existed in foetal life is closed, hence we
must not expect to find the morbid appearances of the surface repeated in
the interior of the brain. Such an occurrence may be remarked in instances
of acute inflammation of the pia mater, but not as a rule in the more
ordinary and chronic forms of meningitis. In the following case, pus was
found both on the surface of the convolutions and in the ventricles.
Case I.?Elizabeth E., examined March 22, 1849. Over the entire
surface of both cerebrum and cerebellum, the pia mater was infiltrated by
yellowish green purulent fluid, which accurately followed the convolutions
of the brain The ventricles contained about three ounces of
turbid yellow purulent fluid; the same morbid appearances were noticed
upon the surface of the spinal chord.
The following is an instance of thickening and opacity of the arachnoid
over the whole cerebral surface; the lining membrane of the ventricles
retaining its natural transparency: the slight increase of limpid fluid in the
interior being derived from the vessels of the pia mater.
Case II.?William S., examined January 8, 1845. The bloodvessels
of the cranium, the membranes and the brain were very turgid, the latter
particularly so, the medullary substance being full of bloody points,
wherever it was cut into. The arachnoid was thickened and opaque, espe-
cially along the sides of the great fissure of the cerebrum. It was slightly
milky over the whole hemispheres. There was considerable infiltration of
the pia mater, and some increase of fluid in the ventricles. The structure
and firmness of the brain were natural.
There were some partial adhesions of both lungs, of old standing; strong
and close adhesions of the pericardium; the right kidney shrunk to one-
third of its natural size; slight diminution of the left.
Were all necroscopical researches recorded after the fashion of Dr.
Greding, we might be disposed to think with Pinel, that it is hopeless to
OF THE BRAIN IN INSANITY. 237
expect, by such, observations, to elucidate the pathology of mental derange-
ments. When we read that out of a hundred cases, the lateral ventricles were
very full of serum in twenty-nine cases ; ready to burst in twenty-three ;
astonishingly distended in ten; the third ventricle quite full in fifty-seven
maniacs, and in sixteen of twenty-four melancholies, we are led to ask,,
"was the communication between the ventricles closed in those cases that
distention of only one cavity was observed ? If such were the case, it is
a phenomenon worth recording, and the particulars should be carefully
stated; for, as a rule, we observe that with the distention of the lateral
ventricles, the foramina of Monro leading to the third ventricle have been
enlarged by the separation of the optic thalami from the fornix. We find
in the same report, " Fourth ventricle ready to burst in eighty out of a hun-
dred maniacs ; quite empty in only three ; completely distended in every
one of twenty-four melancholies. Now, the fourth ventricle is the space
between the under surface of the cerebellum and the upper surface of the
spinal chord. It communicates anteriorly with the third ventricle by a
narrow canal, and posteriorly it is shut up by the arachnoid membrane
and pia mater, which are loosely reflected from the chord. What structure
"Was ready to burst ? As the membranes would readily separate from the
parts which they cover to allow of any amount of effusion ; and as it is clear
the anterior boundary, in which the iter e tertio ad quartum ventriculum
opens, is incapable of giving way, it follows that the danger of bursting
must refer to some part of the cerebellum or medulla oblongata. Such
an observation involves a jprima facie absurdity. Again, in the three in-
stances in which the ventricle is pronounced empty, it is but reasonable-
to infer that the fluid, small in quantity, as is usually the case, had run out
during the examination. In speaking of distention of the lateral ventricles,
it is always implied that the walls of the third and of the fourth ventricles
have been exposed to a similar change; I never have seen a case in which
fulness of the third or fourth ventricle could be recorded as a special
observation. The fluid in the ventricles, consisting of water with a small
proportion of albumen, is not uncommonly poured forth in large quantity,
when, in combination with the effusion of fluid on the surface of the
brain, it produces an amount of pressure sufficient to cause death. In-
stances of serous apoplexy are not very uncommon in Bethlehem Hospital;,
sanguineous apoplexy is rare.
In serous apoplexy, the arachnoid sac usually contains no fluid: there is
a variable amount of fluid in the pia mater; the convolutions of the brain
are flat and compressed, and the whole organ seems too large for the cavity
of the skull.
The following case illustrates the appearances after death :?
Case III.?Maria W. S., aged 3G, admitted into the curable establish-
ment March 31, 1846; died Feb. 9, 1850. The skull-cap was heavy, and
the cancellous texture was obliterated ; the inner surface was rough, pre-
senting prominences which, projecting into the cranial cavity, pressed
against the dura mater, which was rendered thin and transparent, and
against the upper and front part of the cerebral hemispheres, which were
flattened. Upon the removal of the skull-cap, the brain bulged over the
sawn edges of the bone, as if liberated from pressure. The cerebral sub-
stance was white and soft; the ventricles were enormously distended,
and contained full four ounces of clear watery fluid. There was a large
quantity of fluid at the base of the skull. There were traces of old tuber-
culous disease in the chest, and there were numerous tuberculous ulcers
along the course of the intestinal canal. _ . .
In the greater number of the cases, the amount of fluid in the ventricles
"varies from an ounce and a half to three ounces. The normal quantity may,.
288 REMARKS UPON THE MORBID ANATOMY
perhaps, be estimated at two or three drachms. In a report furnished by
Dr. Webster to the Transactions of the Medical and Chirurgical Society,
it is stated that, out of seventy-two examinations conducted by Mr. Law-
rence, in Bethlehem Hospital, an increase of fluid in the ventricles was
noticed forty-one times.
And yet this serous effusion cannot be regarded as essentially connected
with insanity; for the same morbid appearances, to an equal extent, are
seen in those who retain their faculties to the last, and describe, in graphic
language, the sensations which they experience from this internal
pressure.
Case IV.?A beadle in a public institution, who, after living an intem-
perate life, became the subject of gout and disease of the heart; suffered,
for three or four years before his death, extreme distress from weight of
the head, pain about the temples, and dizziness upon making any exertion.
Upon several occasions, the sudden sound of a street-door knock, or a
sharp ring of a bell, would cause him to fall down senseless. He walked
about with the air of one labouring under some affection of the brain, the
head being kept motionless, turning with the whole trunk; as if he feared
even to rotate his face from side to side. Although blood was frequently
and freely abstracted upon any exacerbation of the symptoms, the
relief thus afforded was but partial and temporary. One morning, after
having passed two or three days of more than usual distress, but with his in-
tellect as usual, and in the ordinary discharge of his duties, he fell from his
chair senseless. The breathing soon became stertorous, the mouthwas drawn
to one side, and he died with the usual symptoms of an apoplectic stroke.
Upon examination of the body it was found that the dura mater adhered
firmly to the skull-cap: there was rather slight thickening and opacity of the
arachnoid, along the course of the superior longitudinal fissure. The pia
mater was infiltrated to some extent by serum, but the cerebral convolu-
tions were closely packed together and flattened. The ventricles contained
about three ounces of limpid fluid. In the right hippo eampal, or middle
lobe of the brain, there was a soft dark clot of recently extravasated blood;
the cerebral substance around was broken, soft, and discoloured; and the
fluid on the descending corner of the right lateral ventricle (which was
entire) was slightly tinged with blood.
There was hypertrophy of the left ventricle of the heart.
In sanguineous apoplexy, an accident generally connected with hyper-
trophy of the left ventricle of the heart, the extravasation, as in the case
just related, takes place, (as far as the evidence goes from the examination
of the bodies in Bethlehem Hospital,) in the cerebral substance, and not
in the cavity of the ventricles. If in the immediate proximity of the ven-
tricle, the blood stains the fluid contained in the interior of a light pink,
of pale straw, or of deep reddish brown hue; the sides of the cavity-
may be so pressed together, and the apoplectic cell have so well defined a
boundary, that a mistake as to the true situation of the extravasation may
readily occur, if the examination be hastily conducted.
It has not hitherto occurred to me to witness distention of any of the
ventricles with blood, in a case of pure sanguineous apoplexy, although,
for a considerable time, I have made post mortem examination for the pur-
pose of investigating the point.
The following case illustrates well the morbid appearances:?
Case V.?James A. B., aged 45, admitted into the Incurable Establish-
ment, January 11th, 1839; died, February 18th, 1849.
The external vessels of the head were empty. After the skull-cap had
been removed, the dura mater was tense; and on division of that mem-
brane, the brain bulged a little over the edges of the bone, as if it had
OF THE BRAIN IN INSANITY. 239
teen previously compressed. The surfaces of the arachnoid membrane
Were comparatively free from moisture, and the convolutions of the cere-
brum were partially flattened. In the substance of the left hemisphere
there was a lacerated cavity, with broken and irregular surface, contain-
ing at least three ounces of coagulated blood. The cavity was principally
ln the middle lobe, but it extended into the anterior and the posterior
lobes. It came close to the exterior wall of the ventricle, in which no
breach of surface could be detected, although the fluid in the cavity was
deeply tinged with blood, whilst that in the right ventricle was similarly
tinged in a less degree. The upper surface of this cavity was on a level
?with the roof of the ventricle. The cavity contained a firm recent black
coagulum, with thickish fluid blood of the same colour. The substance of
the brain was tinged of a reddish-brown hue, to the extent of half-an-inch
or three-quarters all round, the colour being deep close to the excavation;
and gradually shaded off for another half-inch, the medullary substance
?was of a light yellow colour. The consistence of the discoloured portion
did not differ much from that of healthy cerebral substance. The brain,
other respects, and the arterial trunks at the base, with their ramifica-
tions, were quite healthy.
_ Slight effusion of fibrine on the lower edge of the upper lobe of the
right lung, and incipient consolidation of the neighbouring pulmonary
substance. These changes were of very small extent. General old adhe-
sions of the left lung, which was quite healthy in other respects.
Concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle, of which the muscular
substance was compact and firm.
The abdominal viscera were healthy.
It is affirmed by Dr. (rreding, that the " Plexus choroides was seen in
a perfectly healthy state in only 16 out of 216 cases which he had the
opportunity of examining." That statement is completely at variance with
toy observations. If the brain is bloodless, the plexus choroides is pale;
if the cerebral vessels, and the vessels of the pia mater are full, it may be
congested and of red colour; but I cannot recal a single instance in which
it could be pronounced diseased, unless, indeed, those cases be selected in
^'hidi small watery cysts are found amongst the veins of which it is
chiefly composed.*" But these cysts are just as frequently met with in
the bodies of those who die in other institutions and from other diseases;
and they cannot even be said to be in any way connected with or depen-
dent upon that morbid condition of the cerebral circulation, of which
traces are so commonly met with in the cranium of the insane. The
yesicular or cortical substance of the convolutions presents in some rare
instances of intense congestion a light pinkish grey colour, perceptible
more especially at the junction of the white and grey matter. In the
cases of chronic congestion it occasionally becomes so adherent to the pia
mater, that upon the separation of that membrane, portions of it remain
attached to its cerebral surface, and the part of the brain, which is ex-
posed, has a rough and broken appearance.
M. Foville asserts that, "in the most acute cases the surface of the
9?rtical substance presents, on the removal of the membranes, a most
intense redness approaching to that of erysipelas." It appears to me that
the language here employed conveys an idea of redness so far beyond that
amount which has ever been observed in this country, that it should be
received with considerable hesitation. The usual grey colour of the con-
* For the mode of development of cysts from veins, I refer to a Clinical Lecture
delivered by Mr. Lawrence, in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, and reported in the " Medi-
cal Times," Nov. 31), IS50.
240 REMARKS UPON THE MORBID ANATOMY
volutions is rarely if ever materially changed; and certainly an approach
to tlie pink colour of erysipelas would be a phenomenon.
We hear much of a morbid condition in the consistence of the brain: that
it is either harder or softer than natural; and the minute changes have been
described upon which such conditions depend. M. Calmeil speaks of the
grey substance contiguous to the pia mater being softened, and having the
consistence of the pulp of a rotten apple. " This ramollissement extends
to the depth of a quarter or half a line. We conclude," adds M. Calmeil,
"that the want of cohesion in the grey matter is the result of inflamma-
tion." To phlegmasia, under different circumstances, and in a different
modification, he likewise ascribes the hardening of the convolutions
observed in some rare instances of the disease. I trust to be pardoned
remarking, that in the records of necroscopical researches there has been
very great looseness in the employment of the terms "hardening and
softening." Before we have any right to assume that alterations in the
consistence of the brain, as commonly witnessed, unconnected with dis-
organization of the tissues, and not extreme in degree, should be recorded
amongst the morbid appearances, there should be taken into consideration,
the patient's condition during life, and the state of the blood; the age;
the mode of death; the period which elapses before the post mortem
examination; the time of year; the condition of the atmosphere; and the
place where the body has been kept. According to the records of Beth-
lehem Hospital morbid hardening and softening of the cerebral substance
are extremely uncommon appearances ; for I presume that the superficial
softening, one line in thickness, mentioned by M. Calmeil, easy to be
found if sought for, would not, in the present state of knowledge upon the
subject, find a ready access to our works on morbid anatomy. Mr. Law-
rence has described the following instance of " hardening of the brain," in
the list of cases from which the remarks contained in this report are
drawn.
Cranium considerably below average adult size; bone thicker than
usual, so that the skull-cap was very heavy. Cerebrum proportionately
small, but cerebellum not at all below its usual dimensions. Anterior
cerebral lobes particularly small, and convolutions very narrow. Cerebral
substance so firm as to resemble a brain hardened by alcohol or strong
acid. Lateral ventricles enlarged; each contained about two ounces of
clear colourless fluid. Septum lucidum extremely thin, and torn towards
its front part. Substance of the brain above the ventricle not thicker
than the third of an inch.
Softening of the cerebral substance may result from more causes than
one. It is stated to ensue from chronic inflammation: we more frequently
meet with it as a consequence of laceration of the brain by extravasation
of blood; or by a sudden effusion of serum into the ventricles. Of the
former, some cases have already been related. The following is an instance
of the latter:?
Case VI.?Alexander M , examined Jan. 20, 1848. General, but
not great emaciation. The external vessels of the head completely empty;
those of the membranes and brain turgid. The dura mater and the cere-
bral hemispheres were in the closest contact; the convolutions of the
latter completely flattened. The lateral ventricles greatly enlarged and
distended by a slightly turbid fluid, estimated at three ounces in each
cavity.
The posterior portion of the fornix, in the extent of about an inch, was
irregularly torn, but not completely through, the edges presenting torn
shreds floating in the fluid, and all the appearances of recent laceration.
Although this might possibly have occurred in the examination, there was
OF THE BRAIN IN INSANITY. 241
little doubt that it had taken place before death, as a consequence of that
sudden effusion into the ventricles which had subjected the whole cranial
contents to pressure, and thus caused the flattening of the convolutions,
the latter appearance being as strongly marked as in sanguineous apoplexy.
-There was extensive tuberculous deposit in the viscera, both of the thorax
and abdomen. The lungs were studded with tubercles, of which some had
softened into cavities. The peritoneum presented a tuberculated appear-
ance throughout; near to the liver there were some accumulations equal
m size to walnuts, and masses of this apparently inorganic deposit caused
general accretion of the opposed surfaces of the diaphragm, liver, stomach,
duodenum, pancreas, and colon.
It is not in all instances possible to determine after death the cause of
" softening." In the record, the doubt, if it exists, should in each case be
expressed.
A young lady, aged 19, became deranged in consequence of family dis-
tresses, by which her parents were reduced from affluence to comparative
poverty. She died, after having passed through a short period of silent
despondency. The body was examined December 13th, 1847. The external
Vessels of the head were completely empty; the internal, on the contrary,
"with those of the brain and of its membranes, were in the highest state of
congestion. The adhesion of the dura mater to the skull was particularly
strong. The vessels of the dura mater, pia mater, and cerebral substance,
"Were injected, to their minutest ramifications, with blood. A few drachms
?f watery fluid, slightly tinged with blood, ran out of the arachnoid cavity
on cutting round the dura mater.
The pia mater was greatly infiltrated throughout; there were a few drachms
?f fluid in the lateral ventricles, and much fluid remained in the base oftho
skull after the brain had been removed.
The substance both of the cerebrum and cerebellum was particularly
soft throughout. (Whether this softness was sufficient to constitute a
pathological condition, might be doubted.)
There was a firm old adhesion, of limited extent, at the upper and back
part of the right lung; the substance of the viscus was particularly hard
for a space not exceeding the diameter of a shilling, and contained a little
knot of dry, hard, whitish substance, apparently earthy. The contents of
the thorax, in other respects, and those of the abdomen, were healthy.
It is not common to find the brain in just that condition which we
should pronounce healthy, although such is sometimes the case. The
"Vessels are generally preternaturally full, or so empty that the brain is
described as bloodless. Softening sometimes occurs in patches on the
surface of the brain, from limited extravasations of blood. The following
18 a good instance of the kind: ?
I was requested, in the spring of 1849, by Mr. Newton, of Howland-
street, to examine the body of an old lady who died deranged. She had
been very violent at different periods of her disease, but for some time
before death she had become bedridden, and almost paralyzed. The skull-
cap was heavy, and the dura mater adhered firmly to the cranium; the
arachnoid surface was lined by a thick layer of organized lymph, which
formed a continuous adventitious membrane, down to the margin of the
1 Oram en magnum. There were three spots of softened and disorganized
cerebral substance upon the surface of the right hemisphere. Two were
the size of walnuts, one the size of a pea. The nerve-tubes were broken
and mixed with a quantity of extravasated blood-discs, nerve-cells,
granular matter, and portions of capillary vessels. There was a similar
?Pot upon the upper surface of the middle lobe of the left hemisphere,
-??here was effusion into the pia mater, the fluid being clear and limpid, an
NO. xiy. K
242 EE MARKS UPON THE MORBID ANATOMY
filling up wide spaces between the convolutions, which were narrow and
shrunken.
The other viscera were not examined.
Tuberculous disease of the brain and of its membranes has been
described, and preparations illustrating the former are to be found in the
museums of many hospitals. It is worthy of remark, that such morbid
appearances are not common amongst the insane. Indeed, I cannot recal
an instance of it out of 150 cases. And this is the more remarkable, as,
in many, tuberculous deposit had gone on to a very considerable extent in
the viscera of the thorax and abdomen. Amongst these cases are to be
found instances of tuberculosis of the peritoneum, of the pancreas, and of
the stomach; both lungs may be infiltrated by tubercle, or the pleura
may present an uneven but continuous tuberculated appearance, from the
same cause. But in the brain and in its membranes such a change is
undoubtedly rare, at least amongst that class of patients who, coming from
all parts of the country, are received within the walls of Bethlehem
Hospital.
Atrophy and shrinking of the cerebral convolutions is a more com-
mon appearance, especially amongst the aged. In an institution where
the greater number of the patients are curable, and in whom insanity
has manifested itself at some late period of life, in consequence of
external causes operating upon a brain which has performed its functions
healthily up to a certain point, it is uncommon to meet with instances
of congenital malformation. Deficiency of the commissures, especially
of the corpus callosum, is always associated with feeble intellect, as
has been proved by the cases of Reil, Paget, and Mitchell Henry.
Patients in whom such a malformation exists, generally remain weak-
minded, but harmless, and would, if unfit to be trusted by themselves, be
more properly consigned to an asylum for idiots, than to an hospital for the
insane. There is no prospect of cure where the derangement is connected
with arrest of the development of the brain.
The only instance of malformation noticed in the list of post-mortem
examinations, which have been conducted in Bethlehem since the year
1840, is the following:?
Case 7.?Elizabeth S., aged 48, admitted on the curable establish-
ment, December 29th, 1848; died, January 5th, 1849.
The vessels of the dura mater were full of blood; the arachnoid mem-
brane was thickened and opake. The layers of the pia mater were sepa-
rated and infiltrated by an enormous effusion of reddish brown serum.
The convolutions were' atrophied; the ventricles contained about three
ounces of clear limpid serum.
The ventricle of the septum lucidum (the fifth ventricle) was distended
by serum. It measured two inches and a half in length, and a quarter
of an inch in breadth; the left wall was adherent in one spot to the
anterior part of the left corpus striatum. The foramina of Monro were
open, and of oval form. There was a congenital longitudinal fissure along
the middle of the fornix.
The lungs presented numerous firm black spots, about the size of a split
pea; there were accumulations of carbon around the minute bronchi and
the air-cells. The other organs were healthy.
It would be interesting, were it possible, to ascertain the condition of
the circulating fluid. The very frequent complication of organic diseases
in the thoracic or abdominal viscera renders it probable that for a long
period previous to death, in a great number of cases, the state of the
blood is far from healthy. The pallid face, the pinched look, the cold
shrunken extremities, are incompatible with the healthy circulation of
OF THE BRAIN IN INSANITY. 243
"Well-organizecl blood. Examination after deatli may detect partial con-
gestions, but in most cases the different viscera are pale and bloodless.
JJecomposition occasionally goes on with a rapidity quite unusual, sur-
passing that with which we are all familiar in fevers, where the skin and the
subcutaneous tissues are stained along the course of the large superficial
veins by the transudation of partly decomposed blood.
Case 8.?William A. B., aged 41, a patient on the curable esta-
blishment, died April 6th, 1850, the weather being fine, dry, and mode-
rately warm. He was examined between sixty and seventy hours after-
wards.
There was an incised wound, about two inches and a half in length, of
green colour, and with foetid odour, upon the forehead. After removing
the skull-cap, which was of dark colour, but healthy, it was found that
the dura mater, also dark-coloured, was distended by the contents of the
skull; upon dividing it with the scissors there was exposed a brain which
tad passed in every part into a state of decomposition. Although the
line of the convolutions yet remained, it was semifluid, of light green
colour, and emitted a most foetid odour.
Both lungs were emphysematous (from decomposition?)
The heart was healthy, but the muscular structure was soft, and dis-
coloured from the same cause. The pericardium contained about an ounce
of turbid serum. The abdominal viscera were soft and rotten; the kid-
neys, in a similar state, were of large size; the weight of each was twenty-
two ounces and a half.
The cancellous texture of the bones was dark from decomposed blood,
"Which had stained the interior in every part not of compact texture. The
colour was particularly dark in the cranial bones, the sternum, and the
ribs.
