Instinct and Reason; or, the Intellectual difference Between Man and Animals
=============================================================================

:Author: JAMES QUILTEIt RTT3IBALL, ESQ., M.K.C.S., L.A.C., ETC.
What is mind? Of whom shall I inquire? Of the metaphysicians?
What is metaphysics ?

I have read that when Sylla conquered Athens, a box of manuscripts
formed portion of his plunder. They were submitted for translation to
one Titus Andronicus, of Rhodes, a learned linguist of that time. They
proved to be the works of Aristotle. There were two bundles; the first
contained his " physics." This being rendered into Latin, the second was
examined, and translated also; but when finished, it was found impossible
to give it a local habitation or a name. It seemed to treat of everything,
but to realize nothing; glancing everywhere, resting nowhere; an air-drawn
dagger, vanishing into thin air even while we clutch it: and so the good
man, with rare modesty, gave a name to it which not only acknowledged
his own entire ignorance of the subject, but prophesied a like blissful state
to all who should hereafter enter on this trackless sea. He wrote on it
" Ta meta Ta pkysica, ra fiera ra rfrvaiKa." That which follows the physics!
And the labours of two thousand years have only served to confirm the
aptness of the title; for, down even to our day, the science of mind is as
little understood, and as much contested, as it was in the time of
Andronicus of Rhodes.

It would be fruitless toil to register the chronological failure of all
metaphysicians from Plato to Paley, who have attempted to fix their
wandering thoughts to tell of others, or to know themselves ; but it is abso-
lutely necessary to a clear stage, that we seek from their own mouths,
reasons enough and good, for one more voyage on the unknown sea?one
more journey o'er this moral Sahara.

INSTINCT AND REASON. " 393
What is mind ? Is it identical with soul ? Is it even a first principle,
breathed into man's nostrils with the breath of life, and manifested by his
animal organism? or is it, as Lawrence writes, a mere consequence, the
result of organization, the product of matter?

If I ask Chalmers, he tells me that I must not even investigate it as I would
physical subjects, or even morals; for " mental science (he says) is as dis-
tinct from all other sciences, including the ethical and logical, as our notions
of things are from the things themselves."*

He denies that we can gain any knowledge of our own minds by self-
examination. In examining the feeling of anger, for instance, page 61, he
says, " The moment that I turn my eye inwardly for that purpose, the thing
thatl amin quest oftakes fligktand disappearsagain, page 75, " All that
is known, all that can be known of the mind, is the various states, whether
of intellect or emotion, into which it passes, and to which states it is
primarily brought, by converse, not with itself, but with objects apart
from itself;" and, "According to this view, it is memory which supplies us
with all the materials of mental philosophy." Is not the above full of con-
tradictions ? How am I to become acquainted with " the various states" of
my mind, but by " turning my mental eye" upon them as they pass ? How
am I to remember unless I previously perceive ?

Dr Brown considers mind " as one substance capable of existing in a
variety of states,"t which seems as perfect a contradiction in terms as could
well be penned.

Dr Heid understands by mind, " that in us which thinks, remembers,
reasons, wills"?not a word about "feels." He declares that " Every man
must have ideas, for he that doubts it thinks, and to think is to have ideas."
" It is certain that Plato had his doctrine as well as the name Idea from
the school of Pythagoras; we have still extant a tract of Timteus, the
Locrian, a Pythagorean, concerning the Soul of the World, in which wo
find the substance of Plato's doctrine concerning ideas. " They were held
to be eternal, uncreated, immutable forms or models, according to which
the Deity made every species of things that exists, of an eternal matter."
These philosophers held that there are three first principles of all things.
1st.?An eternal matter, of which all things were made.
2nd.?Eternal and immaterial forms, or ideas, according to which they
were made.

3rd.?An efficient cause, the Deity who made them.
The philosophers of the Alexandrian school placed all these in the mind
of the JDeity, "the eternal models were theirs and not Plato's."J Aristotle
taught that all the objects of our thought enter at first by the senses; but
" the mind does not receive the object, only the image, as wax receives the
impression, but not the seal." " When they become objects of memory or
imagination, they get the name of phantasma."? " His system was called
the peripatetic." Democritus and Epicurus held that all bodies continually
send forth slender fibres or spectres from their surface, of such extreme
sublety, that they easily penetrate our gross bodies, or enter by the organs
of sense, and stamp their image on the mind. The sensible species of
Aristotle were forms without matter; the species of Epicurus were com-
posed of a very subtle matter."||

* Sketches of Moral and Mental Philosophy.
+ Lectures on the Philosophy of Mind, page 07.
J Essays on the Powers of the Human Mind, page 9.
? Ibid. Curiously enough a phrenological chart was published at Venice, with
cranial delineations, on which, where we now place Ideality, we find Phantasma marked.
[I Page 10.

Dr Beid thinks that we can acquire a knowledge of our own minds by
" an accurate reflection upon its operations," " and by paying due atten-
tion to the course of human actions and conduct. The actions of men are
effects ; their sentiments, their passions, and their affections, are the causes
of those effects, and we may in many instances judge of the cause from the
?effect." Our social affections are instanced as thus demonstrable. He
divides the mind into two classes, " understanding and will." Under the
will, ho comprehends our active powers and all that lead to action, as
" appetites, passions, affections,"* evidently confounding wish with will.
He " cannot understand how the mind perceives objects, and declares his
conviction that our original faculties are all unaccountable."t He calls
" Idea" the creature of philosophy, about which nothing can be known ;
thereby agreeing with Locke, and opposing Mallebranche, Descartes, and
Bishop Berkeley, who all believed the existence of an external world to be
incapable of proof, but consenting to the dogma of Descartes, " cogito ergo
sum," " I think, therefore, I am," as the alpha and omega of all our know-
ledge. Berkeley disbelieved in the existence of matter. Hume denied
the existence both of matter and mind."J In short, so absurd does Beid
think the metaphysical speculations of all who have preceded him, that
at page 111 he sums up thus :?

" Some philosophers will have our ideas or part of them to be innate,
others will have them to be all adventitious ; some derive them from the
senses alone, others from sensation and reflection; some think they are
fabricated by the mind itself, others that they are produced by external
objects; others that they are the immediate operation of the Deity;
others say that impressions are the causes of ideas, and that the causes of
impressions are unknowTn; some think that we have ideas only of material
objects, but none of mind3, of their operations, or of the relations of
things; others will have the immediate object of every thought to be an
idea; some think we have abstract ideas, and that by this chiefly we are
distinguished from the brutes; others maintain an abstract idea to be an
absurdity, and that there can be no such thing. With some they are the
immediate objects of thought, with others the only object." ?

So much tor Beid's opinion of other metaphysicians. But does he
improve upon them ? Hear what he says of the will. " A child cannot
be said to will to suck, because it has not reasoned about the complex
operation." Again, logical and profound as he is, the following passage,
page 472, shows him to be as confused and mistaken as any who went
before him: " When a man beats a drum or plays a tune, he has not time
to direct every particular beat or stop by a voluntary determination, but
the habit which may be acquired by exercise answers the purpose as
?well." Oh! Beid, Beid ; matter is quicker than thought, is it P Muscles
than mind? How is it when a man flays a quick passage at sight ? prch
pud or!

Mind, says Dugald Stewart, is " that which feels, which thinks, and
which has the power of beginning motion." This is denied, of course, by
the materialists, who attribute these properties or functions to the brain.
I have already stated that Hume denied the existence both of matter
and mind. In Book I., Bart I., Lect. 1, of his Treatise on Human Nature
he undertakes to prove two positions :?

1st.?That all that is called human knowledge (meaning demonstrative
knowledge) is only probability.

2nd.?That this probability when duly examined, evanishes by degrees,
* Essays on the Po\ver3 of the Human Mind, p. 32. + Ibid., p. 064.
J Ibid. p. 97. ? Ibid. p. 409.
and leaves at last no evidence at all; so tliat, in tlie issue, there is no
ground to believe any one proposition ratlier than its contrary; and that
" all those are certainly fools ivho reason or believe anything." And yet
he himself is fool enough to reason on the subject, and expect us to
believe him ! Kant and others contend for a merely ideal world.
Hobbes, though a materialist, admitted no knowledge of an external
world. According to him all that we know is the " seeming," the " appari-
tion," the " aspect," the " phenomenon," the " phantasm" within ourselves;
and this subjective object of which we are conscious, and which is con-
sciousness itself, is nothing more than the "agitation" of our internal
organism, determined by the unknown motions which he supposes con-
stitute the world without. He admits no knowledge of an external
world.*

Bayle agrees with Hume that we have not arrived at certainty in any
branch of knowledge. Hume says we cannot!

Locke teaches that we have no ideas which do not arise from impressions
on the senses, or from reflections on our own thoughts and feelings.
Descartes seems to have been misunderstood. In his Letters, No. 99,
he declares that " He never said or thought that the mind needs innate
ideas, which are something different from its own faculty of thinking; but
as he observed certain thoughts to be in his mind, which neither pro-
ceeded from outward objects, nor were determined by his will, but merely
from his own faculty of thinking, he called them innate ideas, to
distinguish them from such as are adventitious, compounded by our imagi-
nation; he calls them innate in the same sense in which generosity is
innate in some families, gout and stone in others. Because the children of
such families come into the world with a disposition to such virtues, or to
such maladies."

Locke clearly proves that none of our ideas are innate, for neither idiots
nor children have them.

According to Leibnitz, it matters not that all phenomena have been
called dreams, " since experience shows that we are not disappointed in
the measures which we take concerning phenomena, when these pheno-
mena are founded on the principles of reason."

Cousins, whose philosophy excites considerable sensation at the present
time, resolves all things into three principles :?
1st.?The one which is infinite?absolute cause?pure thought.
2nd.?The many which is finite?phenomena?relative cause.
3rd.?The combination of these two, which is intelligence.
God and mind are of the first. God, as he is cause, is able to create;
as he is absolute cause, he must create.
" We create as often as we exert our free causality."
" In creating the universe, he does not draw it from nothing, he draws
it from himself. To create is not to make something out of nothing, but
to originate from self." t
Schelling argued that " there is a capacity of knowledge above conscious-
ness, and higher than understanding." But Hogel, his disciple, confesses
that " this pure or undetermined existence is synonymous with pure
nothing."
Cabernis, a pupil and friend of Condillac, asserted the double action of
the nerves, and considered sensation as a faculty of the nerves. Lawrence,
therefore, follows him in asserting mind to be the "result of organization."
Boutkoe, La Peyronie, and Louis, place the mind in the corpus cal-
* Leviathan, Baucliy's Collection. Edinburgh Review, vol. iii. p. 331.
+ Ibid. p. 313.

losum ; Yieussens, in the centrum ovale; Digby, in the septum lucidem;
Drellincourt, in the cerebellum, and Soemmering, in the fluid of the
ventricles.

Reid says, "we have, or we believe we have, an immediate knowledge
of materiality," and he proves it by this anology; "we are conscious of
consciousness, _ therefore it exists! Ave are conscious of external existence,
therefore it exists."

Against the above, place Descartes' celebrated ultimatum, " Cogito ergo
sum?I think, therefore I am?follow this up by examining Dugald
Stewart, who refers almost all our mental powers to attention; and declares
that imagination is the result of habit, and no more given by nature than
wit or fancy; and then examine Brown, who asserts that " attention to
objects of sense appears to be nothing more than the co-existence of desire
with the perception of the objects to which we are said to attend." " But
there is no operation of any power distinct from the desire and perception
themselves."* Compare the whole of the foregoing, which if not already,
might be increased into, the most tedious and confused series of antagonisms
ever committed to paper; and can Ave feel surprised that the late Charles
Mathews, of facetious memory, defined metaphysics to'be "a discourse
about what we do not understand, addressed to those who do not under-
stand us ;" or that Dugald Stewart should have combated the doctrines of
Reid; and that Brown, the disciple of both, should have pronounced " all
that was claimed as original and most important in their philosophy to be
nought but a series of misconceptions, only less wonderful in their com-
mission than in the general acquiescence in their truth;" or that a still
later writer in the " Edinburgh Review" (Sir William Hamilton, I believe,)
should have characterized Dr Brown's theories as containing " Iiadical
inconsistencies in every branch of the subject," " endless mistakes," and
"frequent misrepresentations"P Jam satis! We are compelled once
more to revert to our first inquiry, What is mind ? and failing its dis-
covery among all preceding philosophers, let us turn to Dr Call, and see
if he is able " Inter lios, tantas componere lites."

What is mind? What is matter? What is any ultimate? No man
ever has informed us, or ever can. Beyond the properties of matter, the
effects of time, or the results of mind, Ave know nothing. Of their hidden
essences we shall know nothing till time merges into eternity, and the
future bccomes the past; until we see God face to face, and the veil of the
temple shall be rent. It is with the properties of mind, therefore, that
we have to deal; and in assuming mind to be immaterial, we are borne
out by the fact that its results are so. The properties of matter are few
and simple. It has form, size, and substance; it can be Aveiglied and
measured; it occupies space, and is impenetrable?that is, no one atom of
matter can occupy the portion of space filled by another. But who can
reduce into inches, yards, 01* feet, a mother's love or childhood's joy?
Who can give me, in pounds or ounces, the Aveight of my fear, my fancy,
or my grief? If, then, the very terms we use to describe objects of sense
are manifestly ridiculous and absurd Arhen applied to mental operations,
we may safely assert that mind is not matter, but that it is something
without form, size, or substance, and we employ the word " immaterial "
to describe it.

The same argument applies to life. Who can believe that a grain of
corn, consisting of charcoal, some gases, and some salts, planted in the
soil, which is composed of like materials; shall not only commence an
activity that matter never shows (for its very essence, as far as Ave know
* Brown's Lecture, p. 199,
it, is to be incapable of commencing motion, vis inertia being perhaps its
most prominent attribute) who can comprehend how the small seed shall
send out roots from itself into the dead earth; suck up by their means, and
select that aliment?and that alone?which is suited to its nature, and
convert water, earth, and air, into every variety of herb, tree, fruit, and
flower, that covereth the earth with beauty?ever changing, ever new?
flung up into the air, or through the soil, far away from the small centres
whence they bud, living and growing long after those centres have died
and disappeared?with which in its lifetime they had no connexion, and of
which they retain no similitude? No! life is evidently a second agent; an
immaterial principle in the hands of Deity, whereby he organizes the
earth and garnishes it; lying quiescent in the ovum or the seed, until
favouring circumstances of light, or heat, or moisture, give it birth; when
it runs its course like a wound-up spring, and fades away and dies, when
its allotted time arrives.

" The smallest flower tliat blows
Is past our finding out;
Whence come, and where it goes,
Can we resolve the doubt?"

But although mind must be an immaterial principle or nothing, it does
not follow that it is synonymous with soul; or should it even be so, it is
illogical to claim a soul for brutes, because we assert that they have minds.
The tree lives, so does the elephant; and yet the principle of life in the
one may be as different in its nature from the other, as are the elements
and properties of their bodies. To allow to Deity variety in his material
agencies, and deny them to his spiritual, would be unsound in argument
and absurd in its results. That brutes think and feel, no one can deny;
that thought and feeling can either be weighed or measured, no one will
assert; they have therefore within them an immaterial principle similar to
man's, but an analysis of its attributes will convince us that though similar
it is not the same.

We shall simplify the inquiry, even if we do not shorten it, if we begin
with the beginning, and trace up from the simplest forms of being the
successive stages of development, until we arrive at the most complex of
which we have any cognizance.

Philosophers have classified nature under three heads?the mineral, the
vegetable, and the animal. The first exhibits all the properties above
enumerated as belonging to matter. The second, or vegetable kingdom,
possesses also these properties ; that is, it has form, size, and substance;
it can be weighed and measured. But it has more than these,?it has life!
it lives by means of an internal organized apparatus, by whose action it
takes up from surrounding earth and air, elementary unorganized matter,
which it assimilates to its own nature, converts to its own purposes, and
parts with when its race is run, to fall back into their original inert-
ness, until some other living thing wants them, seeks, and finds them.
Whereas, the mineral, therefore, was created without life, so will it cease
to be, without death: as God made it so would it remain for ever, unless
affected by external forces, mechanical or chemical. The granite on the
mountain, and the clay at its base, would always retain the same size,
density, weight, and position, were nothing to infringe xipon or change
them. The verj- sea maintains its ever-flowing, never changing identity.

" Time writes 110 wrinkle on thine azure brow,
Such as creation's dawn beheld, thou rollest now."

And the inconstant air, raging or still, in summer breeze or storm, is still
and ever composed of twenty-seven parts of oxygen and seventy-three
parts nitrogen; whose weights and properties are, as they ever have been,
unchangeable and unchanged. But the vegetable, although created as
a class, and so for lasting from the world's first to its last; has a definite
term assigned to its individual existence; and although the germ of every
oak may have been in the original acorn, each tree commences its own
independent career, in its own appointed time, and fills the spot and hour
destined for it before time was.

The animal kingdom exhibits all the laws both of the mineral and the
vegetable. It has form, size, and substance. It can be measured and
weighed. It was created as a class, and will last whilst the world lasts. It
lives as an individual and dies: it is nourished by means of an internal
?organized structure, which takes up and applies to its own use suitable
nourishment from surrounding objects; but it also has its own specific
properties, although philosophers have failed in finding them. By some
it has been said that the animal differs from the vegetable in that it has
gluten. But the mushroom and onion and others have gluten! Some
say animals have stomachs, vegetables none : but the zoophytes have far
less appearance of stomachs than the pitcher-plant or fly-catcher ! Even
locomotion belongs not to the lower class of the animal kingdom. What
then distinguishes the animal as a class from the vegetable as a class ?
Consciousness, and this only. Pluck a leaflet from the sensitive plant, and
the wildest casuist will not assert that the root thereof cognizes the wrong;
but wound the remotest fibre of the dullest animal, and the whole frame
sympathises. The plant is injured and knows it not. The animal feels,
and knows it feels, however it may be wanting in power to express.
Consciousness, then, is the corner-stone of the mental temple. Upon it
is laid, one by one, the varied faculties and feelings which build up the
.animal world until it reaches to its apex?man.

" Distinguished link in being's endless chain,
Midway from nothing to the Deity."?Young.
Man! the microcosm of all around him, exhibits, Ave shall find, all the
-attributes of all living things ; and beyond these a moral development that
separates him from the noblest brute, assimilates him to the angels, and
indicates his immortality.

It has been already argued that both man and brutes have an imma-
terial thinking principle, manifested by organic structures; that we know
nothing of this principle except in its manifestation; and that it is essential
to examine into the nature of the manifesting structures if we would under-
stand these manifestations.

The very lowest species of animals have a nervous system; semifluid
.and half-organized it may be, but it is nevertheless the chaos, the " indi-
gesta que moles" out of which the finer fibres and cerebral development
of the higher animals are evolved. Vegetables exhibit no trace of this.
Should it even be contended that I have failed to prove the immateriality
of mind, or, except by analogy, the consciousness of animals, yet here, in
the anatomical analysis, we shall find neither difficulty nor doubt. As
nerve, so sensibility ; as brain, so mind, will be found strictly and demon-
.stratively true, throughout every link of the whole animal chain.
From the long abdominal nerve of the worm up to the complex system
of man, we shall find progressive additions as the animal intelligence
increases.

The zoophites have the nervous system in its simplest form, that is jelli-
form, and yet they exhibit consciousness and volition.
" Ehrenberg thought lie discovered a series of" small gray nervous masses
in animalcule, which he considered ganglions."
In the ascaris* a single thread passes along the body, but no ganglia
are discoverable as yet.
Earth-worms have a double nervous chord and a ganglion at each
ring.

In the crustacea the brain is typified.f " In the caterpillar there are
many ganglia," (i. e., small nervous nodules, composed of white and gray
matter, such as the human brain is composed of, whilst the gray or cineri-
tious matter is never found in the nerves.) " In the chrysalis we find a
notable shortening of the chain of ganglia." In the papilio brassica
Herold found "the whole chain of ganglia scarcely half as long as in the
caterpillar; the sixth and seventh had altogether disappeared. The
second, third, fourth, and fifth were united so as to form only two ganglia,
and the ganglion above the oesophagus was composed of two large lobes,
each of which gave rise to a large optic nerve."

Thus, as the caterpillar progresses to the butterfly?from the lower to
its higher stage of existence?it is found to gather nervous matter into its
head to form a brain; to see, and to fly, and propagate. This is the
type of the whole, and the child's development is equally instructive.
In the head of the foetus during the first month after conception, the
whole head, brain and all, is gelatinous and transparent.

In the rabbit it is so to the fourteenth day.
In the chicken to the end of the second day.
In the second month, or during the fifth and sixth week (in the human
foetus), vessels are seen on and in the brain, and a few limpid and trans-
parent globules formed by the pia mater. In the seventh and eighth
week the head and spine lose their transparency.?

The dura mater is visible; the brain is like the white of an egg. The
cerebellum still divisible into two.\\ The cerebral hemispheres commence;
there are no nerves, no annular protuberances, commissures, corpus
callosum, &c.

As the foetus progresses, additions are made to the brain as well as to
the body; the eyes appear, and so do the nerves which are to supply them.
The senses of smell, and hearing, and taste, all undergo a progressive de-
velopment, until the child is born, and even after that; for the brain of an
infant is not half so large, nor so fibrous, nor so perfectly developed as
that of a full grown man, and its mental development maintains a pre-
cisely similar ratio.As the brain of man is thus proved to be built up
by degrees, so does it decline. The brain of an old man not only measures
less, but weighs Jess than it did in the prime of life. Mr. Magendie
ascertained that in persons above the age of seventy, the specific gravity
of the brain is less on an average by a fifteenth than in adults."**
In fishes the brain is composed of egg-shaped ganglia, perfectly distinct,
and only united together by small nervous filaments. " From the brain
uniformly proceed the nerves of hearing, sight, and smell; and, conse-
quently, the number of its principal divisions is always fixed at three."tt
In addition to this cumulating evidence, we find that " the brain of man
is larger in proportion to the spinal marrow than it is in any animal
or, as Tiedeman has it, page 143, " L'homme est celui de tous les
* See Plate. + Tiedeman;
X Carus, Comparative Anatomy, vol. i. p. 89.
? Tiedeman, p. 13. Anatomy of Foetal Brain. || Ibid. p. 22.
If For the successive stages of development in tlie human brain, see Plate.
Mayo, p. 251. ++ Carus, ? 290. Soemmering.

animaux qui a l'eiicepliale le plus volumineuse en egard a la masse de sa
moelle epiniere." Whilst Ilicherand goes so far as to say, " Of all
animals man has the most capacious skull in proportion to his face ; and as
the bulk of the brain is always of a size proportioned to that of the osseous
case which contains it, the brain is also most bulky in man. This difference
of size between the cranium and face may be taken as the measure of the
human understanding, and of the instinct of the lower animals. The
stupidity and ferocity of the latter are greater according as the proportion
of these two parts of the skull vary from those of the human head."
Uicherand's Physics, 2nd edit. p. 322. And, although opinions differ re-
specting the absolute size of the various brains of animals and man, yet
all agree that the brain of man is larger, when compared with his nervous
system generally, than that of any other animal. All agree that whatever
the mind may be, the brain and the brain only manifests it. That in pro-
portion to the comparative size, complexity, and composition of the brain,
is the amount, power, and variety of animal intelligence, more especially
in connexion with the grey nervous matter which we have traced up from
its earlier ganglionic development to the brain of man. " There is an inti-
mate relation (says Solly, page 57,) between the bulk of cineritious neurine,
in which each individual nerve of sense terminates, and the perfection of
the organ of sense from which that nerve arises."

" The further we advance, indeed, we meet with fresh proofs that the
brain, even of the highest order of animals, is no more than a series of
ganglia."*

And that, up to a certain point, there is no traceable difference but only
in degree between the arrangement, composition, and functions of the
brains of the higher class of animals and man. As in him, so in them, the
nerves all proceed directly or indirectly to or from the brain,?in him as
them, the ganglia receive mere nerves of sensation, whilst all the nerves of
sense proceed from the brain;?in them as in him the intelligence is propor-
tionate to the frontal development, and amount of cineritious matter.
Before quitting this part of the subject, it may be necessary to prove
that the brain is really and truly the organ of the mind, that is, the pe-
culiar and sole portion of the body which manifests it. As regards the
higher class of animals, this is easily done. All the nerves proceed
directly or indirectly, as already stated, to or from the brain. If we
divide a nerve in any part of the body, all the functions of that nerve will
be lost in the part which is cut off from the cerebral connexion, whilst that
portion which is still in communication with the brain, retains its power
more or less modified by the injury. Thus, if the optic nerve be divided,
no image can be received by the retina, or transmitted to the brain.
Blindness is a necessary consequence; but if a man's leg be cut off, the
nerves of ordinary sensation retain their functions in the stump, often in
an aggravated degree, and years after, from long habits of association,
pains will be referred to the toes, which are really existing in the thigh.
Moreover, every other portion of the body may be mutilated and destroyed,
without affecting the manifestations of mind; " but there are no cases on
record in which the mental faculties have remained undisturbed, when the
disorganization has extended to both sides of the brain."

So far then our theory is established.
1st.?The brain is the organ of the mind.
2nd.?As brain, so mind.
Young or old, healthy or diseased, powerful or feeble, as the brain is,
so is all we know of mind, and this can be predicated of no other part of
* Soemmering, p. CD. + Solly on the Brain, p. 349.
the body. But liere a question arises wliicli affects the matter seriously.
Is consciousness truly the distinguishing characteristic of the animal
kingdom, and is it a mental manifestation ? How then do animals mani-
fest it who have no brains?

It has been already stated, that the human brain is nothing more than a
series of ganglia?and, it is equally true, that the cineritious portion of
these ganglia manifests perception and will. Now, down to the caterpillar,
we trace not only ganglia, but cineritious neurine. Properly speaking,
there is no brain; the single ganglia in the head of the insect performs the
function. Lower still in the polypus, whose every portion may be cut
away, forming so many new animals, and containing so many centres
of life and consciousness, even though the microscope should fail to detect
neurine, or even a ganglion, we have the authority of every living thing
above it, for declaring that there must be ganglia, though we cannot detect
them; there must be neurine though we fail to find it; because ganglia
alone receive sensations, and neurine alone perceives them. We are
carried, therefore, from the known to the unknown, by a large and unerring
analogy, which becomes almost a syllogism, and bears about it marks
of mathematical precision.

Thus the most certain, never-wanting attribute, of all animals whose
nature we can examine, is consciousness.

The universal concomitant of consciousness is neurine.
Both the above can be traced or inferred to the lowest link of animal
life; and
Neither of them can be traced to the vegetable.
We have now to inquire if the mental manifestations, exhibited by
other animals and man, differ in kind, or only in degree.
Consciousness has been already named as the primary element of mind;
and the term is used as synonymous with perception. All animals perceive
or feel, most of them see, many of them hear, taste, and smell. These are
intellectual operations, and man exhibits no superiority over the dog or
the monkey in this respect; nay, in civilized life he falls far short of their
perfect sense. Animals, too, especially of the higher class, become as
accurately acquainted with the physical properties of matter as man him-
self. They perceive and appreciate form, size, weight, and colour with
the nicest judgment. Their sense of smell is far more acute than ours, and
their hearing as superior. They have musical ears?are conscious of the
lapse of time?can construct and count,* though to a very limited extent.
It is certain that a dog will fight one dog, and run away from two; he,
therefore, knows that two is more than one, and this is nearly equal to some
savages who can only count four; whilst the Bidders amongst us can
almost multiply the stars of heaven by the sand on the sea-shore, and tell
us the result.
Among the perceptive powers, then, those which cognize number,
time, and perhaps order, seem to bo those generally given more largely to
man than to the brute; whilst those which perceive the physical proper-
ties of bodies, are frequently more exquisitely developed in animals than
man. Ulysses' dog alone detected him, whose long wanderings had made
* This was doubted by Spurzlieim, and affirmed by George Le Hoy. He states that
a magpie having stolen some game, it was determined to shoot it. A man hid himself
in a hut near its nest for this purpose. The bird flew away when he entered, nor would
return. The next day two men entered, and one came out. Mag was not to be cheated,
she waited till the second left also. Three went in and two came out with the same
result. Four then entered, and three came away. The bird went back and was shot.
So magpies, says George Le Roy, can count three but not four!
laim equally an alien to the memories, as to tlie affections, of liis courtiers
and friends.

By the action of the perceptive powers all knowledge comes into the
mind; and this knowledge is directly proportionate to the size and quality
of the nerves, ganglia, or brain, which receive the transmitted impressions.
Wot only will blindness or deafness ensue, if injury be done to the eye or
ear, but any damage to that portion of the brain receiving a nerve of sc-ncs,
produces a corresponding result in the perception; thus deafness may
arise from pressure on the brain, and blindness from a tumour within it.
Thus, too, the eye may be perfect, the ear well-formed, the nostril,
tongue, and skin in a normal condition, and yet, from malformation of the
brain, not only shall the higher class of faculties be wanting, but the per-
ceptions degraded below the lowest animal that crawls or swims.
" William Eedfern, who resided about ten years since at Stone, near
Kidderminster, aged fourteen years, was a striking instance of this. His
eyes were prominent, bright, and apparently perfect; all the external
organs of sense, as far as they could be examined, seemed equally well-
formed. He exhibited no other mental powers than the following:?' He
cries out when hurt; and, what they believe to have been a smile, has
occasionally been seen upon his countenance. He eats voraciously of
some things, reluctantly of others, and turns round more quickly at the
sound of William (his name) than at any other; but beyond this lie has
been never known to differ from a vegetable. Consciousness is present,
and slight traces of memory; but judgment, understanding, and almost
volition are nearly wanting.'

" His touch is perfect, but he has never been known to take hold of
anything in his life; his hearing is perfect, but, except as regards his own
name, they cannot discover that he distinguishes one sound from another.
" His sight is sound, but he knows not his own mother, or one object
from another.

" From long disuse his fingers are bent upon his hands, and his legs are
permanently crossed. As they place him, so he remains, never moving
hand, foot, or head; an occasional whine or motion of the eyes being the
only proofs he ever gives of anything approaching to volition."
As far as the perceptions are concerned, then, we have abundant
evidence that animals equal man in most, and surpass him in some. That
they have memory is equally clear, but this obliges an inquiry into the
nature of this supposed primary elementary faculty; for even Eeid so
considers it.

" In the gradual progress of man, from infancy to maturity, there is a
certain order in which his faculties are unfolded." "The external senses
first appear?memory soon follows." " Memory must have an object?it
must be past."* But enough of quotations, and, in spite of Chalmers, let
us look into the workings of our own minds for evidence of their nature.
To see is one thing, to look another; to hear is one thing, to listen
another; to look, or listen long, attentively, and with highly organized
eyes, ears, and brains, is a third ; and in proportion to the intensity of our
attention, and perfection of the organs, especially of those in the brain, is
the power possessed of recalling the impression, of reviving the image, of
reproducing the idea which has been received. All the physical properties
of bodies can thus be renewed and recombined, long-buried thoughts
restored, and words and acts repeated. We can re-quote and re-argue the
same ideas and the same words we employed, it may be, years ago; or,
shutting our eyes, we can fling ourselves abroad into the world we have
* Reid's Essays, iii. p. 158.
seen, and trace again, in hues as bright and forms as bold as when first "we
saw them with our bodily organ, the gorgeous temple, or the heaving sea?
the mighty mountain, or the battle-plain. But each man knows that his
memory is not one, nor his memories equal. The mind is one, but it has
many agents. The eye of one man may be more perfect?the ear of
another. One may perceive colours, another forms, more clearly. Music
may be the attribute of one, mechanics of another. Our faculties differ in
power, so do our memories; and it will be found, that, so far from memory
being an elementary power of the mind, it is nothing more nor less than
the highest function of an intellectual faculty; and this at once explains the
vast difference observable, not only in various individuals, but even in
ourselves, at one or other periods of our lives. 'Tis the last to come, the
first to go?most readily affected by illness or fatigue?and requiring the
greatest labour to strengthen and retain where the perceptions are feeble,
but clear and ready as the perceptions themselves, where they are
strong.

Although foreign to our present subject, it may be mentioned that
feelings have no memories. "We can remember that we relished the
feast, or enjoyed the dance; we can enumerate tlie viands, recal the
groups, but can no more reproduce the feeling than we can the objects
that created them. Similar feelings may be renewed by similar objects,
but the same feelings are gone for ever; we can remember that we were
happy or sad, and we can even feel sad or happy that we were so. Be
this, however, as it may, it is evident that animals differ in nowise from
man in the exhibition of perceptive memories, except that herein many of
them excel him.

By perceptions animals gain knowledge. The various items of which
this knowledge is made up constitute so many ideas, and in dealing with
those ideas, we reason. "In reason," says Locke, "there are four
degrees; first, the discovering and finding out proofs; second, regularly
and methodically arranging them; third, perceiving their connexion;
fourth, making [a right conclusion;" again: " Reason is that faculty
whereby man is supposed to be distinguished from beasts, and wherein it
is evident he much surpasses them." Space is wanting to analyze these
definitions, but it will be observed, that Locke doubts the supposed dis-
tinction between man and beasts, and only asserts positively that our
reason greatly surpasses theirs.

What do we when we reason? We take any two or more of our ideas,
thoughts, or feelings, and compare them; we cannot compare an idea with
itself, but only with something else. For instance, I may compare this
book with other books, this page with others, or this line, word, syllable,
or paper, with other lines, &c., but I cannot compare any of these with
themselves, only with others. And in comparing them or any other
things, or ideas of things, I endeavour to find out wherein they differ,
wherein they agree, and why they differ, why they agree ? These three
faculties, then, the one which traces differences, called by phrenologists
the faculty of comparing, but which should be named, the power of analyz-
ing ; secondly, the power of tracing resemblances, improperly named wit;
and thirdly, the power of connecting causes and consequences together,
constitute, as far as I can judge, the whole of our reasoning faculties, and
they are employed in every relation of mind; in knowing a tree when
we see it, or in distinguishing a tree from a stone, a house from a man,
earth from water, or straw from grass, truth from falsehood; by these
three powers the poor idiot distinguishes his food from fire, takes one
and repudiates the other; by them he goes to his bed, or rises, or walks,
or warms himself; by them, and only them, Newton followed the planets
in tlieir orbits, tracked tlie comet in its wildest flight, showed that charcoal
and diamond were the same, and that water ought to burn.

And does man then only reason ? Is instinct the brutes' only prero-
gative ? What is instinct ? It has been well defined, as " Icnoivledge
before experience." It is the desire to do and the power to do, as the pro-
genitors have done before in all time, without varying, without change, the
like thing in the like manner. The bird builds its nest each after its kind,
of the same shape, and if it can get them, of the same materials, as it has
been built in all time by those who have preceded it; and it does this
without instruction, without experience. Hatch a blackbird, a swallow,
and a thrush, in cotton in a cage ; let them free when grown, and in the
coming spring the blackbird will line her nest with hay, the thrush with
clay, and the swallow will carry mud from pond or river to build up
the walls of her house in your chimney, as her ancestors' of yore have
ever done.

The spider hangs her nest upon the branches, or spreads her gossamer
over the fields; the squirrel, unknowing that winter is coming, or that nuts
will disappear, garners up a store in some hollow beech tree, and sleeps
secure of her bonded corn when winter shall have past away, and nor
fruit nor grain be found.

It is the very essence of instinct to be unteachable and unimprovable;
so perfect has it ever been and is, in all its works, that Sir Isaac Newton
always believed it to be the spirit of God directing the wings and beaks of
birds, antenna) of bees, and spider's limbs; for that no second agent could
be so infallible.

But the essence of reason is, that it is knowledge after experience; it is
built up by a comparison of facts, and by tracing their relations and
results ; it grows with our growth, and strengthens with our strength. It
not only can be taught, but exists only by teaching; it is fallible, whilst
instinct never errs; it is progressive, instinct immutable; reason is inde-
finite, instinct limited and defined; each man acquires his own results,
whilst instinct is given at birth. In proportion as we ascend the scale, wo
find instinct becoming less and less apparent. Whilst the ant, the
spider, the bird, and the bee are beautiful models of it, the elephant, the
dog, and the monkey exhibit scarcely a trace. Man none at all.

What intelligence have they then, if wanting in reason, and deficient in
instinct ? * Instead of being the most, they should be the least sagacious
of all animals; but if the above views are correct, they have reason
approximating closely in amount, and identical in quality with that which
has so long been thought to belong exclusively to man; and so has the
bee, and the fish, and the serpent, and all things having brains that are to
be found "in the heavens above, or the earth beneath, or the waters
under the earth." Instinct tells them what to do, reason how to do it.
The bee builds her cells of the hexagonal shape, flies from some flowers
and to others, swarms and makes honey and wax, instinctively; but
reason shows it the way. It dashes not itself against houses and trees;
it compares one hive with another, enters the right, avoids the wrong;
knows a drone from a working bee, cherishes the one, and destroys the
* One of tbe most striking instances of instinct occurred in a Newfoundland dog
belonging to the author. She was going down to St. Albans with her master, when,
suddenly she sniffed the air, started back, and evidenced every symptom of intense fear.
By encouragement she would advance a few paces, then dash back again, and cower at
Lis heels. On looking for tbe cause of her alarm, Wombwell's caravan was observed
about three hundred yards in advance!! The animals made no noise, or if they had,,
the dog was not a twelvemonth old, and liad never seen or smelt a wild beast in lier
life!

otlier. Instinct leads tlie salmon from tlie deep sea tlirougli unknown
ways to the topmost rill of the running stream; instinct compels it to
burrow in the gravel there to deposit its spawn, but reason guides it in its
course, and directs it3 operations.

Cannot the elephant be taught? does he not compare, analyze, trace
similitudes, calculate results ? Then how is it he learns to fire off pistols,
unbolt doors, hold out his trunk for halfpence, cry "cake!" and exchange
his money for the dainty, like any school-boy ? Will not the goldfinch
learn to draw up water in his cage ; and the dog to go where he is bidden,
to fetch and carry, guard the flock, or bring it home as his master may
direct ? The very pig may be taught to pick up one card in preference to
another, by comparing the tones of his master's voice, and associating
them in his memory with the object to be accomplished.
But we must have, forsooth, evidence of remote inferences, abstract
comparisons, before we grant reasoning powers to the brutes. We are
not content with those powers of comparison which " guard his master
from a post," and enable the horse to enter the stable-door when it is
open, and refuse the attempt when it is shut! We deny the name of
reason to the mental operations, which make the lamb fly from the dog that
has bitten it, to the mother that protects it, and enables that mother to
single its own out of ten thousand.

Huber relates that bees always commence building their combs at the
top. They cannot build upwards, but always down.

ISTow, a high wind shook one of his hives, and detached a comb. The
bees immediately wedged it firmly in between the others, lest it should
damage them; and they did more?they immediately set to work, and
strengthened the attachments of all the other combs, to protect them from
a similar accident!

Kirby and Spence relate how a sparrow robbed a swallow (quere martin)
of her nest, and how the swallows consulted together, went in a body to
the pond, flew back each with some mud in its mouth, built up the en-
trance to the nest, and made him a prisoner, as the monks of old did their
victims, not only for life, but unto death, lie was walled in, and starved !
An animal, then, can neither walk, swim, or fly, feed or sleep, without
exercising the whole of the reasoning powers attributable to man; and his
reason differs from ours, not in kind, but only in degree : it constitutes
our pre-eminence, but not our prerogative, for the poor idiot and the child
exhibit far less of it than the beast of the field or bird of the air. Now, if
this be so, why are animals stationary ? Why do they not progress as
man progresses ? Why do they not construct machines to shorten labour ?
Why do they not help each other ? Why cannot they hand down their
knowledge to their offspring P It is not for want of hands; for the
monkey has them. It is not for want of memory;?Ulysses' dog was but
a sample of his kind. Nor from lack of judgment; for they know, there-
fore they have judged. And when a horse or dog obeys the voice, to stop
or go, stand up or lie down, or do the thousand things they learn to do,
they evidence by their actions that they understand the tone, the manner,
and the object. They crouch or come, as the harsh or harmonious in
sound or gesture meet or eye or ear; and understand the meaning of the
uplifted hand and whip as well as the veriest urchin, who is conscious he
deserves it, and sees it coming. The very pig distinguishes the difference
between the sound of the pail that brings his meal, and any other in which
he has no interest, be it wheelbarrow or cart: how he cries in his joy, as
he hears tlie bin-lid fall, and footsteps going thence to him. It is because
reason, and memory, and judgment, and will, have been assumed to be
elementary powers of the mind, instead of terms describing intellectual
operations and results, tliat brutes Lave been thought to want them; and
it is because animals have instinct, and man has not, that it has been sup-
posed amply sufficient to account for all their doings; although every
thinker on the subject, and almost every writer, from Plato to my Lord
Brougham, have felt that, if animals have not reason, they have something
so very like it, that it is hard to draw the line. I hope to have shown that
the operations of instinct are limited and well-defined, and that reason does
not constitute the intellectual difference between other animals and man 1
Why, then, again, do we find no other class of animals than man capabls
of improvement? The answer is obvious. They have no articulate speech!
They have intellect, feelings, and tongues; they have the power by inarti-
culate sounds of making their feelings known, but not their knowledge.
The sentry crow flies off", and screams when fox or gun comes near, and
all fly off and scream: it is frightened, so are they, but it alone knows
why. It cannot tell to them the cause of its alarm, neither can dog or
horse impart his cunning. Each begins life for himself, and by himself
must he gain his own knowledge : however great this may be?though he
shall learn to fetch and carry, obey commands, fire guns, mimic death, and
do the thousand imitations of humanity exhibited by beast and bird, even
to the senseless imitation of our speech?yet have they no means of hand-
ing down to their offspring the smallest information on any point whatever;
and so, although the individual animals grow " old and wise," the class
remains as it was created?it "dies and makes no sign." Man, too, has
inarticulate language as even have the beasts, which, when his heart is
bursting with sorrow or with joy too deep for words, supplies their place,
and, by reducing him to the level of a brute, emulates its truthfulness.
The cry of terror or delight can neither be simulated nor deceive; and
" childhood's moan o'er a mother's grave" is as beautiful and true as the
dog's wailing howl for its slain companion. But man has more than this?
he has articulate speech! He alone can associate sound with sense,?
change the fleeting tones of his voice into arbitrary and conventional signs,
?paint images in the air, as palpable to the ear as solid matter to the eye,
1?change sound into substance,?" give to airy nothing a local habitation
and a name," and fix imperishably in stone or brass not only his feelings
but his experience?not only what he felt, but what he did; and why he
did it. He alone can communicate his knowledge, and that not only to
those about him, but to distant lands and times : so that each child begins
life upon his father's shoulders. The experience of ages constitutes the
base of his own temple, and that of his child's children down to the
remotest generation. Each after each will be spared his trouble; all they
have to do will be to add to the mighty Babel of human knowledge aught
they may discover of the new and the true; and, however small the con-
tribution, the man who adds but one brick to the building may exclaim,
with Horace, "Exegi monumentum fere perennius!" Intellectually,
therefore, articulate language, and that alone, constitutes the distinction
and the supremacy which separate man from every living animal but
himself; and if it be objected that some are dumb even from birth, I
answer, that some lose their legs and some their arms,?some are deaf, and
some are blind; and yet, legs, and arms, and eyes, and ears, essentially
belong to the genus man; and the accidental privation of either affects not
his description.

Animals have all his perceptive powers,?all his reflective. In the
feeble development of these latter, however, is to be found the degree of
inferiority which belongs to them. They can analyze and trace analogies,
?they can readily connect consequence and cause,?but all these intellec-
tual processes are limited to their own personal wants and experience,
bounded by their own mental horizon. They cannot reason upon abstrac-
tions,?not because they want reason, but because they have no abstract
ideas; and why they have none will be determined when we come to
investigate, should an opportunity be allowed, the moral difference be-
tween other animals and man.
