On The Psychical Progress of Nations
=====================================

51
Art. iil_

" The internal development of mind, so far as it is historical, belongs as
mucli as the external events of politics, to the department of human history."
Sclilegel.
The history of a nation is the history of a collective mind, for it is that
?^lnch projects and governs its actions. As individuals compose a com-
munity. biography is the record of its common psychological character;
So that a complete review of the psychical progress of nations is indeed
a ^tory of the world.
In tracing this progress from its outset, we must of course find our-
selves at once in a dilemma, as the obscurity of ancient history renders it
ithcult to decide where the apocryphal ends and the authentic begins.
The pages of sacred writ, abounding as they do with symbol and
legory, require the deepest study and attention ere the divine can pre-
sume to expound and interpret their grand and awful truths. Man is
introduced to us at the dawn of creation as a pure and innocent being,
resh from the hands of his Maker, an emanation, indeed, of the divine
essence, endowed with qualities of which, as they partook of the angelic
nature, and were fraught with holy intelligences and inspired knowledge,
can merely form conjecture.
Even for ages after the fall, we are told that there was immediate and
special communication of the Creator with man, which, as it implies a
subversion of those natural laws that, as it seems to us, now govern
the universe, have been termed special or supernatural. The history of
le antediluvian world, therefore, can no more form a part of our essay
an the fables of Confucius or of Ovid.
Early profane history is so emblazoned "with myth and exaggeration,
, ^ ^e selection and sifting of their truths is a work of still greater
1 culty. The origin of almost every race is shrouded in obscurity?
every ancient country had its mythical period, so that almost every his-
ian of olden time opens his volume with a romance. The professed
e-writer returns the compliment in kind, by so blending fiction and
' that shallow readers are completely bewildered in the maze??
more truth-like the fiction, the greater of course will be the dilemma.
^ plays of Shakespeare and the novels of Scott may in after ages excite
or T?h controversy as the chronicles of the Cid, the poems of Ossian,
e epics of Homer. It is thus genius flings a gauze veil over the
b?ght mirror 0f truth.
a Psychical history of a nation, then, is a history of itself?its
0f ? nS' .1^s exploits, its manners, its literature, are the manifestations
its mind?the impulse of its psychical forces. For as it is with the
e 2
52 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
being, so is it, from tlie sympathy of surrounding circumstances, with
the nation of which he forms a part.
If the world had progressed in its primitive state of innocence, we
may believe that a regular progression of the intellectual development
of nations may have ensued; but rivalry, ambition, discord, war?the
results of sin?have combined to thwart this Utopian march.
As nations and empires rise and fall, so of course the intellectual
character of its members will flourish and decay. We must not, however,
strictly measure the one by the other, nor must we always refer the
political decline of an empire merely to a decadence of its intellectual
energies. Young nations will again and again begin de novo?so that,
however they may profit by the records and the wisdom of their prede-
cessors, the universal mind is, as it were, broken up into sections, and
we must often be content with tracing the psychical development of a
nation as almost isolated from the influence of others.
Now if the globe were tenanted by one solitary being, it would be
almost a folly to write about the development of his intellect. This
tenant of the creation would, in the absence of psychical collision, be in
every sense of the word a mere egotist?a slave to his animal instinct:
his mind would ever centre in itself; for he would experience no blend-
ing of thought,?no excitement of the higher sympathies. INI an would
be a mere animal, with a superior or more extended capacity than other
breathing things, and scarcely, perhaps, making a better use of his senses.
However Camper might argue the accuracy of his facial angle, or Gall
map out the surface of his cranium, still the facial mensuration would
deceive, and the encephalic organization would, psychologically, be little
more than a blank, in consequence of the want of influence to bring out
its faculties.
If we would contemplate the immediate dawn of mind, and the rela-
tive influence of instinct and reason, we should perhaps study the isolated
child or solitary savage; but these phenomena are most rare, and we
must be content to watch the gradual unfolding of the mind, warped and
modified as it ever will be by the incessant sway which surrounding
circumstances exert over its progress, and to reconcile, as far as we can,
psychology with general history.
We must not pause to compare the impulsive power, the centrifugal
force, the unvarying agency of instinct with our self-controlling reason,
?nor to inquire how far Rousseau and Monboddo were justified in their
libellous comparisons,?nor to discuss the nature of mind. This would be
vain, for the deepest philosophers, from Aristotle and Plato to our time,
have differed, widely differed, in their psychological speculations. We
must, however, be at once convinced that this mind is a germ to be
developed. The savage, as Reid has hinted, may have the seeds of ?
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATTONS. 53
logician or a saint, which only wait to be vivified, somewhat as the
atching of an animal ovum. Thus Peter the Great, from his bright
** vivifying example and legislation, brought out all the intellect of
le Muscovite boors, which otherwise would have yet been but a latent
t,ermj aud made his Russia one of the most powerful nations of the
earth.
-luis national mind is often thus pent up, as it were, and not mani-
e(*" waiting for its exciting cause?an agency most varied and
subtle, and immensely complicated. The spring of some of our own
Commotions was a mere expression of a man of high influence; and that
o the second French revolution, the obstinacy of a citizen-king. So
gla when this spark of mind is blown on, it will burst forth like wild-
, 'lu consequence of its psychical sympathies or imitative propensity,
"rtness tlia Am'/io?;?, ^  +i>?
^mati,?the Mormons, &c. &c. And all this may be pathologically
explained; for the brains of all are excited, the disease becomes
eIJiuemic, and while it rages they call it an age of reason; soon, liow-
e\er> *? be terminated by the downfal of debased tyranny. Even now
JJdJions of minds are so imprisoned, and only wait an occasion to burst
lr bounds. The late simultaneous overthrow of thrones and dynas-
s proves that the seeds of rebellion are universally scattered.
progress of social life is one train of antagonisms. Instinct and
r?ason are constantly warring against each other. There are infinite
laues of difference displayed in this struggle?even in individuals of
e same family,?and what is true of a tribe, is true, on a larger scale,
of a nation.
-ttr
must not, however, reason abstractedly on this point, otherwise
nnght conjecture that two beings, placed in the same circumstances,
display the same traits of character?that the copper Indian might
p UU_ in-hand in the march of intellect with the Mexican and the
ceTdVlaU" r^'e science ethnology must be deeply studied ere we pro-
se^ t<J a t"S(luisition on the psychical progress of mankind. The primal
a ? the migration and the present locality, of every race should be
_ niplated,?a study in ethnological science which the maps of
r|tc iard and the erudite history of Latham* will tend to elucidate.
Ave ^ ari?ns conditions of the brain, also, must be demonstrated, ere
0j. Ctm Presnme to a full analysis of human action and the manifestation
k^wund, or even to laud a fellow-being for his virtues or his vices. We
0NV that cerebral conformation, even of individuals of the same race,
?ver S an 1U^u^e varicty, and exerts a most potent and varied influence
le ^leart. Indeed we may, as moralists, venture to affirm, that it
* Tli v
F.U.s. V at',lr'1^ History of tbe Varieties of Man. By Robert Gordon Latham, M.D.
ouJon, John Van Voorst, Paternoster-row.
51 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
is almost as difficult for some to be evil as for otliers to be good. A
seeming virtue may scarcely have a motive, and vice may be so irresis-
tible as to call forth, not an anathema, but even our pity, to temper our
judgment. Not that we would foster the maudlin mercy so much in
fashion, that qualifies every dastardly attack as the irrepressible impulse
of a maniac; but we would soften down the asperity with which we might
be disposed to deprecate the acts of those whose natural temperament
renders them morbidly prone to a course which others less excitable, and
even their own cooler judgment, would deplore and condemn.
We do not in this argue the all-in-all of organization. Education
may raise high a low capacity, and bad habits depress lofty intellect.
The truth lies midway between the sceptics and proselytes of phrenology.
The scientific study of ethnology has proved to us the value of compara-
tive phrenology in our analysis of national character. Not that we
presume to solve the problem once proposed?" Given, a physical man,
to find the true intellectual scope of genius;" but we lay it down almost
as an axiom, that intellectual quality is at least intimately associated
with the relative proportions of cerebral to the rest of the nervous tissue.
But this rule, even among the lower varieties of our race, must be taken
with exceptions. We find the idiot, the acephalous monster, born among
the most perfect of the European races; so do Ave find an occasional ele-
vation of development even in the wilds of -(Ethiopia, with its corre-
sponding psychical superiority. But these may be deemed the lusus
natures, and, perhaps more than aught else, prove and illustrate phreno-
logical truth. The divine indeed has based his cmfo'-phrenological argu-
ments on the faith of these exceptions, forgetting that there may be an
exalted as well as a debased phenomenon of nature.
Then, although the capacity may be indicated by high frontal deve-
lopment, we must remember that the tissue of the brain may be
abnormal?either the hemispherical ganglion that conceives or regulates
the thought, or the tubular neurine that transmits it, may be diseased ;
and we believe that many psychical phenomena may be explained by a
mere want of balance between these portions of the brain?in opposition
somewhat to the hypotheses of our late friend Dr. Wigan, with whom
we have had the gratification of exchanging thoughts and books.
Cowper's grey-matter, for a whimsical instance, might be firm and
originate a healthy idea, but the soft medulla might soon feel fatigued
by its transmission; while Walter Scott's well-balanced organization
carried on its work with energy and harmony. Perchance some of
these deviations may be referred to the parental age, state of mind and
body, at the moment of impregnation, a subject which, although we do
not follow up, engaged even the attention of that shrewd lady, the Mar-
gravine of Anspach. The more the capacity of the cranium, then, e%-
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 55
<5eeds that of the face, we may look for a higher grade of intellect. The
reverse of this, so characteristic of the darker races, is not more con-
spicuous than the inferiority of their psychical character?especially in
the inhabitants of South Africa and the Polynesian islands, and the Arctic
0r hyperborean regions : and it is further illustrated by the facility of
their extermination by the white races.
t ^he aborigines of Australia, of Papua, of Congo, and other African
istricts, and even those of New Zealand, are characterised by the most
degrading sensuality. Many of the southern Tasmanians have no idea
a deity, and their lives are one course of cruelty and crime. A mere
dream is both an impetus and an excuse for the most diabolical act.
It is true that Barrow, Park, Barbot, and others, have eulogised the
and generous disposition and chastity (!) of the black races, even of
the Hottentot and Bosjesman, and have stated that they lend a wil-
nS ear and are easily converted by the missionaries. But even if it be so,
their generosity is as much a blind impulse as their revenge?it is cer-
tainly not philanthropy. The Polynesian as well as iEthiop disregard
^ lth the most ungrateful indifference the valuable treasures which nature
a? scattered round them, and especially the bounteous fertility of their
Dative soil. It is asserted, too, that some of the Bushmen, as well as the
3ciuimaux, are so stolid, that, like the Yahoos of Swift, they are scarcely
^Vorth making slaves of.
As we ascend in cranial proportions, we see corresponding psychical
development?the Malay, and many of the Americans," and the insular
Mongols are still inferior. Of the natives of Java, as a wondrous
exception, Sir Stamford Baffles tells us they have no penal laws, be-
cause they have no crime !?resembling in this the Pimos of Western
1;aerica; who, as Father Font informs us, neither steal nor quarrel,
and therefore need no criminal or civil tribunals.
The American Indians, Dr. Yon Martius asserts, are the lowest in
psychology?but this may be explained by Bobertson's affirmation, that
le Spaniards petted their negro slaves, and thus reduced the status of
e Indians; the Chaymas, and the Darien people, however, have to this
y scarcely any idea of the science of numbers.
Ven the Mexicans and Peruvians, together with psychical obtuse-
^ess, Possess a corresponding apathy or want of sensibility, to which the
^ 111 courage has been applied. Bobertson eulogises the Mexican
ramngs with coloured feathers; but, like the Chinese pictures and
carvings, they were merely mechanical and of fine colours, indicating?
c o also their casas grandes, as well as the temples and palaces of
? Incas in Peru, and the elaborately carved temples with pinnacles
^ 1C ^ordova discovered in 1817, among the Maya race, and which
?W exist in Yucatan?not a spark of genius.
50 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
When Cortez, with 500 men, came to Montezuma, although his
city was immense and his court inagnificent(?), and when he erected the
Cross and the Virgin and destroyed the idols of Zempvalla, this legion
of warriors made no resistance. Their language, however, is marked by
an unity that proves their depressed character not altogether depending
on psychical causes. Historians have also eulogised the lofty virtues of
the Incas, and Molina especially of the Araucans of Chili; but this
again is more apathy than noble endurance, a quality which is exhibited
in the coldness of their passions. In such a clime we might suppose
their love to have been a lava flood instead of that indifference, in which
indeed they resemble their more savage neighbours, among whom
women are degraded and despised, treated as slaves, and slighted to that
degree that few of them are prolific, and if the mother dies during
lactation her child is buried with her.
The savage and the negro especially are conscious of their inferiority,
and contemplate the accomplishments of the white races with wonder
and envy, and without the slightest hope of imitation. Mungo Park
especially alludes to this feeling in his account of Pisonia. When
Columbus, too, first landed on Hispaniola, the natives thought he was
a god, and worshipped him. This sentiment seems also to have infected
the natives of Oriental India; else the myriads of Hindus, especially
those of the Sunderbunds, would not have quailed before a handful of
Europeans, with which Clive and Hastings began and completed the
conquest of Hindostan. And yet they were among the descendants of
that people who, under the command of Porus, drove Alexander back
from the Punjaub.
Now individual examples of psychical excellence have, though rarely,
shone among the inferior races, as we see cretinism and idiocy among
the most enlightened communities. We are now visited by the con-
verted chief of a tribe of Ojibbeways, who speaks our language fluently,
eloquently, and has conceived and laboured in the grand project of
civilizing the Indians of the North-West. But these, as Ave have before
hinted, are exceptions to the rule?otherwise Capitein, Omai, Feodor,
and Thay Endanega, would not be cited as phenomena among the
./Ethiopian Malay, Mongol, and American races. They are not types
of their races. Strange is it, then, that arguments should be adduced
from this against a science on the ground of exceptio7is.
We must believe, then (whatever Humboldt and others have, written
to the contrary), that certain races of men are physically deficient in the
highest attribute of our being, reason; and especially regarding the
analysis of the relation of psychical impressions with externals. The
minds of many of them are, therefore, cyphers?they are animals of sense
and sensation, and little more,?reasoning, like a dog, merely from
ON THE rSYCHICAL TROGRESS OF NATIONS. 57
memory. They can scarcely conceive of mind distinct from matter, or
trace more than the immediate step from an effect towards a cause; and,
therefore, they of course stop far short of first truths.
Their thought is a vain dream; and as they have little power of con-
trolling or directing it, their intellect may he deemed a mild insanity,
fadeless and wandering, without the faculty of attention, the basis of all
mental exertion. In foresight, for example, how deficient is the Carib,
^ho will sell his hammock in the morning, when refreshed by sleep, not
reaming that he shall need it again ere night comes on; and will neg-
his sheltering hut when winter is gone.
Our chronological tables scarcely allude, in matters of science and
erature, to others than the Caucasian variety of the old arrangement,
a few of the Mongols. Some of the Transatlantic tribes are endued
^th very acute sense and energy; but these qualities, any more than
le stolidity of the Malay, and the grovelling nature of the yEthiop, come
??t within the category of intellect. These races, in different degrees as it
^'ere imperfect, constitute four of the five varieties, in the favourite
assification of Blumenbacli, and two of that of Cuvier, which was com-
posed ?f three; the six varieties of the Systema Naturae of Linnaeus
}nS a geographical error. In the varieties of man just quoted, the
. 1Partite division combined with the ethnographic system of Pritcliard,
ls nearly preserved mutato nomine; save that some of the psychically
Superior classes, as the Turks, the Magyars, Circassians, and Georgians,
^e blended with the Mongolidae, the Japetidse, European, and Asiatic,
.eillg pre-eminent in psychical excellence, and withal, with the excep-
*l?n of the Ugrians and the Turks, the conquerors and masters of the
^?rld. Tiie researches of Dr. Latham are acute and laborious, and will
. ^e the effect of simplifying the science of ethnology, and of reconcil-
S the psychical and philological history of mankind.
iegarding this psychical depression, we may refer, on the ground of
analogy aU(j Qf higtorical record, to one influential cause, especially
eryed among the Jews, and some other races, who, from principle,,
custom, law, or isolation, are exclusive in their generation. The Negro,
^ lstaste did not so often counteract it, might somewhat improve his
reed by crossing?indeed, we do see both beauty and intellect advanced
t?.t intermingling of races. The infusion of European blood into-
sa\age races at once raises the psychical character. The Mestigo,
i ,TSS ^tween the European and the American Indian, is of higher
? e ect than the Mulatto, the offspring of a white and a Negro, and,
1 ee , little inferior to the Creole, who is of European blood, born in a
^ransatlantie clime. My esteemed, and I fear lamented friend, John
rau -lin, assured me, that the psychical qualities of the half-breeds of
or i America were far superior to that of the races devoid of European
58 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
blood. The Persian nobles thus improved both the physical and psy-
chical qualities of their races, by alliances with their Georgian captives.
If we contrast the intellectual beauty of the Persian nobility with that
of the Peninsular, who are almost exclusive in their unions, we shall at
once be inclined to refer it to the excellence of Circassian development.
Their breeding in-ancl-in, we may believe, has often depressed both the
constitution and intellect of royal and noble families, as well as of the
Hebrew race. The system of crossing, indeed, is a lex scripta among the
breeders of flocks and herds?to which, perhaps, the vigour of bastardy
may offer some analogy;?the dwindling also of the potato tuber is cer-
tain if it be limited to one locality or soil.
If we measure psychology on geographical principle, we shall discover
that the seat of science has been limited to the temperate zone, and has
ranged between the 35tlx and GOtli degrees of north latitude. And
here, also, we have the clearest proof of the importance of organization
in psychical advance, displayed in the comparative intellectual powers
of different races within these degrees; those of central Asia, for in-
stance, compared with those of Europe. Even among the Chinese, the
highest of the Asiatic Mongolidte, slavery is the fashion, from the chief
mandarin, downwards.
There is also something of an interesting assimilation between the
corresponding latitudes of the old and new world. Of this the Mugri-
sians, the Samoiedes, the Ugrians, the Fins, the Kamscliatkadales, and
the Esquimaux, are examples. The Tartar corresponds Avitli the Mexican,
the Moor with the Floridan or the Natches, some of the least unintel-
lectual among the Transatlantic aborigines: the Malay with the Yucatan;
the Papuan with the Carib; the Albinoes of Darien with the Negroes
of Africa, among which, indeed, are observed whole families of white
Negroes; these, however, are mules or abortions, rather than a race.
If we compare the varieties of man, regarding their power of resist-
ance, even among conquered nations, we find them greater in the Cauca-
sians, and also their faculty of imitation or acquirement of knowledge
from their victors. The Britons and Celts soon profited so much by the
contemplation of their invaders, that they eventually turned and dis-
lodged them. The Polynesians have never learned this lesson from their
conquerors. These aborigines, evincing little more than a tutored
instinct, continue to drudge and grovel in their slavery, and will, in the
end, be exterminated. The Tasmanians, located in one of the most luxu-
riant districts of the globe, had not begun to till the soil long after the
Europeans had settled among them and were reaping the rich harvests
of their cultivation.
Mere isolation cannot sufficiently account for all these deficiencies,
this tardy progress or abeyance of intellect. No doubt the collision?
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 59
the antagonism of intellect of an inferior with a superior race, will often
confer on it great improvement. The step of the ancient Romans to
eloquence and refinement was the example of Greece and Sicily. With
Nations of tlie same degree of capacity, this collision will ever prove a
Mutual benefit; for the intellectual races of the world are like the
learned societies of a metropolis?one communicates with the other, and
hotli discuss, and thus mind and truth are developed, the germs of know-
ledge are brought into light. As one field lies fallow another is tilled;
so the crops of science are perpetually springing, and new minds are
added to the intellectual world.
The immense facility of present intercommunication will speedily
effect wonders, and equalize and assimilate all the races displaying an
equal degree of cerebral development. The Georgian frontal beauty
ma)' not long want the corresponding grade of intellect, yet it has
hitherto been so. But Minerva may yet rebuild her temple in
^ estern Asia. It may be that some approximation of physiognomical
expression may also be effected by this interchange and culture of mind;
f?r as there must be organic development to ensure intellect, intellectual
study will modify the cranial proportions, so that in the end an un-
tutored European may display less intellect than a cultivated Asiatic
Mongol.
With cerebral development we might here combine temperament, age,
and sex?all deeply influential in the creation of character. The first only
comes within our limits. The constitution of the blood, as we see it in-
dicated, especially by hue and complexion, bears intimately on the sub-
ject. The terms melancholic, nervous, lymphatic, and sanguine, are but
definitions of condition dependent chiefly on the blood and its products.
^ et, although they are of national as well as individual importance, we
must leave them among the principles of general pathology. Not the
least effect of this intercommunication will be its influence on language,
to which psychical progress must be so much indebted, and by which it
may indeed be in some degree measured. If we regard the Polynesians,?
almost all the Oceanic Mongolidaj of Latham, except those of the Malay
Peninsula, and especially the Papuans,?we find the language one of
almost inarticulate gabbling, resembling, even in the opinion of the
peninsular Malays, the chattering of birds. In them there is no psychical
Progress; their faculty is like instinct, as it was in the beginning.
Even the Chinese and the Tibetian, among the Altaic Mongolidse
of Latham, though ingenious and clever, are certainly not intel-
lectual; the language is monosyllabic, aptotic, and puerile; the alpha-
etj which is hieroglyphic or rhsematographic, consisting of 80,000
Words. "We cannot believe that there can be a lofty psychical progress
when a dictionary can scarcely be learned or comprehended in a life.
CO ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
The other monosyllabic languages are those of Oriental Tartary, the
Malayan, and Indo-American districts, and we see at once their asso-
ciation with a low psychical development.
There are, however, many glossological problems to be solved. The
Yakuts, or Northern Asiatic Mongols, who resemble the Esquimaux
in character, possess a language intelligible in Constantinople. The
polysyllabic tongues indicate a race of higher intellect. The Indo-
Persic, the Grace-Latin, the Teutonic, with the Arabic and Hebrew, are
clearly and excellently adapted for the communication of ideas, and with
them we witness the perfection of intellect. The language of the Cir-
cassians, however, once deemed the model of a race, is not perfect?
" position," according to Dr. Latham, " doing the work of an inflection,"
?as ab-dce?-father-horse?the priority of ah indicating possession, or
the genitive case. The roots of language, however, may often be almost
forgotten when Ave are perusing the perfect glot. The various languages
comprehend five or six thousand families, split into innumerable dialects
or idioms seemingly dissimilar. Even those of Britain are five or six;
the Teutonic or German, the Scandinavian or Norse, and the Gaelic
and Cwmric branches of the Celtic, contributing to perfect our modern
English tongue.
We cannot attempt to analyse the system of glossology. Among
the families of Asia and Europe, however, very striking resemblances
are discovered between tongues at first apparently dissimilar, e. cj.
those of India, Persia, Greece, Bome, Germany, and perhaps the Scan-
dinavian or Norse, the Slavonic and the Celtic being still dissimilar;
these comprehend the intellectual races. The Tschudic, the Oceanic,
and others, are the medium merely of conversation and commerce.
Begarding the intermingling of races also, Ave have in glossology a proof
of intellectual superiority: the most perfect or psychical language soon
becomes the common medium, as Ave see in the modern languages of
this day. We may yet refer all inflectional languages more or less to
classical roots. To analyse these would require a volume; and perhaps,
in attempting such a labour one might often come to this quaint con-
clusion of Goldsmith?by changing " Psam" into " A," and " mis" into
" toes," Ave prove, by a very natural and easy conversion, King Psammis
and Atoes to be one and the same man.
The analysis of Dr. Latham, lioAvever, is so acute and laborious, that
Ave may safely refer the curious philologist to his erudite volume. The
classification is more simple and more natural than that of previous*
systems, (the tripartite division of the human race being that Avhicli Ave
ourselves have long mentally adopted,) and it will assuredly form the
text-book of future disquisitions in ethnology.
We believe, then, that we may consider organization as the natural
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 01
essence of psychical development. The earliest history of mankind,
sacred and profane, refers with scarcely an exception to that race hitherto
termed Caucasian, including the Hindus of high caste, the Persian, and
4-1 T-1
e -Egyptian. With these we witness the dayspring of the arts, the
<lawn of early literature.
Sculpture was confined to the schools of Greece, Italy, France, and
?England, and painting to the latter three. The national mind of their
great cities lias loner trloried in the pre-eminence of their art. The
T?1 .
orentine, like the ancient Athenian, looks on his glorious city with
alm?st a filial veneration. The magnificence of the Oriental temples,
Salsette, Elephanta, even Thebes and Carnac, does not indicate so high
a degree of development; its beauty is merely that of gorgeous and ex-
quisite detail; it possesses no architectural proportion or symmetry that
aPproaclies the styles of the gothic or classic lands. We allude to India,
China, and Persia, and not, of course, to Palmyra and Balbec.
The pillars and huge structures of Egypt, the pyramids, Memnon, and
^le Sphinx, like the Cyclopean works of Greece, the colossal statues
that La Perouse and Cook discovered in Easter Island, and our own
Stonelienge, certainly excite our wonder, but it is the admiration of
Magnitude: they are the effects of slave-labour, the co-operation of a
servile clan. The newly discovered Transatlantic temples, especially
those of Yucatan, which, as they closely resemble the Oriental, indicate
an ethnological mystery yet to be unfolded, are curious, but not beautiful.
Regarding India especially, perhaps the division of the nation into
Rervile castes may have somewhat to do with this. The Brahmin was
ordained to pray and teach, the Chehetree to fight, the Bice to till and
traffic, and the Sooder to serve and labour. If he violate these rules of
ls caste he is excommunicated and outlawed, and is called a Pariah or a
Chandela. Thus the Hindu mind has been fettered, whatever his genius,
?ne line of exertion, and he must of necessity lag behind the freeborn
Ur?Pean, whose genius is allowed full scope to soar as his enthusiasm
^ay direct or impel him.
It has been affirmed that we are now below the ancients in the march
science. Guizot has asserted that " modern literature is far inferior
to the ancient." Is it so1? No; our modern works are little short of a
Oracle, and if the magic of engineering slept with Archimedes, (and we
accept no more than a tithe of his greatly-exaggerated power,)
Beaton and Telford, and Brunei and Stephenson, have, with a glorious
Purpose, roused it from its slumbers. The works of their lofty genius
are evidence of the progressive nature of intellect. )
> in the composition of colour, Correggio and Titian, and Claude and
ri lo, ruay have been pre-eminent, the modern English school far
!pses them in conception, freedom, and delicacy of touch.
(52 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
In the senate, the elegance of Cicero and the energy of Demosthenes-
have been at least equalled by many a modern statesman; and the Vir-
gilian numbers must yield to the magnificent genius, the poetic beauty,
and the exquisite verbiage of Byron.
The perfection of the wondrous creations, the universality of genius,
of the twin stars, Shakspeare and Scott, (for it is no profanation to asso-
ciate the bard of the Tweed with him of the Avon,) have gone forth, and
are confessed, throughout the civilized world.
But to favour this pre-eminence, were combined geographical position,
climate, temperature, soil; their blood was neither chilled into apathetic
and mindless indifference by the icy breath of the Arctic circle, nor their
temperaments disordered, their dispositions degraded, nor their energy
dropped, by the hot winds of the tropics. Their lives were not, like
those of the hyperborean races, one unvaried course of defence against
elemental foes, nor of voluptuous indulgence, like those of the equinoc-
tial or tropic people. The sun smiled on their climate like a mild and
fostering nurse, rendering it beautifully varied and congenial.
They were, therefore, surrounded by circumstances calculated to foster
social and intellectual development; there was a combination of favour-
ing causes.
Tasso would not have recorded his voluptuous love-breatliings amid
the snows of Zemla, nor would the pencils of Ilaphael and Correggio
have created their divinities had they set up their easels amid the sands
of Sahara.
In the marshes we see the lymphatic temperament prevail, combined
with indolence and mental sloth. Abdera was so characterized that
stupidity was termed " Abderitica mens!" When we are compelled to
resist an excess of evil?the stern realities of life?instinct, as in the
Esquimaux, is called into play, rather than reason. In cold, heat,
hunger, there is little scope for the poetry of existence. Eulogise as
we may the genius of Burns, Bloomfield, Hogg?would they not have
written better in the smiles of prosperity, in trimming that native fire
which reverses could not altogether quench? For after all there was much
common stuff emanating from their pens, and they eminently failed in
farm-keeping and shoe-making. All that we can say is, " they were
very fair notwithstanding
As a rule, therefore, the intellectual being is more perfect if he
breathes an atmosphere congenial to the expansion of mind: and a
hue is often imparted to the species of intellectual blossoming and fruit
by the especial qualities of climate. In the sunny clime of the Medi-
terranean, poetry and painting found a home. Cradled amid the shadows
of the glorious Appenines, smiled on by the sun, o'ercanopied by the
" deeply, darkly, beautifully blue" arch of heaven, the sister arts have
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. G3
keen instilled into hearts and minds almost from infancy. Still would
^ e not imply that mind is cold or barren in proportion as it approaches
10 Arctic circle. The Scandinavian Sagas, the Skalds of Iceland,
Psala, Stockholm, Gustavus, Linnaeus, Berzelius, Jenny Lind, will
indicate the claims of the Baltic to all posterity.
^ et organization hears its sway, although the constitution of the mind
^le constitution of the climate contrast and oppose each other.
^ ycumstances may alter, they will not metamorphose the intellectual
1Qg. His superiority will loom out at the equator, " or Zemla, or
le Lord knows where," while the iEthiop will never soar, although the
kc? d an(l the French Academy to boot, were to take him in
" Ccelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currant."
E\en the old Roman spirits do not sleep. The Trasteverini still
f ?f their Roman lineage, and even their descent from Troy; and
^ssic physiognomy does not belie them.
^ 0 attempt to trace the course of the human mind, from its dawn to
Present hour, must be as futile as to adduce an abstract cause for
?Vp^T ^e^ectual manifestation.
lu the very origin of a nation, it is clear, if we adduce Eomu-
Us> Lrahma, or Odin, as founders, that history at once dwindles to a
e- The maps, too, are marked with the sites of illustrious countries
cities?Babylon and Ilium, for instance"; yet the locality and limits
le first, as well as those of Assyria, Syria, Phoenicia, Scytliia, and the
^ery existence of the second, are still doubted. The date as well as the
Nation of ancient kingdoms, and their relative priority of birth,
niUst often be mere conjecture. We must, therefore, ever commence
ofyask at a far later date than their affirmed birth. The early records
in Assyria, Chaldsea, India, China, Greece, Rome, are all involved
? fcunty. The researches of Rawlinson and Layard may unfold much
this mystery.
Then the ancient and modern histories regarding religion and language
and^ GSSentially differ- The Egyptians, once the subjects of the Pharaohs
oiemies, are now a jumble; the Arab hordes, once Sabeans, are
?* lahomedans; and the Copts are Christians.
roughout the earlier ages the heathen philosophy of the Hindu
?f?th U -Egyptian priests was blended with the glowing psychology
that i S?ns.0^ ^ran a^ter the victories of Cyrus and Cambyses, imparting
u eautiful though completely imaginative tone to the psychical
dieter of the then known world
Nation DaUS^ a^S0 constantly separate the early and the late theology of
le ' T Bel, Dagon, Thaumuz, do not now reign as the mytho-
&1Ca of the Egyptians, the Assyrians, and the Syrians. The grand
C4 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
metempsychosis from imagination to rationalism took place on the
field of Marathon, when the Hellenes overcame the fire-worshippers, and
a, colder philosophy, still blended with the myths of the Zend and the
Sanskrit which tinge and taint our classic pages, was adopted. This
maybe termed the second grand spring of the human mind; for although
Homan arms subdued the bodies of Greece, the psychical stamp of the
Hellenic philosophy and poetry remains a model to our own day.
In the Oriental records we constantly discover the greatest ignorance
end presumption. The Japanese affirm the reign of one of their
emperors to have been more than two millions of years; and the
Hindus boast the high antiquity of their Sanskrit, also to hundreds of
thousands of years. The Chinese are equally bombastic, although the
real history of their religion cannot date further than 200 years before
the Christian era; while the Indian Sagas would locate the physical and
psychical birth of the world in the immediate vicinity of that mountain
range which, either on this account or that it is the geographical summit
of the globe, they have denominated Himalaya, or Heaven.
Now, wherever intellect had its birth in the east, it is clear that
its tide has set progressively westward. India, Persia, Chaldsea,
Assyria, Judtea, what now is the manifestation of their psychical
degree? slavery, bigotry, or ignorance; and the learning that was once
their pride and glory has fled to adorn and enrich the climes of Western
Europe.
Schlegel, with the peculiar intuition of his country, has compared,
very graphically, the mental elements of the four chief nations of the
primitive world.
The national mind of the Hebrews, he believes, was eminently
susceptible of divine truth; that of Egypt, deeply constructive and
skilled in the more abstruse mysteries of science,?as we learn, indeed,
from the description of the golden zodiac in the temple of Orymandes,
and other astronomical works; that of the Hindu is coloured (we may
write stained) by the most prurient imaginativeness; while that of China
is to this day, with all its idol-worship, the same simple theism as in the
time of Confucius?the slavery of sovereign reason.
This might once be true, but there has been much amalgamation of
these various attributes. There is much resemblance in poetic imagina-
tiveness between the Indian, the Persian, and the Hebrew, while the
Egyptian is completely metamorphosed.
The Altaic Mongolidse are still unchanged. The Chinese alone?the
" Mongol softened down"?although an isolated race, exhibit superior
psychical character. Literature scarcely forms a department of their
intellect; but their genius is extensively though not deeply blended with
the arts and luxuries of the world, of which silk, tea, and porcelain are
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 05
Ple daily illustrations. Their exclusiveness, isolation, narrow-minded
Jealousy, and tlie religion of Fo, which they profess in common with the
offsets of the empire, mark them as dissociated from the rest of the
Clylized world. Yet the analogies of their sacrifices, their laws, both
With other ancient nations and with the records of holy writ, point to
some yet unfolded secret.
Their offerings resemble those of the first brothers in Paradise. In
the countries bordering on Assam, one man is enjoined to marry his
pother's widow; and a lover, as in the land of Israel, wins or earns his
Wife by years of agricultural servitude; while the patriarchal system
is the prominent feature of family life. In some districts of the Thi-
.an c?untry, polyandry is said to have prevailed; but the history of
. Una and India, and Persia and Greece, exhibit so many close affini-
*les> that ethnology may have an interesting study even in tracing their
bogies and parallels.
The early records of the Greeks claim almost as high antiquity as the
e brews. Indeed, they refer to their king, Pelasgus, who gave his
lltaue to the primitive inhabitants of Greece, as " Earth's firstborn,"
and who eventually overran Italy, Spain, and other Mediterranean
Qds. They had also a deluge and an earthquake, which separated Ossa
Olympus. Sicyon is called the first Greek city; its date more
^'an 2000 years before Christ. Long after this, the Hellenes, the
auii, the Dorians, the Cadmians, the Argives, possessed the land. The
aSe of the heroes Perseus, Hercules, Theseus, Jason, Achilles, their
ln}'ths and polytheism, compose a fable, and we of course pass by their
etallic " dome of heaven," and the author, whoever he be, Avho wrote
10 "rst and finest epics of any age?the Iliad and the Odyssey, and take
as the first authentic instance of their wisdom, the confederacy of the
puictyonic Council, and the sources of their high pride of prowess
|~"^he Olympic, ISTemsean, and Isthmian games. Then follow thelegis-
th^6 W*S(^0IU Lycurgus, in Lacedtemon; of Solon, in Attica; and
e establishment of the first tripartite constitution of king, lords, and
^ommons?then termed the Arclion, the Areopagus, and the Four
undred; and the school of Phidias, from which first beamed forth the
ecuons of ideal beauty. Let us but glance at all this, and we must
oniess the eminence of early Greece in aught that could ennoble and
a,1?m a heathen race.
ca/01? 300 to 500 years before Christ, a resplendent constellation still
a halo over Greece: Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, in philosophy;
t'mostheneg, iu tbe Senate; Sophocles and iEschylus, in the drama;
the |aS ant^ ^eux*s' the arts; Miltiades, Themistocles, Leonidas, in
p . a ^eld; Hippocrates, in the science of medicine. The noble
ieon was built by Pericles, and adorned by the magic chisel of
Ko- xiii. F
66 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
Phidias. These, and many other men and deeds of worth, must mark
the palmy days of Greece as the most glorious sera of the world.
For a long period ancient history records a series of intestine and
foreign wars. For two centuries, at least, there was a dearth of high
psychical character: but an sera was approaching which was to throw
a holy light over the path of man. Anaxagoras, the first Unitarian, had
sapped the foundation of polytheism, and proved the being of one deity
?the source of nature; Scipio, by the third Punic war, had destroyed
Carthage, the mistress of half the then known Europe, and with her,
the last of the great blood-sacrificers; and Plato, by his disquisition on
the immortality of the soul, paved the way, as it were, for the Christian
sera.
The triumph of peace in moulding the national psychology of Rome
rendered the Augustine sera so illustrious as to become a proverb. Virgil,
Ovid, Horace, Cicero, Livy, Tibullus, rendered their age the spring of that
sparkling brilliancy that even now delights the classic mind; but the
character of that early sera, like that of pagan Greece; was not virtue.
Stoicism, it might be; but that was but another name for heathen pride.
As yet there was no divine light to consecrate the mind and heart.
Men were the rational pupils of Nature, and adored her with a blind
worship?self-murder Avas a virtue! Even the honied numbers of
Virgil and Horace were debased by licentiousness; and it is a melancholy
evil that those pages, which abound with all the beauty, melody, and
sublimity of poetry, should teem Avith the most debasing immorality.
After an age in which sloth or vice had infected the rulers of pagan
Rome, and contentions inflamed the minds both of patrician and plebeian,
the sun of Christianity arose, and as it purified and softened the hearts
of men seems to have changed the psychical character also of the age.
History and biography Avere the subjects of the pen?the gospels and the
records of the apostles' acts engrossed the mind. The Plinys, Josephus,
Tacitus, Floras, Plutarch, compiled their histories, until at length Con-
stantine removed the seat of empire and learning to Byzantium, and
spread Christianity to the shores of the Bosphorus. This transplanta-
tion did not produce much advance of intellectuality, although the
Greek denizens avIio Avere called the Byzantine historians, have left volu-
minous records. And when the second Mahomet again conquered
Constantinople from the Greeks, the doAvnfall of all intellectuality
ensued. The only evidences indeed of psychical energy or eminence
being displayed in their architecture, especially the Mosques, as that of
the Moors during their sojourn in Spain Avas by the construction of
an Alhambra.
The Greek emigrants deluged Rome and Constantinople Avith Hellenic
literature, and from thence the Western nations of Europe, Italy*
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 67
prance, Germany, Britain, Florence, which subsequently, under the
ledici and Bessarion, became almost Greek academies.
Aristotle and Plato were the great oracles of the schools of psychology
aQd natural history, and the terms of art and science were defined by
reek names. It was the Latin language, however, that characterized
all the northern shores of the Mediterranean, the Peninsula, and indeed
the European nations not originally Sclavonic, as Russia and Po-
and, and Illyria on the Adriatic shore, and the Roman alphabet,
ended with the Greek, became the prototype of all the present alplia-
ets ?f the intellectual world. Even when, in the 17th century, the
toman influence had waned, and Gaul, Britain, Spain, and Italy were
^le abode of Franks, Saxons, Goths, and Lombards, the classic lan-
guage was still that of the church and theology.
We therefore regard Rome as the great centre or focus of intellect into
^hich the Orientals, the Greeks, and the Germans poured their treasury
learning, to be concentrated at last in the west. At the time Gregory
e<l the papal chair his mind was engrossed by his missions. The chief
0ccupation of his monks was the writing and illumining of missals,
Until Augustine infused the light of Christianity into the British people,
a branch of that race which Dr. Latham calls Indo-Germanic Japetidaj,
^ossed with the Kelts or occidental Japetida?, from their first seat in
e central regions of Europe, the farthest point to which we can trace
them.
^lle desire for learning which Augustine imparted to the Britons was
ni0re and more fostered by the Anglo-Saxons, (although the myths and
steries of the Teutonics tinged for a time the mind of the British
iS Gs as we even now discover in the derivations of our week-day
Raines) until Alfred in his wisdom established the first English constitu-
n> about the period when Charlemagne was endeavouring to enlighten
'ranee. It
is curious that light poetry from the lips of his mother
ou d have brought out the first truly great mind that shone upon
^ British isles. .
The translation of a portion of the sacred Scriptures and of Bedc's
?ryj the endowment of public schools, and the mission of the first
mi ^ expedition to India, prove the enlightened scope of Alfred's
? But Alfred had been twice to Rome, and had received the royal
st?n f-?m Leo tlie Third'
clia 1 ^ example conferred no lasting mark on the psychical
sji^ae^er ?f the Anglo-Saxons, whose intellectual attainments were
e> ed, and termed barbarian ignorance, even by the unintellectual
Normans.
Sax ?re ^1G ^on(lues^ Britain was composed of three races, Anglo-
onj Gallic, and the Cwmri; a strange compound of Angles, Saxons,
f 2
08 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
Cambrian, and Pictish Kelts, Irish and Scotch, and Manx Gaels, and
different districts of our isles Avere characterized by the Saxon, the Mer-
cian, the Hibernian, and Caledonian idioms. In our own day, the Irish
or Erse idiom is confined to their western counties and the lower classes
of Erin?the Caledonian to the western isles and the Highlands, and
Manx to the mining and northern districts of Man.
After the Conquest, the national mind was long agitated, especially
by contentions with the Saxons, until the reign of Henry the First,
which was perhaps the most quiet and peaceful one of British annals.
It was not, however, until the reign of the Second Henry, the most
accomplished and amiable prince of his time, that the psychical cha-
racter of the British nation was first elevated to an intellectual degree.
Even then the communication of ideas was little more than oral.
Records were few, consisting of Anglo-Saxon runes, a few monkish
missals, and the manuscripts of the clerici or clerks : although even in
pagan Borne there was a sort of printing, and, as Boger Bacon informs
us, a sort of block printing, even then in China. But there were no
master minds to work out a discovery like those of Guttenburg and
Caxton to perfect that art, which produced the greatest psychical reno-
vation of the age, and which Luther felt eventually to be the greatest
help in the march of the Beformation, especially by the spread of the
Greek language, which he deemed essential to the study of the holy
books.
After the feudal system and the great charter had civilized and
quieted the people, the expanded mind of the third Edward raised still
higher the prowess and the fame of England. The battles of Cresci
and Poictiers were fought and won, and by the conquest of "Wales and
Scotland, England became Great Britain.
This was the period in which the Saxon and old English dialects be-
came pure English. Chaucer's poetry, " that well of English undefiled,"
and Mandeville's Travels, being the first well-written books of the four-
teenth century.
The wars of the Boses, an age of fraternal bloodshed, again blighted
the national mind, and filled the land with weeping and groaning.
Henry of Lancaster sat on a throne of thorns, and his son stained and
desecrated his reign with his domestic murders. The virtues of Edward
the Sixth again brought blessings on the land. In few brief years of
his reign, three large hospitals arose, which still cast a glory round his
name. England was a school of pure charity?too soon to be converted
again into a bloody arena. Let us sum up the murders of the Catholic
and the Protestant sisters. Jane Grey and Mary Stuart, Seymour,
Somerset, Dudley, Northumberland, Norfolk, and Essex, for state
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. GO
policy; Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, for heresy. Let us blusli for
tle dark side of human nature.
The age of Elizabeth, however, was studded with stars of learning,
e greatest of which was Bacon, whose inductive philosophy, in oppo-
sition to that of Leibnitz on the continent, enlightened, while it strength-
ened and purified the national mind. It was then the fashion for ladies _
be learned; the queen herself was deeply read, and not a little proud
in boasting of her attainments. Sidney, Spenser, Raleigh?above all,
x.spear, complete the psychical glory of the Elizabethan reign. This
Was the end of what was termed the middle English language, and from
tins period there was a change, not only of language itself, but of
national thought and sentiments.
During the Stuart dynasty, if we except the commonwealth and
le belligerent reign of the Nassau, learning and wit were not idle.
?yle and Newton, Sydenham and Harvey; Dryden, Butler, Otway,
?Pe, Addison; and Buckingham and Rochester, attest the psychical
eminence of Britain in philosophy, medicine, poetry, and wit.
To revert. The inundation from Scytliia seems to have populated the
eater part of Europe; to them the Cimbri or Danes, the Teutones or
ernians, and the Scandinavian, or Norse, owe their origin. Yet among
lem we perceive superstitions that closely resemble those of the Orien-
and even the transatlantic Indians. The Keltic Druids, like the
-"-nidus, the Peruvians, and the Carthaginians, burned victims on the
fltar, to propitiate their gods; and like the Pythagoreans, they believed
ln Metempsychosis.
The early creed of the Norse races was theism. It was a religion of
sensuality, like that of Maliomedans and of the classic mythology.
?tn m Odin's and Mahomet's paradise, voluptuous girls ministered to
10se renowned for earthly virtue. The valkas of Odin, however, were
*nore of the Hebe; Mahomet's houris, more of the Venus. Drinking,
lerefore, was the order of the day with Odin?sensuality with Mahomet,
.^et we are told the Goths taught the Southerns chastity. We doubt
? And it was seven hundred years after what they term the coming of
*n, ere they were Christianized.
1^. leir psychical scope was limited, the Runic stones and sticks
.'m? almost the only aids to memory, and confined to the Scandina-
^ scribes, who little dreamed of making a volume to record a train of
oughts and reasonings. Their intellect was debased; the poetry of
aeir scalds, or poets, absurd.
le discovery and settlement of Iceland and Greenland, however, are
^ ,UuilnP?rtant points in geography, as it was indeed the first discovery
x meiica, if Ave may credit the beautiful "Codex Flatoiensis," written
70 ON THE PSYCHICAL TROGRESS OF NATIONS.
on vellum by Eirek tlie Red, one hundred years before the first voyage
of Columbus.
The pages of Icelandic literature certainly indicate some genius, the
Eddaic being superior to the Skald and Saga writing; its style resem-
bling in a low degree the magnificent Arabian romance of Antar.
Like tlie Bedouins, the European Slavi were originally wanderers, and
were soon overwhelmed by Ostrogoths, Ugrians, and Fins. The offspring
of the Slavonians are Russians of the Greek church; and Servians, Poles,
and Illyrians, of the Romanist. Their psychical character was ever
low, rude warfare being their chief aim; although roots of their lan-
guage are interwoven with the classic. The spring of the intellectual
advance of the Russian, was the establishment of the Greek church by
Vladimir, and the baptism of the Princess Olga. The people had become-
half Christianized, when Yaroslof, the successor of this Russian Alfred,
like Egbert of England united many provinces. Still, commotions and
intestine war depressed the intellectual scale, until Peter I., by his
own quaint though firm example, raised the psychical and constructive
spirit of his nation, which Catherine, with all her grossness, still im-
proved, herself being a dramatic writer. Yet they were a nation of
serfs, until Alexander civilized the Russian boor by the foundation of
schools and universities, and orders of merit. How did his country
prove its gratitude? The czar, as we are informed by a noble lady,
walked at his coronation, "preceded by the assassins of his grandfather,
followed by those of his father, and surrounded by his own."
The first natives of the peninsula were Iberians; the Basque pro-
vinces, however, excite our greater interest psychologically, as their lan-
guage bears a more ancient date than any other in Europe, being spoken
not only throughout Spain and Portugal, but carried to the eastern shores
of the Mediterranean. The peninsula has, however, been the constant
victim of invasion. She was the prey of the Romans and of the Moors,
when the Arabic was the common language, until Ferdinand and Isabella,
the sovereigns of Aragon and of Castile, terminated the wars of the cross
and the crescent, and made Spain one kingdom, at the dawn of the 15th
century. From this period we may date the psychical progress of the
peninsula.
Although the scriptures were early translated into Spanish, a blind
fanaticism overspread the land. The psychical character partook of the
lieat of her climate, especially the first prose of Alonzo, and the poetry
of the monk Gonsalvo, and the composition of the Sequidilla and the
Spanish ballads.
The "Guerras de Granada" was the first model of the historical novel,
in which De Hita has preceded Scott, in making his hero of an enemy.
The lives of Gonsalvo de Cordova, of the Cid, and of other heroes,
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 71
evince the full conception of knight-errantry, which the racy romance of
"Don Quixote" so unmercifully attacked, and with almost as much
success as the Don himself did the wine-skins.
We trace the scope of the Spanish genius through a succession of
sparkling and imaginative works; those especially of the voluminous
dramatists, Lope de Yega and Calderona; of De Leon, the first Spanish
?de writer; of " Boscan and Garcilasso," over which Don Juan pored;
the racy novels of Lazarillo de Tormes and Guzman de Alfarasclie; and
the exquisite portraiture of Murillo and Velasquez.
Suddenly, in the 16th century, a blight came over the psychical march
Spain, chiefly the work of Cardinal Ximenes. The Inquisition arose
^ith all its horrors, and freedom of thought and pen were fettered and
arraigned. Not only did the flames destroy her sons, but all their valued
stores of literature. So the 17th century was a blank in Spanish psy-
chology^ and so also will be the 18tli.
The psychology of the oriental nations points to India as one of the'
^ost interesting studies, as it is a sort of type of the higher intellect of Asia.
Its intellectual character, if we may judge from their ancient records, has
not progressed from the time of Megasthines?the period of her greatest
learning being as far back as her earliest authentic history. The science of
^etaphysics is profoundly treated in the Sanchya and Nyaya systems:
*u the former, natural philosophy and the infinite mind of its author.-
?But it is too transcendental, especially that termed the "i oya philosophy.
It is enough, however, combined with the beauties of its poesy, to prove
the deeply imaginative minds of the ancient Hindus.
In the Vedanta philosophy we are presented with that beautiful fiction
?f transmigration, which, we might believe, more than a score of Martin's
aets, would inculcate and ensure a freedom from cruelty to animals.
1^ey who believe that the souls of their relatives and friends pass into
the bodies of the brutes, will be loth to treat them harshly, but would*
rather cherish and protect them. This is one of the charities that almost
consecrates superstition. The psychology of India has been retrogressive.
Ker wealth and her fertility have attracted, from the earliest ages, the
broads of the invader. She has been conquered and enslaved in con-
sequence of her division into many small states, which either spontane-
ously warred with each other, or were inveigled into opposition by the
Uiore powerful victor; and thus, on the principle of " divide et imp era,
Hindostan still remains a sort of psychological problem.
The nature of climate, and other influences, cause the ethnological
characters of the Hindus and the Persians to approximate. Their
superstitions and their languages are also in close assimilation. The
^end and the Pali dialects are parallels of the Sanskrit and Prakrit of
the Brahmin. The solar theism also is common, in varied degrees, to
72 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
both countries. But we may extend this parallelism to countries re-
mote from these Oriental climes; the worship of Belus at Babylon, and
of Osiris in Egypt, suffice to associate the superstitions and theology of
nations. The Mosaic authority may be said to corroborate this belief,
as it refers to the resemblance of the two great monarchies in the world,
Elam and Egypt, the Persians and Hindus being the people of the
first. It is by these psychical resemblances that we are drawn imper-
ceptibly nearer to the illustrations of the Mosaic cosmogony. So that
the prosecution of ethnology, the Oriental researches of Layard, and the
wondrous unfoldings of paleontology, will progressively tend to reconcile
those historical discrepancies which have been the stumbling-block of the
divine and the triumph of the sceptic.
Egypt, throughout its various transitions, has imparted its character
to the surrounding countries?to those of Phoenicia and Chaldcea especi-
ally, its theology and its astronomical science. The Arabs were once
enlightened, and, we are told, mighty mathematicians. Some, however,
even before the birth of Islamism, were, like the Jews, a wandering
tribe, and possessing no fixed residence. The Bedouins lapsed into such
a state of unintellectuality, that it was termed their " time of ignorance?
passing their years, like the Scotch borderers, in inroads and maraudings.
They became gross idolaters, and lived in sexual socialism, a state which,
combined with errant habits, afforded no scope for psychical advancement.
The fixed tribes, however, adored the shrine of Mecca, once the dwelling
of Abraham and Ishmael, who was probably their primal ancestor, and
even prided themselves on their literature, and especially their orations,
which are stated to have been highly epigrammatic. At Ochadli they
held an annual poetical exhibition, and the Modhahabat, or Moallakat,
and the " golden verses," were hung up in the Caaba. This profanation
was abolished by Mahomet, and he gave them in lieu the holy war.
Their chief literary glory and inspiration was the wondrous tale of
Antar, a hero equal to Hercules or Achilles. It was written by Asmael
in the reign of Haroun Alrashchid, about the sera of Charlemagne. It
is highly extolled by Sir William Jones, who affirmed it to be very
superior to the tliousand-and-one nights, as a true picture of Arabian
life. Their name now designates a people that overrun the deserts of
two quarters, even as the Jew compasses the financial area of four quarters
of the globe. In a civilized sense, therefore, an Arab is but a name, al-
though the Semitic or Syro-Arabian language, together with the Hebrew
tongue, are placed by Scldegel at the summit of the dialectic pyramid.
The pyschical history of intellectual nations may be located within a
limited circle, if compared with the superficies of the globe, of which the
shores of the Mediterranean, and especially the classic lands, are the
southern bounds, the chief abode of the Iapetidse of Latham. The com-
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 73
plete psychical history of the varieties of man would here require, that
?ne sh?ul(l trace step by step the alphabets and the synonymes of lan-
guages, that we might accredit each nation with its due influence in the
progress of intellectuality and the advancement of art and science. We
0 not now wish to trench on the field of philology.
There are, however, casual or artificial causes sympathetically stimu-
a lng or depressing the functions of the brain; and others, above all,
ucatmg the mind, and regulating and curbing the will of man; all
exerting a potent influence over the psychical progress of nations.
The habits, customs, manners, and amusements of a people depend
somewhat on their temperament and capacity, and are constantly modi-
by the nature of their locality.
Among the lower races, customs and amusements often approximate
sely to the pursuits of their animals. The Ethiopians, and some of
10 Malays and Mongols, display in both extreme degradation. Their
''"misernents are licentious and brutish, and their occupation a tissue of
cruelties. The American is still an animal, but of a less ignoble nature
"~~his habits, however, tend to degrade the mind and heart?his war
lce aild his scalping inspire in his brain the most infuriated ecstasy;
revenge and cruelty for ever rankle in his heart. Even the course of
booing is stained by such an impetus; the affection and accomplishments
? a Wer being measured by the squaw according to the number of vic-
lms he has scalped. The habits and amusements of the northern Mon-
S?ls are marked by slothful luxury. The Esquimo, as he is a swinish
feeler, lives in a sty, and maunders away his useless life. The
mese Mongol is of course more refined and intellectual, but his sloth
and sensual luxury must ever be a bar to high mental expansion.
^ Intercourse with more civilized nations may ameliorate the sensuality
0 these beings; but the innate propensities will not be subdued,
especially if they have been encouraged in early life. We know the
Unpressiveness of a tender mind, and how difficult it is to eradicate the
^ baneful example and tuition.
le Swiss boy has been bred to the mountains; the islander, to the
?Cean; their habits and their pastimes will of course be those of crags-
^en aU(l fishers. The amusements of the town-bred will be the theatre,
fa 1 .C?ncer^' ^'e debating-society, and the club-room; and society and
iion wdl finish every one off as members of one great family.
le pride of birth, rank, and wealth, however, steps in constantly to
pre\ent the law and course of Nature. This exclusiveness imparts a
certain psychical character to classes at once to be recognised by an
accurate observer
T' ?
esprit du corps, too, is often ridiculously influential in giving tone
r'iincl. Every one appreciates, and often puffs over-mucli, the pursuit
74 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
in which he is an enthusiast; underrating, often, pre-eminent talent
engaged in other callings. The French dancing-master was astonished
that Queen Anne had made Harley, Earl of Oxford; for he had thrown
away two whole years on the dolt, and could not then teach him to
dance.
New lights sometimes burst suddenly on a land, which at once meta-
morphose the national mind. Thus, at the end of the fifteenth century,
on the conquest of Constantinople, the Greek and Latin manuscripts
deluged the western world. This, coupled with the ecclesiastical move-
ment of the day, poured out a cornucopia of learning into Italy. Dante,
and others under Cardinal Bembo, founded the classic school. NcW
views of geography, thus imported, led to the doubling of the Cape, and
the discovery of America.
The Reformation also altered the psychical character of Europe at
once, by creating party, and that of the most determined nature: papacy
and protestantism were the topics of the day. The religious prejudices
of the reigns of Francis, of Charles V., of Henry VIII., of Mary, Eliza-
beth, and the Stewarts, were the reigning spirit of the time. The one
fulmination of the Pope against Luther was the bursting asunder of
the psychical bondage, in which the Vatican had held the general mind.
The essay of Milton may be considered almost as the first propounding
of that principle which, by the detention of Hampden, and Pym, and
Cromwell, in England, in the end established the Commonwealth.
" What great events from trivial causes spring."
The memory and contemplation of genius and virtue,?the graven
images of great men, as in the Ceramicum and the Valhalla,?the heroic
poems, laudatory of valour,?all these have exerted much influence in
elevating and ennobling the national mind. For emulation is not envy'
a noble mind aims at superiority, because it admires the excellence of
a rival.
History and biography at once excite desire of imitation; even songs
and common ballads, from the odes of Tyrtseus to the sea songs of
Charles Dibdin, have inspired the hearts of a host of heroes. The
stateman was shrewd who said, "Let me make the ballads of my country: I
care not who makes her laws." The prowess of Themistocles, the graphic
force of Thucydides, and the eloquence of Demosthenes, werfe the result
of their excited efforts to emulate Miltiades, Herodotus, and Callistrates.
Although the subject may seem more physical than psychical, yet the
sympathies of the stomach with the brain have a powerful influence on
mind and character. A strong stomach?dura ilia messorum?is almost
synonymous with success in our pursuits: a healthy digestion cannot be
completed without a quiet and unstrained mind. So dyspepsia is a
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 75
c?nstant penalty for psychical pre-eminence, and pays it off by tlie re-
gion on its organ, too often in the end subduing its energy. The effort
0 study will ije often futile immediately after a full meal.
^ mis diet, if a fashion, may decide the character of a people: the
osaic code of laws involves the strictest precepts on this point. The
es of medicine, too, were prominent both in Egyptian and Hebrew
station, and were consecrated as a religious injunction.
^ atever food is defective in its property of assimilation is, in varied
grees, a poison. For if black or unhealthy blood be circulating
?ugh the brain, various forms of psychical derangement will be the
Result. To some new properties imparted to the blood, we may often
j^pute a change of temperament and disposition: the quality of the
^od must be congenial with the pursuits of the feeder,
th 16 ^Pai^ans> *n obedience to one of the precepts of Lycurgus, and
? Romans, before the time of Pyrrhus, adopted a very spare but
^ esome diet,?they were, indeed, under a constant system of training,
0 that they were ever ready for active exertions. This austerity,
Per laps, decided the action of Thermopylae.
is recorded of the Bosjesmen, that their character has been changed
w*t1 their diet: when they led the life of wild shepherds, and fed on
b??ts and larvae, their habits were passive and apathetic; when they
ccjirne hunters and flesh-feeders, they also became ferocious and cruel.
e ^rab, from his own confession, was also cruel and malicious, which
} sicians assure us was the effect of feeding on camel's flesh.
The Tartar and the Cossack, who drink the blood of wild horses, and
^ ^ cannibal, who quaffs that of his fellow-men, are marked by pre-
01 y and brutal propensities. The Rajpoots, also, are very gross and
Seiisual feeders, and their habits correspond.
_ e must, however, regard this with reservation. The Samoeids and
Th ' arG a^S? ^lood-drinkers, are dull, sluggish, and slavish,
tvell b!Ubber"eatinS ^s(lu"no *s an almost unintellectual sloth; his mind
a blank. But these are Mongols of a low degree: while the
butUjiese.' Av^? drenches himself with tea, is also cruel and treacherous;
e inhabits a warmer clime. Here we see organization and climate
botli influential.
the Irish labourer, who feeds on potatoes and Avater, can endure
een hours' labour, and his pugnacious qualities, the effect of whiskey,
"fcWwnly are not to he questioned
U. ^le truth is, there is a concentrated energy in the process of assi-
off hi10n *U be^nSs low intellect. There is no strain of mind to draw
d ?? ^r?m ^1C ohylopoietic functions; so the animal force bears sway,
Jr a high
per-centage of nutriment is abstracted, as in the brute,
j GU Columbus was in Cuba, he found the natives in a state of extreme
c> ranee. A handful of maize or cassada bread was enough for a
7G ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
meal, so tliat tlie Spaniards, tlie most spare feeders in Europe, seemed
to tliem like cormorants.
The modern Pythagoreans, yclept vegetarians, assure us that their
bodily power is increased, and their intellectual faculties rendered lucid,
energetic, and undisturbed, under their system. And we are reminded
that the diet of the Greeks and Romans, in their palmy days, was chiefly
vegetable; but then that character did not change when they adopted
animal food. As man is carnivorous, however, and constantly doomed
to migrate, he can feed with impunity on the productions of every clime,
lie therefore wisely adopts a mixed dietetic rule, to suit himself to the
torrid zone, in which the extensive consumption of flesh food is precluded
by the rapid decomposition of animal fibre; and to the northern lati-
tudes, in which the scantiness of vegetation reduces the inhabitants to
diet of more gross and unctuous nature.
We cannot therefore impute an important psychical influence to diet,
so long as the system is not physically disordered.
The imbibition of alcoholic liquors, however, comes under a very
different category. Ben Jonson's Canary, and Sheridan's Burgundy,
as well as Coleridge's opium, for a time inspired their intellect, we are
told, but it might have produced more golden fruit without them. We
are not aware of any peculiar people, who, as a nation, are topers; yet
Tacitus does refer to the custom of very free drinking among the ancient
Germans, who quaffed strong drink even to the manes of departed
friends. The abuse of opium exerts a very baneful psychical influence.
The full or elysian dose is totally subductive of mental integrity; life is
a baseless vision that does ' leave a Avreck behind.'
Those who have witnessed the slaves of the habit, in the divans of
Constantinople,?for here the vice is a national one,?will not forget the
pictures of psychical derangement?of mental annihilation. From these
narcotized Orientals, therefore, we can expect no fruits of intellect.
Their field of literature is well-nigh a desert; while they have often been
made the slaves of those northern conquerors, whose degree of natural
intellect was far beneath their own.
The Christian, who knows that his life is one of probationary denial,
does not thus fall into the pit by wholesale. The whole life of the Moslem;
however, is one voluptuous dream?his heaven, the end for which he also
lives, is the paradise of harlots.
But more than all does legislation influence and mark the progress of
mind, as it is the bond that unites a community.
The first law was a divine injunction. Religion taught by the tables of
Moses Avas the basis of all subsequent legislation. To love God was the
first great law; to love our neighbour, the second.
If these laws were carried out to the letter, pure philanthropy would
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 77
j^C ^le fading spirit of tlie time : art and science would be secondary;
01 self-interest, tlie most potent stimulus to exertion and invention,
Would be wanting. The age of gold would be established without gold
eing thought of. Mind would be eclipsed by heart; and intellect, as
^egards its deepest study and its loftiest flights, would lie dormant and
?w. But insanity would be a most rare phenomenon; for its essence
0 consists in over-working of the mind.
. ^is, however, is an Utopian vision. Religion is prone to degenerate
lVlL r . . . OA o
fanaticism and superstition, legislation into despotic and selfish
b^ernment, and liberty dies when she degenerates into licentiousness
rebellion. Hence the various shades of psychical derangement, even
^sanity on religious points. Not that religion creates insanity (a com-
mon error among pseudo-psychologists), but that the excited brain is
ed to its real truths by an ignis fatuus.
It is when religion and law are thus set at naught that the most ex-
_ niary psychical phenomena are elicited; the motives of human
Action being self-gratification and not God's law. Of this truth the
uge and Babel, and Sodom and Nineveh, are historic records.
The revolutions of false religion are less overwhelming and violent
lan those of the State, but they are not less in perverting the consti-
ution of the mind.
^ e need but to look on the idolatry and licentiousness of the heathen
Nations, and on the grovelling propensities of the slave, to be sensible
?f the benignant influence of Christianity and good government.
The earlier inhabitants of the world were without this light, when the
posterity of Seth, proud of their alliance with the women-angels, com-
**utted their heinous crimes; the flood came, and a new race, chiefly of
^Syrians, Chaldseans, and Hebrews, arose from the sons of Noah.
Us pride of birth destroyed the first people; pride of wealth the
Sccond?the full penalty paid for all their psychical debasement.
^ Among the ancient theists and polytlieists, ere the light of revelation
?ained abroad, the systems of ethics may indeed have evinced a high
"lenient of intellect, and the wise men of Athens and of Rome, the
arned pundits of Benares, the Peruvian incas, the Mexican caciques,
^}} even the skalds of the Hyperborean seas, evolved their various
'e>hts of very ingenious mythology. Of their legislation, the codes of
roaster, Lycurgus, Solon, and Justinian, are on record. Even among
iese heathen moralists we certainly learn of high examples of heroic
-rtue and sacrifice. Yice was distinguished from virtue, and the
oj, lens> eyen those of the wild races, were impressed with the vision
? ^ie Judgment. But truth was yet unrevealed, and the intellectual
j V? 10n> without the light of Christian influence, was perilous almost
11 ie direct ratio of its intensity?its children being the spoiler, the
78 ON THE PSYCHICAL TROGRESS OF NATIONS.
sceptic, and tlie refined voluptuary. Hence, with all this seeming virtue,
the mind was absolutely enslaved to vice.
The archives in the temples of heathen Greece, and the pagodas of
the Brahmins, were, it is true, enriched by rolls of disquisitions on the
distinction between virtue and vice, and their choultries thickly
scattered over their land for the reception of the wayfarer. But the
virtues of the Stoics were recorded in blood; suicide was deemed the
acme of magnanimity, and a dying gladiator was looked on with a
degree of heated enthusiasm, only exceeded by that which her Majesty
of Spain displays when a bull rips up the belly of a tauridor. The
suicide of the Stoics was a murder?-felo-de-se?differing from the majority
of suicides among the Christians. The effect of the first was to prevent
insanity?so rare a malady among the heathen; that of the second is,
we believe, almost invariably the result of a degree of madness?the
result of those sensations from which the Stoic would release himself
by plunging cold steel into his thorax.
As a type of the inconsistencies of a Budhist pagan, we read in the
Baglivat Geeta this sublime sentence: " The man is praised who,
having subdued all his passions, performetn with his active faculties all
the functions of life, unconcerned about the event." With all this fine
morality the abominations of their priesthood were almost incredible;
and indeed it is probable that we do not yet know all the crimes com-
mitted behind the mysterious veils of their gorgeous but polluted
temples. The isolation of the Chinese, a nation of sceptics, conceals
from us many crimes of which we implicitly believe them guilty. In.
Thibet, the custom of polyandry, or community of husbands, indicates
little modesty in her daughters. Yice must of necessity be predo-
minant in those heathen lands, where the attributes of the Olympic
gods and of the idols of the Hindu temples are in the lowest degree
licentious and disgusting, and the possession of every vice as it were
deified?the base example of the gods consecrating the deeds of their
worshippers. We cannot, therefore, believe the account of Marco
Polo, that the high Asiatic Mongols and Tatters were chaste to a degree
from the influence of their religion, half Christianity, or Shahmanisru.
The slavery of this people to the priesthood was equal to that of the
low papists at the present time. The Soodar was directly put to
death if he but opened the sacred books of the Vedas, as the low Irish
suffer a moral death when they are debarred from the life of the Gospel-
The bondage of a false religion is ever wofully detrimental to the
progress of intellect, charity being its purest and its noblest mani-
festation, whether it be of the pagan or Jesuitical idolater. The
blasphemous sensuality of the Hindu temple, the blind and mad
sacrifice of Juggernaut, the Sutti, the murder of the innocents, i. e-
ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 79
female infanticide of Rajpoot, practised at this very hour, and the
^urders of the Inquisition, as they are utterly void of charity, the only
Vlrtue that can complete the sanctifieation of a people, must be a fatal
error.
To what maniacal enormities has it not given origin, especially in
le e^eventh, thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. The Yokels, the Fakirs,
le flagellants?Jewish, Catholic, and Protestant persecutions without
dumber, merely because one believed himself right, and therefore all
others wrong, forgetting that there may be two rights, according to the
??nscience of a creature. In modern Spain, Portugal, and Italy, the
intellect, as a rule, is in a state of apathetic slumber. In France there
are a few exalted and leading spirits; the mass presents a painful
c?ntrast. Yet Mahomet has been even a greater enemy to psychical im-
provement than Loyola ; the Arabs, once enlightened in art and science,
windled and decayed under the blight of Islamism. But though the
. ls^ered priest must be ever a bigoted book-worm, yet perhaps
Jesuitism effected some counterbalancing good, by inciting our Pro-
an^ colleges to greater exertion?even as the present pontiff, by
ls late appointment, will minister, we hope, to the purification of the
nglican Church, and tend to ensure that Christian benevolence
Ue'1 springs alone from pure and lioly motives. Else were that
standard of excellence vain, which cast down the degraded idols and
1 tars of paganism, and, instead of the mythological creations of a
Prurient imagination, established divine truth, a truth which has
lightened even the barbarian, if humility has predisposed him, for
?Se Laps and Fins who immediately bordered on Russia and Sweden
embraced the Christian faith.
ut the national mind is too often a proud spirit. The pride of
sect is f . . .
s *ar more detrimental than the pride of birth or wealth, for it
^?odemns nine hundred and ninety-nine out of every thousand of the
U^?an race: an(l yet this is termed religion.
illu - 6 ^ristian faith, as it has been desecrated often by national
to T?U5 ^aS ?^en> though failing of its primal object, given character
pe, 1G sPlr^t of a people. The crusade, for instance, " the first Euro-
event," as Guizot terms it, tended to expand the national mind of
Gr? ?urope by travel in other lands, and by the accrediting of
ssies from Christians to Pagan courts, and by the incitement to
scovery. The history of the crusades first roused the curiosity of
afC0 and, through his marvellous stories, of Columbus.
A ~ j-I ? '
of }> martial glories of pagan Greece and Rome were the subjects
To r .^von(lrous epics, so were the crusades the spring of our later
v , lc poesy. The adventures of the holy Avars have been sung
e poets, from Tasso to Scott: and as English, French, German,
80 ON THE PSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS.
Italian, Spanish, all took part in the martial pilgrimage, a tinge of the
romantic was directly given to the literature of those lands, and the
poet has consoled himself for the failure of the three great expeditions
for the elevation of the Cross.
The second great European event that sprang from a devotional
source?the Reformation?metamorphosed for a time the national mind.
"YYickliffe, Luther, Zwingle, Huss, were the topic of their day, and the
pen was engrossed Avitli doctrinal theology, and a purer religion Avas
adopted, although during the onset the flames of the Inquisition
certainly rose the higher.
In Germany, France, and England, even to the reign of William the
Third (Ave may to a degree add, to our oAvn day), sectarian theology
gave a colour to the psychical character of those countries. In burnings
and bloodshed, and the thirty years' Avar, the minds both of Catholics
and Protestants Avere equally bigoted, and the Avritings of Spinosa and
Socinius tended as much to sap theology as the doctrines of Pyrrho
himself.
If Ave reflect on cosmogony, Ave find that the religion and theology
of a nation Avere often intimately connected Avitli its government.
Religion has not only characterized a nation already established, but it
lias been the origin of a new state. In the reign of Elizabeth a handful
of puritans Avandering from England to Holland, and thence to
Massachusetts and Connecticut, founded those states, and established
that one religion which noAv prevails throughout the Transatlantic
Union.
The principle of church and state is of high antiquity. The
patriarchs Avere both the kings and priests of their family. Moses and
Aaron Avere the joint rulers of the state. In ancient India, lioAveArer,
the Brahmin Avas even of the first caste, the monarch of the second;
and this Brahmin, like our chancellor, Avas the conscience-keeper of his
sovereign.
The national mind Avas thus especially prone to take its hue from
the example or character of its rulers: just as it folIoAvs a fashion set
by a great personage; or as the students stained their faces yellow that
they might resemble their master.
Moses, Lycurgus, Ptolemy Philadelphus, Pericles, Justinian, Ackber,
Alfred, Peter, Napoleon, all imparted their oavu great conceptions to
the national mind, and even to neighbouring nations. 80? enlightened,
indeed, A\ras the reign of Ackber, that even the Greek sophs went to
India purposely to converse Avitli the pundits of the holy city of
Benares: and as Robertson has hinted, perhaps the stoic school may
have had its spring from the notions thus imparted to Zeno and
Epictetus. The Peruvians, Avho had from very high antiquity continued
ON THE rSYCHICAL PROGRESS OF NATIONS. 81
^ statu quo, were speedily formed into a government by the genius of
auca Capac, the first Inca.
Hence emanates a passion for learning throughout a state. And
, ls especially, if the one great mind he a patron of art and science. To
ecasnas, Pericles, the Medici, are we indebted for many of those
SP endours which still delight the eye and the understanding of the
Ayor Id. "Were such minds in constant succession we may believe to
. a degree of perfection the psychical condition of nations would
arrive.
^ But let us take the contrast of these bright pictures?the worst
ni of government, probably, of which we possess a record, that of
* 11 ey Isrnael, of Morocco. They must be degraded slaves indeed
?> after he had killed forty thousand of his subjects with his own
1 -barefooted and trembling, and bowing to the ground, screamed
^reat is the wisdom of our lord ! the voice of our lord is like the
Voic*e of an angel from heaven."
xth the contrasts of the psychical effects of servility and freedom
. ,a c?untry, history abounds, not only regarding the happiness and
Utilization, but the intellect of a people. In the one state Ave may
> perchance, a few leading minds, meteors that blaze for awhile
1IU(^ a host of slaves; in the other, science is spread abroad, and as
a rule, remunerated ad valorem.
11 Russia, for instance, the bondage of the serfs causes the manifesto-
es of intellect to be very low and rare indeed.
^ In the servility of rebellion (the rebel despot being the most cruel
? all the slaves of power) the intellect of a people must of necessity
C0lUe degraded, and degenerate into a national monomania. They
la^ C1'*n?e aiK^ how awhile to their idol, until the crushing of his iron
causes the worm to turn and sting the tyrant to death. Then
'orne.-i the reign of anarchy. The republican mind will be too much
th *U P?^^ca^ disquisition, or intestine warfare, to even dream of
se pursuits which enlighten the mind and soften and amend the
heart.
rr|^u^ even legitimate warfare, as it is termed, is too often the vain-
.? ^ a nation, to the blighting of its psychical progress ; although it
^ true many illustrious men are deeply associated with war, but they
^eeiued it a necessity, not a glory. Fabricius, Cincinnatus,
p Ungton, grasped not an imperial crown, like the first Consul of
andT^ an^ ^iere^01'e they are glorified while Napoleon was reviled
-SJed- The history of a nation, therefore, is too often a history of
tl * G' ^1G Mongol dynasty, perhaps, excepted. With the American,
nopian, and the Malay, war is a passion, the indulgence of male-
GUt revenge. There is no quarter; for they fight to kill, not to
So* xin.
82 ON THE PSYCHICAL FEOGEESS OF NATIONS.
conquer; the prisoner of Avar is not immured and exchanged, but
scalped. If wounded, like the Ferae, they tear the weapon from their
flesh, as Herera and others report, and break the shaft and dash it
with execrations on the ground. Their victories are the result chiefly
of stratagem, or a sort of instinctive cunning, aided by the acuteness of
their physical sense. They have, it is true, a sort of discretion, for they
run aivay if they are likely to be worsted. In this too they resemble
the Ferse, as they do indeed even in their feeding, after which they are
apathetic, but when hungry or aroused they then play the tiger.
With the Caucasian (the Iapetidte) war is a science, a system. We see
the plan of a battle, the co-operation of forces?a word, which in itself
implies civilization, and advance of psychical capacity. The first grand
step of the Romans was in arms, especially after the fall of the
Tarquins, when the annual elections kept the leaders on the qui vive;
and in the wars with Pyrrlius, especially as the consulship and ovations
were the guerdon of military prowess.
From the earliest sera the mind of man has run wild upon invasion?
and he has jumbled together religion and wholesale murders, making
the former the pretext for the latter; the common psychical development
was desire of conquest. The holy wars of the Crusades?the con-
quests of Mahomet, the three changes of dynasty in Constantinople,
were some of the monomaniacal illusions which from time to time have
controlled and metamorphosed the psychology of the world.
And such was its psychical influence, that the peace of war became
the pastime of the nobility?especially after Philip the First of France,
in the lofty spirit of chivalry, established the joiite and the tournoi.
But contention on a field is the grave of intellectuality. Even the
sgavans of Napoleon, with all their boasted researches in Egypt, came
meagre off?if we except Denon, and he would have done better in
peace; and Larrey, who threw some light on military surgery?but even
that is a poor compensation for the loss of legs and arms and lives.
What lesson may we learn, then, from our brief psychical survey of
the globe 1 That intellect is vain if we promote not the moral happi'
ness of man. He should have but one idol?his Maker; but one
motive?a Christian spirit of benevolence.
We cannot hope, of course, for a community of taste in art and
science, but Ave may hope that the foreshadowed national intercom-
munication will ensure a bond of sympathetic interest between the four
quarters of the globe, if it do not in the end establish an Utopia of the
universal mind.
