On The Education Of Idiots
===========================

157

^Iuch attention has been paid of late years to this subject, and many physicians have
claimed the honour of originating so important a movement. In justice to an English
Physician still living, we are in duty bound to call attention to his early labours in
department of psychological medicine. Dr llichard Poole,* formerly superin-
tendent of the Montrose Asylum, published in the year 1827, an article on "Educa-
in the Encyclopaedia Edinensis. In this essay, under the title of" The Imbecile,"
he makes the following observations, on the practicability of improving the condition,
and educating a large and neglected class of insane patients. Prior to the publication
?f these views, Dr Poole assures lis that he was not aware that any writer had
anticipated his views on the education of the idiotic and imbecile. Dr Poole is the
author of the article " Mental Diseases," which appeared in the Encyclopedia
Edinensis.
. " The defects of the mind," says Dr Poole, " or, more properly speaking, of that
?nstrument by which the faculties of the mind are manifested, are probably as numerous,
and of as frequent occurrence, as those of the animal part of our constitution. It
^ight be possible also to subdivide them. But hitherto philosophers, with few excep-
tions, have contented themselves with general conclusions on the subject. It seems
to have been thought enough, when any mental deficiency presented itself of a nature
and magnitude which rendered ordinary education unavailing, to apply to it some such
epithet as that which is placed at the head of this section; and this discovery of an
incapacity for customary instruction was judged quite conclusive against the necessity
?f inquiry into specific differences among the unfortunate individuals who exhibited it.
It is not to be wondered, therefore, that cases as dissimilar as those of the blind and
the deaf, have been promiscuously comprehended under one sweeping sentence of dis-
regard; or that any vague ideas, which philanthropy rather than science had suggested
in their behalf, should prove abortive. The consequences, as might be expected,
Wherever the nature of a calamity, whether moral or physical, which is of frequent or
extensive occurrence, is allowed to pass without suitable investigation, have devolved
on our police, and that in a manner and a magnitude which positively disgrace civilized
society.
" What but the most culpable ignorance, and the most culpable indifference, can
account for those appalling and truly heart-rending spectacles which are so often wit-
nessed in almost every village, and, still more marvellously, in the streets of our largest
cities ? Is it as a foil, one might ask, or in compliment to the usually-enjoj'ed pro-
portion of intellect, that the poor idiot is permitted and encouraged, by the carelessness
of his nominal keepers, in his objectless and staring perambulations among us ? But
if this be the motive, why is so flatteringly important a personage allowed to become the
recipient of every abuse and cruelty which wantonness or fiend-like perversity thinks
proper to devolve upon him? Is he not entitled, if his visitations be either profitable
or tolerable, to at least the humane treatment which our laws award to the brute crea-
tion ? May not even his partial and inferior resemblance to our species be somewhat
enhanced by his being furnished with a decent garb, which shall protect him from the
inclemencies of the weather and the harsher of insulting and prostituted superiority.
Finally, is there not a possibility, if he must go at large, of guarding him against
brutality and outrage, with as much care as is manifested in the preservation of
property ?
" In whatever manner these questions, or any similar, may be disposed of, it is certain
that the evil to which they relate is of much earlier and deeper growth than the period
at which such wretched beings stalk about as reproaches and nuisances to society: and
the only proper efficient remedy is one, the accomplishment of which demands more
profound examination, more ample command of means, and more extensive co opera-
tion, than may at first sight be imagined necessary. Nothing could be easier, it is true,
than the alleviation, if not the entire removal, of the most visibly obnoxious symp-
toms. The fiat of authority might compel, under severe penalties, the entire disappear
ance and confinement of those helpless creatures. But, admitting the efficacy and
expediency of legislative interference, is it fitting for an age of improvement and
* Middlefield House, Aberdeen.
158 ON THE EDUCATION OF IDIOTS.
benevolence to allow the success of such interference, thus far, to be the ultimatum of
what is desirable and practicable on the subject ? Would it be, ought it to be, enough
for us that those unfortunates are simply removed from our sight ? We answer?No ?
" It is with some anxiety, a commendable regard to decency and feeling, that we
dispose of the dead bodies of our fellow-men. We protect them, too, in the last and
common receptacle, by an opinion of sacredness and a rigour of law, even against
the demands of an important science, which can never be duly cultivated, so as to
yield its full amount of benefits, without violating a sanctuary so respected. Shall we
be less concerned about the disposal of those living beings, whose weakness ought
to call forth our compassion in the very proportion that it renders them burdensome
to society. That there prevails a great degree of negligence as to their condition
and comfort, will appear very obvious, when we compare the little attention yet shown
them collectively with the extensive plans devised, at least in this country, in favour
of every other class of unfortunates. Let us confine ourselves to a single city. In
Edinburgh, then, we have a great variety of other [establishments for
benevolent purposes. But what is done in it?what has even been attempted?in
behalf of that by no means small class of helpless creatures, whom the hand of nature
appears to have cast around us as if to humble our pride, and to demonstrate our
dependence, for much of what we deem our excellence, on the laws of the material
world ? The poor-houses, it is true, usually contain some of them. But many are
allowed to wander at large ; and those, again, who are so lodged are, with few excep-
tions, precluded, by the circumstances of the establishments, and by the influence of a
very general opinion, as to the total incapacity for education, from all chance or possi-
bility of being ever useful to society. We are not certain, indeed, that there is a single
institution in Great Britain exclusively, professedly, and systematically appropriated to
this class of defectives.
" The reason of this neglect seems to be exactly what has been mentioned?a per-
suasion that there is only one species of the disease or evil under which they labour,
and that this is entirely and for ever incurable. But some inquiry ought at least to be
made before allowing such a conclusion; and even were this conclusion better founded
than it is, there would nevertheless exist some ground for charging the practical con-
sequences, as they are now displayed, with untenderness and impolicy, It is here
contended, however, that the conclusion, in place of being warranted by facts, is dis-
proved by them; that the mental defects of the individuals in question, so far from
being all alike, are immensely dissimilar ; that in many cases there is reason for ima-
gining the principle of substitution, by which one faculty or sense is made to answer
in some degree for another,'might serve as the basis of successful education ; and that it
is possible the very worst cases which are ever met with would so far yield to science
and industry as to vindicate and reward the patience and ingenuity bestowed on them.
All that is meant to be given on the subject in this place are a few observations which,
it is thought, if extended and modified by farther inquiry, might lead some benevolent
minds to the adoption of a plan calculated to lessen the evil now complained of.
" Mental deficiency appears to be of two kinds?one, in which there is an imbecility
or weak state of all the faculties; the other, in which there is an imperfection or a
want of one faculty, or of several faculties.
" In the first, that in which all the faculties common to man exist, but in a degree
inferior to that which is commonly enjoyed, there is little difficulty to be encountered
in rearing the individuals to some useful occupation. Such persons are readily
enough taught to a certain amount, after which they make no progress, at least no
progress proportioned to the labour of instruction expended on them. An approach to
this species of debility is more frequent than is generally imagined. But it is only
where the case is well marked, that any departure from established treatment is
required. The chief things to be attended to are the state of the bodily health and the
kind of mental exercises suitable."
" There cannot, we think, be a doubt that cases of this kind, which - are allowed by
despair to become confirmed and deteriorated, might have been relieved by professional
interference. Who has not witnessed the expressionless insane countenance, perfectly
indicative of the internal state, in a person just recovering from fever, or reduced by
poverty and hunger ? Is it not quite conceivable that a condition of the system some-
what analogous, but dependent on causes which have operated before birth, and con-
tinued to operate even for years afterwards, might admit of an alteration and improve-
ment similar to what occurs in these cases on the restoration of wonted health ? It
ON THE EDUCATION OF IDIOTS. 159
^ould not be difficult to demonstrate the truth of these remarks, and to confirm the
hopes which they are intended to excite by an appeal to examples of infantine weakness
followed by manual vigour. Instances are not wanting of great ability succeeding to
long-continued feebleness of constitution, which did not seem to promise even medio-
crity.
"In these cases, it is of the utmost consequence to proportion mental exercise to
Rental strength. This may be so little as to render every sort of study absolutely
Jtuproper, and the very employment of the senses, beyond a certain degree, injurious.
-The individual must be treated at first much as a plant?and that also a sickly one?
With suitable nourishment and exposure to good air. The next step is that of merely
animal life, as characterized by sensations and perceptions, which will require suitable
exertion. The manifestation of any of the intellectual or moral powers is an advance-
ment of still more promising nature, and may be haile'd as the basis of some mode-
rate endeavours towards ordinary education. But throughout the whole process,
great caution is necessary to guard against any overstretch of power in any di-
rection, which would be sure to occasion a relapse, and perhaps entirely prevent
recovery.
" The cases in which there occurs a defect in some one or more of the faculties are,
?Q the whole, probably not so frequent; but, generally speaking, they are more to be
lamented. Here, however, as already hinted, there are great varieties?as the facul-
ties themselves are numerous; and, again, the faaculty or faculties which are imperfect,
or altogether wanting, may not be of great importance. It would be of no very material
consequence, for example, that a person was defective in the faculty concerned in
ttusie or painting. All the concerns of life may be very well carried on without them.
The same may be said of several other faculties. They are not essential to human
happiness, or the common business of the world. There are instances, accordingly,
of persons being destitute of them who have attained to eminence in various profes-
sions, A defect in verbal memory would be a more serious difficulty, inasmuch as it
might render the individual incapable of acquiring the proper command of his mother-
tongue. This is actually the chief peculiarity discernible in some idiots. The whole
of their language does not, perhaps, extend beyond a dozen or two of words, and
these may be often erroneously used. But the same creatures maybe remarkable for
some other faculty?as, for example, that on which the knowledge of places is founded,
so that they may become highly useful in the capacity of guides through an intricate
country which they have inhabited. On the other hand, there are instances of extra-
ordinary verbal memory existing in individuals who were incompetent to manage the
simplest affairs in life. It is quite conceivable that they might be found subservient to
some useful purpose. In many idiotical persons, there is chiefly observable a total
inattention to bodily wants and appearance. They have, therefore, to be reminded of
the necessity of taking food, and to be forced to put on and to keep decent apparel.
In some of these cases, it is not unusual to meet with singular fidelity and strength of
attachment towards those who show them kindness. In others, the main peculiarity
seems an entire surrender to the appetites. But even in them, unfavourable as their
case is, it may be practicable to operate with some profit, as their bodily strength may
often be engaged by the hope of the only reward they covet. Some idiots are noted
for timidity and apprehension; others are equally so for hardihood and indifference to
danger. Examples are to be met with amongst them of an unconquerable propensity
to pilfer and to conceal; and occasionally one may be found possessed of an ex-
tremely ferocious disposition, and the love of mischief. It is not easy to decide,
either to what good end some of these cases may be made to contribute, or in what
manner they may be best restrained from doing injury. But enough, perhaps, has been
said to point out the possibility of distinguishing differences in the class of defectives,
and to confirm the idea that something more might be done for many, if not all of
them than has usually been attempted. The philosopher?for such he would require
to be?who should undertake to investigate the whole subject, and to suggest a plan
of remedy or alleviation, would perform an acceptable service to science, and merit the
gratitude of mankind."
It appears, from the preceding extract, that more than twenty-three years back,
Dr R. Poole endeavoured to awaken public and professional attention to the lament-
able and neglected condition of the poor helpless idiot. Honour be to the man who, if
he did not originate, certainly assisted in doing so, one of the most important and
noble efforts of modern times.
