The Theory of Reasoning
========================

503
Art. II.?
*
Like every other branch of learning, Logic has not escaped the general
scrutiny which has been applied, during the present century, and
especially of late years, to the most established systems of knowledge,
and to the master-pieces left us by the greatest names. Aristotle has
reigned over more countries than ever his renowned pupil, Alexander,
over-ran by the prowess of his arms; and while the conquests of the
latter have left scarcely any traces on the map of the world, the
influence of the former was absolute, for many ages, over the most
enlightened nations of the earth; and it has by no means ceased, even
now, to be partially recognised. His logical treatises have been the
admiration of successive generations: and though the "Organon,''
under which title they have been comprised, contains much which the
greatest advocates of their author acknowledge to be extra-logical, the
main principle on which the system is founded may be said to have
maintained itself, in one form or another, down to the present moment
in which we write. Dugald Stewart only did justice to Aristotle when
he said that " the conception and execution of so vast a plan as that in
which the philosopher has included all reasoning, are such, that Aris-
totle's logical writings will ever form a proud and imperishable trophy
to his genius." Many have been the attempts to overthrow the throne
of the Stagyrite in his domain, but we may safely say that no one has
yet succeeded in fairly wresting the sceptre from his hand. Is not
this because, whatever be the faults which Aristotle is guilty of in
detail, the main principles on which his claim to the empire of logic
rests are inviolable 1 Whatever answer may be given to this question,
we are quite willing to lend a candid ear to any kind of speculations on
the subject, prepared as we are to anticipate that they will turn out to
be really proposals of emendation in detail, rather than what we must
be compelled to admit as fundamentally and essentially distinct
principles.
The neglect of logical studies in this country, till a recent period,
was very much owing, Ave think, to the influence of a few great names,
among whom may be placed that of Locke. His prejudice against
logic was hardly dealt with too severely by Leibnitz, when he said of
a philosopher from whose psychological system, in general, he no doubt
greatly differed, though he treated him in criticizing it with exemplary
candour?sprevit Logicam, non intellexit. Murray's Logic at Dublin,
Duncan's in Scotland and at Cambridge, and Aldrich's Compendium at
* The Theory of Reasoning. By Samuel Bailey. Longman & Co. 1851.
304 the theory of reasoning.
Oxford, supplanting mucli better and more learned works, all testify
the low ebb to which logical studies had sunk at the outset of the
present century, in the main scats of learning in the three kingdoms.
There is no question that the credit of having revived these studies is
mainly due to Dr. Whately, the present Archbishop of Dublin, whose
" Elements of Logic" decidedly form an epoch in the history of this
.science, though his work is by no means on a level, for learning and
fundamental research into the laws of thought, with the German, or
even the scholastic writers on the subject. It is a popular work, well-
calculated to draw general attention to logic; for an easier book on
science no boy in his teens need ever wish to open: but neither his-
torically nor scientifically, is it so satisfactory as to promise anything
like a very lengthened reign. The truly masterly, surpassingly learned,
and wonderfully acute and elaborate criticism (with which the public
are now familiar) of Wliately's book, from the hand of Sir W. Hamilton,
may almost make the reader tremble for any one who enters anew,
as an author, on the high field of logic. Here, however, Mr. Bailey
has ventured; and the attention which he has already paid to metaphy-
sical subjects, induces us to follow him into this arduous arena with
somewhat less apprehension than we should have felt for any man
who should now come forward with a new theory of reasoning. For
really we are having so many " logics," containing so many different
views, that it is not very easy to suppose any fundamentally new prin-
ciple, whatever modifications of old ones may be possible. Mr. Bailey,
however, is not a mere novice. He is already a psychologist. No
man ought to write on logic who has not studied a good deal in this
direction, generally. We say "metaphysical subjects," because we
hold logic to be fundamentally metaphysical. The Germans have done
right in regarding psychology as divisible into " experimental" and
" metaphysical." Of the former we have an example in the laws of
Association, which Ave only know in their details, by experience. Of
.the latter we have instances in all those forms of thought which are
primary, and incapable of analysis?forms of thought by which we
cannot help being ruled, though we cannot prove their validity either
by demonstration or by experience. In fact, they are neither deduc-
tive nor inductive. Thus, for instance, that every change in the
?universe around us must have its cause, is a principle felt to be as
certain, or thereabouts, as our own individual existence; but no man
can prove it, in any way. We believe it, even from early childhood,
because we cannot help believing it, and we stake everything on it. It
is a "metaphysical" truth; and on such truths does logic itself rest.
But we must now address ourselves to Mr. Bailey. We are glad to
perceive, at all events, that he does not set out with the extraordinary
THE THEORY OF REASONING. 505
and unheard of lieresy of Professor Blakey?that of cashiering all
demonstrative reasoning from the domain of logic, (of which it is the
most perfect example,) and limiting the dialectic art and science wholly
to moral subjects!
Mr. Bailey, in this work, proposes to himself to give a connected
and consistent view of the theory of reasoning, and of the relation
in which the several parts of it stand to each other. He states that
his views differ as a whole, and in some of their details, from any
theory hitherto promulgated; but he adds, very properly, that "there
can be no merit in any difference from former works, unless that
difference is founded in truth." He informs us that he " designed at first
to make the treatise wholly expository; but the number of unsettled
questions on which he had to touch, forced him more extensively into
criticism and controversy than he had originally contemplated entering.
In such a work it was especially impossible not to advert to the
scholastic logic; and as his theory is at variance with some of its
fundamental principles, he has had occasion to comment upon it at
considerable length."
We have no desire to enter very critically into those preliminary or
adjunct remarks which are rather incidental to the work than essential
parts of the author's views of argument or syllogism. Nevertheless,
accuracy of statement, and consistency of nomenclature, are of the
utmost moment in all subjects connected with psychology, including, of
course, those important branches of it, logic and ethics. We are not
aware of any standard author on mental philosophy who would identify
" recollection" and " mere conception," as Mr. Bailey evidently does in
his first chapter. A man may form a conception of an object never
before known to him even in thought; while recollection is evidently a
distinct case of remembrance, attended with volition, and involves a
similar previous state of consciousness. But let this pass. Our
author defines reasoning to be the " determination of the mind to the
belief of something beyond its actual perception or knowledge;" or, at
all events, he says, " this determination is obviously what is termed
reasoning." We should offer some remarks on this passage, if we were
not desirous of suspending our criticism in order to allow the author to
speak more fully for himself. He goes on to say, " There is, however,
another mental operation to be noted, which consists, not in our being-
led to believe, or in our inferring from what we perceive and know,
something else neither perceived nor known; but in our being led to
discern some fact, not directly manifest, through the medium of some
other fact or facts in which it is implied." In illustration of the above,
the fifteenth proposition of Euclid's first book is referred to, proving the
equality of the vertical angles, where two straight lines intersect, by the
506 THE THEORY OF REASONING.
construction necessarily involving a common supplement to these
angles. " Here we do not infer the existence or the happening of
something past, or future, or absent; but we are led to discern some-
thing not directly obvious, by an arrangement of propositions expressive
of facts, each of which implies its successor." Waiving all discussion
as to the propriety of the terms which Mr. Bailey employs in designat-
ing these two modes of reasoning, and especially the use of the term
fact in regard to demonstration, in which the construction is merely an
example of an infinite number of cases, which are all concluded d, priori,
it is evident that he here points out the old distinction between that
kind of reasoning which is only probable, however it may approach to
moral certainty, and that which is strictly necessary as being based on
demonstration. Our author, however, prefers designating the former
kind of reasoning by the appellation contingent.
Next follows a more particular inquiry into the nature of " contin-
gent" reasoning. "We have observed that the tide, in ebbing, has left
the sea-weed high on the beach. I recollect this fact; and on seeing
the sea-weed left high on the sea-beach, I now conclude that the tide
has washed it there." In the same manner we infer that the " gay
people walking on the beach will, sooner or later, die. In the first
example, a past event is inferred from other past facts; in the second,
future events are inferred from past events." Our author justly adds,
that it is the resemblance in the cases which leads us to infer that un-
observed events have happened, are happening, or will happen." Some-
times one case is enough to produce the inference; at other times a
collection and comparison of various instances is necessary, before we
can conclude. A good example follows:?" From what may be con-
veniently termed the collective fact, that men have hitherto been fallible
as far as observation has extended, I may deduce the particular conclu-
sion, that an unknown and untried individual named Peter is fallible,
and I may equally deduce the universal conclusion that all men are
fallible."
There can be no doubt, we apprehend, of the general soundness of
the above remarks: they present, in fact, examples of induction?not
indeed of Aristotle's induction (e7raywy?)) or syllogism by induction,
in which there is a professed enumeration of all the particulars; for he
concludes, oddly enough, that " the whole class of animals wanting bile
are long-lived;" but this only by enumerating, as he supposed, all the
species of animals of that class. It is obvious that it is in this way
alone, theoretically, that induction can be absolute, and have precisely
the same kind of force which is due to the ordinary deductive syllogism.
In the latter case we deduce the new particular from the general, which
is asserted to include all the particulars; in the case of perfect indue-
THE THEORY OF REASONING. 507
tion, we build up the general out of all the particulars which are
included under it. But we can only do this in strictness when wc
really know all the particulars; which we very seldom do. Our induc-
tion therefore is, for the most part, imperfect?that is, it is not apodictical
or demonstratively absolute. Hence the inductions of science only
amount to probabilities, however high. In Mr. Bailey's language, they
are contingent. Thus, though all naturalists believe that " all horned
animals have cloven feet," because no living or fossil animal has been
found to exhibit a different law; still, it would not be absurd to sup-
pose that an animal might possibly be found without a combination of
these conditions. In the same manner we believe that every individual
now alive will die; but, so far as this conclusion is matter of human
reason, we believe it, not on demonstrative principles, but on the ground
of probable (" contingent") evidence, amounting, no doubt, practically,
to moral certainty. It should, however, be remembered that although
the general conclusion which we build up from particular instances
cannot have the force of positive demonstration, unless all the par-
ticulars are enumerated; nevertheless, when once we have admitted the
general principle as a major premiss, and have referred any class of
objects to this premiss as a minor, we are entitled to pronounce the
universal law or attribute predicated in the major premiss, to belong as
matter of necessity to any given particular included under the minor
premiss. If you assert that all men are mortal beings, and if you
further assert that a certain class of beings are partakers of human
nature, you are compelled by the laws of thought to assert that any
individual, however unknown to you, who belongs to that class, is of
necessity mortal. If there be in the conclusion any want of absolute
certainty, such as mathematical demonstration involves, this defect lies,
not in the connexion between the premises and the conclusion, but in
the principle or universal major premiss which you have admitted
into the reasoning; or, in other cases, the other premiss may be at
fault.
We must hear what our author says on this subject. He denomi-
nates the proposition, " all men, as far as observation has extended,
have been found fallible," " the collective fact." The " universal law"
inferred is, " therefore all men are fallible;" and the assertion, " there-
fore the man Peter is fallible," is termed " the particular inference."
He proceeds :
" Both these conclusions are deduced from the same fact or collec-
tion of facts: they are co-ordinate; one is not or needs not be logically
subsequent to the other; both are probably inferences, for which the
real evidence is the same. The mental process, too, is alike; it does
not consist in the mind's discerning one thing to be implied in another;
508 THE THEORY OF REASONING.
but in its being determined by known facts to believe unknown
facts."
If by this be meant, that a certain collection of facts frequently
causes the mind to form a general principle which includes all particular
cases, we can have no hesitation in admitting it. But if this language
mean, as it seems to do to us, that the psychological process by which
Ave obtain the general principle, is precisely similar to that by which we
assert a particular case, we should demur to it. No doubt, logically,
the particular is contained in the general; but the question is?how
does this appear 1 What is the process of which we are conscious ?
The examples of horned animals having cloven feet are very numerous.
They have occurred under a great variety of circumstances. We assert
that all horned animals have cloven feet. We are prepared to expect
that whenever we see an animal with horns, it will also have cloven
feet. But we may be unacquainted with many kinds of animals of
this class. We do not profess to have included all in our actual exami-
nation; if we did, our induction woidd be a perfect one; it would be
demonstrative, and not contingent. As it is, we have, after obtaining
a number of instances, advanced per saltum to a universal proposition;
and we are now, and not till now, in a condition to say that all future
instances may at once be disposed of by being brought under this pro-
position. It is very true, that in an example of perfect induction we
do obtain an identical proposition, corresponding in its place to the
minor of a deductive syllogism; for instead of the form all As are Bs,
all Cs are As, therefore all Cs are Bs; we have the following: x, y, z
are D, x, y, z are (whole) E; therefore E is D; but we do not see that
any right exists to pronounce on any particular example (where we
have not enumerated all) until we have become convinced of the gene-
ral principle; for, until we feel ourselves justified, by some means, in
waiving all further induction, and neglecting what remains of the
series of examples, we do not feel assured that the very next instance
may not stop us in our career, and prove that our embryo principle is
wrong. Notable instances of this kind have actually occurred, even in
the more exact branches of science, where general proofs were either
not discovered or unattainable; of which an example occurs in Euler's
" Memoirs of Berlin." We would suggest that a distinction between
the logical and the psychological would often help us where there may
appear a conflict of seeming truths. Thus the infinite logically contains
the finite, but can it be doubted that psychologically and in point of
fact we acquire a knowledge first of the finite, and by this are led on
to form some notion of the infinite? So, also, it is certain that a
universal proposition logically contains all the particulars which may
turn out to belong to it; but this does not prove that we do not arrive
THE THEORY OF REASONING. 509
at particulars never before known, through the previous admission of
the universal, gained by ordinary induction?indeed, here, we need not
restrict the theory to induction, for the principle is equally true of the
demonstration of particular cases when they are brought under general
and ci priori truths. That " every act of reasoning proceeds on some
general principle" must be granted: but when our author states, that
the reasoning by which we conclude that " all the persons walking on
the beach must sooner or later die," may be thus expressed: " All
human beings formerly living have died before attaining a certain age;
therefore these human beings will die before attaining that age"?the
conclusion, though it is no doubt connected with the understanding
that like effects proceed from like causes, is, we would suggest, only
so connected through the medium of the general principle. We believe
that A, B, C, now " walking on the beach," will die, not merely because
an innumerable multitude of human beings have died ; but because we
cannot but suppose that those who have died sufficiently represent all
mankind, among whom all future individuals must be classed. Our
particular conclusions all virtually pass through the general principle.
Our author next inquires, how the cogency of this "<contingent"
reasoning?for "itis confessedly not demonstrative"?is to be proved.
We agree with him that there can here be no demonstrative proof. If
there could, the reasoning would no longer be based on general
induction; it would either exhibit one of the few cases of perfect
induction, or it would be at once deductive in the strictly demon-
strative sense. When we say this, we do not forget what we have
before said, or at least fully implied?namely, that when once we have
assumed that our general principle may be taken as though abso-
lutely universal, there is no distinction in the mode of inference. If
nny one asserts that all magnets attract iron-filings, he is as much
obliged, by the laws of thought, to admit that this, that, or tlic other
magnet will attract iron-filings, as he is obliged to admit that any
possible plane-triangle that can be drawn will have its angles together
equal to two right angles, after having once admitted that this is true
of the general scheme or form triangle. But it must still be granted, that
whatever absence of apodictical certainty may attach to the general prin-
ciple, must attach to every particular case under it. Our author is, we
?think, quite right in referring to some principle of our nature, of
a character which might be almost called " instinctive," the tendency
we have to believe that what has happened will, in like circumstances,
?happen again. It is a fact that animals act on this principle. The
dog which has repeatedly been thrown into the water, may be observed
to give evident indications of apprehension on approaching a river. We
confess we should be inclined to make a distinction between this case?as
NO. XVI. L I.
510 ^ THE THEORY OF REASONING.
related to the operation of the tacit principle, " like causes produce like
effects"?and the case of children, after reason and reflection have been
developed. Animals, we apprehend, are influenced in these instances
by association; but in man, this principle being blended with reflection,
the result is not a blind impulse, but an inference guided and modified
by intelligence. I have experienced many times the fact, that a stone
thrown up into the air falls to the ground ; and I learn that the same
fact has been observed from time immemorial. Many more stones
will be thrown up?what will be the result 1 always they will fall.
Hence the general law will operate in any particular instance you can
name. Had association alone been adequate to solve the psychological
fact of my thus concluding, there would have been no place for a
general principle; but reflection and inquiry show so many uniform
cases, that the uniformity is predicted to be continuous, and we may
therefore bring any particular case under it. No rule can be given, we
must admit, for the point at which the collection of facts shall stop,
and be pronounced adequate as a basis for the general law. Different
experimental sciences demand different precautions and tests; but
there is always a point beyond which we should feel all further expe-
riment or inquiry to be superfluous; and, at this point, the principle is
seized and held with a tenacity which we are very well content to term
the result of a law of our mental constitution?call it a sort of intel-
lectual "instinct"?call it a species of intuition, if you please. We are
also well satisfied with Mr. Bailey's summation of his doctrine, in the
brief form, that " when our minds are determined by present facts,
conjoined with experience or knowledge, to believe some fact past,
absent or future, we reason;" but we would repeat, that we distinguish
this reasoning from mere unreasoning association. The child who has
been once burnt " dreads the fire;" the man who knows by long expe-
rience the properties of fire, is certain that he will be burnt if he
thrusts his fingers among live coals, because he has learned that fire
always severely punishes those who trifle with it?he believes in
a general law.
Mr. Bailey's third chapter treats of Demonstrative Reasoning. The
instance given is, in fact, Euclid's axiom respecting the equality of
things respectively equal to the same thing; or, at least, it is an
example of this axiom.
" The mind, observing successively the equality of A to C, and that
of B to C, is thence led to discern the mutual equality of A to B,
which is not self-evident, or immediately discernible from the inspection
of A and B alone. It is plain that in reasoning of this second species,
which is with great propriety termed demonstrative, we intuitively
discern, at each step, that one fact implies another, and discern, too4
that a denial of the implied fact involves a contradiction."
THE THEORY OF REASONING. 511
Now here, we should say that either too little is stated, or too much.
If the author intends that Euclid's " axiom" is an example of demon-
strative reasoning, we should deny this altogether. This would cer-
tainly be asserting too much. If it be meant that, in any particular
previously unexamined case, such as that of some one A, B, and C, the
assertion is true?we ask why? The reply must be, surely, because it is
impossible we should think otherwise. Is it again asked?Why so ?
what other reply can be given than that it must be so in all cases, of
which this is one. In fact, we hold the axiom, as a general principle,
to be like all other real axioms, whether geometrical or other, to be not
only self-evident, but, at the same time, incapable of proof. Now
surely no one has ever demonstrated the axiom that things equal to
one and the same thing are equal to each other. Every mind which
once comprehends the terms in which this proposition is couched,
instantly feels it to be true, and, on a little reflection, also feels that no
proof of it is possible. It is a truth which is on a par Avith many
others, which Ave belieA'e only just because Ave cannot help it. Such a
truth is that of our OAvn personal consciousness and existence; or that
of the necessity of causation for every change. But Avhen we say A is
equal to C, and B is equal to C, therefore A and B are equal, Ave are
doing nothing more nor less than giA'ing an example of a principle on
Avhich, from early childhood, we tacitly act every day. This is evident
when Ave consider that if any one should question our conclusion, Ave
instantly justify it by saying, Why, must not things respectively
equal to the same be equal to each other 1 We suggest, therefore,
that our author has only given a partial statement, in the pas-
sage before us, of a case of demonstrative reasoning. His example is
a case of demonstration only, because there is a tacit understanding of
the general principle?the a priori truth that equals to equals are
equal?a truth which Avould never ha\-e entered the mind but for some
particular example, but which, on occasion of some such example,
instantly flashed upon the understanding as universal and necessary.
The reasoning, therefore, Ave hold to be as follows:?A and B are equal
to each other if severally equal to C, because it is impossible that any
case can arise in which equals to the same are unequal.
The above example is not exclusively geometrical, the only tAvo dis-
tinctly geometrical axioms being, "two straight lines cannot enclose a
space," and " only one parallel to a line can be drawn through a point out-
side it.and Ave agree Avith Mr. Bailey, that " demonstrate reasoning
is not confined to the science of quantity." By demonstratiAre reason-
ing, Ave imagine, from the context, that he Avould mean that Avliich is,
throughout, absolute and necessary in its conclusion, not only from the
conclusion being drawn, strictly, from the admitted premises, but from
L L 2
512 THE THEORY OF REASONING.
the premises themselves being also incapable of being doubted. One
example, however, is given, which does not fulfil this condition, and
which ought rather, on Mr. Bailey's own principles, to have been
regarded as a case of " contingent reasoning." The example we refer
to is: " All horned animals are ruminanttherefore " this horned
animal is ruminant." No doubt the conclusion, here, follows neces-
sarily from the premises; but so also does the conclusion, " The man
Peter is fallible," follow necessarily from the expressed premises that
" all men are fallible," and the implied premises expressed with the
conclusion, that Peter is a human being. Peter's fallibility as neces-
sarily follows from that of all mankind, as the rumination of any one
horned animal that has, does, or shall exist, follows from the assertion
that all horned animals ruminate. The difference, therefore, between
the two cases would naturally be sought by the reader in the character
of the major proposition. But it is evident that in both cases this
proposition is not an (I priori truth; it is, as Mr. Bailey calls it in the
former case, a " collective fact," and it is equally so in the latter. We
should hardly, therefore, have expected that the general truth, "all
horned animals are ruminant," would have been classed with the
general truth, " the three angles of every triangle are together equal
to two right angles." The one is no doubt a contingent fact, that is,
a fact of induction; the other is demonstrable a priori.
We are glad to find, notwithstanding certain modes of statement in
this work, in which, as our readers have already seen, we are not
entirely at one with Mr. Bailey, that he vindicates the syllogism in
demonstrative reasoning from some of the charges brought against it
by some writers of note, who appear to have mistaken its pretensions,
and to have taken a wrong view of it in relation to the psychological
process which it exhibits. We quote the following passage:?
" The objection is that the major premiss not merely implies but
contains the conclusion ; that the conclusion is in reality a constituent
or integrant part of the major premiss, without which the latter would
not be completely true. This allegation, it must be confessed, cannot
be contradicted. The force of the reasoning in a demonstrative
syllogism, or an entliymeme with a major premiss, depends altogether
on the fact expressed in the conclusion, forming an integrant part of
the general fact expressed in the major proposition, and consequently
no new or unknown fact can ever appear as the inference. The essence
of the conclusion, in such cases, consists in asserting that the subject
of it does form an integrant part of the major premiss. But*although
the allegation must be admitted, it does not by any means prove
that such reasoning is nugatory or useless. It may obviously be of
service to be reminded, or to remind others, or to have distinctly
brought into view, that a given individual of a class possesses a certain
THE THEORY OF REASONING. 513
attribute, when there is at the moment no other evidence to prove it,
by citing the known or admitted fact, that all the members of the
class possess it. As an illustration of this part, suppose I am engaged
in the demonstration of a geometrical theorem: there is before me a
complicated diagram containing, amongst several figures, a triangle,
which I have to compare with other figures, and, as a step in the
reasoning, I have to show that the angles of the triangle in question
are together equal to two right angles. I have not gone through the
proofs with this particular triangle, but I call to mind that I have
seen the proposition demonstrated of all triangles whatsoever; and
from it, as an established truth, the conclusion that the angles of the
triangle in the diagram, though not expressly investigated, are together
equal to two right angles, irresistibly follows. It is simply thinking
or saying: 4 in all triangles, the three angles are equal to two right
angles, and of course, the particular triangle before us is included in
the general fact.'"?pp. 39, 40.
\
The above we hold to be good orthodox doctrine; but we must
demur to a subsequent statement, that " all instances of the conversion
of propositions are really instances of demonstrative reasoning." We
should rather say, that if all As are Bs, it intuitively follows that some
Bs must be As, without the intervention of any additional proposition
expressed or implied. When Ave say all men are mortal beings," we
say that there ave beings which have the two marks, human nature
and mortality; but we do not say that wherever either of the marks
exists, the other is also found. We simply shut up man within the
sphere of mortal beings: we do not say, in stating this proposition,
whether the sphere of men is coincident with that of mortal beings
or not. On the contrary, when we say "no man is an infallible
being," we are entitled to say " no infallible being is a man," simply or
sufficiently because the terms mutually exclude each other by the very
form of the expression?we deny all intercommunion between them.
When we have said no As are Bs, we have said, in fact, that no Bs are
As, and vice versd.
We should also equally except, again, to Mr. Bailey's mode of
getting rid of premises, in some cases, where he alleges that their
introduction " masks the real nature of the evidence for the conclusion."
He objects to the syllogism, all horned quadrupeds are ruminant, and
therefore this animal, being homed, will also be found ruminant, his
objection being founded on the above reason; and he states that the
real argument is?"All other horned quadrupeds have been found
ruminant, therefore this horned quadruped is ruminant." Now we
think the major premiss, here, is hardly stated fairly. Taken literally, it
means, first, that we have had actual experience of all horned animals
but one, and have found them ruminant; and therefore, having now
514 THE THEORY OF REASONING.
found the last horned animal, we conclude that it also is ruminant.
This induction would be almost a perfect one, the collective fact having
a force approximating by so much nearer to absolute certainty as the
known cases are more numerous, or have fewer unexamined cases.
But is this the real major premiss? or does it express the real
collective fact? "We think not. The real fact is, not that all other
horned animals (this one excepted, as being yet unknown,) have been
found?and have been found ruminant; but that all which have
hitherto been found have been ruminant. Hence the mind, by
some process natural to it, but not capable of much analysis, flies to
the general principle, that horned animals always will be found to
ruminate; that this, in short, is a law in natural history, and hence the
conclusion, be the particular case what it will; and although it be
admitted that not a millionth part of all the horned animals in creation
have been, or ever will be, examined by man.
We have already admitted that the conclusion, in the case of ordi-
nary inductive or " contingent" reasoning, must partake of precisely
the same degree of probability as the " collective fact" laid down as
the major premiss, though this conclusion as necessarily follows from
the premises as any conclusion deduced from an absolutely universal
major premiss. Whether this reasoning is to be called " demonstra-
tive" or not, is a question of terminology. The brief dialogue which
is introduced in the fifty-second page by way of illustration, would
evidently be as applicable to any reasoning that we could call demon-
strative, as to the contingent example there adduced; and we might
parallel that example by one taken from the chapter on " Demonstra-
tive Reasoning," and say, the three angles of every triangle, including
the triangle A, B, C, are together equal to two right angles; there-
fore the triangle A, B, C, is equal to two right angles. But this would
not, we imagine, be a fair representation of the true psychological
analysis of the syllogism. We want to develop a process, step by
step, which is for the most part hurried over practically, so as seem-
ingly to contain merely two propositions, to the latter of which the
mind is necessarily determined by the former. But a little reflection
will show, that when Ave have got a major premiss, it may be still often
necessary, for the sake of clearness, to state a minor, or, in other words,
to announce that a certain individual or class actually does belong to
the class of which something is predicated in the major premiss.
We do not think that our author has quite done justice to the
subject of axioms, though he has fortified himself with the names of
Locke and D'Alembert. Locke, in terms, denied innate truths or
principles, though he admitted them in practice, and was in so doing
notoriously inconsistent with himself; as every tyro knows who has
THE THEORY OF REASONING. 515
carefully read his Essay. If it be true to say, with D'Alembert, that
there is "no necessity to enunciate axioms," certain it is that we
cannot get on a step without proceeding on the principle that there are
axioms. They are always tacitly presupposed, and if we are to have
anything like a full analysis put down on paper of the process of the
mind in reasoning, it is necessary, in some cases especially, to state
axioms at length. Mr. Bailey says that maxims or axioms are " only
generalizations of the particular arguments, or of the particular
instances of implication, and the self-evidence of both maxims and
arguments is on a level, although the priority in respect of origin is
with the latter." There may be some ambiguity, perhaps, in the
meaning of this language; but if it mean that it is only after a
certain number of arguments have been felt to be conclusive that we
form out of them a maxim or axiom, we should say that this, is only
true of ordinary induction, in which the term axiom would not be
rightly used; for an axiom, as already remarked, is properly a pro-
position which is both self-evident and incapable of proof. It carries
its own conviction with it, and it admits of no corroboration. Let us
take the former axiom, "things equal to the same thing are equal to
each other," which is adduced by our author as an example of his view
that axioms are only " generalizations of particular arguments." If
by " priority of origin" it is intended to say that some example of
the comparison of equal things with a third must arise, before the
mind frames the axiom to itself in distinct consciousness, we admit it.
But is it not true that the very first time that an intelligent child has
such an example distinctly brought to his attention, he would admit
the truth just because he feels, or, if you please, discerns at once by
the eye of reason, that it cannot be otherwise?that is, that if A and B
are each equal to C, they must equal each other?let A, B, and C
represent what they may?that is, no case is conceivable, whatever
be the equal things, or the nature of the equality, in which they must
not both be equal or both unequal to the same third thing. If this
be a mere " generalization of the particular arguments, or of the par-
ticular instances of implication," we would take the liberty of asking
one question, and when it is answered we shall know whether or not
we ought to give tip our opinion of the nature of real axioms. The
question is this: How comes it to pass, that, quite " irrespectively of the
mere number of the instances, the generalization of the particular
arguments" is, in some cases, felt to lead only to probability, however
high, while no absurdity seems to attach to the idea of an instance
occurring in which the principle shall fail?whereas, in other cases, it is
at once felt to be absurd to imagine the possibility that any instance
should ever occur in which the principle is not true. It involves no
51 6 THE THEORY OF REASONING.
absurdity to imagine that a liorned animal were found without hoofs,
but what should we say of any one who gravely maintained that a
change might take place without a cause, or that an instance was
possible of two things, each equal to a third thing, in the same
respect, while the two things are, in that respect, unequal to each
other. The fact is (or at least so it appears to us) that in the former
case the general principle has grown out of a great number of instances,
each of which has added to its probable truth; Avhile in the latter
case the general principle was felt to fasten on the mind (on the first
particular example occurring) with all the force of universality and
necessity. In one sense it is true that " maxims (axioms) have no
probative force, they add no cogency to any argument;" for the argu-
ment, in fact, already presupposes their tacit admission: but if they
do not add force, they point out where the force lies. The ground we
tread on adds no vigour to our muscles in walking, not previously
inherent in them; but it renders walking possible; in other words,
(though it is so obvious as to be readily overlooked,) the very idea of
walking presupposes or involves that there is always something to
walk on. Archimedes not only wanted machinery, but also the
7rou (Trio.
That Aristotle's dictum is a "self-evident and indisputable truth," we
readily admit; and we would go further, and say, that it may be
reduced to the assertion?call it definition, or axiom, or what not?
that every whole includes all its parts. All we have to do is to deter-
mine, and if needful to assert, that a certain individual is a part of
the given whole, and the conclusion. We may laugh at the simplicity
of this doctrine, if we please, and say that no ghost was needed to tell
us that. Well and good: but the only question is, whether this is not
the true psychological analysis of reasoning. No doubt, as Mr. Bailey
says, "When I affirm that a man could not commit a crime at a
specified time in London, because he was at that precise moment in
Edinburgh, I reason just as much as I do when I affirm?that the three
angles of the triangle before me are together equal to two right angles,
because the three angles of every triangle are equal to two right
angles." Yes, certainly, I reason as much in the former as in the
latter case: but what is the principle of my reasoning?or has it any
principle? Imagine a person to be asked why a crime could not be
committed in London under the above circumstances, and what is
tacitly proceeded on, as the ground of conviction in the particular
instance, would at once be stated in words?namely, that it is impos-
sible for any person to be in two places at the same moment. Would
not this show the granted or understood general principle on which
each particular case was based1?
THE THEORY OF REASONING. 517
No logician will be prepared to deny that maxims or principles may
be drawn out briefly expressing the precise character of tlie syllogisms
in the imperfect moods, as has been done in the Organon of Lambert, a
German logician of merit. Mr. Bailey has done the same; but the
question is not so much, how we may describe certain arguments, but
whether there be any way in which all may be described. It would be
impossible to reduce all kinds of categorical arguments to any of the
four maxims proposed by our author; but by certain legitimate and
obvious transpositions of premises, and conversions of propositions, in
the process of which not an iota is uttered, or denied, which was not
uttered or denied in the original state of the arguments, all are reduced
to the simple form of the dictum; and many are, by this means, made-
much clearer, and more intelligible to the ear and mind.
Let us take the following argument in the fourth figure; which
figure, by the way, is not Aristotelian, being traditionally ascribed to-
Galen:?All the planets are opaque bodies: no opaque bodies are capable
of transmitting light in any other way than by reflexion; therefore
bodies capable of transmitting light in any other way than by reflexion
are not planets. Now, it cannot be doubted that the immediate prin-
ciple on which this syllogism is constructed may be expressed, as in the
Artis Logicce Eudimenta (Oxon), thus: "If one class be universally
comprehended under another, from which a third is wholly excluded,
this third is wholly excluded from the first." But who would dispute
the superior clearness of the argument in the following form, in which
the same things are laid conformably with the dictum 1 No opaque
bodies are capable of transmitting light in any other way than by re-
flexion. All the planets are opaque bodies; therefore the planets are not
bodies capable of transmitting light in any other way than by reflexion
?a conclusion logically identical with the former, as the terms mutually
exclude each other. The dictum is truly not the sole principle which
may be applied to legitimate arguments; but the dictum expressed in
some way or other, so as to point to classes or attributes, has never, so
far as we know, been fairly disproved to be a principle to which all
syllogistic reasoning may be reduced, when put in its most analytical
and elementary form.
"VVe regret that our space forbids us to pursue further the analysis of
the volume before us in detail. This, however, is of much less conse-
quence than it might be, if the views which we have already examined
did not frequently reappear, in the subsequent pages, by way of their
further application. Oar remaining observations must be concise, and
almost aphoristic. Mr. Bailey remarks that, in this argument, " the
planets are opaque bodies; therefore they must shine by light derived
from an external source;"?it is obvious that a " proposition affirming
518 THE THEORY OF REASONING.
that all opaque bodies shine by light derived from external sources,
would be merely generalizing an argument sufficiently conclusive, and
would not add to it a particle of cogency." Now, we must say that we
deem this observation quite beside the mark. There has probably been
many a student who, on first reading Newton's Principia, (if he studied
the original text,) would have been glad if its illustrious author had
been a little more detailed in his analysis; but no one who has read
Euclid would suppose that even the minutest detail of steps would
have added a particle of cogency to Newton's conclusions. The addition
of a major premiss to the above truncated syllogism (which the moderns
call an entliymeme, though it differs widely from the enthymeme of
Aristotle) would certainly add no cogency to the argument, but is as
certainly implied in the argument as such; for it is evident, that when
we merely say that planets, as being opaque bodies, must shine by a
light not their own, we imply that the planets are no exception to the
general law of opaque bodies. We do not here stay to quarrel with the
matter of this particular example; but we believe that the best dic-
tionaries, and scientific usage, would warrant the application of the
term " opaque" (not diaphonous) to the sun itself. The example we
have just given, in the fourth figure, is evidently different; for an opaque
body cannot transmit light through it.
In regard to our author's example: " Solon was a wise legislator,
because he adapted his laws to the genius of the people"?what earthly
connexion, we would ask, can there be between these two assertions,
which does not imply that the conduct ascribed to Solon was a mark of
wisdom, and would have been such in any legislator ? Here then,
surely, is an implied principle; which you may express if you please,
but which you must tacitly admit, if your conclusion is to have any
real connexion with the reason given for it. Our author, however,
purposes, by way of " strengthening the reasoning," to add to it such a
proposition as the following: "For when laws are adapted to the
genius of the people, they are cheerfully obeyed." Now, this addition
may be very good; but then it is evident that it will not answer the
purpose wanted: for we shall now have two arguments instead of one;
the first proving that Solon was wise because he adapted his laws to the
genius of the people?the second proving wherein this wisdom con-
sisted?namely, in taking the readiest road to have the laws obeyed.
The question is simply whether it is worth while or not to have an
exact psychological analysis of a process of argument, understanding
by an " argument" a case in which some one proposition is made to
follow from what preceded? It would be pedantic enough, no doubt,
and very tedious, to supply all the enthymemes in which we talk, with
the omitted premises; but this proves nothing against the dictum as a
THE THEORY OF EEASONING. 519
register of the actual or virtual psychological process. It would be
just as bad to parse every word in our conversation; nevertheless
grammatical analysis is not without its use, and philology is an im-
portant science.
Our author concludes his discussion of the "forms of reasoning"
with the remark that?" in numerous cases of demonstrative reasoning,
one premiss is alone sufficient for the inference; although it may be
granted that, even in those cases, it is possible to form a complete
syllogism, by thrusting in a fruitless and redundant proposition." We
grant that there are cases in which it may be much more important, for
the sake of clearness, to state an omitted premiss than in others: we
go further, and admit that many logical examples appear frivolous, and
almost ridiculous, when stated at full length, chiefly because the thing to
be proved and the premises which may be stated in connexion with it
happen to be so very familiar. Every body knows that " all men. are
mortal f and every body who knows " Peter" knows that he " is a man,"
and not an angel; and every body knows that " Peter is mortalbut
will any body deny that the statement of Peter's mortality is true,
because Peter is a member of the human family, and so comes under the
general law to which, from the beginning, it has been observed that
mankind have been subject? Now the syllogism merely says this
in all the minutiae of detail. The same remark, of course, applies
to reasoning in which the major premiss is an absolutely certain or
<% priori truth.
To Mr. Bailey's conclusion, that " the syllogism is not an analysis of
the process of all demonstrative reasoningand " that a single fact or
combination of facts capable of being expressed in one proposition,
frequently determines the mind to a conclusion without reference to
anything elseand that this is the whole of which the mind is " con-
scious, or which can be discerned as having taken place on reflection"?
to this, we need not add, we decidedly demur. It may include a
description, perhaps, of what takes place in cases of mere association,
which often misleads?witness Bacon's four " idolsbut it is surely a
very inadequate, we may say incorrect, account of what takes place in
reasoning proper, and more especially in that which is demonstrative.
In fact, it wholly overlooks the sense, tacit or expressed, of a general
law.
We would willingly have pursued our analysis of the author's
volume throughout, because his book is really a good one of the school
to which it belongs; but Ave must forbear. In the chapter on " Primary
or Original Premises," he fortifies himself with references to Locke,
Dugald Stewart, Smart, and John Mill. With the latter work he
shows that he is familiar, and to its views some of his own will be
520 THE THEORY-OF REASONING.
tliought by tlie reader to bear considerable resemblance. We were
glad to find him, in his chapter on the " Relation between Reasoning
and Language," controverting Whately's statement, that " logic is solely
conversant about language"?a statement not in harmony certainly with
Aristotle's doctrine of the syllogism; and, what is much more important,
not in harmony with consciousness, as Hobbes, Brown, and perhaps
Dugald Stewart, in some measure, were aware. In the tenth chapter
are some valuable remarks on the " Relation of Observation, Experi-
ment, and Induction, to Reasoning and to each Other." The eleventh
chapter is practical, containing " Rules for Guiding the Operation of
Reasoning." It Avas to be expected that here our author would hardly
be prepared to do justice to the scholastic logicians, who, with all their
faults, were not without great merit?witness the " Manuductio ad
Logicam" of Du Trieu. The volume closes with some useful popular
remarks on the " sources of erroneous conclusionsbut the author
does not go into a minute exposition of sophisms. An Appendix
follows, containing some analyses of trains of reasoning; in which,
after all the criticism which the dictum de omni et nullo, and the syllo-
gism have undergone?enough surely to lay these ghosts for ninety-
nine years?they nevertheless reappear, and are allowed to possess
a vehicle of corporeity; for they are both referred to as substantial
elements of reasoning, and especially the former, though it is evident
that they must stand or fall together.
We will only add, that we apprehend much of the controversy which
has taken place on the fundamental principles of logic has been occa-
sioned by the contending parties not fully comprehending each others
drift and aim. Moreover, the psychological aspect of a process of con-
sciousness, and its logical content, though they can never really clash, not
unfrcquently present apparent discrepancies, and require to be harmo-
nized, as they often easily may. The distinction has been well marked
in the modern Eclectic school of France. The use of terms, again, is
constant crux of logicians, as well as of divines, moralists, and metaphy-
sicians. These circumstances have all tended to augment the difference
subsisting between those who are more inclined to Aristotelian views
of logic, and those who would like to banish the Stagyrite wholly from
his throne.
