Influence of Mental Emotion in the Production of Disease of the Heart
======================================================================

:Author: "W. FKASEK, ESQ., M.E.C.S.E.
(Read at the Medico-Chirurgical Society, Aberdeen.)

The subject of the following remarks was an unmarried female, forty-
four years of age, whom I attended for the first time about a year ago.
She was then labouring under decided symptoms of valvular disease of the
heart, which had been of considerable (I suppose about five or six years)
standing. The change which she had shortly before then undergone, from
a private to a public position, involving considerable responsibility, and
requiring an amount of activity which she had never been accustomed to,
and which she was then finable to render, together with the consideration
that the original causes which had probably led to the disease still conti-
nued in operation,?all tended to the formation of a guarded and, indeed,
an unfavourable prognosis; and it was in accordance with this view that
my opinion was given of the case.

By the use of a diuretic and tonic plan of treatment, and the retirement
to the country, so as to ensure the most perfect withdrawal of mental and
physical excitement, she at that time perfectly recovered; that is to say,
the more obvious and distressing symptoms, such as the anasarca, hydro-
thorax, dyspnoea, cough, extreme debility and exhaustion on the slightest
muscular exertion, had disappeared, although, of course, the disease itself
could not be supposed to have' been removed. In fact, notwithstanding
every precaution that her situation admitted of, it began again in a few
months to develop itself in the usual results attending valvular obstruction
of the heart, although not to the same extent that had occurred on the
previous occasion. About six weeks before her death she had a sudden
and violent attack of common cholera, from the prostration occasioned by
which she never properly recovered. This might have been considered as
an effort of nature to relieve the overloaded tissues and vessels; which
effect it had to a considerable extent, and she so far rallied that great hopes
were entertained that she would soon be restored to her usual condition,
till one day, through her own and her attendant's inadvertence, she left
her bed-room, and was placed at the fireside of a large room, an open
window of which transmitted a draught of air directly athwart her person.
The consequence of this indiscretion was an attack of pneumonia, which,
although all along masked and overlaid, as it were, by the gravity of the
previously established symptoms, evidently was the means of bringing the
case to a fatal termination. Dr Ogston attended her with me for the last
fortnight, and he and Dr Steel were present with myself at the autopsy
on the 21st of the month of February.

Not having taken any notes either of the history or post-mortem exami-
nation of the case, I must confine myself to such remarks as my memory
will sufficiently warrant me in making. In tlie cliest, about tlie lower
third of the right lung was hepatized (and partially adherent to the costal
pleura), and there were old adhesions between its middle lobe and the wall
of the chest; the lungs throughout were rather more tlian usually gorged,
and there was a quantity, not large, of fluid in both cavities of the thorax.
The heart, which was abundantly covered with fat, appeared to be of the
normal size: it contained but little blood, and its muscular substance
seemed tolerably firm and healthy. All its cavities, but more especially
the left ventricle, contained pieces of pure, pale, and firm fibrin, which was-
in some places so intermeshed with the chord? tendinea) and calumnco-
carnea), as to be with difficulty removed. The auriclcs, but particularly
the left one, were pale and attenuated; the ventricles, on the other hand,
especially the left one, were very considerably contracted in their capacity
and hypertrophied in substance. The semi-lunar valves, at the origin of
the pulmonary artery, were thickened, and must have been impaired in
their function, as they did not prevent the passage of water when it was-
poured into the artery, though this was probably in part owing to recent
fibrinous deposit. The mitral valve, however, presented the greatest
marks of disease, as will be shown by the preparation. Its orifice was of
the button-hole shape, and measured about three-fourths by one-fourth of
an inch in diameter. The contraction produced by osseo-cartilaginous
deposit was such that it could scarcely admit the tip of the little linger,
instead of the two forefingers, as the opening, when of its natural size,
will do. Its flaps were so thickened and altered in shape by the deposition
within their substance of a sort of brittle osseous or osseo-calcareous mat-
ter, that they must have permitted a considerable regurgitation of blood
into the auricle.

The abdomen, from which more than half a bucketful of bloody serum
was removed, was not very minutely examined. The liver was found
slightly enlarged and indurated. The spleen was likewise indurated, and
the kidneys were pale and very deteriorated in the cortical substance.
Having sent this paper to Dr Ogston, with a request that he would
correct any inaccuracies in my account of the post-mortem appearances,
he sent me the following reply, which, I think, will show that there is no
material discrepancy between our recollections of the case; and moreover,
from the well-known accuracy and extensive experience of the Doctor in
this department, will be a guarantee as to the general correctness of the-
description.

" Adelphi, 4tli March, 1851.
" Deae Sie,?These are my recollections of the morbid appearances in
Miss 's case, so far as our hurried inspection allowed us to examine
the body. If it serves your purpose, it is at your sei'vice.
" I am, dear sir, yours faithfully,
" (Signed) P. Ogston.
" 1. Emphysema of the upper lobes of both lungs.
" 2. Old adhesions of the middle lobe of the right, and the lower lobe
of the left lung to the walls of the chest.
" 3. Copious deposit of fat under the investing membrane of the heart-
" 4. Dilatation and attenuation of the right cavities of the heart.
" 5. Concentric (?) hypertrophy of the left ventricle.
" 6. Contraction and old thickening of the mitral valve.
" 7. Cartilaginous thickening of the tricuspid valve.
" 8. Patency of the semi-lunar valves of the aortic and pulmonary
arteries.
" 9. Slight hypertrophy of the liver.
424 INFLUENCE OF MENTAL EMOTION
" 10. Hepatization of the spleen.
" 11. Wasting and pallor of tlie secreting portion of the kidneys (with
albuminous urine).
" 12. Moderate effusion of serum into the chest.
" 13. Copious effusion of serum into the abdomen.
" 14. Unusual smallness of the stomach."

As the case presented nothing unusual either in its history, progress, or
treatment, and as I had preserved no notes on the subject, I shall, without
entering further into these points, come at once to my object in bringing
it before you.

The occurrence of so well-marked a case of valvular disease of the heart,
mainly brought on, as I believe it to have been, by mental causes, having
led me into a train of speculation as to the pathogeny?the modus operandi
or rationale of the production?of this class of cardiac diseases, I shall,
with your leave, read over a few ideas I have noted down, crude and
hasty though I admit them to be.

An examination of the mechanism of the great central organ of the
circulation will give one (at all events it has given me) the impression that
the action and office of the mitral valve, the left auriculo-ventricular open-
ing, is of a different nature from those of the other valves, both in the
cardiac and the venous systems. While these are mere passive resisters
of the return or retrograde passage of the blood, it would appear that, in
addition to this function, the mitral valve, the ostium arteriosum, acts as
a governor or regulator of the amount of blood which is transmitted
through its opening. This it effects by the action of the calumnea) carnea?,
chiefly those belonging to the larger flap of the valve. It is evident, from
the construction and arrangement of the parts, that the degree to which
these columns contract and relax, will decide the size of the auriculo-ven-
tricular aperture, and of course regulate the volume of blood transmissible
through it and through the vascular system generally. The exigencies
and demands of the system, or constitution itself, in all the various circum-
stances in which it may be placed, will be the procuring or deciding cause
of this action, and upon it will depend, in a great measure, the volume or
fulness of the systolic or arterial pulse. The nervous influence communi-
cated by the appropriate portion of the ganglionic system, with its various
anastomoses, connecting it with the cerebrum and the most important organs
of the body, may be presumed to be the means by which the muscles of the
valve are, through the medium of their motor, or muscular nerves, signalled
'as to the extent of contraction or relaxation they shall undergo. The
feelings and emotions of the mind, by whatever means they may be called
into action, concentrated or collected, in all probability in some portion of
the medulla oblongata, and transmitted through a branch of the par vagum,
are thus brought in an instant to bear upon the actions of this important
valve. Of course, it is understood, that, with its action, all other asso-
ciated and independent operations, such as those of the other portions of
the heart, the diaphragm, and the arterial system generally, are, through
the medium of the great sympathetic nerve, brought into harmony and
co-operation. But this function of the valve appears to be the first?the
primum mobile?the starting-point, as it were, of this circle of vital
actions, and, like the point d'ajpjoui of a bowstring, it is subjected to an
amount of excitement, resistance, and wear, which does not bear upon any
other portion of the circulatory system. The natural consequence of this
will be, in accordance with what we see in other parts of the body when
subjected to a long course of irritation and over-action, that the organ will
become strengthened and thickened by the deposition of additional sub-
stance, either of a homogeneous or of an analogous kind, and tliis deposi-
tion, under the continued operation of the cause that produced it, will go
on till the proper configuration and action of the part become very
much impaired, or even at last entirely destroyed.

Persons who by practice have acquired the power of paying minute
attention to their nervous and internal sensations (a very unadvisable and
dangerous habit, by the way, especially in this instance), can easily reco-
gnise and feel the action of which I have been speaking; and they can even
at times, by an effort of the imagination and the will, voluntarily cause it
to take place. The mode in which this can be done, speaking from my own
slight experience, is this:?supposing the patient, or experimenter rather, to
have been for some time gently occupied in body and mind, as in a reverie
or waking dream, for instance, so as to be generating a larger amount of
nervous influence than he is expending, let him quickly call before his
mind's eye some scene or circumstance, or combination of events, calcu-
lated to produce a feeling of consternation?a sudden emotion of fear,
frief, and surprise?and he will?or rather he may, under certain con-
itions that can scarcely be described?feel a kind of aura or tremor
proceed from the base of his brain down to the heart. Immediately a sort
of spasmodic closure of the valve is felt to take place, giving a sensation like
the sudden contraction of an involuntary sphincter muscle, and causing, by
the impulse of the arrested blood, a violent jerk or leap of the heart at the
same time, as a natural result of the arrest of the current of blood thus
occasioned, a short flutter or struggle of the overloaded left auricle takes
place, till the entire organ has had time, by the increased rapidity and force
of its action, induced probably in part by the stimulus of over-distention,
to make up for, and accommodate itself to, the diminution in the current of
its contents.

But here the question naturally presents itself?as nature, or the vis
medicatrix naturae, does nothing in vain, or without some beneficial purpose
in view, what is the object of the action under discussion, resulting, as
we know it in some circumstances to do, in the most morbific and dis-
astrous results P In the beautiful language of Shakspeare we might ask?
" Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for itself,
And dispossessing all the other parts
Of necessary fitness ?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
All come to help him, and so stop the air
By which he should revive; and even so
The people subject to a well-wisbed king
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Must needs appear offence."
Measure for Measure, Act ii. scene 4.
And again:

" Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom:
My heart beats thicker than a feverish pulse ;
And all my powers do their bestowing lose,
Like vassalage at unawares encountering
The eye of majesty."

Troilus and Cressida, Act iii. scene 2.
This action, I will venture to reply, like every other natural process in
the animal economy, is essentially and in itself of a healthful and pre-
servative kind, and it is only by being thwarted and diverted from its
original purpose, that it issues in that series of baneful results of which it
is often tlie first link. I liave observed, on microscopically examining an
insect in which, the action of the heart and blood-vessels could be seen,
that on receiving a wound, the first and almost instantaneous effect pro-
duced is a spasmodic contraction of the heart, followed by an unusually
long and large dilatation; and, afterwards, a more rapid, and at first
almost convulsive action of the organ : the blood is, at the same time, seen
to be directed with increased force and abundance towards the wounded
part, and the animal puts itself into an attitude of defence, or perhaps of
retaliation and attack.

Precisely the same thing takes place, in similar circumstances, in the
human body?the instinctive or vital provisions for self-preservation and
defence being the same in both cases. To borrow the idea of Shakspeare,
in a passage which I shall presently quote, in reply to the question that
we asked in the same poet's words?it may be said, that on the instant of
danger occurring or being discovered, a message is telegraphed to the
citadel, from which reinforcement and succour are to be looked for : there
the alarm is immediately sounded, the portcullis is closed, or at least put
under guard, the forces are mustered, and, amidst the turmoil of prepara-
tion and arrangement, a momentary consultation is held, and then the
required assistance is despatched to the region in want of it.

" Between the acting of a dreadful thing
And the first motion, all the interim is
Like a phantasma, or a hideous dream :
The genius and the mortal instruments
Are then in council; and the state of man,
Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
The nature of an insurrection."
Julius Ccesar, Act ii. scene 1.

But besides the attacks of mere brute force, and the palpable evidence
of immediate jeopardy to his bodily safety, man,?a creature of intellect
and feeling,?can easily recognise and appreciate the existence of other
dangers that equally menace his happiness and life: and here, too, the
same instinctive process of warning and of self-defence that we have been
considering, is still employed by the vis medicatrix natura?, although its
external manifestation will differ in accordance with the nature of the
threatened danger. " Sorrow," says Melancthon, " strikes the heart as
with a blow, and causes it to languish with a deep feeling of pain." Such
would probably have been the case in one of his intellectual and angelic
temperament, while in those of a different constitution, like his friend, the
energetic Luther, a different result would have been produced. The out-
pouring of speech, for instance, is one of the most obvious means had
recourse to; as Shakspeare again says?

" The heart hath treble wrong
When it is barred the aidence of the tongue.
An oven that is stopped, or river staid,
Burnetii more hotly, swelleth with more rage :
So of concealed sorrow may be said."
Poems.
And on another occasion :?
" Give sorrow words ; the grief that does not speak
Whispers the o'erwrought heart, and bids it break."
Macbeth, Act iv. scene 3.
Or, the whole system may be roused into a fit of passionate excitement,
IN DISEASE OF THE HEART. 427
and this with a very beneficial effect as regards the individual's personal
health and comfort; for as Armstrong, the poet of medicine, says?
" There are meantime to wliom the boisterous fit
Is health, and only fills the sails of life:
For where the mind a torpid course would run,
And each clogged fountain lazily move on,
A generous sally spurns th' incumbent load,
Unlocks the breast, and gives a cordial glow."
Or, as Akenside, still more apropos to our subject, remarks?
" Passion's fierce illapse
Rouses the mind's whole fabric with supplies
Of daily impulse ; keeps the elastic power
Intensely poised, and polishes anew
By that collision, all the fine machine.
Else rust would rise, and foulness by degrees
Incumbering choke at last what Heaven designed
For ceaseless action and a round of toil."

But amidst the high-pressure conventionalities and law-protected
arrangements of civilized society, it is in general the intellect or brain to
which the alarm-struck heart applies?at which it may be literally said to
knock?for assistance and advice. If the intellect and resources of the
individual be able to extricate him from the difficulty in which he is placed,
all will be well, and the instinctive actions of his system have answered
the purpose of their implantation. But where they fail to do this, and
when the cause of the disturbance continues constantly renewing its
operation on the body, it is then that the valvular affection with all its
concatenation of abnormal products may be the result. Such a fixed
and irremovable heart-sorrow, for instance, was that of the majestic Lear,
who thus bewails the mischief done by his ungrateful daughter, in whose
power he had placed his noble and too confiding heart.

" She liatc
Looked black upon me ; struck me with her tongue
Most serpent-like, upon the very heart."
" She liatli tied
Sharp-toothed unkindness like a vulture here."
King Lear, Act ii. scene 4.
And how significant are the words, whether taken figuratively or literally,
that were written by that wise king, whose last act, also, according to the
authentic record we have of his life (1 Kings, xi. 4), proved so melancholy
a commentary on his own aphorism: " Keep thy heart 'with all diligence,
for out of it are the issues of life."?Prov. iv. 23.
The dangerous and often fatal effects of the sudden removal of the cause
of a prolonged heart-struggle, if the precaution of an appropriate diverti-
culum be not employed, are well known. May not the immediate cause
be, that the left ventricle is overpowered and paralyzed, and its action thus
brought to a stand, by the rapid and continuous rush of blood permitted
by the too sudden relaxation of its valve ? Pericles, Prince of Tyre, who
had suddenly recognised and recovered his long lost daughter, thus speaks
to his friend :?

" 0 ! Helicanus, strike me, honoured sir ;
Give me a gash, put me to present pain ;
Lest the great sea of joy rushing upon me,
O'erbear the shores of my mortality,
And drown me with their sweetness."
Pericles, Act v. scene 1.

Hence the propriety of gradually breaking tlie force of good news by
the interposition of a certain amount of doubt or uncertainty, and thus
preparing the system for its operation; in the case of a person in whom a
long course of grief has had time to reduce to a settled condition those
changes which this is capable of producing on the system. The relief
which the instinctive tearing or beating of the breast?the natural language
of violent grief?would seem to afford, is to be accounted for on a similar
principle, namely, that of establishing a diverticulum or by-path to the
nervous influence, which would otherwise be transmitted to the seat of
disease. On the same principle wo may account for the great relief which
is afforded in chronic or fixed disease of the heart by the insertion of a
seton?a chronic or permanent gash?over the region of the heart.

The consecutive lesions of structure, after the valvular affection has been
established, that would naturally take place in the other parts of the cardiac
apparatus, and the system generally, would depend, to a great extent, on the
constitutional character and temperament of the individual. The most
natural and obvious consequence, in the first instance, would be, that the left
ventricle would become hypertrophied without dilatation; that is to say, that
its walls would become thicker and less capacious by adapting themselves to
the increase of work which the more rapid, though smaller supply of blood,
would entail upon them. The more passive character of the office of the
left auricle, that of a safety or supply-chamber to the force-pump of the
ventricle, and its engorgement with blood in the circumstances supposed,
would, in general, rather lead to a dilatation of its cavity, with a thinning,
or, at all events, without any hypertrophy of its walls. But supposing the
person to be of an ardent and determined temperament, with passions yet
uncooled by age, or the discipline of experience or of religion, or to be
under the necessity, though of an opposite temperament, of exerting his
muscular and arterial system in strong corporeal labour; when under the
influence of the causes which we have supposed as tending to contract the
ostium arteriosum, the probability would be, that long before the last
degree of thickening or ossification of the valve could be produced, a fatal
dilatation or aneurism of some other part of the cardiac or arterial system
would ensue,?that of the left auricle, for instance, or of the origin, or of
some neighbouring part, of the aorta.

The effect produced by the continued or frequently-repeated contraction
of the mitral orifice on the venous circulation, tracing it backwards from the
point of obstruction, would be, in the first place, as we have seen, an
engorgement and dilatation of the ventricle; then beyond that, there
would be a corresponding engorgement and retardation of the blood in the
vessels of the lungs, occasioning, as it does, one of the most serious and
distressing symptoms in these complaints; namely, serous infiltration and
dyspneea; beyond that, again, the right ventricle and auricle would feel
the effect of the impediment, either with or without undergoing hyper-
trophy, dilatation, or other alteration, according to circumstances ; beyond
that, again, the whole venous circulation would be kept back, and its
vessels, both large and small, brought into a state of congestion. Tracing
the remora still further back, we come to the capillary system of arteries,
and from them to the larger trunks, and finally to the aorta itself,
which brings us almost to the point from which we started. The contrac-
tile force of the left ventricle, together with such action as the arteries
themselves are capable of exerting, especially when under stimulation
either of an emotional, therapeutic, or exertional kind, meeting, in the-
circumstances we have supposed, with the resistance which the obstructed
capillaries intoi'pose, would expend itself upon their own walls, and what-
ever portion of these was the most powerfully assailed, or happened, from
"whatever cause, to be unusually weakened, would naturally give way and
suffer dilatation. That this would probably be at the origin of the aorta,
or in some of the larger trunks, which are acted on by a large mass of
blood in close proximity to the vis a tergo, rather than in the more remote
and smaller branches, could easily be shown upon the established principles
of hydraulics. *
