Commissions In Lunacy
======================

A commission (le lunatico inquiremlo was held at the Sussex Arras Hotel, Hammer-
smith, before F. Barlow, esq., one of the masters in lunacy, relative to the state of
Captain James Gordon, late of the 3rd West India Regiment, and now resident with,
and under the care of, Dr Forbes Winslow, of Sussex House, Hammersmith. The
commission was issued on the petition of his wife, and was made imperative in con-
sequence of the death of Sir Thomas McKenny, hart., the late father of Mrs. Gordon.
It appeared, from the statement of counsel, that Captain Gordon had been under Dr.
Winslow's care since January, 1840. Prior to that period, he had been in two other
establishments, one of which was that of Dr Fox, of Bristol. He was subsequently
placed in the private family of a physician, and becoming unmanageable, he was then
removed to a cottage in St. John's Wood, and from thence he was taken to Sussex
House.
Dr Forbes Winslow was then examined at some length. Dr Winslow represented
that Captain Gordon laboured under several delusions. He believed that he was a man of
title, and signs himself so; he thought that a conspiracy existed against him, and that
the Roman Catholics were connected with it. He disowned his own wife, saying that he
was not certain that she was his wife. In conjunction with these fancies, he is subject to
violent paroxysms of mania, which come on without any assignable cause. At these
times he is highly dangerous to himself, and others. Dr Winslow said that occasion-
ally Captain Gordon was quite incoherent in conversation. He waS incapable of
exercising continuity of thought. It was extremely difficult to direct his attention to
any one particular idea. He did not appear (although distinctly told) to have a clear
notion of the nature of the inquiry. After the evidence of Dr Winslow, Captain
Gordon was introduced into the room, and took his seat by the side of the commis-
sioner. Mr. Barlow then informed him of the nature of the investigation, and recapitu-
COMMISSIONS IN LUNACY. 153
lated the evidence of Dr Winslow, with a view of exacting from Captain Gordon an
explanation of the facts sworn to. It was, however, at once evident to the jury that
the alleged lunatic could not advance anything to satisfy tliera as to bis sanity. He
admitted that he was violent, and this was owing to the air affecting his head. He was
asked if be had anything to complain of. He replied, that he ought not to he deprived
his liberty, that he wished to go to the north; but would have nothing to do with
his wife, whom he said was Lady Gordon.
Several members of the jury questioned Dr Winslow as to his particular treatment
?f the case, with the view oif ascertaining whether there were not causes, apart from his
malady, which probably might originate the violence and excitement to which Captain
Gordon was occasionally liable. Dr Winslow said that Captain Gordon had, since the
first day he was placed under his care, been humoured very much. He was invariably
treated with the greatest kindness, and never contradicted; and although he now and
then broke his windows, Dr Winslow thought it unnecessary to have them barred or
protected by wire gauze, considering that, in a temperament like Captain Gordon's, it
would greatly increase his irritability and excitement. The jury expressed themselves
to be perfectly satisfied with Dr Winslow's explanation.
Mr. Warwick, a surgeon, and Mr. Flint South, vice-president of the College of
Surgeons, and surgeon to St. Thomas's Hospital, were also examined, and gave evidence
similar to Dr Winslow's. They had no doubt of Captain Gordon's lunacy, and incapa-
bility of managing himself or affairs. Mr. Vickers, a relation of Captain Gordon,
also gave similar evidence. A solicitor appeared, at the request of Captain Gordon,
the supposed lunatic, to watch the proceedings. This gentleman appeared satisfied
with the evidence adduced. The jury, without a minute's deliberation, declared
Captain Gordon to be of unsound mind, and incapable of managing himself or affairs.
The lunacy was carried back to the 3rd of January, 1840. It appears that Captain
Gordon, independently of his half-pay, is entitled to two sums of 0000/. each, besides
other money, and a legacy of 500/., left him by a sister, which is to be appropriated for
his benefit.?(Daily News.)
Another Commission of Lunacy was held before the same master, in the neighbour-
hood of St. George's Circus, Blackfriars-road, relative to the state of mind of Miss
Teresa Wakeman, residing in that locality, in the house of Mr. Solly, a chemist.
Mr. Folleit appeared in support of the commission, which had been issued on the
petition of the sister.
Dr Forbes Winslow was first examined. It appears that he had received instruc-
tions to visit Miss Teresa Wakeman; but on arriving at the house, and sending up his
card, she refused to see him. The matter was then brought before the Lord Chancellor,
who gave Dr Winslow full authority to obtain admission to the alleged lunatic. The
following is the substance of Dr Winslow's evidence:?
On the 28tli February last, and on 4tli of March inst.,lie visited the above Mary Teresa.
TTakeman, residing in the house of Mr. Solly, chemist, of No. 0, St. George's Cir-
cus, Blackfriars-road, in the county of Surrey, and that on both occasions he was
accompanied by Mr. Laurie, a solicitor, who was present during the whole of the
first interview with the said Mary Teresa Wakeman, and during a portion of the last
examination of her on the 4th March.
That on said 28th day of February, said Mary Teresa 'Wakeman expressed herself in
strong language against Mrs. Moorley, her sister, declaring that she was not her
sister; and upon being asked whether she meant that she did not act in a sisterly way,
or was not literally any relation of hers ; she replied that she could not ascertain
the fact until she had seen the parchments. She also said she had no brother, that
the party said to be her brother was no relation of hers. She declared she was a
special subject of persecution ; and that the Boman Catholics were at the bottom of
it. That the Boman Catholics had taken forcible possession of her parchments
and papers, and until they were restored she could not reply satisfactorily to any
questions. Upon being asked by witness whether she knew the amount of her money
or her income, she replied she did not; to the question whether she had money in the
funds, she said she did not know: and when Mr. Laurie told her that she had money,
she said yes, but could give me no idea of the amount, whether it was 100/., or 1000/.,
or 10,000/. She had no idea of the amount of money standing in the funds in her
name. Neither did she appear able to say what her income was, or what she was in
154 CASE OF MR. DYCE SOMBRE.
the habit of receiving, or what she expected. She said that the Roman Catholics knew
all about her money, for they were building churches and schools with it, particularly
one in St. John's Wood.
That on the 4tli March, when Dr Winslow again saw the said Mary Teresa Wake-
man, her conversation occasionally was wild and incoherent, and that she talked about
her having directly descended from Edward the Second. She said that Edward the
Second was awake, and thus the Wakemans sprung out of royalty. She said that
Mrs. Moorley was engaged with the " Moon Works;" and upon being asked what she
meant by the " Moon Works," she replied, if he had studied astrology witness would
liave known the " Moon Works" were managed by the Wakemans, and the Roman
Catholics. She then referred to the Roman Catholics, whom she believes were persecut-
ing her and have possession of her property; when asked again as to the amount of her
income, she said the bondholders knew and would tell. She did not know whether her
income is hundreds or thousands of pounds a year: she said that the Lord Chancellor
lias the control of it, and that he will inform witness as to the precise amount. She said
she had never given offence to government, and she did not see why the government or
Roman Catholics should interfere with her and her property. The Roman Catholics had
concealed the Wakeman family papers, and she was in ignorance of her pecuniary re-
sources, and of her family, until they were restored to her.
That she declared that the Duke of Wellington had been killed at Waterloo, and
that her father was now the Duke of Wellington.
That upon being again questioned as to her sister and brother, whom he, Dr Win-
slow, understood to be alive, she declared that she was an only child, idid had no
relatives or friends living.
That it appears that she is under the impression that she ia a special subject of perse-
cution by the Roman Catholics, who possess her private papers, and are building
cathedrals and schools with her money ; that she has no relations in the world ; that
her father is or was the Duke of Wellington ; that what she calls the " Moon Works,"
and " Sun Works," are conspiring against her, and that the government and the Lord
Chancellor know the amount of her pecuniary means, and control partly her
property.
That her mind is evidently in a very weak and unsound state, and that witness con-
siders her to be quite incapable of taking care of herself, or of managing her aifairs.
Mr. J. Bowling, surgeon, of Hammersmith, was next examined.?His evidence was
similar to that adduced by the previous witness.
Miss Wakeman was introduced to the jury, and in answer to several questions put
to her by the commissioner, she gave very incoherent answers. The jury, without any
hesitation, gave a verdict of unsoundness of mind.
