The Process of Thought or, Electro-Biology
==========================================

355
Art. IY.?

" Electro-Biology !" What is its meaning? Literally, the theory of
life, explained by electricity, or the electrical theory of life, a new-
fangled pseudo-science, ingeniously enough engrafted upon mesmerism.
If the facts of mesmerism came before us, like Hamlet's Ghost, in a
" questionable shape," those connected with electro-biology assume a
still more dubious aspect, and certainly demand a much larger amount
of heathen credulity. There are men at this moment " starring''' about
the country, performing feats of metaphysical jugglery, before crowds of
well-th-essed and intelligent people, who can no more explain what they
see and hear, than they can the leger-de-main tricks of a French con-
juror. There can be no doubt?aud we give these comedy-acting phi-
losophers the benefit of this admission?that one human being may, by
performing certain antics, affect the senses of another. The annals of
witchcraft abound with such cases. We can easily conceive the machi-
nations of a reputed witch affecting the imagination and nervous system
of certain persons?particularly females?in the darker ages; and we
have the clearest judicial evidence on record, that a state analogous to
catalepsy, accompanied by coma, convulsions, and sometimes profound
physical insensibility, has been frequently so produced. The Lancashire
Witches,t the Surrey Demoniac,X the Nuns of Loudun, exhibited
all the symptoms now ascribed to mesmerism, and were subjected to
the pin-thrusting test of sensibility, which is now so fashionable with
mesmerists.? In a treatise entitled ' Daimonomagia,' 1C65, the " dis-
ease of witchcraft" is described as "a sickness that arises from
strange and preternatural causes, and from diabolical power in the use
of strange and ridiculous ceremonies, by witches or necromancers,
afflicting with strange and unaccustomed symptoms, and, commonly,
preternaturally violent, very seldom, or not at all, curable by natural
remedies."||
* Tbe Process of Thought adapted to Words and Language, together with a description
of the Relational and Differential Machines. ]3y Alfred Smee, F.R.S. London: 1851.
+ A briefe ami true discourse, contaymug the certayne possession and dispossession
of seven persons in one family in Lancashire. By George More, Minister and Preacher
of the Worde, now a prisoner at the Clinks, where he hath continued almost for two
years. 1GC0.
J The Surey Demoniacke; or, an account of Satan's strange and dreadful actings in
and about the body of Richard Dugdale, of Surrey, near Whalley, in Lancashire-
London : 1C97.
? Veritable Relation des Justes Procedures observees au fait de la possession des
Ursulines de Loudun et au proces de Grandier. Paris : 1634.
|| Daimonomagia: a Small Treatise of Sicknesse and Disease from Witchcraft anil
Supernatural Causes. London: J. Dover, 1005. *
356 THE PROCESS OF THOUGHT
There can be no difficulty in recognising the effects produced by what
are called mesmeric manipulations; tliey have been exhibited, and are
patent to the world; but we are not, in seeking an explanation of these
effects, to have recourse to hypotheses which are purely imaginary.
The mental faculties may, by a variety of tricks, be curiously enough
disturbed. Thus, if a person be desired to keep a fixed and steady
gaze on any inanimate object, the attention will become fatigued; and
sleep, more or less profound, will ensue; and, in the intermediate state,
between waking and sleeping, when the mind is wavering, and only
half conscious of what is passing around, it may easily be imposed
upon by any suggestion audibly communicated. Some years ago, the
following curious experiment was performed at Manchester, before an
audience of eight hundred persons:?Mr. Braid, who has written much
upon what he terms ' Hypnology, or Nervous Sleep,' undertook to pro-
duce sleep by causing persons to gaze continuously at inanimate objects.
Fourteen male adults, who had never tried the experiment before,
stepped forward from among the audience to be experimented upon.
He then desired some of them to keep a steady, fixed gaze upon the
end of a cork, which he bound upon their head, so as to project over
the eyes from the middle of the forehead. Each was then desired to
look at the cork bound upon his own forehead, and concentrate his
undivided attention on the act. Some also were desired to fix their
sigh't and thoughts on other objects, as the gas apparatus in the room.
They all commenced the process at the same time, and what was the
result ? Ten of the fourteen went to sleep, although the operator did
not touch them until after their eyelids had closed involuntarily. None
of them were able to open their eyes; some became cataleptic, others
were insensible to the prick of a pin, and one or two forgot all that
occurred. During these proceedings, three more of the audience threw
themselves, of their own accord, into a state of profound sleep, by
fixing their gaze and thoughts in the same way, upon other single points
in the room.* There is nothing by any means so very marvellous
in all this. Darwin, long ago, in his 'Zoonomia,' pointed out that,
by fatiguing the attention, and thereby suspending volition, sleep
would be produced. There is no doubt a great difference in the sus-
ceptibility of different people; as, indeed, was observed, in the more
palmy days of witchcraft. " Aspect and contact do not always," accord-
ing to Biernannus and Wierius, " bewitch; witches sometimes try to
bewitch one, and cannot, and yet bewitch another of the same family."f
But supposing, instead of the piece of cork, a disc of zinc, or a com-
* The Power of tlie Mind oyer tlie Body. By James Braid. London: Churchill.
1846.
+ Daimonomagia, loc. cit.
OR, ELECTRO-BIOLOGY. 357
mon brass button were substituted, and the same attention to it
enjoined, would it be at all wonderful if the same effect were produced?
Certainly not. Nay, we can easily understand that when the vision
becomes confused, and the mental faculties bewildered, erroneous
impressions and illusions, ocular and aural, may easily be suggested.
" You cannot open your eyes," cries the electro-biological magician; his
patient, half asleep and half awake, hears, believes, and immediately
imagines his eyelids closed under a weight. In trying to open them,
he makes no real muscular effort, the power of his volition is paralyzed,
his eyelids remain closed, and the lecturer stands, with an air of intense
pride and satisfaction, before his astonished audience.
The researches on magnetism by Baron von Reichenbacli, recently
published by Dr. William Gregory of Edinburgh, have excited con-
siderable sensation; but, if fairly examined, his experiments will be
found altogether inconclusive. The aim of the Baron is to establish
the existence of a " new imponderable"?a something of magnetic
origin akin to the supposed mesmeric fluid?affecting the powers and
forces of all objects, animate and inanimate, organic and inorganic.
There can be little doubt, that a magnet of a certain power drawn along
the surface of the body, and in immediate contact with it, will produce
certain physical sensation; and when at a little distance from the body
sensitive persons may experience similar sensations in a modified degree.
But the Baron von Reichenbacli goes farther than this; he assures us
that his patients, when in the dark, saw different coloured streams of
light actually issue from the magnet.
The patients, we may premise, were principally sensitive females,
and the Baron did not himself witness these extraordinary phenomena,
neither was there any other corroborating testimony. The evidence,
therefore, in limine, rests upon the individual report of each patient;
but here, although Ave do not wish to be deficient in gallantry, we must
say that the evidence of nervous and susceptible ladies, upon matters
affecting their own impressions and their own senses, ought to be
received with considerable caution. " It is an undoubted fact," ob-
serves Mr. Braid?and the profession will agree with him?" that with
many individuals, especially with the highly nervous, imaginative, and
abstractive, a strong direction of inward consciousness to any part of
the body?especially if attended with the expectation or belief of some-
thing being about to happen, is quite sufficient to change"?or rather, we
should say, to modify?" the physical action of that part, and produce
such impressions from this cause alone, as Baron Reichenbach attributes
to this new force."* Half a century ago, Dr. Haygartli, of Bath, by
substituting wooden for the famous metallic tracters of Perkins, came
* Braid, loc. cit.
358 THE PKOCESS OF THOUGHT;
to tlie same conclusion. One of Baron Reichenbach's patients imagined
that she saw the magnet giving out light, not only when open, hut
when closed. When open, she said the flames from the poles were
about eight inches high, those at the joining of the plates of the magnet
about a finger's breadth in length. These small flames appeared blue,
the chief light being white below, yellow higher up, then red and green
at the top?both poles seemed to give out similar appearances of light
and flame; but, unfortunately, the same lady being again experimented
upon, saw the streams of light issuing from the same magnet different
both in size and colour. At the pole pointing to the north or negative
end of the magnet, the flame was larger than at the opposite end; it
was red instead of white below, and blue instead of yellow or red in
the middle. There would clearly not have been this discrepancy had
there been any physical reality in the alleged flames and colours. All
doubt on the subject is, however, set at rest by the fact that in several
of Mr. Braid's experiments, when he deceived the patient by pretending
to use a magnet, all the abnormal sensations were produced by the mere
imagination of the patient; as in Dr. Haygartli's case, the key of his
portmanteau?when the patient imagined it to be a magnet?produced
effects as singular as if it had been endowed with the new imponderable
magnetic force discovered by the Baron's patients. Upon the very equi-
vocal testimony of his nervous lady patients, the Baron conceives he has
proved that this new imponderable force lias the power of attracting the
human body and adhering to it as steel to tlie magnet, and that it is a
force in superaddition to the magnetic force in the magnet itself.
Furthermore, that this imponderable is equally active in crystals, in
which it exists pure and distinct from ordinary magnetism. He also
believes that his patients saw, from the finger points of healthy men,
fiery bundles of light streaming forth exactly as from the poles of
magnets, and of crystals visible to the sensitive. He, moreover, alleges
that where it is passive, it can be excited into activity by the sun's rays,
by the moon's rays, by starlight, by heat, by chemical or mechanical
action, and, finally, that this luminous or phosphorescent appearance,
and certain other peculiar properties, may be discovered by the sensi-
tive in almost every place, and from nearly every object, animate or
inanimate. Assuredly this is the very poetry of science; it reminds us
of a passage in the conversations of Goethe with Eckerman and Soret.
"We are all," said Goethe, "groping among mysteries and wonders.
Besides, one soul may have a decided influence on another, merely by
means of its silent presence, of which I could relate many instances.
It has often happened to me that when I have been walking with an
acquaintance, and have had a living image in my mind, he has at oncc
begun to speak of that very thing. I have also known a man who,.
OR, ELECTRO-BIOLOGY. 359
without saying a word, could suddenly silence a party engaged in cheer-
ful conversation by the mere power of his mind. Nay, he could also
introduce a tone which would make everybody feel uncomfortable. We
have all something of electrical and magnetic forces about us, and we
put forth, like the magnet itself, an attractive or repulsive power,
accordingly as we come in contact with something similar or dissimilar.
It is possible, nay, even probable, that if a young girl were, without
knowing it, to find herself in a dark chamber with a man who designed
to murder her, she would have an uneasy sense of his unknown pre-
sence, and that an anguish would come over her which would drive her
from the room to the rest of the household."* There is something
certainly droll in the notion of our being human magnets; it is even
alleged that sensitive patients should lie with their heads towards the
north, and that they will suffer great discomfort if they do not, when
nestled in their bed, place the position of their body in proper relation
to the magnetic meridian. Hence, a young lady, writing to Mr. Braid,
expresses herself in the following lively terms:?"You will, no doubt,
be gratified to learn, that in common with the whole human race, you
are a magnet, with this peculiarity only, that if you were suspended by
the middle you would point from east to west instead of from north to
south?with which interesting fact I leave you to your meditations.
The discoveries which have been made by Ampere, Faraday, and
others, in electro-magnetism, and the recent observations of Matteuci
on the evolution of electricity during muscular contraction, suggest
not only an analogy between the imponderable agents?light, heat,
electricity, and magnetism?but the probability that they are modifi-
cations only of the same subtle principle. Many physiologists, indeed,
entertain the opinion that the nervous fluid itself has some affinity
with, or is perhaps identical with, electricity. This view appears to have
suggested the term " Electro-biology," which?we quote, and beg atten-
tion to Mr. Smee's definition?" signifies neither more nor less than the
relation of electricity to the vital functions." Unhappily for the
interests of science, there is a disposition in the human mind to go
beyond the actual limits of what is really known, in order to speculate
upon things which are unknown, and no sooner is any one discovery
supposed to be made, than a host of inconsequential theories imme-
diately spring out, or are based upon it. This is eminently the case
with electro-biology, which, under the mask of science, puts forth
assumptions, which are ludicrously untenable, and promulgates doctrines
which are eversive of the immateriality and independent existence of the
* Conversations of Goetlie with Eckermann and Soret. Translated from the German
by John Oxenford. 2 vols. London: Smith nnd Elder. 18")0. Vol.1. Page 100.
+ Braid, op. cit. p. 2G.
360 THE PROCESS OF THOUGHT;
human mind. It is materialism in its most repulsive form, pretending,
in its presumptuous speculation, to explain the mystery and origin of
life. These mistaken philosophers believe that they can positively, hy
the action of a galvanic battery, create life; that they can call into
existence a multitude of insects, of which the acarus Crossii is a notable
example; and, having allowed them their premises, they then proceed
to show how every fundamental organic globule is endowed with a
principle of self-evolution, and how, by an easy process of gradual
development, one species of animal passes into another species of
animal until reptiles become fish?fish, birds?birds, monkeys?and
monkeys, men. Happily, however, for the stability of the insect-world,
the more enlarged observations of Ehrenberg completely overthrow the
vaunted experiments of Mr. Cross, who can no more, with the aid of his
galvanic battery, give life to an acarus than to a cockchafer, a tadpole,
or a pullet's egg. In the " Elements of Electro-Biology," by Mr.
Alfred Smee, we find that he far outrivals?at least in his attempts?
the insect-maker, Mr. Cross. He gives very clear instructions how to
make an artificial electric fish. " Catch your hare first," says Mrs.
Rundell; but it is not necessary to catch, you must, secundem artem,
in electro-biology, make your fish. " This artificial electrical fish," says
our electro-biological philosopher, "is made by taking an ordinary
solution of ferrocyanate of potash contained in a glass-vessel. In this
glass-vessel a porous cell, with a similar solution, is introduced. Now,
if a series of these cells be taken and connected together by platinum
wires, so arranged that the inside of the porous cell of one vessel be
connected with the exterior of the second by a platinum wire, no action
will be indicated by the galvanometer. If, however, a current of
voltaic electricity be now passed through each cell, from the porous
tube to the exterior, one department, or the hydrogen side, will be-
come alkaline, and the salt will retain its chemical character; the
other cell will become acid, and be converted into the red prussiate."*
In designing this "abundantly complex" mechanism, we cannot con-
ceive any feasible source from which the principle of vitality could,
after all, be eliminated; the projectors and builders of the Tower of
Babel were as far from reaching Heaven as these philosophers are from
approaching the solution of the mystery of life. Could " Man, proud ma n
?dressed in a little brief authority," thus mimic the works of his own
Maker, and set a-going an infinite transmutation of species, beginning
with a fundamental cell, an organic globule, what anomalies and
* Elements of Electro-Biology, or, tlie Voltaic Mechanism of Man; of Electro-
Pathology, especially of the Nervous System; and of Electro-Therapeutics. By Alfred
Smee, F.R.S. Longman: 1850. p. 55.
OK, ELECTRO-BIOLOGY. 361
wonders would not be ever-and-anon starting into existence under our
own immediate observation.
From the same electro-biological authority we learn, " that the
ganglia of the sympathetic nerves are rudimentary brains, which might
be evolved in structure to such an extent as to render us cognizant of
minute changes taking place in our own bodies, but which for many
hundred filaments only send a single impression to the noemic batteries
in the brain."* Alas! for the safety and integrity of our own great
solar plexus, and the cranial protection of our "central" cerebral bat-
tery. This "gradual development" and "self-evolving principle" in the
inorganic and organic world; this transmutation of one specific being
into another, might suggest considerable uneasiness about our own per-
sonal identity. " Under such celestial treatment," says a severe but acute
critic, " we might live to see a grizzly dowager, a wheezing bachelor,
and a withered maid, sitting down to a quiet game at whist, with a
new-fashioned dummy in the form of a solemn poodle, while a lively
spitz, or fawning spaniel, is raised on its hind quarters at the end
of the sofa, and teaching the knight's move to the youn'ger ladies
of the household, "t
Wishing, notwithstanding all this, to give the principles of electro-
biology a fair hearing, we were curious to ascertain what light it could
possibly throw upon the constitution of the human mind, and finding
the book which suggested this article, " The Process of Thought adapted
to Words and Language," floating on the surface of literature, we deter-
mined to analyze its contents; and Ave regret to say, our worst appre-
hensions are more than verified; paragraph upon paragraph numerically
succeeding each other, as if each should be accepted as a canon in
philosophy, will be found to contain the most common-place descrip-
tion of truisms wrapt up in the most solemn and pompous phraseology,
masking at the same time the most daring materialistic speculations.
We shall allow the author to state his own aphorisms in his own lan-
guage; his style appears to us both obscure and often unintelli-
gible; but metaphysics has been wittily enough defined, "Tart de
segarer avec methode. As the paragraphs are numbered, so do we
take them. The first propounds the following dogma, which is deli-
vered as abruptly as if it were articulated by an oracle. " (1.) The
perfection of the operation of the brain by which man perforins the
noblest attributes of his nature, can no more be enhanced by a know-
* Elements of Electro-Biology, or the Voltaic Mechanism of Man; of Electro-
Pathology, especially of the Nervous System; and of Electro-Therapeutics. By Alfred
Smee, F.R.S. Longman: 1850. Page 79.
+ Edinburgh Review: Article on the " Natural Vestiges of Creation." Vol. lxxxii.
page 7.
802 THE PEOCESS OF THOUGHT;
ledge of its organization, than the working of a steam engine could be
improved if it could be made to know tlie mechanism by which it
obtained its desired result/' p. 1. Here we must emphatically throw in
an interlocutor. We protest, in limine, against the assumption that the
noblest attributes of man are to be ascribed to the mere functional
operations of his brain j we regard the mind, although in its manifesta-
tions influenced by matter, as something higher than the result of mere
cerebral organization; surely, if man be ennobled by his moral attri-
butes, or exalted by his intellectual faculties, it is to the mind that we
must refer this ascendancy. The clumsy illustration of the steam
engine we repudiate; if a steam-engine were capable of reflecting upon
its own springs, levers, pumps, pistons, valves, and mill-wheels, we do
not see why it might not improve upon its own working, just as man,
by reflection and self-control, may improve his own moral and intellec-
tual nature. " (2.) Electro-biology teaches, that man receives impres-
sions from the external world through the medium of his organs of
sensation, transmits those impressions to the brain, and there registers
them in such a manner as to render the sensorium one vast mechanism,
in which everything that has been heard or seen, or felt, or smelled, or
touched, has produced an effect which modifies the action of any
impression which may be subsequently received," p. 2. Now, when
the electro-biological philosopher teaches us that "man receives im-
pressions from without, and that man transmits these impressions to
the brain, in order to register them in the sensorium," what does he
mean? it is the mind of man, we apprehend, which receives these
impressions, and performs these operations. But, no! the electro-
biologist does not recognise the existence of a thinking, intelligent
principle, apart from cerebral organization. He adopts an exploded
theory, which Eeid long ago censured in these terms: " Some philo-
sophers among the ancients, as well as among the moderns, imagined
that man is nothing but a piece of matter so curiously organized, that
the impressions of external objects produce in it sensation, perception,
remembrance, and all the other operations we are conscious of. This
foolish opinion could only take its rise from observing the constant
connexion which the Author of Nature hath established between certain
impressions made upon our senses, and our perception of the objects
by which the impression is made; from which they weakly infer, that
those impressions were the proper and efficient causes of the corres-
ponding perception. But no reasoning is more fallacious than this,
that because two things are always conjoined, therefore one must be
the cause of the other. Day and night have been joined in constant
succession since the beginning of the jvorld but who is so foolish as
to conclude from this that day is the cause of night, or night of the
OR, ELECTRO-BIOLOGY. 3G3
following day? There is huleed nothing more ridiculous than to ima-
gine that any motion or modification of matter should produce thought.
If one should tell of a telescope so exactly made as to have the power
of seeing ; of a whispering-gallery that had the power of hearing; of a
cabinet so nicely framed as to have the power of memory; or of a
machine so delicate as to feel pain when it was touched,?such absur-
dities are so shocking to common sense, that they would not find
belief even among savages; yet it is the same absurdity to think that
the impressions of external objects upon the machine of our bodies can
be the reed efficient cause of thought and perception.* We must, how-
ever, give our philosopher credit for the amusing notion of the sen-
sorium being " one vast mechanism," in which man registers every-
thing he has "heard, seen, felt, smelt, or touched;" the idea was,
doubtless, suggested by the Crystal Palace, and completely eclipses the
cave of Plato, and the dark-chamber illustration of Locke.
Electro-biology next teaches (3) " that every idea or action on the
brain is ultimately resolvable into an action on a certain combination
of nervous fibres which is definite and determinable; and, regarding
the sum total of the nervous fibres, is a positive result over a certain
portion only, which has a distinct and clearly defined limit. Thus, if
Ave take ten nervous fibrils and call them A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J,
and suppose an action to have occurred on D, E, F, the combination,
excited to action, will give rise to an idea which would depend upon
their positive excitement, and the positive character of the idea would
be limited to that combination. Instead of using the letters D, E, F,
I may illustrate the proposition by assuming the fore-finger to repre-
sent those letters, when it would be apparent that if that finger was
placed in hot water, the idea of that particular action of the hot water
would be confined to the nerves supplying that part."?p. 2. Here,
again, our philosopher appears to have sadly bewildered himself. What
does lie?mean by using synonymously the words "every idea" and "action
on the brain?" Are we to understand that every idea is an action on
the brain? or every action of the brain in itself an idea? Then, again,
resolving these into an imaginary combination of nervous fibres repre-
sented by the first ten letters of the alphabet, and shifting these about
like a child's toy, in order to show how these fibres may be excited to
different action, is as absurd a piece of conjuring as can possibly be
conceived. The theory of Hartley was at all events ingenious, but
even he, with all his vibrations and vibrunaili, failed to account for the
operations of thought. " Let us," says Blakey, " admit all that the
* Rcid on ihe Intellectual Powers. Essay II. Cliap. iv. p. 2.j3. Sir William
Hamilton's Edition of Reid's collected Works. Edinburgh: 1840. This valuable
work ought to be in the hands of every student of psychology.
364 THE PROCESS OF THOUGHT;
doctor demands?what is the result 1 Suppose that the nerves were to
vibrate, and we were to find thinking or mental perception followed,
this would not enable us to account for any intellectual operations; for
we should just be as far from the comprehension as before. If the
brain and the whole nervous system were laid bare, as Ave display the
wires in a pianoforte, and Ave could see all the various vibrations Avhich
are effected by the operation of external objects upon the senses; still
Ave should be as far removed from a knoAvledge of the thinking prin-
ciple as we Avere before such Avonderful mechanism Avas exhibited to
our view. We might register every movement; Ave might observe,
Avith great accuracy and minuteness, various connexions betAveen
particular medullary motions and particular trains of thought; and yet
there AA-ould not one single ray of intelligence fall upon ' the sightless
eyeball of the mind,' as to the nature or principles of its operations.
This is evidently beyond the reach of theory."* Unfortunately, also,
for the fibril theory of electro-biology, the most recent physiological
and pathological researches lead us to believe that the vesicular, and
not the fibrous?the grey, not the Avhite?matter of the brain, is con-
cerned in mental operations. We have not time to amuse ourselves
Avitli dilating upon the absurdity of the alphabetical illustration; but
Ave cannot help observing, that if Ave dipped our finger in hot Avater,
the idea of the pain would not, we conceive, be confined to the scalded
finger?Avould it not be carried up and registered in that " vast
mechanism," the sensorium ? The sense of touch, Ave apprehend, is not
exactly confined to the tips of the fingers, although a blind child may
be taught to read with his fingers, and, as Sidney Smith wittily observes,
learn to "/eel his Avay through Homer and Virgil."
The fundamental principles of electro-biology, which its professor con-
ceives Avill throw light upon the " process of thought" and illustrate
the meaning of Avords and construction of language, are laid down in
the following terms. " (8.) In the preceding chapter," he obserATes?and
this is the summary of its logic,?"I have stated that external objects
act upon the organs of sensation (!) that that action is transmitted to
the sensorium (!!) and that it is probably registered in a certain com-
bination of nervous elements, to appear again on subsequent occasions,
constituting memory (!!!)" p. 5. A system of philosophy, based upon
so crazy a foundation, can hardly be expected to elucidate the meaning-
of Avords and the construction of language; nevertheless, Ave are carried
back to the grammar of our vernacular tongue, and confess, that under
this electro-biological tuition the use of Avords (as our philosopher
states) " becomes a very complex phenomenon," p. G. But what are
* History of the Philosophy of the Human Mind. By Robert Blakey. 4 vols.
London: 1848. Vol. iii. p. 281.
OR, ELECTRO-BIOLOGY^ 365
words? The simplest operation of our minds must be expressed by
certain sounds; and by putting together a given number of letters,
words are formed, which symbolize and are associated with certain
visible objects, or certain ideas, passing through the mind. "Words,"
says that great authority, John Murray (see his school grammar), " are
articulate sounds, formed by the organs of speech, and used by common
consent as signs of our ideas." We confess we remain contented with
this definition, which we learned in our school-boy days; but electro-
biologists must fain desire more ; " words," according to them, are used
to " represent various images impressed on the brain," p. C,?these are
ideas which we presume the brain reflects as a mirror would objects
around it. " The letters of the alphabet are used to designate certain
combinations of nervous fibres;" so that one of Dr. Johnson's rounded
sentences must express a tolerable amount of intertwisting among
these brainular fibres. What, then, is a substantive1? Electro-biology
teaches us, that " a substantive is a part of speech given to the action
on a combination of nervous elements, which are affected in common
by a large class of objects, and is therefore in itself a very general
term," p. 7. This is just the definition we should have supposed that
great philosopher Crabbe putting into the mouth ofMartinus Scriblefus.
How much better would it be for such philosophers as these to go back
to their Eton Latin grammar, where, without puzzling themselves about
their nervous fibres, they might learn simpliciter, that " a noun sub-
stantive declares its own meaning, and requires not another word to be
joined with it to show its signification?as homo, a man; angelus, an angel;
liber, a book." So also with adjectives; we had always in our simplicity
believed that an adjective was added to a substantive, to express its
quality?or, as our Eton preceptor taught us, " a noun adjective always
requires to be joined with a substantive, of which it shows the nature
or quality; as, bonus puer, a good boy; malus puer, a naughty boy."
The etymology of electro-biology, however, is far more recondite?it
teaches us that an adjective is used to denote some further combination
of cerebral actions. " When we use a word adjectively, and couple it
to a noun, the adjective implies that only a portion of the actions of
the brain, which led to the idea from whence the word is derived, are
coupled with the noun; hence, as the amount varies, Ave have various
degrees of the word used adjectively; as, good?better?best." (18.)
p. 9. As the amount of cerebral action becomes augmented, we have
the positive eliciting the comparative, and the comparative the super-
lative degree; truly, this is charming philosophy! The clown in the
forest, in " As you Like it," giving Audrey such a lecture as this, would
draw down from the audience shouts of laughter. But we cannot
afford room to entertain ourselves with the electro-biological definition
3G0 THE PROCESS OF THOUGHT; OK, ELECTRO-BIOLOGY.
of all tlie parts of speech; suffice it, therefore, that we conclude with
the account given of the meaning of a verb. " A verb" (says our
philosopher) "we may electro-biologically define to be a word used to
signify the changes on the sensorium of the respective portions of one
image, and their relation to those of other images." (24.) p. 11. Shade
of Murray defend us! But what follows 1 " To explain this defini-
tion, it is important to remember that the brain is one large organ, on
which a series of impressions are being continually made, both from the
action of external agents upon the organs of sensation, as well as from
the changes going on in our own frame." (25.) p. 11.
The adaptation of electro-biology to the etymology of words and
construction of sentences is, however, best illustrated in the following
paragraph. " In many cases verbs have relations to two substantives,
as, 'John killed Thomas.' In this expression we understand that at
some time past the act of killing was done by John on Thomas; the
first individual performed certain actions which caused a second set of
actions to supervene on Thomas. The verb here modifies the ideas
which we derive of both nouns; and the sentence gives us the idea of
at least three different states?
First. John and Thomas, both alive.
"Second. John in action, Thomas being acted upon.
" Thirdly. John alive, Thomas dead.
" These series of changes or sequences stand in relation as cause to
effect, and, in language, may be rendered that John caused the death of
Thomas." (4o.) p. 21.
Let us take another example:??" 'John and Thomas killed William.'
Let J stand for John, T for Thomas, C for casualty, D for death, E for
effect, W for William, P for the past; which, electro-biologically, would
poiut to different distinct ideas, having mutual relations, thus :
JTC WEDP.
In the first place, John and Thomas underwent certain changes, in
consequence of which, in the second place, William underwent certain
changes to death, the whole happening at some time past."?
(49.) p. 50.
So much for the adaptation of electro-biology to the use of words
and the construction of sentences;?a set of such philosophers as these
we can only conceive giving lectures in the flying island of Laputa;?
nay, we prefer, infinitely, the philological theory of Will Wizard, whose
philosophical turn of mind led him, in Salmagundi, to make this pro-
found observation,?" Words are but breath?breath is but air?and air,
?put in motion, is nothing but wind?' Here the relation between cause
and effect?antecedent and consequent?must be manifest, to the satis-
faction of every electro-biologist.
