Criminal Lunatics
==================

The present condition of tlie lunatics termed " Criminal," confined in
various asylums in this country, and the importance and necessity for
the establishment of a central asylum exclusively for the reception of
this class of the insane, are subjects, we are glad to perceive, at
this moment attracting a large amount of professional and public
attention.
In this number of our journal we have only space for the subjoined
selections from the public and medical press. The following is a copy
of the petition agreed to by the visiting magistrates of the Lunatic Asylum
for the county of Somerset, at their meeting of the 24th of July, 1851:?
" That your petitioner has been requested by the aforesaid visiting
justices to represent to your right honourable House the great importance of
providing a separate place of detention for criminal lunatics, and other
persons confined for purposes of justice. That the visiting justices con-
sider that it is most important to keep the separation distinct between a
lunatic asylum and a prison. That greater liberty is both possible and
expedient for persons confined with a view to their cure, than could be
afforded to those whose detention is demanded by justice; inasmuch as
with the former their sense of responsibility is strengthened by partial
liberty, and on this sense of responsibility most of the hopes of their cure
depend. That the detention in asylums of persons acquitted on the
grounds of insanity (many of whom are no longer insane, but must still be
detained in a hopeless perpetual imprisonment) operates most unfavour-
626 CRIMINAL LUNATICS.
ably by driving tbem to desperation, and to acts most injurious to tliose
confined with tliem, as well as to the discipline of the establishment,
while the presence of such persons, and conversations with them on the
subject of their trials, naturally supply to the other classes of lunatics who
loot forward to their release, an argument for their security hereafter,
most prejudicial to public morals and their own good, inasmuch as they
see clearly that whatever crimes they may commit, they will be sure, in
consequence of their previous lunacy, of a verdict of acquittal, on the plea
of insanity.
" That the visiting justices have been informed that a separate place of
detention has been provided for such persons in Ireland. Your petitioner
therefore prays that your right honourable House will take this deeply-
important subject into its consideration, and make such a provision for a
remedy as to your consideration and wisdom may seem meet.
(Signed) " H. W. Burnakd."
In referring to the above petition, the Lancet observes?
"We are rejoiced to perceive that public attention is being directed to
this most important subject. The present mode of treating criminal lunatics
is disgraceful to a civilized and Christian community. We do not wish
to express any maudlin sympathy for crime or criminals, but if a man,
after going through the oraeal of a trial for the violation of the laws of his
country, is acquitted on the ground that he was not a responsible agent;
that he could not distinguish between right and wrong; that he was insane,
or in plainer words, that he, at the time the offence was committed, laboured
under the effects of diseased brain disordering his mental faculties; then
we say such a man is entitled to our warmest sympathies, and ought
invariably to be treated with great kindness and consideration. The
lafr, in its wisdom, declares that the insane ought not to be subjected to
Eunishment, and yet as soon as a prisoner is acquitted on the plea of lunacy,
e is consigned for life to the cheerless, desolate, and heart-breaking atmo-
sphere of a public asylum, and thus subjected to the worst description of
human punishment. The man in whose behalf no such plea is urged, is,
in many instances, in a much more favourable position. He is accused of
committing an act termed criminal. He is tried and found guilty, and
perhaps either transported for a term of years, or confined in one of the
county prisons for a short period ; whilst the poor lunatic is incarcerated
at her Majesty's pleasure?that is, for life, in a lunatic asylum, and com-
pelled to herd day and night with the maniac. It is a monstrous perversion
of language to deny that this treatment is no punishment. It is punish-
ment, and that too of a severe kind ! It will be admitted that there is a
certain class of criminal lunatics who require to be carefully watched, and
to be under surveillance for the remainder of their lives; but other
cases occur in which crime is committed during a temporary paroxysm of
insanity, and where recovery?complete, undeniable restoration to health
?occurs either immediately after the act is perpetrated, or after a short
period of confinement. But, taking the more extreme kind of case, wo
maintain that the law never contemplated the subjection of the criminal
lunatic to the severe and protracted punishment now inflicted upon him.
Insanity is considered to be a disease rendering the party irresponsible.
The criminal placed, on this ground, beyond the pale of the law, is sup-
posed to have self-control completely destroyed; to be as incapable of pre-
venting himself from committing a breach of the law, as a patient is to
arrest the act of vomiting after the administration of a potent emetic!
What would be said if we subjected the poor man with an irritable
stomach to corporeal punishment P and yet such treatment would not be
CRIMINAL LUNATICS. 627
more irrational and unscientific than to punish, with great severity, or even
at all, the unhappy lunatic guilty of criminal conduct.
"We are now talking of positive and undeniable insanity, not that
pseudo-morbid condition of mind in which the person has sufficient capacity
to distinguish right from wrong, and is to all intents and purposes a respon-
sible agent.
" The reader may be under the impression that in some cases Govern-
ment would be disposed, under peculiar circumstances, to relax the severity
of the system, and release, when it is proved that it could be done with
safety, some of the criminal inmates of Bethlem and other asylums, after
their having been subjected to a long, painful, and protracted confinement.
But such, alas! is not the fact. At the recent meeting of the Association
of Medical Officers of Hospitals for the Insane, Dr. Forbes "Winslow, when
speaking of the necessity of effecting some alteration in the treatment of
criminal lunatics, quoted, among other illustrations of the present conduct
of the Government, the following case:?
" Dr. Winslow was consulted by the wife of Captain Johnston, who was
tried for the murder of the crew of the Tory, and acquitted (without medical
evidence) on the ground of insanity. He was accordingly sent to Bethlem.
It appeared by the evidence that the murderous act was committed during
a paroxysm of delirium tremens. As the medical authorities of Bethlem
Hospital assured Mrs. Johnston that her husband, whatever might have
been his previous state, was then perfectly sane, she presented a petition
to Government for his liberation, and offered, in the event of his being
released, to provide an ample and sufficient guarantee that Captain John-
ston should be taken out of the country into a far distant land, and that he
never should set foot on English soil again. The petition was rejected,
and the poor broken-hearted wife informed that there was no chance of her
husband ever gazing on the blue sky of heaven, beyond the gloomy courts
of the asylum into which he was transferred after his acquittal on the plea
of mental derangement.
" Without entering into the merits of this particular case, it may be
asked, is this justice? Is this common humanity? Do the authorities at
the Home Office consider it a part of their creed that patients never recover
from attacks of homicidal insanity, and if evidence, clear and undoubted,
of recovery presents itself, that no relaxation is to take place in the treat-
ment of the unhappy prisoners ? If this be their doctrine, the sooner its
hollowness, its absurdity, its cruelty, are exposed, the better for the credit
of a Christian community and a Christian government. The criminal
lunatic, we again maintain, is in many instances in a worse condition than
the felon consigned to one of the model prisons, or even to the hulks or
!>enal settlements. The man confined in Pentonville or Heading prison
las advantages and enjoyments which M'Naughten, Oxford, Tuckitt,
Johnston, and others, confined in Bethlem, are strangers to. The felon
transported to one of the penal settlements can, if he is well-conducted,
obtain, after a short term of punishment, a ticket of leave, which amounts
almost to entire liberation. He may then enter the service of the colonists,
and perhaps ultimately obtain a free pardon; but alas ! what hope is held
out to the lunatic, who, in a moment of transient madness and irresponsi-
bility, under the affliction of disease, commits an offence against the State,
be it murder, manslaughter, theft, or arson? Well might the words said
by Dante to be written at the entrance of the infernal regions, be inscribed
over the portals of that portion of Bethlem Hospital appropriated to the
poor criminal lunatic:
' Yoi clie entrate lasciate ogni speranza.'
028 CRIMINAL LUNATICS.
" It is to be lioped that the day is not far distant when the Government
will take more enlightened views on these and kindred topics, and that the
opinions of men of experience, judgment, and knowledge, connected with
our own profession, will exercise a right influence on the discussions of
those into whose hands are entrusted grave and heavy responsibilities. As
to the necessity of having separate asylums for the reception of criminal
lunatics there cannot be a aoubt, and asylums too in which the poor
unhappy inmates will have within their reach more of the comforts and
enjoyments of life. Some change must soon take place. Let us hope that
a brighter and a happier morn will soon dawn upon the poor, wretched,
criminal lunatics at present confined within the iron gratings of Bethlem
and other public lunatic asylums ; and that if the patients are not fitted
for entire liberation, their relatives will be permitted to transfer them to a
private establishment where greater comfort and relaxation, with the same
degree of security, are to be obtained."
The following observations, in connexion with the same subject,
appeared in the columns of the Morning Chronicle newspaper, a journal
ever ready to advocate an enlarged, liberal, humane, and philosophical
view of all questions involving the well-being of the state, and the hap-
piness of the people.
The remarks we are about to quote proceed from the pen of Mr. F.
H. Dickenson of Kingsweston.
" I wish you would call the attention of the public to the neglect of the
government in not providing a separate place of confinement for lunatics,
and persons supposed to be lunatics, who are detained for the purposes of
justice. Such a prison has been established in Ireland, and the urgent
necessity of providing one here has been repeatedly pressed on the
government by the Commissioners in Lunacy, and the managers of the
Lancashire and other asylums. But while the Government and the House
of Commons have wasted their time on legislation, trifling if it be not
tyrannical, they have none, it would seem, for matters that are not
pressed on public attention by urgent and influential agitators. There
may possibly be objections, from the time it would take, to that reform of
the law of lunacy which is called for, and which is recommended by the
commissioners; but I am at a loss to see the difficulty in obtaining a grant
of the House of Commons for establishing a prison for the due custody of
a class of persons who are already a heavy charge on the country in
another way. It implies no real increase of expense beyond the outlay for
building, and it could not long occupy the time of the House of Commons.
Only let those who have the public charge of lunatics, and who therefore
feel the evil, knock loudly at the door of the Home OfBce, and a willing
assent will be yielded to Lord Shaftesbury when he brings the matter
before the next session of parliament.
" The commissioners state as follows, in their report for 1850, pages
16, 17
' We entertain the same opinions which we expressed in our last report
relative to the class of insane patients termed state or criminal lunatics;
for although the arrangement, to which we referred last year, with the
proprietor of Fisher ton House, near Salisbury, for receiving harmless
criminal lunatics, has been carried out, the small number so received gives
very inadequate relief to the asylums in which (exclusive of more than
100 criminal patients in Bethlem Hospital) 264 of such patients were
confined on the 1st of January last.
" Your lordship is aware that the construction of lunatic asylums is so
CRIMINAL LUNATICS. 629
essentially different from that of prisons, that an effectual security against
the escape of criminals cannot be provided without restricting the liberty
of other patients with whom they are necessarily associated, and mate-
rially interfering with that treatment and general arrangement which
ought to be adopted for their benefit. Criminal patients have, therefore,
escaped, and must continue to escape from asylums and houses licensed
for the reception of the insane. As an instance of this we may mention
the fact which was brought by us specially under the notice of Secretary
Sir G. Grey, that a most active and cunning criminal patient escaped for
the fifth time from Hoxton House, in February last. [He has since
escaped a sixth time; his name is Henry Adams].
" ' Our objection applies especially to such lunatics as have been charged
with the more heinous offences; and it has been frequently brought
under our notice by the friends and relatives of patients, and also the
patients themselves, when conscious of their being associated with criminal
lunatics, have considered such association as a great and unnecessary
aggravation of their calamity.'
"There was held in London on the 17th of July a meeting of the
' Association of Medical Officers of Hospitals for the Insane.' You have
been a little disposed to quiz, lately, the annual meetings for objects of
all imaginable kinds that are now held, and certainly some of them are
odd enough. But the periodical meetings of those who have a common
want or a common interest, are a necessary and most useful consequence
of our present state of social freedom; and whether they merely become
acquainted with each other and amuse themselves, or help forward a
great cause, or strengthen the foundation and extend the knowledge of
some science, or make themselves ridiculous, we may tolerate the absurdity
for the much greater amount of substantial good that is obtained.
" The meeting then comprised many gentlemen who have devoted
themselves to the care of public asylums in the central and southern
parts of England, and one even from Belfast. The principal business was
this very question of the treatment of criminal lunatics, and they agreed
to petition the Government ' for the establishment of an institution apart
from Bethlem, exclusively for the reception of persons acquitted of crime
on the plea of insanity.' The unfortunate, desolate, and unhappy con-
dition of the criminal lunatics was feelingly dwelt on by all the speakers,
and it appeared to be the unanimous opinion of the Association that suffi-
cient attention had not been paid to their state. It was thought that
great good would result from the separation of the criminal from the
other lunatics confined in Bethlem and other public asylums.
" They also suggested amendments in the laws relating to county
asylums, which I hope they will take means to make public, and Dr.
Winslow and four others were appointed a committee to report on this
matter, in all its branches, including the law of the property of lunatics.
In all this they are but seconding the commissioners, who have expressed
their wish, and appear to have devised plans, for similar improvements in
the law.
" Those whose experience justifies their doing so, may, I apprehend,
suggest modes for the classification and separate detention of different
classes of lunatics, from which their more sure recovery or greater comfort
may be secured. I will not attempt to trespass on this extensive and
somewhat delicate ground. And on the point which I have brought
before you I will merely venture to point out, in addition to the remarks
I have quoted, that it is important to keep clear the distinction between a
Prison and an Asylum?between a place of confinement and disgrace, and
one where these things ought to be studiously avoided ; in order that the
poor man may, by a system of relief and comfort, be aided to bring the
630 CRIMINAL LUNATICS.
better feelings of his nature to bear on the mental disease which has for a
time incapacitated him from society and his usual work. The commis-
sioners, in the passage of their Beport which I have quoted, have glanced
at the importance of giving as much liberty as possible to patients. It is
plain that a system of trust and confidence, which is so salutary to
strengthen the feeling of responsibility and moral rectitude in those who
are recovering, must be interfered with when the restraint necessary for
criminals is used. The discontent arising from confinement is also obvious
and most prejudicial. Among those whom one calls, for the sake of con-
venience, but incorrectly, criminal lunatics, there are?besides those who,
having no control over their own actions, would by every one be con-
sidered innocent?many others who committed crime while temporarily
insane, or who simulated madness. I suppose there is no question but
that all these persons?when the acts they nave committed would, if done
by sane persons, have been murder or any other of the more heinous
crimes?ought to be confined for life. Consider, then, the feelings of the
man during his lucid intervals, or of him who knows he has never been
insane at all?but who each of them know that they will never be let out,
and have free scope to employ all the energy that villany and despair can
give them, to the prejudice ot their companions in a county asylum. And
the latter are naturally led to expect, from seeing sane persons in confine-
ment along with them, that their own imprisonment may be unduly pro-
longed ; and a feeling must occasionally force itself on their minds, that if
ever they get out and commit crimes, even the most heinous, their punish-
ment cannot be worse than what they are then enduring. Many think
that the law of acquittal on account of lunacy is, in its present state, most
injurious to society. It is not my business to offer any opinion on that,
but every one must agree with me that a system which familiarizes every
pauper lunatic in the country with the idea of the boundless privilege of
doing wrong, which he seems to enjoy under that law, ought at once to be
abolished; and this can only be effected by the separate confinement of
these very different classes of men."
