Remarks Upon the Morbid Anatomy of The Brain in Insanity
=========================================================

383
?rtgmal GTommumcatfons.

BY HOLMES COOTE, F. E. COLL. SUEG. ENGLAND, DE1TONSTEATOE OF ANATOMY
AT SAINT BAETIIOLOJIEW's HOSPITAL.
In the investigation of the pathology of the brain, we must bear in mind
that the greater proportion of the morbid appearances found after death,
cannot be considered as explaining the phenomena of intellectual dis-
turbance, which characterize the last periods of existence. Any attempt,
for example, to connect the different forms of mental alienation with the
character, locality, or amount of effusions of fluid within the cranium, would
undoubtedly fail, inasmuch as the disturbed state of the sensorial func-
tions depends upon the previous condition of the cerebral circulation, of
which such morbid appearances are but the result. The infiltration of
fluid into the pia mater, by which it becomes converted into a thick sponge-
like texture, which has lost all the delicacy and tenuity proper to that
membrane; or, its effusion into the ventricular cavities, is observed as well
in those who have died violent and raving, as in the silent, the timid, or
the desponding. The rapidity with which the fluid is poured forth, deserves
consideration, when the symptoms which occur during life are of a nature
to justify our forming an opinion upon the subject; for it is well known
that any part of the cerebro-spinal centre will bear with apparent impunity
an amount of slowly produced pressure, which, if suddenly exercised,
would cause immediate death. It is rare, however, that we have any clue
to the time when the amount of secretion in these textures is first morbidly
increased: the change from the natural state is so gradual, that the brain
bears it without further complications than those already existing. In a
patient, examined May, 1851, there was found within the head so great an
amount of serous effusion, that it might have been expccted some symptoms
of compression would have been the result ?? he had -been noisy, talkative,
and turbulent, up to the time of his death. In a female, examined April,
1847, there was found a moderate amount of purulent effusion in the sac
of the arachnoid, in the pia mater, and in the cavity of the ventricles : she
had never been otherwise than silent, morose, and feeble. Speaking of
effusions of serum, Dr. Abcrcrombie remarks, " Whenever this remarkable
condition occurs, it naturally becomes the prominent object of attention?
and, as it has been by long established usage strongly associated with the
idea of pressure upon the brain, the investigation has generally been
directed to the discovery of a compressing cause. Effused fluid, having
been found, upon examination after death, in a great proportion of the
cases referred to, has on this principle been considered as explaining the
symptoms, and here probably the investigation closed. This course of
inquiry seems to have been the occasion of so much of that obscurity,
which so long involved the pathology of affections of the brain."
Although we are unable, with any accuracy, to refer particular symptoms
to disease of definite regions of the brain, yet where disorganization or
softening of the cerebral substance ensues, it is attended with a marked
impairment of the intellectual faculties ; and this condition of the mind, in
.a, medico-legal point of view, quite distinct from insanity, is equally de-
serving of supervision and direction. I cannot believe in any positive
NO. XV. c c
384 EE MARKS UPON THE MORBID ANATOMY
destruction or disorganization of the substance of tlie brain, without some
corresponding functional impairment; and I attach but little importance
to cases stated to be illustrative of the converse view, when all the proofs
of a perfect and vigorous mind consist in the fact, that the patient can
answer in a rational manner the commonest questions relative to his own
feelings and wants. If the injury to the cerebral substance be limited;
if, for example, a small quantity of blood be effused, from the giving way
of the coats of some diseased capillary vessels, the reparation may be com-
plete ; but the occurrence of the accident is marked by symptoms not to
be mistaken, varying from a slight and transient giddiness, to complete
paralysis and loss of speech. In course of time the blood becomes dis-
organized and reduced to a granular mass; the dark spot, where the
extravasation occurred, passes through the different shades of brown,
yellow, or yellowish white, as the disintegration of the blood-discs is the
more complete. A delicate and organised cyst surrounds the torn nerve
fibres, which in course of time undergo the same change as the blood-
discs, and are removed as a foreign body. In the examination of a brain
in wliich the process of repair may be said to be complete, we find nothing
but the thin, transparent and empty cyst, formed of condensed areolar
tissue. The patient, though for a long time conscious of a feeling of
insecurity in his head, eventually regains his former clearness and vigour.
The same, however, cannot be said when the extravasation is considerable,
or where small superficial extravasations have recurred in quick succession.
The mind, in such cases, becomes permanently weakened, and the patient
is, to a considerable extent, at the mercy of those who surround him. The
external senses may convey true impressions, and the patient may retain
the facility of reasoning correctly; but he may, at the same time, have lost
the vigour of mind requisite to form his own conclusions, and to act inde-
pendently upon them. Such a person, though clearly not insane, can
hardly be said to be competent to undertake the management of his
a flairs.
Amojigst the many causes which disturb the sensorial functions, the
most common doubtless is a faulty condition of the circulation. The blood
itself, frequently in an abnormal state, is either propelled with too great
force, or not in sufficient quantity through the cerebral vessels. In a
brain rather below the proper standard of development, these conditions
will produce, in a permanent form, symptoms which, in a well-organized
brain, would be only transient. In order to express an opinion worthy of
attention, as to whether in this class of cases any morbid appearances can
be discovered after death, the examination must be continued from the
head to the other regions of the body: the state of the lungs and of the
heart must bo carefully ascertained; that of the liver, alimentary canal,
and kidneys, should be duly investigated.
Many who have professed familiarity with these subjects, have asserted
that tlie morbid appearances found in the bodies of the insane were
unworthy of record: they should have rather confessed that they were
unable to appreciate their value. With the more thorough and complete
investigation of these matters, we may hope eventually to arrive at some
correct views as to the nature of those laws, the transgression of which
leads to sensorial disturbance, but no approach to the truth can bo made,
exccpt through the portal of morbid anatomy, which has revealed this impor-
tant fact, that the record of post-mortem examinations, as preserved in an
asylum for the insane, differs in most striking and essential particulars
from that preserved in a general public hospital.
The cavity of the body which next demands attention is the thorax,
containing those important organs, the lungs and the heart.
OF THE BRAIN IN INSANITY. 385 '
The frequency of tuberculous deposit iu the lungs has been remarked by
other writers. There seems to exist, in many families, subject to tuber-
culosis, an hereditary disposition to insanity. The disease of the brain
does not show itself until the occurrence of some of those troubles, through
which all have to pass, in greater or in less degree. Disappointment or
inability to carry out projected plans excites, in some cases, violent fits of
passion, connected with increased activity of the cerebral circulation, ter-
minating occasionally, though rarely, in inflammation ; in other cases great
melancholy, and depression of spirits, accompanied by general emaciation.
The deposit of tubercle appears to have been arrested in many cases.
Having formed in the upper part of the lungs, it loses its fluidity and
semi-transparency ? becomes dull, yellowish, and opaque, and even-
tually cretaceous, when it is either imbedded in the healthy pulmonary
substance, or is coughed up, leaving a dark-coloured, irregular, and
puckered cicatrix at the apex of the lung. Such appearances are very
common, and they lead to the conclusion that, destructive to life as is the
progress of that disease known as consumption, in its acute form, especially
when it attacks the young, tubercles are deposited in a very large propor-
tion of persons at some period of life in the structure of the lungs, where,
after exciting more or less disturbance, they either undergo the changes
above described, or are coughed up in the expectoration, the patient
remaining well afterwards, as far as the respiratory organs are concerned.
Miss   became deranged in consequence of domestic calamities. She
died, December, 1847, in an extremely emaciated state. Examination of
the body, December 11.
There was considerable opacity and thickening of the arachnoid mem-
brane, with infiltration of fluid into the pia mater. The ventricles con-
tained an increased amount of serous fluid: the cerebral substance
presented, upon being cut into, more numerous red points than natural.
The structure of the lungs was generally healthy, but the opposed sur-
faces of the right pleura were united, to a small extent, by an old adhesion
in the upper and posterior part of the thorax. In the adjoining pulmonary
substance was a knot of yellowish white concretion, the size of a pea,
imbedded in a delicate capsule. The surrounding structures were puckered
and drawn in, but otherwise healthy; there was no other trace of
tubercle.
The condition of the brain, however, not uncommonly seems, for the
time, to render a patient exempt from those sufferings usually attendant
upon tuberculous deposit. Disease goes on, withoiit destroying life, to a
greater extent than is observed in general practice. I have occasionally
examined lungs in which, from the general consolidation by tuberculous
deposit, it has been a source of inquiry what parts have been subservient
to the purposes of respiration. Both sides of the chest were occupied by
heavy, incompressible masses, which, when divided, presented a continuous
surface of yellowish white colour, speckled with black, or blackish grey
lines and spots. Patients in this state are visually feeble; they remain
cither in bed, or are confined to a room, where, being always at rest, there
is no call for any increased respiratory acts.
An old woman died in Bethlcm Hospital, April, 1850. Having been foi*
many years spiteful and vindictive, she suddenly, and without obvious cause,
became good-tempered and talkative. Body examined April 30.
She was extremely emaciated: the skull-cap was thin, light, and shallow;,
the arachnoid membrane was transparent, but separated from the cerebral
convolutions, which were much shrunken, by the effusion of a large-
quantity of clear serous fluid in the layers of the arachnoid. The shrink-
ing and atrophy of the convolutions was such as to leave many spaces,
c c 2
386 REMARKS UPON THE MORBID ANATOMY
"which would readily admit tlie introduction of the end of the finger. The
cerebral substance was firm, but vascular.
Both lungs were universally infiltrated by the deposit of light grey
semi-transparent miliary tubercles; there was no softening, nor any trace
of a cavity in any part; the whole pulmonary substance seemed occupied
by this morbid substance, and sunk when immersed in water, unless the
section were taken from the inferior border of the lung, where there were
a few dilated air-cells. There were a few old adhesions of the pleura on
both sides of the chest; on the right side, the lung was united to the fifth
rib by a tough band, which, when divided, was found to form the limit of
a small cavity containing a bit of dead bone connected with the rib. Along
the course of the ilium were numerous round ulcers with raised margins,
which had, doubtless, been the result of the deposit of tubercle.
The mesenteric glands were slightly enlarged.
The uterus was much elongated, and considerably larger than natural in
the unimpregnated state. Under its peritoneal covering there was a large
collection of yellowish white masses of tubercle, varying in size from a pin's-
liead to a pea, or even larger; the walls of the uterus in their whole thick-
ness, were occupied by a similar deposit, whilst its cavity was lined by a
continuous layer of it, several lines in thickness, and of the consistence of
cheese. It closely resembled, in its general characters, as well as in its
minute structure, that yellow tubercle found in solid opaque masses in the
substance of the testicle, and in the lumbar glands. At the neck of the
uterus there was softening and ulceration; the surface, broken, shreddy,
and uneven, was covered by a considerable quantity of yellow, purulent
matter, mixed with blood. Both ovaries were diseased by the deposit of
similar tubercle; the right adhered to the uterus, the left to the sigmoid
flexure of the colon.
I believe it to be an almost invariable law, amongst the inhabitants of a
country with a climate similar to that of England, that tubercle is depo-
sited first in the lungs. If patients ultimately die from the development
of the disease in other situations, still the lungs have first experienced the
disease. In the ease here stated, it must be confessed that the evidence
goes far to prove the uterus to have been the first affected. The amount
of tubercle there collected, its infiltration through the walls of the organ,
the ulceration going on at its neck, are all strikingly in contrast with the
condition of the lungs, where the semi-transparent and semi-fluid morbid
product had not yet lost its low vitality, but exhibited under the micro-
scope, a structure consisting of well-marked cells, not very different from
those of cancer.
Instances are upon the hospital record, where tubercle has been depo-
sited in the bony parietes of the chest, as well as in the viscera. The can-
cellous texture of the bone becomes infiltrated by this morbid product, the
part swells, ulceration ensues, in a precisely, similar manner as when a
strumous ulcer forms in the soft parts (<?. g., the neck, &c.,) for the pur-
pose of throwing off the infiltrated matter, and a large, irregular ulcerated
cavity results, to which the term of carious has been applied. Caries may
be defined as tuberculous ulceration of bone. The effects of such a
disease upon the thoracic viscera when it occurs in the sternum, may be
illustrated_by the following case:?
Examination of tlic body of , JBethlem Hospital.
Bloodvessels of the brain and membranes rather empty. Cellular mem-
brane of the pia mater covering the cerebral hemispheres greatly infil-
trated. Five or six ounces of clear, transparent fluid in the lateral
ventricles; much fluid also in the basis of the skull. A few convolutions
or THE BRAIN IN INSANITY. 387
of tlie cerebral hemispheres slightly shrunken. Pineal gland converted
into a thin cyst, equal in size to a horse-bean, containing a clear, light-
yellow fluid.
There was caries of the sternum, with an abscess, and the inflammation
had extended to the anterior .mediastinum. The pericardium was also
inflamed. The right pleura was connected to the sternum, and adhered
firmly on the inside to the lung. The right lung was connected to the
pleura by extensive old adhesions; tuberculated, and contained a vomica
about the size of an ordinary orange. A portion of the right lung red
and indurated. There was a pint of fluid in the left pleura; old adhesions of
the left lung, and on its surface there was the appearance of an indurated
and depressed cicatrix. The substance of the lung was here blackish,
hard, and contained small deposits of a greyish cheesy matter. The heart
was enlarged much beyond its natural size.
As contrasted with the frequency of tuberculous deposit in the chest in
the insane, I may again allude to its rarity in the brain or its membranes.
There is no region of the body where it is so seldom seen as the cranial
cavity; even in those cases where it has been infiltrated to an extreme
extent, both amongst the abdominal and thoracic viscera. Pathological
collections confirm this statement; for although specimens are to be seen
in which the brain or its membranes are the seat of this disease, yet they
bear no proportion, in point of number, to specimens illustrative of the
same morbid changes in other situations.
The history of the cases shows that the effects of such deposit, during
life, vary according to the region affected; but that there is not manifested
necessarily any intellectual disturbance. In what manner, then, are
we to regard the frequency of phthisis pulmonalis amongst the insane?
Is the cerebral circulation insufficient for the healthy exercise of the sen-
sorial functions, owing to the imperfect arterialisation of the blood ? There
is, I beheve, some truth in this statement, although it will not of itself
explain all the phenomena now before us. The chief cause exists in the
brain itself, whose development, in these cases, must be incomplete,
although hitherto we have failed in detecting the deficiency. Upon such
a structure it is easy to imagine the effect of the stimulus of unhealthy
blood, and to understand that it would not be exempted from the general
want of power which characterized the other component parts of such an
organism.
The following cases are good instances of the extensive deposition of
tubercle:?
A criminal lunatic, aged 48, died January 20, 1848.
The membranes of the brain were full of blood: the convolutions were
flattened ; the lateral ventricles were distended by at least five ounces of
clear serous fluid. The septum lucidum was softened, thinned, and shreddy
in the longitudinal direction; the foramina of Monro were very large ; the
corpora striata presented a concave surface towards the ventricular
cavities. There was yellow sero-purulent infiltration under the arachnoid
membrane at the base of the brain, about the pons varolii and the pituitary
body. The third ventricle contained much fluid, and the pressure and
distention were greatest in the situation of the commissure of the optic
nerves. The patient had been blind for some time before death.
The lungs were everywhere studded with tubercles. Some were distinct,
semi-transparent, and grey; others of darker colour, more opaque, and
confluent; softening had taken place, so as to form small vomica;, contain-
ing a mixture of pus and tubercle, in many situations, in both lungs.
The opposed surfaces of both pleura) were universally adherent.
The peritoneum was studded throughout with deposits of tubercle, vary-
388 REMARKS UPON THE MORBID ANATOMY
ing in size from a pea, to the last joint of the thumb; large confluent
masses were accumulated by the round ligament of the liver and the small
omentum. The hepatic vessels and the biliary ducts were completely
surrounded, pressed upon, and nearly obliterated. There were numerous
old thready adhesions between the opposed peritoneal surfaces. The
transverse colon adhered to the front surface of the stomach, and to the
under surface of the liver.
The peritoneum was in many situations much thicker than natural,
and presented a mottled grey appearance from the copious deposit of
pigment. There were masses of tubercle upon the surface and in the
interior both of the pancreas and the spleen. The former was firmly
attached to the duodenum, the walls of which were thickened by the same
morbid deposit. All the other viscera were healthy. There were no
ulcers along the course of the intestinal canal.
The pancreas is very rarely changed in structure. This is the only
instance in which I have seen it diseased.
Examination of the body of , Criminal Lunatic, Bethlem Hospital,
May 19, 1851.
Skull-cap shallow; dura mater firmly adherent to the bono ; arachnoid
membrane transparent; vessels of the pia mater moderately full of blood;
there was shrinking of the cerebral convolutions with effusion of fluid into
the spaces. Substance of the brain rather soft; vessels filled with thin,
pale-red, fluid blood.
The pericardium contained about three ounces of straw coloured serum;
the heart was healthy.
The left lung, occupied throughout by tuberculous matter, presented in
its interior a large vomica capable of holding the closed fist of a large
man. This cavity, almost completely empty, and traversed by the
branching remains of bronchi and blood-vessels, had opened into the sac
of the pleura, and was bounded externally by five or six of the ribs, to
which the remains of the lung were firmly adherent. There were several
other smaller cavities, of which about three opened by rounded orifices
into different parts of the pleura. The right lung in its upper three-
fourths was completely consolidated by the deposit of tubercle, which had
in many places softened into cavities. Only the lower fourth was fit for
purposes of respiration, and tubercles, even here, were scattered rather
plentifully about. The pleura pulmonalis was here and there covered by
a thin layer of soft semifluid lymph. The abdominal viscera were pale
and the intestinal canal was contracted: there was no fat either in the
peritoneal folds or in the lumbar region. The lower part of the ilium was
dark, and the walls felt thicker than natural; upon opening the tube a
series of ulcers were found upon the mucous membrane, which was of
deep reddish-brown hue. Some of the ulcers as large or larger than a
shilling, with everted edges, had perforated the muscular coat and were
bounded by the serous covering of the intestine. Others were of smaller
size and not so deep ; granulations had sprung up in some, giving to the
surface the appearance of a healing sore. There were some ulcers along
the upper part of the caecum and colon, but the rest of the intestinal tube
was healthy.
The patient, whose post-mortem examination has been here described,
was an emaciated subject, who, before death, had been, apparently from
mere weakness, confined to his bed. He made no complaint respecting
his chest, nor was his cough sufficiently severe to distress him. He lay
powerless, helpless, yet uncomplaining, until his death. Suspicions were
entertained by those who attended him that there was disease of the
OF THE BRAIN IN INSANITY. 389
lungs, and the large cavity, here described, was detected by auscultation;
so feeble, however, was the respiration, that no very definite opinion, in
the absence of all complaint from the patient, could be formed. Dr. Wood,
the resident medical officer at Bethlem Hospital, informs me that he has
frequently remarked the apparent exemption from suffering, in the
insane, when labouring under extensive disorganization of the lungs. No
symptoms indicate the amount of disease, nor does the patient express any
desire to be relieved of that, which in one of sound mind would be a
source of constant misery.
The effects of simple inflammation are very commonly seen in the
contents of the chest. Adhesions of the pleural surfaces the effusion of
lymph, serum, or pus ; congestion, softening, or consolidation of the sub-
stance of the lung; occasionally also, gangrene. The interesting point in
connexion with such changes is the small amount of constitutional dis-
turbance which they excite in proportion to their severity. Patients, the
subjects of severe inflammatory diseases, have been known to lie in bed
feeble, emaciated and silent, uttering no complaint which could excite the
attention of those about them.
Thomas E , aged 29, died in Bethlem Hospital, January 30, 1850.
There had been no change in his symptoms before death; he sank appa-
rently from general weakness.
There was great turgidity of the vessels of the brain and its membranes;
the pia mater was gorged with blood. The cortical substance of both
cerebrum and cerebellum presented a pinker tint than natural; there was
congestion of the cerebral vessels, and effusion of fluid into the ventricles.
There were no adhesions of the pleura) on either side of the chest. The
posterior portion of the left lung was greatly congested with blood;
though still crepitant upon pressure it was dark coloured, soft, and broke
down easily under the fingers. Upon the surface of the upper lobe there
was a dark black spot, without change of structure in the pleura. TJpon
division this was found to indicate a mass of pulmonary substance equal
in size to a small orange, quite black with offensive gangrenous odour.
There were no morbid changes in any of the abdominal viscera.
A similar condition of the substance of the lung was seen in the following
cases:?
Examination of the body of TV. L., March 18, 1850.
There was general congestion of the vessels of the brain, &c. In both
the lungs portions were found of the darkish colour from internal vascular
congestion, and hepatized. The pulmonary substance in these hepatized
portions was broken down in the centre, infiltrated with a stinking ichor,
and mortified. There were seven of such portions in the left lung, the
largest measuring about two inches each way: the others not larger than
a walnut or filbert. The mortified parts were fewer in the right lung, of
which, however, the posterior portion was more extensively hepatized.
The abdominal viscera were healthy.
Examination of the body of A. J3., June 12, 1850.
The skull-cap was very heavy; the arachnoid membrane was trans-
parent, but the cerebral vessels were gorged with fluid blood.
The cavities of both pleura? were lined by a thick continuous layer of
soft, yellow, recently effused fibrin; there were a few soft adhesions, and
but a very small amount of sero-purulent effusion. Both lungs floated in
water; but parts of their substance were softer than natural, cedematous,
and infiltrated by fluid. Numerous dark spots, varying in size from a
pin's head to a split bean, occupied the surface of the lungs under the
pleural covering. They were surrounded by a wavy yellow line, and con-
390 REMARKS UPON THE MORBID ANATOMY
tained cavities filled either by pus, or by softened lung. Many of the
cavities emitted the unpleasant odour of mortification, and some seemed
on the point of bursting into the pleural cavity; none could be found
?which had absolutely given way.
The abdominal viscera were healthy.
The frequent occurrence of morbid alterations of structure in the con-
tents of the thorax is familiar to all accustomed to open the bodies of the
insane. Of 72 persons examined consecutively in Bethlem Hospital,
55 exhibited instances of pectoral disease. Dr. AVebster, in a report
published in the " Medical and Chirurgical Transactions," thus analyzed
the cases : "43 showed either recent or old adhesions in the chest; and
31 had the lungs consolidated; in 24, suppuration had commenced; in
15 the pleura, or lungs, bore marks of previous or recent inflammation;
in 12 cases there was effusion of lymph into the pleura; in 0, considerable
effusion into the bronchi and air passages; in 9, the lining membrane of
the trachea and bronchi was of a deep red hue." *
Death sometimes ensues from acute pericarditis?a disease of rare
occurrence unconnected with rheumatism?the other viscera being sound.
In a male patient, whose head, upon examination, presented the usual
appearances of congestion and turgidity of the brain and its membranes,
there were found traces of active and probably recent inflammation of the
pericardium: both portions of the membrane were covered by a coat of
fibrin of variable thickness; the loose surface was rough and shaggy; it
readily peeled ofl from the pericardial membrane, which was found thick-
ened, with its surface of a deepish red colour. Over a great portion of the
left ventricle the heart adhered to the bag. The cavity contained about
three ounces of a dull yellowish turbid fluid. Slight purulent infiltration
of the cellular texture external to the pericardium at two or three points.
There was an abscess on the external part of the chest towards the left
side, containing a pint of thick yellow pus. It had existed for some months
before death.
Such disease, if not proving fatal, terminates in adhesion, either general
or partial, of the surfaces of the pericardium, or the production of those
white spots so frequently met with upon the anterior surface of the right
ventricle. It has been proved by my friend, Dr. Kirkes, that adhesions
of the pericai'dium, the result of the organization of lymph, are by no
means invariably permanent; that in the greater number of cases the
morbid union slowly gives way, and the heart again becomes free in its
fibro-serous capsule. In such cases there is no serious disturbance of the
circulation. There are instances, however, of permanent adhesions of the
opposed pericardial surfaces, when the ventricles, especially the left, arc
often found hypertrophied. In the examination of the body of a female,
who died in Bethlem, with slight effusion of blood between the dura mater
and arachnoid membrane, in the neighbourhood of the falx cerebri over
the right hemisphere, the pericardium was found everywhere closely
adherent, the adhesions beinj? thready and areolar, and evidently of old
date. There was concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle, the walls
being more than twice the natural thickness, and of deep red colour. The
other viscera were healthy.
Morbid changes amongst the abdominal viscera are by no means so
common as in the contents of the cranium or of the thorax. The alimen-
tary canal and the adjacent glandular structures are usually in a healthy
state. It might have been expected that the kidney would often be found
diseased; and then, from the known effect of the admixture of urea with
* Transactions of Medical and Chirurgical Society. Series II. Yol. VIII.
OF THE BRAIN IN INSANITY. 391
tlxe blood, an attempt might have been made, upon tliesc grounds, to
explain some of tlie morbid conditions of the brain. The contrary, how-
ever, is the fact; the capsule rarely adheres more firmly than natural to
the cortical substance : there is generally the usual proportions of the two
substances. Small cysts, formed by dilatations of the uriniferous tubules
are occasionally met with, and in one case both kidneys were atrophied,
being not above one-third the natural size.
I have seen one instance of true cystic degeneration of the kidneys -r
both glands being from four to five times beyond the natural size, and
converted into a mass of cysts filled with fluids of different colour and
consistence, varying from a light-blue to a deep brown or black hue; from
the fluidity of water to the thickness and stickiness of bird-lime. But
amongst these cysts, which were clearly and indisputably traced by Mr.
Quekctt to the uriniferous tubes, there existed much of the true glandular
structure, elongated, twisted, and displaced, but in other respects healthy;
so that, during life, a considerable quantity of urine flowed, and there was
no suspicion of renal disease.
One cannot but imagine, in the later stages of such an affection, there
must be some failure in the proper excretory power of the kidneys; some
of the constituents of the urine must cease to be eliminated; yet the
amount of fluid passed in these cases is rarely below, and sometimes even
above, the natural standard. Eayer has related some cases of this disease
as it was observed in persons of highly excitable temperament; but we
cannot do more than allow that any disturbance in the function of so
important an organ as the kidney, would, by its influence on the blood,
indirectly affect the brain, and thus perhaps hasten the manifestation
of intellectual disturbance in one previously so disposed.
In cases of tuberculosis of the lungs, the usual tuberculous ulcers are
found alongthe course of the ilium and csecum. In cases of typhoid fever,
ulcers characteristic of that affection are met with in the same situation:
the alimentary canal is sometimes perforated, when the escape of its con-
tents leads to acute peritonitis, during which the same indifference to
suffering on the part of the patient has been often observed. In the
following case an ulcer has perforated the jejunum. It is related to show
the extent which disease may attain in patients so circumstanced.
Examination of John , JBeildem Hospital.
There was effusion of serum into the pia mater; the vessels of the brain
"were full of blood; the lateral and the third ventricles were greatly
enlarged; more than two ounces of fluid in the cavities. Foramen of
Monro large; septum lucidum distended, thin, and had actually given way
in one point, having a few separate shreds in which individual vessels
"were seen.
The right lung adhered strongly and universally to the cavity of the
chest; there was a vast cavern in the upper lobe; the entire lower lobe
tuberculated and excavated by suppurating cavities throughout. The left
lung was not adherent; tuberculous masses, from the size of a pea to a
gooseberry, but not yet softened, were scattered through it. Active vas-
cular congestion in the pulmonary texture immediately surrounding these
masses.
There were universal adhesions, partly ancient, partly recent, of the
several abdominal viscera to each other and to the parietes. The peri-
toneum lining the cavity and covering the intestinal canal, and the
omentum was thickened by an universal tubercular affection. The
tubercles were minute, but crowded into the closest arrangement. There
were partial firm adhesions of the omentum and different parts to each
?392 ON THE MORBID ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN IN INSANITY.
other and to the parietes. There had been, universal and recent violent
inflammation of the peritoneum, with an ulcerated aperture in the jejunum,
from which the intestinal contents had escaped in small quantity. The
convolutions of the intestine were closely agglutinated; there were collec-
tions of thick puriform fluid on separating them, and effusions of soft
yellow lymph, from the size of a pin's-head to half-a-crown, seen in count-
less number. The peritoneal covering, both of the small and large intes-
tines, was deeply discoloured in many parts by intense vascular congestion.
That of the mesentery was in the same state, with the mesenteric glands
slightly swollen by recent inflammation.
It must be confessed that the evidence is still unsatisfactory as to the
exact nature of those conditions upon which unsoundness of mind
depends; yet the reports which have been given in this journal show,??
first, that the body of a lunatic is rarely, perhaps never, opened without
our discovering some morbid appearances within the cranium; secondly,
that there are frequently to be seen the traces of serious organic disease
within the chest, and more rarely in the cavity of the abdomen. These
morbid appearances generally indicate disease of old standing, but occa-
sionally of more recent date.
Can we then feel surprised, even if such changes are but indirectly con-
nected with sensorial disturbance, that, upon the return of the insane,
reported cured, to society, relapses are so frequent ?
