The Maniac's Wail
==================

We copy the following beautiful and expressive lines from tlie columns of
the " Examiner." They are from the pen of Mr. Edmund Oilier, and are
designated " The Wife-Slayer." We have taken the liberty of altering
the title of the poem, as it so accurately and poetically delineates that
morbid and insane state of mind which so often irresistibly and blindly
impels to acts of suicide and homicide. Our readers will at once recognise
in the poem a truthful, beautiful, and affecting sketch. In homicidal
insanity the victim is, alas ! frequently related to the lunatic by the closest
and tenderest ties of consanguinity. A morbid desire to shed human blood,
from a conviction that something dreadful must be done to relieve the brain
of its agonizing pressure, occasionally overpowers all feelings of affection
and love. " It must be done?it shall be done?blood must be shed?my
wife?my infant child must perish bv my hand before this mental anguish
can pass away." Such was the sad description, given to the Editor of this
Journal, of the morbid feelings of the most loving and affectionate of
husbands and fathers. A gentleman whose mind had been exposed to much
distress and anxiety in consequence of pecuniary losses, manifested symp-
toms which led his family to suspect the approach, if not the actual exist-
ence, of mental derangement. One day he was suddenly missing. Search
was made in every direction for him, but without avail. Months rolled on,
and no tidings of the poor man reached his afflicted wife. After the lapse
of nearly half a-year, she was sitting, one beautiful moonlight evening,
near the door of her house, when she saw the tall figure of a man, gliding
slowly, leisurely, and with measured steps, up an avenue of trees, leading
from the mansion to the main road. She watched the somewhat suspicious
and singular movements of the stranger, as he occasionally stopped, and,
with folded arms, gazed vacantly around him, first at the moon, then at the
house, and afterwards at the tall trees skirting each side of the road. As
he approached, his wife immediately recognised in the face of the
mysterious stranger her long-lost husband, but, alas! he was a lunatic!
During the night the wife heard the sound of footsteps stealthily ap-
proaching her room. Before she had time to secure the door, it opened,
and her husband entered. He made no remark, but after gazing vacantly
and sadly round the room, he placed a chair at the head of the bed, and
sat quietly down upon it. His wife, in her fright, lost all presence of mind,
and made no attempt to speak, or to leave the room, or even the bed. A
few minutes had scarcely elapsed, when the lunatic was seen to be gazing
rather wildly upon something he held in his hand. He turned his eyes,
and fixed them upon the face of his wife, and then they reverted to an object
he appeared to have brought with him into the room. To the horror of the
poor woman she perceived that her husband had possessed himself of a carving
knife. Her first impulse was to seize the instrument and attempt to wrest
it from his grasp?her second thought was to escape out of the room; but
618 the maniac's wail.
the great risk which would accompany either movement flashed across
her mind, and she resolved to remain quiet and composed, and wait the
issue of the anticipated struggle for her life. The lunatic, with an ex-
pression denoting the most horrible intentions, gazed for some minutes
fixedly and uninterruptedly upon his wife, and then upon the murderous
weapon. To her inexpressible joy, she saw a manifest alteration in the
character of his countenance. His whole features relaxed, and a sweet
smile was seen playing upon his face, and, looking with the affection he
was wont to do in happier days gone by, he, with an expression of deep
pathos, convulsively exclaimed, "Poor Sally! poor Sally! dear Sally!"
Upon this he rose from his seat, and quietly left the room. The wife
immediately locked and barricaded the door. In a few minutes the
maniac returned, and endeavoured to obtain admission by main force into
the apartment. Finding his efforts ineffectual, he returned to his own
room. When morning dawned, he was again missing. Under the im-
Sression that, failing in his attempts to murder his wife, he might have
estroyed himself, a neighbouring pond was dragged, and his dead body
discovered.
It was our intention to cite other cases illustrative of that melancholy
condition of mind so forcibly described in the poem before us, but want
of space forbids us.
"No, 7io ! I did not kill lier! No!
I say I will not have it so?
I will not hear it! 'Twas a dream
From which I woke with sudden scream,
And found the sweat upon my brow,
And that dull pain which even now
Is heavy oil my heart and brain :?
Oh God! I must have slept again,
And stumble yet through dusky chasms,
Flesli-quakings, and tremendous spasms !
" I have a wife?a dear one.?Nay,
Start not! I have one still, I say,?
Or shall, when from this dream I wake.
We were heart wedded: we did slake
Our miseries in each other's tears,
And grew, through all the strange, sad years,
Quiet in grief's own quietness.
We could walk straight beneath distress,
And make no cry. But want extreme
Seiz'd us; and then?then came this dream!
" Beware! You'd tell me she is dead!
But I will dash my desperate head
Against these walls, before you speak
That cruel word!?Oh foul! You seek
To crush me, seeing I am weak.
You have no touch of human ruth:
You shake me with mere shows of truth
Which must be false, or heaven would pass
In shudderings to one formless mass.
Why, look in one another's eyes?
How calm they are ! You tell me lies,
Or your own tears would fleck the ground !-
I dreamt it, if this brain is sound.
"I thought I had been out all day,
Wandering, in some half-witted way,
THE maniac's wail. G19
In search of work ; and, failing quite,
I came home by the fall of night,
And sat down in my wretched room.
The place was hush'd in ghostly gloom,
And voidness lay upon my eyes,
Until I heard some creature rise
Within the darkness,?and a face
Fell on me like a strange disgrace;?
The face of her whom most I love,
Dead to all thoughts of all above,
Burnt up with drink?a pallid drouth
Around a vague and twitching mouth
That welter'd into speech obscure !
Oh, how could Love itself endure
That loveless sight??Fierce words upgrew
Between us, raining poisonous dew.
The hot blood sang within my head,
And liumm'd through all my veins, and fled
Out of my heart: till, half in fear,
Half rage, I seiz'd a bludgeon near,
And dasli'd the face that look'd on mine!
The blood leapt out like awful wine!
My own blood answer'd it. I sought
To beat and crush that face to nought;
And so the human features fell
To crimson blanks?a soul-less shell.
?I felt like one new-born in hell.
" And with a scream from me (not her)
I stagger'd back, and felt a stir
Of gathering crowds, and on my sight
A weight of huge and shoreless night.
" My eyes are fire; but they could weep
Strangely!?I walk even yet in sleep.
Things are not only as they seem:
Men dabble in dark pools of dream,
And shriek themselves awake in bed,
Grey with one night's enormous dread.
Even so shall I. I lean with faith
On what my soul to itself saith.
Yet you who stand about me here
Have almost numb'd me with the fear
That, after all, this thing is real,
And that I kill d her.?Let me feel
These stony walls and windows barr'd.
Oh, misery! They are firm and hard!
" I wail and wander like a ghost,
Houseless, about a glimmering coast,
Where one lost face makes red the night.
?Oh, lingering dawn! Oh, day! Oh, light!
