Description of a New Window for the use of Asylums
===================================================

WOOD, M.D. LICENTIATE OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS J
RESIDENT MEDICAL OFFICER OF BETHLEM HOSPITAL.
Whenever tlie stern necessity arises for breaking up a family circle, and consigning
to an asylum some one of its members, the first thought which the anxiety of relatives
properly and naturally suggests is, how the distress occasioned by the separation of
those who have perhaps never yet been parted may be mitigated, if not entirely saved?
how the gloomy presentiments of coming evils, and the distracting doubts of groundless
suspicions, may be most speedily removed, while the wild excitement of mania may be
calmed with the least appearance of opposition or control. The very aspect of the
building to which a patient is often so unwillingly taken, may make an impression on
his mind most difficult to efface, and most prejudicial to his recovery. Important as
they are, it is not enough to provide for the mere animal wants and personal comforts,
Uor will it suffice to insure the kind assiduity of attendants, aud all the resources which
Various well-ordered amusements afford, if the arrangements of the building itself
suggest the thought of imprisonment, and remind the unhappy sufferer, as he wistfully
gazes through his heavily-barred window, that he is not only forcibly separated from
his family, but at the same time shut out from tlie world. I need not dwell 011 the
impediments to recovery which all unnecessary precautions are so well calculated to
produce; they not only tend to perpetuate gloomy thoughts, to create discontent, and
to rouse opposition, but are constantly referred to as arguments in proof of some
imaginary wickedness already committed, or some still more severe punishment yet to
he endured. Universal anxiety is manifested on the part of all tliose concerned in tlie
?erection and management of asylums, to deprive them as much as possible of all
prison-like appearance, and to imprint on them, as it were, the aspect of cheerfulness.
The importance of appearances has not been lost sight of; and though the windows
have received a fair share of consideration, and many great improvements have been
?effected in their construction, the great desideratum remains yet to be supplied?viz.,
a window which sball allow the greatest extent of free and uninterrupted circulation of
ftir without the appearance of bars or other contrivances, which are obviously intended
only for security. The windows are the objects which most frequently remind the
captive of his condition, and tell him, in no very gentle terms, that he may not be
trusted with the same liberty as his fellow-men. But, independently of the depressing
effect of such means of security as are frequently out of all proportion to what is
I'eally required, there is something extremely irritating to sensitive minds in being
doomed continually to look through bars, which are obviously only placed there for the
safe keeping of the inmates. The governors of Bethlem Hospital having turned their
attention seriously to the improvement of the windows, with a view to remove all
unnecessary appearance of security, and so contribute to the cheerfulness of the
galleries, and the lighter aspect from without, caused model windows to be constructed
aud fixed, for the purpose of comparing the relative advantages of different designs,
?ihe first consisted of an iron window, cast in three pieces, the top, which is neces-
sarily arched, to suit the original plan, being fixed?the two other portions being so
constructed as to swing horizontally on a central axis, after the plan of luffer boards,
?nly, of course, not overlapping each other, but, when shut, fitting so closely as not to
show any increased thickness of the bar, which divides when the window opens. -As
regards appearance when closed, this plan is consistent with everything that can be
desired, but there are some objections to it: in the first place, the contrivance for
opening it, which consists of a moving rack, worked by a key, is somewhat complicate ,
150 NEW WINDOW FOR THE USE OF ASYLUMS.
and requires the expenditure of some force and time; and this, multiplied over a
number of windows, would amount to something rather considerable. A greatei
objection still is, that it does not open sufficiently wide for the purpose of ventilation,
and tlie patients could not very well be left to open it themselves. Two other model
?windows are simply modifications of a principle already adopted?viz., a wooden sash,
to open as a French window, with an iron guard, corresponding to the divisions of the
wooden sash, which is made to shut so close on to the iron as to appear like one bar-
Here, again, there is nothing very objectionable in the appearance while shut, excepting
that the total depth, resulting from the combined thickness of the wooden and iron
bars, looks heavy ; but when open, the patient has to look through bars which are
obviously only for the purpose of security, and therefore necessarily suggestive of the
circumstances which require such contrivances.
Whatever may be the artificial means of ventilation employed in an asylum, it Is
desirable, at any rate, to be able to open the windows as much as possible, consistent
with safety?in other words, leaving only such spaces as will not enable a patient to
escape through; and it is also desirable that the opening and shutting should be as
simple as possible. Next in importance to the necessary security comes the appear-
ance, both within and without; and the importance of this consideration can, I think,
scarcely be over-estimated.
It occurred to me that a window might be contrived, sufficiently secure, without any
appearance of bars, which would allow of a considerable space being entirely open, as
much, in fact, or even more, than could be obtained in the case of an ordinary house
window, where one sash slides or is pulled over the other, and the greatest amount of
open space is obtained when the two sashes occupy the same level, and just half of the
whole opening occupied by the window is without any interruption to the free circula-
tion of air. The first question, then, was to decide what was the greatest width of
pane that could be allowed consistently with safety. I found, on measuring a large
number of heads, that the broadest part of any as young as twelve years of age, was
something more than inches, and I therefore determined to adopt that measurement
for my design. The length of pane is quite immaterial, and is merely a question of
some trifling additional expense in glazing; but, as far as appearances go, the longer it
is the better, of course within reasonable limits, and having regard to the size of the
whole window, its necessary divisions, and the general style of the building. The
principal advantage of long panes is, that they diminish the number of divisions, and con-
sequently show the least possible quantity of iron. The next important part of the
design is the manner of opening, which I conceive should be as simple as possible, so
that the patients themselves may at any time, without difficulty, open a window when
they wish it, and having opened it, find nothing suggestive of the control to which they
are subjected: this semblance of liberty, even in such an apparently trifling matter, is well
worth providing for. When the intention of accomplishing security is not apparent,
there is less danger of arousing a spirit of resistance, and patients are more likely to-
submit quietly to arrangements which appear, after all, to differ so little from those in
their own homes. But I have said, that having opened a window, the patient should
see nothing suggestive of the control to which he is subjected. This is accomplished by
opening the whole length of the window to the extent of one pane in width in one
piece, as shown in the annexed sketch. The most external portions are folded back,
quite out of the way, against the wall of either side; the other portions of the window
which open are folded back upon the adjoining compartments, and are made to fit so
closely as to appear one with the frame on to which they fold; the most important
and I believe original, part of the design being, that no bar appears in any of these open
spaces, though four-sevenths of the whole space, if we except the top?which may or may
not be fixed?is entirely open; if the window were square at the top, four-sevenths-
of the whole space might be entirely open. The design supposes the top of the
window fixed ; but it might be made to open entirely in one piece by means of a
hinge, or in compartments ; and this might be necessary, if it were adopted for
windows in any story above the ground-floor, on account of the' inconvenience
which would arise in cleaning or repairing; the former might be accomplished altogether
from within, perhaps without any other than the lower part of the window opening,
hut at any rate by the top pane?corresponding as it were to the key-stone of the arch,
being made to fall on a hinge or hinges. As regards repairs, the lower part of the
windows, when they are most likely to be required, opens sufficiently to enable them
to be done entirely from within, and if the top of the window is square, the same prin-
ciple of opening would extend to the top and remove all difficulty on this score, but
if arched, an accident is so rare in this situation as really to render tjie difficulty un-
NEW "WINDOW FOR THE USE OF ASYLUMS. 151
important, and a ladder would always reach from the outside, if the opening of the
P lame were not sufficient. It is perhaps sufficient to say of the fastenings, that if
butt'3'6 necessary, they maybe of the simplest possible construction, perhaps a
?", just to prevent the wind blowing the window open. Under ordinary circum-
ances, it is presumed that if the window be properly made, its own weight would
Keep it shut.
cl '^''e/av0l\ra^e ?pinion that has been expressed of the model window, and the de-
are intention of our architect, who has seen it, to adopt it in a county asylum which
is now building, has induced me to draw up this description of it for the Psycho-
Journal, under the impression that it may be thought worthy of the considera-
of those who are interested in the improvement and construction of asylums.
Description of the Plate.
f acc0mPanyino sketch represents the window as seen from within, one side being
u v opened, the other entirely closed. The compartments marked with odd numbers,
iz. 1, b, 5, and 7, are those which open; those marked with even numbers, viz. 2, 4,.
f^i i i' aie ?xe<^> ant^ no,; open. The spaces 1 and 3 are represented open, 1 being
0 ed back against the wall, ,1 being folded back upon 2, which, though now really
ouble, is intended to have the same appearance as when single. The compartments
tl U<i ma* ?Peile^ are ^ and and these would fold back, the former upon 6,
e.latter against the wall. It will of course be understood, that each compartment
ich opens is in one piece, as seen at 1*, and the whole security of the window
epending upon the bars, which are fixed, the moveable frame need not be heavy?-
indeed only strong enough to carry the glass.
