Mental Dieteticsthe Effects Of Stimulants, Solid and Fluid, on the Mind
========================================================================

Art. Y
He liuman mind is never in a state of absolute repose. Impulses from
Avithin and influences from without continually disturb its equanimity-
-^activity is incompatible with thought. The active principles of our
Mature, as Dugald Stewart and other philosophers describe them; our
appetites and desires, our affections and passions, our hopes, and " fears
^hich kindle hope," are constant sources of emotion, resembling those
Natural springs and under-currents which unceasingly agitate the surface
0 a lake. These impulses originate in the mind itself; they are ema-
nations, strictly speaking, from within, giving rise to a succession of
id' aU(^ feelill?s variously modified, according to the peculiar
syncracy of each individual. There are other influences, however,
?perating irom without, which take their rise from the body, for our
* The Use of Alcoholic Liquors in Health and Disease: Trize Essay. By llliom
?Carpenter. Loudon, lBOO.
^ ?r<.u>cr. jjoimon,
Temperance and.Total Abstinence, or the Use
Health and Disease. By Spenser Thomson, M.D
and Abuse of Alcoholic Liquors in
London, 1850.
QQ MENTAL DIETETICS.
spiritual is so intimately blended with our material nature, that a reci-
procal interchange of impressions is constantly taking place. E\eiy
change of organic function is folloAved by a corresponding change in our
mental frame; and in like manner, the lights and shadows which flit
across the mind excite or depress the energies of our nervous system.
This mysterious influence of the mind upon the body has been poetica y
compared to that which the sun was supposed to exercise 011 the Egyp
tian statue of Menmon, which was said to become musical when irra
diated with its beams. The mode in which two entities, so essentia y
different from each other, are united, the link of connexion between
them, is utterly unknown; but this much is certain, that their mutual
harmony gives rise to that state of health which communicates a certain
degree of tone and buoyancy to all our feelings, which Shakespeare a(
mirably describes when he makes Romeo say
" My bosom's lord sits lightly on liis throne,
And all this day an unaccustomed spmt ?
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
The consciousness of health is something more than mere ficedom
from pain; it is a positive pleasure.
"The pleasure which attends good health, obscnes Dr. Thoma
Brown, "like every other long-continued bodily p easuie, ^
suppose to be diminished by habitual enjoyment anc 1 is
chiefly on recovery from sickness, when the liabi _ as ee ?
broken by feelings of an opposite kind, that Ave recognise w 1a 1
originally have been. To those who know what it is to lia\ e lisen
the captivity of a bed of sickness, I need not say that every function is
more than mere vigour; it is a happiness but to breathe and to mov>
and not every limb merely, but almost every fibre of c\eiy im , ias 1
separate sense of enjoyment."*
This happy state of mental and bodily health; this unity, and^ com-
bined harmony, constituting all that can be conceived pleasurable in the
" voluptas vita;," may be deranged by a variety of the causes referred
to, operating from within or from without; the former comprehending
those changes which originate in the mind itself, the latter those which
arise from certain conditions of the body. The influence of climate;
the state of the atmosphere, the quantity of its electricity or moisture;
its barometrical pressure and various alternations, operate sensibly upon
the feelings and mental powers of every person; how much does its
purity exhilarate, how much its contrary condition depress the mind.
What a blessed thing it is to breathe fresh air, exclaimcd Count Struenscc,
*? Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind. 13y Thomas Brown, M-D*
i vols. Edinburgh, 1820. Vol. i. p. GOO.
MENTAL DIETETICS. 91
upon quitting liis dungeon, although lie was being led out to tlie place
of his execution. The effect of different aliments, solid and fluid, upon
the mind; more especially those which are of a stimulating description, is
still more striking; and these we now purpose considering, under the
head of Mental Dietetics.
The physiology of digestion?the mastication and insalivation of food
and its propulsion into the stomach; its conversion into chyme, and the
course of the vessels by which its nutritious particles . are taken up in
the form of chyle, and poured into the current of the venous blood just
as it is reaching the right side of the heart, and the transmission of this
venous blood, mixed with the chyle, into the lungs, there to be arte-
ttalized and rendered fit for the nourishment and support of every part of
the body, need not here be described; suffice it to observe, that the great
end of the digestive function is to supply the vital stream with the
dements of nutrition. The process of digestion, therefore, in reality,
terminates in the lungs. The object of dietetics, as a legitimate branch
?f psychological as well as physiological science, is to regulate the supply
?f such food, whether taken in a solid or fluid form, as will be most
easily digested. The very great proportion of blood which is sent
directly to the brain, and which Haller states to be one-fifth of the whole
Cllrrent, would lead us, a priori, to anticipate that this organ would be
the first to suffer from any morbid alteration in the condition of the
Clrculating fluid. But this is not all; we must remember that an imme-
diate connexion is established between the brain and the digestive
0rgans, by means of the eighth pair of nerves and the sympathetic
system; and hence Mr. Mill, in his analysis of the phenomena of the
human mind, correctly observes,
" Connexions are proved to exist between our ideas and certain
states of these organs. Thus anxiety, in most people, disorders the
'gestion. It is no wonder, then, that the internal feelings which accom-
pany indigestion should excite the ideas which prevail in a state of
anxiety. Fear in most people accelerates, in a remarkable manner, the
Vermicular motion of the intestines. There is an association, therefore,
ej^ycen certain states of the intestines and terrible ideas; and this is
urhcicntly confirmed by the horrible dreams to which men are subject
.?"i uidigestion; and the hypochondria, more or less afflicting, which
' uiost always accompanies certain morbid states of the digestive organs.
10 fateful food which excites pleasurable sensations in the mouth,
continues them in the stomach, and as pleasures excite ideas of their
causes, and these of similar causes, and causes excite ideas of their
ects, and so on, trains of pleasurable ideas take their origin from
I easurable sensations in the stomach. Uneasy sensations in the
omacli produce analogous effects. Disagreeable sensations are associ-
eu with disagreeable circumstances; a train is introduced in which one
Painful idea following another, combinations to the last degree afflictive
gg MENTAL DIETETICS.
are sometimes introduced, and the sufferer is altogether overwhelmed by
dismal associations."*
To the same causes, viz., reciprocity between sensations and ideas, may
"be ascribed those instinctive principles of action which origina e
certain wants tliat are common to all animals.
" Our appetites (says Dugald Stewart) are three in number, liui g >
thirst, and the appetite of sex. Of these, two were intended^for the
preservation of the individual, the third for the con ? those
species ; and without them reason would have been me cic i er
important purposes. Suppose, for example, 1that t ieaPj^*e mi ht b?vc
had been no part of our constitution; reason and e.1 ?i.ould
satisfied us of the necessity of food for our preservation? u rj-n<y
we have been able, without an implanted principle, to ascei c ' ratin?
to the various states of our animal economy the proper season o?
or the proper food that is salutary to the body. 1 ie ow er < ^ , .
only receive this information from nature, but are, moreov ,
instinct to the particular sort of food that is proper or 1
health and in disease."+
. So also Dr. Eeid observes:
" Though a man knew that his life must be suppoited b>
could not direct him when to eat, or wlmt; how muchor bow often.
In all these things appetite is a better^ woulJ often bc
reason only to direct us 111 this matter, its c anTnonf p,nt the
drowned in the hurry of business and charms o amu enough to
voice of appetite rises gradually; and at last becomes loud enough
call off our attention from any other employment. +
We must not, however, restrict our observations to the means a *
an all-wise Providence has provided lor suggesting, instinc i\ e ),
means of gratifying physical desires; the psychologist must go ur 1
In a state of nature, doubtless, instinct would be an uneriing gui ;
and yet, so strange are the effects of habit, that the appetite o ai^
has been changed by domestication, and some brought to su sis o
food unadapted even to their organic structure. Herbivorous an^
graminivorous animals have been so trained as to live on
food; and carnivorous animals, the lion, tiger, cat, &c., been taug 1
live, and thrive tolerably, on a vegetable diet. Horses, 011 the coas
of Arabia, are constantly fed upon fish, herbage being deficient; an ^
Bishop Heber informs us that in Norway, as well as in some parts o
Hadramant and the Coromandel coast, they are constantly fed on t c
* Analysis of tlie Phenomena of tlie Human Mind. By James Mill. ~ vols
8vo. London, 1820. Vol. i. t>
+ Tbe Philosophy of the Active and Moral Towers of Man. By Dngald o cn
2 vols. Edinburgh, 1828. Vol. i. y
+ Essays on the Powers of the Human Mind. 3 vols. Edinburgh, lol~.
iii. c. 00.
MENTAL DIETETICS. 03
refuse of fish. In tlie Philosophical Transactions, Dr. Tyson states that
a horse in London, accustomed to stand at a tavern door where oysters
Were left, acquired a liking for this strange food?crunched the shells,
and swallowed them with their contents. In Monro's narrative relating to
the coast of Coromandel, we learn that the dealers fatten their horses by
giving them balls composed of the boiled flesh of sheep's heads, mixed
with grain. A lamb, during a long sea-voyage, was induced to live upon
animal flesh; and afterwards, upon being turned into a pasture, refused
to crop the grass destined for its support. Even a young wood-pigeon
has been brought to relish flesh, and refuse every other kind of diet.
?The effects of these different kinds of food on the temper and disposi-
tion of such animals are curious. It has been remarked, upon good
authority, that herbivorous animals, which are trained to eat flesh,
become extremely ferocious; and that carnivorous animals fed upon a
Vegetahle diet, become, on the other hand, extremely gentle. We are-
informed by Bishop Heber, that the cattle which are fed upon fish
fatten rapidly; but the diet changes their nature, and renders them un-
manageably ferocious. It has been observed, too, that the Tartars and
?ther nations which live principally on animal food are warlike and
Cruel, while the Brahmin and Gentoo, subsisting chiefly on vegetable
diet, evince a peaceable and mild disposition. Fuseli, the painter, was in
the habit of eating raw meat, for the purpose of engendering in his
imagination horrible fancies. Dryden, it is said, did the same. It is
related that Mrs. liadcliffe, when writing the "Mysteries of Udolpho,"
t?ok heavy suppers, and ate uncooked meat. Voltaire humorously
Suggests, that Cromwell must have been labouring under a fit of indiges-
tion, when the idea of bringing Charles I. to the scaffold entered his
mind. When Lord Byron, in one of those capricious episodes of his
life which he frequently indulged in, entertained a horror of corpulency,
^e would accustom himself, for days, to live on biscuits and soda water;
and after this fit of abstemiousness was over, a dinner of beef-steaks
Was wont to make him savage. He would then argue, that eating flesh
excited men to war and bloodshed :
" Hence Pasiphae promoted breeding cattle,
To make the Cretans bloodier in battle."
His biographer says, " one day as I sat opposite to him, employed, I
suppose, rather earnestly over a beef-steak, after watching me for a few
seconds, he said in a grave tone, c Moore, don't you find eating beef-
steaks make you ferocious V "* The zeal with which Shelley, at one
Peiiod of his life, denounced the use of animal food, and the cruelty of
Life and Works of Lord Byron. By Thomas Moore. 17 vols. Murray, 1830.
Vo1-iv. p. 158.
94 MENTAL DIETETICS.
slaughtering animals, may be remembered. In the Utopian perfection
of the ideal world revealed by " Ianthe," in tlie poem of Queen Mab, be
describes a meat diet as giving rise to "the germs of misery, death,
disease, and crime;" and depicts man, when regenerated, living entirely
on the fruits of the earth:
" No longer now
He slays the lamb that looks him in the face,
And horribly devours his mangled flesh."
Tlie history of mankind sufficiently evinces, that not only individuals,
but even nations, have lived almost exclusively on vegetable food; it
has, however, been abundantly proved, that a mixed diet is the most
conducive to health : nevertheless, there are certain conditions of the
system, when the physician is called upon to substitute a purely vege-
table for a mixed animal diet, and, vice versd, a stimulating animal for
a vegetable regimen. In Watt's work on Diabetes, the case is detailed
of a student who had been the subject of severe depletory measures, and
whose intellect was raised in the inverse proportion to the reduction of
his body.
- " From my own observation," observes Dr. Tliackrali, "I am con-
vinced that by a low diet the intellect is often relieved and invigorated;
but, on the other hand, I have seen it improved by an opposite system.
A young gentleman who has tried various diets, assures me that his
mind is most capable of exertion when his body is most plentifully
nourished. He now takes flesh twice, and milk once a day. Dr. Stark,
on taking beef after a low diet, had ' a keenness for study. It is evident,
from these and similar observations, that the intellect may be powerfu
on contrasted diets, and that advantage has been derived from an in-
creased proportion of flesh, as well as from the opposite change. To
vigour of mind, a proper circulation through the brain, a supply of
blood healthy both in quality and volume, is always requisite. Now the
digestive organs of individuals vary so much in tlicir power of abstract-
ing nourishment from like qualities and kinds of aliments, that a diet
which is moderate to one will be excessive to another. One student,
living chiefly on vegetables, may have the brain weak or torpid from the
defect of good blood; another, taking a richer diet, may have the brain
oppressed^ from sanguineous excess. Let there be a mutual transfer ot
diet to suit the opposite constitutions of their digestive organs, and the
state of the brain in both individuals will be materially improved."*
The principles upon which the physiology of digestion is explained
must be clearly kept in view before we can appreciate these facts
psychologically, for in pursuing, step by step, the induction which
enables us to connect the changes which take place in the body with
Lectures on Diet and Digestion. By Charles Turner Tliackrali. London, 1S2.A*
p. 64.
MENTAL DIETETICS. 95
Cental phenomena, we must trace tlie mode in which these various
elementary substances are introduced into the system, and the influence
which every stage of this process has upon the mind. When the stomach
has received a certain supply of food, its bloodvessels and nerves are
stimulated to increased activity, whence arises an afflux of blood into its
mternal lining membrane, accompanied by a copious secretion of gastric
juice. This great afflux of blood, which takes place in the stomach and
intestines, diminishes the quantity of circulating fluid on the surface
and in other distant parts of the body, and is accompanied by an increase
?f nervous energy, concentrated from the centres of the nervous system.
Hence, delicate persons frequently experience a certain degree of cold-
ness, or chill, after taking a full meal; and most people feel disposed,
after dinner, to draw near to the fire. This, however, is not all: the
distended stomach curves round upon its axis, and presses upon the
descending aorta, which impedes the downward current of the circula-
tion. Hereby the blood accumulates in the vessels of the head; the face
ls observed to be unusually flushed; and sometimes the action of the
lungs being interfered with, occasions for awhile difficulty of breathing
and a sense of oppression in the region of the heart. This condition fully
accounts for the impaired intellectual activity which is experienced after
a plentiful repast, and, accordingly, the whole animal creation evinces
a disposition to remain quiet and sleep after eating. The lion, after
gorging himself to repletion, " smoothes his brindled mane," and lies
down in his forest solitude in a state of sluggish repose;?the wolf, with
his hide distended, betakes himself to his mountain-fastness; and slumbers
unconsciously until his system becomes again reduced, when, urged by the
pangs of hunger, he again goes forth, almost wasted to a skeleton, howl-
lng in search of prey; the boa-constrictor, gorged to excess, remains in
a state of stupor many days, and, until digestion has performed its office,
eannot rouse itself to activity. So is it with the gourmand: he, too,
Slnks into a profound and stertorous sleep, and not unfrequently falls a
Victim to apoplexy. When, however, the stomach has relieved itself of
^?s burthen,?when it diminishes in bulk, and no longer presses on the
aorta,?the respiration becomes free,?the circulation is again restored,
the nervous energy becomes equably diffused through the system, and
tlie intellectual faculties recover their accustomed vigour. A curious
observation is made by Dr. Paris: he says that, at the moment the chyle
ls poured into the blood, " the body becomes enlivened; then it is that
animals are roused from that repose into which they had subsided during
the earlier stages of digestion, and betake themselves to action?then
?j ? ? O
ls that civilized man feels an aptitude for exertion."* We believe,
A Treatise on Diet. By J. A. Paris, M.D. 2nd Edition. London, 1827. p. ill*
"00 MENTAL DIETETICS.
however, tlie relief is more immediate than this, and is experienced as
soon as the.stomach is partially unburtliened, otherwise, considering the
period which various aliments take to he digested, man would, after
-eating, he much longer than he is, indisposed to activity.* The nutritive
particles of the food being thus, in the form of chyle, mixed with the
blood, and supplying it with the elements which enable it to repair
the waste of the animal system, it is obvious that the health both
of the body and of the mind must depend 011 the quality and quantity of
the vital stream. According to Lecanu, the proportion of the red glo-
bules of the blood may be regarded as a measure of vital energy, for
the action of the serum and of the globules on the nervous system is very
different. The former scarcely excites it, the latter do so powerfully.
Now those causes which tend to increase the mass of blood, tend also to
increase the proportion of red globules; whilst those which tend to dimi-
nish the mass of blood, tend to diminish the proportion of the globules.t
The result is obvious. A large quantity of stimulating animal food,
without a proper amount of exercise, augments the number of the red
globules, and diminishes the aqueous part of the blood. Hence the
nervous system becomes oppressed, the brain frequently congested, and
the intellectual faculties no longer enjoy their wonted activity. In the
meantime, the system endeavours to relieve itself by throwing a counter-
stimulus upon certain other organs, the functions of which are morbidly
increased. The blood in such cases becomes preternaturally thickened,
and its coagulum unusually firm. | On the other hand, if the system
be not supplied with the requisite amount of nutrition, the blood be-
comes, by the loss of its red corpuscules, impoverished in quality, and in
cases of extreme abstinence diminished in quantity. In these cases the
powers of the mind soon become enfeebled. " Among the poorer classes
of children (observes Dr. Andrew Combe), the children as well as the
* From a Table drawn out bv Dr. Beaumont, we learn that the mean time of
digestion in the stomach (or chymificalioit) of various articles of food, is as follows-
11. #?
Roast turkey
Roast pig ~ Tr
Venison steak 1 3J
Fricasseed chicken 2
Cheese, old and strong .... -3
Hashed meat ^ n
Boiled tripe 1 ^
Boiled eggs, soft (
- ? , Boiled cabbage *
, ofo Per"^ntS and 0bservati?ns?n the Gastric Juice. By W. Beaumont. Edinburgh
1838. p. o 1. J
w + ?.Ianu1ai7?/ CLemistry-'" By William Thomas Brande- 2 vols. London, 1818.
Vol. 11. p. 1172.
+ An Inquiry into the Nature and Properties of the Blood in Health and in Disease-
By Charles Turner lhackrah. Edited by Thomas Wright, M.D. London, I8%t-
"P. XJ/v. ?
Roast beef . . "? "?
Beef steak, broiled ".'"''on
Salt beef, boiled "
Boiled mutton ?!!""* o n
Boiled salt pork
Boiled fowl 7
Roast fowl ??.."in
Roast duck ???"!"* x n
'Boiled turkey ... . * * 9 o*
MENTAL DIETETICS. 97
parents suffer much, both physically and morally, from insufficient food.
Their diet being chiefly of a vegetable nature, and consisting of a scanty
allowance of porridge, potatoes and soups, with very little butclier's-
111 cat, is far from adequate to carry on vigorous growth in the young
0r repair waste in adults; hence arise in the former an imperfect deve-
lopment of the body, a corresponding deficiency of mental power, and
a diminished capability of resisting the causes of disease. In work-
houses and other charitable institutions, ample evidence of these defi-
ciencies obtrudes itself upon our notice, in the weak and stunted forms
and very moderate capacities of the children. Under an impoverished
diet, indeed, the moral and intellectual capacity is deteriorated as cer-
tainly as the bodily; and full exposition of the fact, and of the principles
involved in it, would be a great public benefit. When Sir John Frank-
in and his companions were reduced to a state of starvation at F ort
-Enterprise, in November, 1821, lie was struck with the signs of weak-
ness of intellect which they exhibited. I observed, says he, that as
?nr strength decayed our minds exhibited symptoms of weakness,
evinced by a kind of unreasonable pettishness with each other. Each
?f us thought the other weaker in intellect than himself, and more in
need of advice and assistance. So trifling a circumstance as a change of
P^ace, recommended as being warmer and more comfortable, and refused
i'y the other from dread of motion, frequently called forth fretful ex-
pressions, which were no sooner uttered than atoned for?to be repeated
Perhaps in the course of a few minutes. The same thing often occurred
When we endeavoured to assist each other in carrying Avood to the fire;
none of us were willing to receive assistance, although the task was dis-
I)roportioned to his strength. On one occasion, Hepburn was so con-
vineed of this waywardness, that lie exclaimed?' Dear me, if we are
spared to return to England I wonder if we shall recover our under-
standings.' This narrative, (adds Dr. Combe,) affords a striking con-
firmation of the truth, that unless the brain be adequately nourished and
stimulated by the blood, the mental faculties cannot display that energy
which characterises them in opposite conditions."*
In cases of extreme abstinence, the body, not being supported by
nourishment from without, preys as it were upon itself; the alimentary
eanal becomes contracted; the muscular walls close on the empty
abdomen; the secretions become depraved, the gastric and pancreatic
Juices, and even serum of the peritoneum, partially absorbed, and the
blood becomes diminished in volume and deteriorated. The first effect
?t starvation is the disappearance of the fat, the elements of which
(earbon and hydrogen) are given off through the skin and lungs, having
* The Physiology of Digestion. By Dr. Andrew Combe, M.D. Edited by James
L?xe, M.D. " Edinburgh, 1849. p. 108.
NO. XIII. II
<jg MENTAL DIETETICS.
served to support respiration. The cellular tissue embedded, between the
muscles becomes absorbed, the whole body emaciated; " it is not, how
ever, the fat only," says Liebig, "which disappears, but also, bj e
grees, all such of the solids as are capable of being dissolved. n
the wasted bodies of those who have suffered from starvation, t ie
muscles are shrunk and unnaturally soft, and have lost their con
tractility; all those parts of the body which were capable of entenn0
into the state of motion have served to protect the remainder of t ie
frame from the destructive influence of the atmosphere. Towards t ie
-end, the particles of the brain begin to undergo the process of oxidation;
.and delirium, mania, and death close the scene; that is to saj, al re
sistance to the oxidizing power of the atmospheric oxygen ceases, an
the chemical process of eremacausis or decay commences, in which ev cry
part of the body, the bones excepted, enters into combination wi 1
?oxygen. The time which is required to cause death by starvation, e
pends on the amount of fat in the body, on the degree of cxeicise, as
in labour or exertion of any kind; on the temperature of the air, and,
finally, on the presence or absence of water. Through the skin ant
lungs there escapes a certain quantity of water, and as^ the presence
water is essential to the continuation of the vital motions, its *SS1P
tion hastens death. Cases have occurred in which a full SUPP J 0 wa
being accessible to the sufferer, death has not occurred ti a ter
lapse of twenty days; and in one case, life was sustained in t ns w
for the period of sixty days."* . . i
In the midst of all this disorganization and dissolution, the mm
frequently retains its self-possession with marvellous perspicuity, an
is enabled to recount with painful accuracy the physical suffering
to which it is subjected. Some years ago a German merchant, age
32, who was depressed by severe reverses of fortune, formct t
resolution of destroying himself by abstinence, and with that vie
repaired, on the 15tli September, 1818, to an unfrequented wood,
where he constructed a hut of boughs, and remained without too
until the 3rd of October following, when he was found by the lan
lord of a neighbouring public house, still alive, but very feeble, speec
less, and insensible. Broth, with the yolk of an egg, was given hn?>
which he swallowed with difficulty and died immediately. In the pocke
?of the unfortunate man was found a journal written in pencil, singu
in its kind, giving a narrative of his feelings, and which may be regardc
as a curious psychological fragment. It begins thus: " The generous
philanthropist, who shall one day find me here after my death, is requeste
to inter me; and in consideration of this service, to keep my clothes,
purse, knife, and letter-case. I moreover observe, that I am no suici e,
* Animal Chemistry, or Chemistry in its relations to Physiology and Pathology*
By Justin Liebig, M.D. Edited by William Gregory, M.D. London, 1843. p- ~7,
MENTAL DIETETICS. 99
tut have died of hunger, because, through wicked men, I have lost the
whole of my very considerable property, and am unwilling to become a
burthen to my friends." The next remark is dated September 17, the
second day of abstinence : " I yet live; but how have I been soaked
during the night, and how cold has it been ! O God ! when will my
sufferings terminate ? No human being has been seen here for three
days?only some birds." The next extract continues: " And again
three days, and I have been so soaked during the night that my clothes
to-day are not yet dry. How hard is this, no one knows; and my last
hour must soon arrive. Doubtless during the heavy rain a little water
has got into my throat, but the thirst is not to be slaked with water;
Moreover, I have had none even of this for six days, since I am no longer
able to move from the place. Yesterday, for the first time, during the
eternity which, alas ! I have already passed here, a man approached me
within the distance of eight or ten paces. He was certainly a shepherd.
I saluted him in silence; and he returned it in the same manner.
-Probably he will find me after my death. Finally, I here protest before
the all-wise God, that notwithstanding all the misfortunes which I have
suffered from my youth, I yet die very unwillingly; although necessity
has imperiously driven me to it. Nevertheless, I pray for it. Father,
forgive him, for he knows not what he does. More can I not write, for
faintness and spasms, and this will be the last. Dated near Forest by
the side of the Goat public house, September 29, 1818. J. F. N."*
Iu this case, amidst all his physical distress, the unhappy individual
Was enabled to note down his sufferings until the fourteenth day of
abstinence; the sensation of cold and faintness arose obviously from
diminished nervous energy, and the thirst, from reduction in the quantity
aud quality of the blood. "Drink, drink,"?"Water, water," is the last
agonizing cry of the poor victim, dying, while he writhes tortured upon
the rack.
Having thus far explained the physiological principles which govern
the assimilation of the elements of nutrition derived from solid ali-
ments, we are prepared to consider the physiological and psychological
effects of those stimulants which, principally in a fluid form, are com-
monly used as articles of diet.
The universality of the appetite for intoxicating drinks is a curious
fact in the history of our species. " It seems," says Dr. Robertson,
to have been one of the first exertions of human ingenuity to dis-
cover some composition of an intoxicating quality; and there is
hardly any nation so rude, or so destitute of invention, as not to
lave succeeded in this fatal research."i* The juice of the grape was
Hufeland's Journal. Apml Thaekrali. Op. ciL, p. 42.
+ History of America, vol. i., p. 390. 4to. Edinburgh. Apud Dugald Stewart,
UJ>. cit.; Vol. i., p. 18.
100 MENTAL DIETETICS.
undoubtedly tlie first intoxicating beverage known to mankind; hence
Bacchus, after liis education by the Nyssean nymplis, is said to have
traversed nearly the whole globe, introducing the culture of the vine,
and diffusing refinement wherever he went. The Greeks and Romans
were certainly ignorant of ardent spirits; but the use of the still
was known to Geber in the seventh century, who, in a curious
book entitled " Liber Investigations Magisterii," describes the process
of distillation by alembics, " per descensorium et per filtrum." The art
of distillation was long preserved in profound secrecy by the alclicmists,
and it is affirmed by the erudite in these matters, that Raymond Lull)'?
who flourished in the thirteenth century, was the first who gave the
name of Alcohol to the spirit of wine so obtained. For two or three
centuries after its discovery, alcohol was used only as a medicine; and
the physicians of those days, attributing to it the extraordinary property
of prolonging life, designated it the elixir vita;, and aqua vita;. Hence,
the French still designate their Cognac " eau de vie." Without enter-
ing into minute chemical details, the process of fermentation, under its
simplest conditions, consists in adding a certain quantity of yeast or
other ferment to an aqueous solution of sugar, which, subjected to a
certain temperature?say between 70 and 80 Falir.?resolves itself into
carbonic acid, sugar, and alcohol. The carbonic acid is evolved, the
sugar, provided a due temperature be maintained, soon disappears, and
alcohol is gradually formed.
Accordingly brandy, rum, gin, whiskey, are the spirituous products
obtained by distilling fermented liquors, and most commonly used as
articles of exhilarating luxury,t and although they differ very materially
* Brande, Op. ext., p. 1017.
+ Brandy is the result of the distillation of wine, and its qualities vary with tlie land
of wine from which it is obtained, and the precaution with which it is distilled. I'?
flavour and fragrancy are derived from a portion of essential oil, and of an etlierial
product, which pass over along with the alcohol and water in the process of distills*
tion. Its average sp. grav. is 0-825 at 00?. It contains about 03 per cent, of alcohol)
or 42 per cent, of absolute alcohol. (Sp. grav. 0'791.)
Bum is distilled in the West and East Indies from a fermented mixture of molasses
and water, with the skimmings from the sugar boilers, and the lees or spirit-wasli
former distillations. Its peculiar flavour is ascribed to an oily product, formed pr?*
bablv in the process of fermentation, to which its sudorific property may probably b?
111 S err, Its average strength is 53 to 54= per cent, of alcohol (sp. grav. 0'8~y
at 00?), or about 42 per cent, of absolute alcohol.
Gin, oi ene\a from genievre, juniper?is prepared from different kinds of e?rU
spirit;1 was originally largely imported from Holland, and hence known as Hollands,
oi o an gin. ts flavour is derived from juniper berries, or the essential oil0
juniper which contributes to its diuretic qualities. ' .
Wlnskey, a term said to be derived from the Irish usquebaugh, is also a corn spi"1'
and when genuine its characteristic flavour is derived from the malt used in its man"'
faeture having been dried over pent or turf fires ; but this odour and flavour of burned
tin oi pea leec is lequently given to raw corn spirit by impregnating it with Pea
smoke. The average strength of genuine Scotch and Irish whiskev amounts to about
?>4 per cent, of alcohol (sp. grav. 0-825 at 00?). Brande, Op. cit., vol. ii., p. 1050. '
MENTAL DIETETICS. 101
from each other, and possess very different qualities?inasmuch as
brandy is simply cordial and stomachic; rum, heating and sudorific;
"Whiskey and gin, diuretic ; yet the stimulating quality of each depends
entirely on the quantity of alcohol which enters into its composition.
^Vines, too, although containing the same absolute amount of spirit,
vary materially in their qualities and stimulating effects. To what is this
to he attributed? Dr. Paris accounts for it by supposing that, in some
wines, the alcohol is not only more intimately mixed with water, but its
combination with the extractive matter is more perfect than in other
wines; consequently the spirit is incapable of exercising its deleterious
effects before it becomes altered in its properties and partially digested.
It follows, therefore, that from the peculiar state of the digestive organs,
the intoxicating effcct of the same wine will vary at different times in.
the same individual. Hence, also, imperfectly-fermented spirits, apart
from any noxious ingredients with which they may be adulterated, will
have a very deleterious effect upon the animal economy. Independent,
too, of the alcohol itself, their influence will be very much modified by
the various acid, saccharine, mucilaginous, and other adventitious matters,
Which enter into their composition. Hence the practice, so generally
adopted in Scotland and Ireland, of dissolving sugar in boiling water
before adding the whiskey, is founded upon correct chemical principles*
for the condensation between the fluids is hereby greater, and the combi-
nation of the spirit with the saccharine matter held in solution more
complete. It is also a matter of common observation, that the excite-
ment produced by one kind of wine or spirit differs very materially
from another. The wines of Oporto give rise, when drank to excess,
to an excitement of a sluggish nature, very different from that de-
rived from sparkling champagne, which intoxicates very speedily,
because the small quantity of alcohol which this wine contains rises up
along with the bubbles of the carbonic acid gas in a volatile state, pro-
ducing an excitement of a more lively and agreeable character, and of
shorter duration, than that which is caused by any other species of
wine.* The different effect which different alcoholic liquors have upon
the mind is a matter of common observation ; but independent of their
direct action on the nervous system, which may be accounted for upon,
chemical and physiological principles, the peculiar idiosyncracy of
each individual mind must be taken largely into account. " It is well
known," says Coleridge, "how nearly allied to frenzy are the effects of
spirituous liquors 011 men who have strong feelings and few ideas. The
quantity of stimulus which, taken by a man of education, surely as it
Io./tistory of Wines, Ancient and Modern. By A. Henderson, M.D. London,
p. 353.
IQ2 MENTAL DIETETICS.
?will hasten the decay of all liis powers, would yet for the time onlj call
them into full energy,
" And only till unmeclianized 1)}' death, ^
Make tlie pipe \ocal to the player's breath ;
the same quantity renders an uneducated man a frantic wild beast.
Nor do these effects cease with temporary intoxication; but engen er
habits of restlessness, a proneness to turbulent feelings even when ie
man is sober; in short, a general inflammability of temper, nor can 1
be denied, whatever may be its causes, that there exists a cer a
nationality of constitution, which occasions the poison of spirit no
drinks to act with greater malignity in some countries tlian in ot lers.
The propensities of individuals, and their peculiar habits o 1mug
and feeling, give a corresponding tone to the character of t leir in
ebriation?the lover of poetry spouts verses the orator dec aims
disappointed politician pours forth invectives against his part), wn
he whose mind is demoralized gives way to obscene jesting, pro an
language, and closes his night's debauch in some such stew o miqui
as Hogarth has depicted in his " Harlot s Progress. ? ,,
Among the various expedients that have been lesorte to or
purpose of abolishing this vice, the establishment rf temperanc
societies was some years ago adopted; and, especial y in menca ^
Ireland, have been of essential service; but the pro 1 ltion pnnc P
we are afraid scarcely strikes at the root of the evil. jnma e y
zealous desire of assisting the " Temperance movement, as 1 ias
called, a worthy individual, Mr. Eaton, early in the year 1848, advertise
a prize of one hundred guineas for the best essay 011 the so an
Abuse of Alcoholic Liquors in Health and in Disease;" and although wc
agree with our able contemporary the Atlienseum, that the competition
for prizes adjudicated upon the shrine of Mammon does not sugges
the highest motives for making literary or scientific researches, yet we
have been much gratified by the perusal of the two very able essujs
which have on this occasion been called forth. The successful can-
didate to whom, we are informed, the prize was unanimously awardc ,
was Dr. Carpenter; and the next best essay, in the opinion of tie
umpires, was by Dr. Spencer Thomson; both are published, and tit-
titles of the works are annexed to the present article. Dr. Carpenter
had already signalized himself as one of the champions of tota
abstinence, and, as might be anticipated, he has brought all his scientific
knowledge and practical experience to bear, with lawyer-like sagacity,
upon his brief, wherefore his evidence and argumentation appear to be
impressed with an ex parte colouring, which is, in a scientific point o
* Essays on his own Times, forming a second Series of the Friend. By S. *'?
Coleridge. Edited by his Daughter. 3 vols. London, 1850. Vol.iii. p. 795.
MENTAL DIETETICS. 103'
view, to be regretted. The interests of science ought not to be
enlisted, in a special-pleading spirit, to uphold in a one-sided manner
any popular cause, particularly one that is not founded 011 the basis
of true philososophy; for the abuse of alcoholic liquors 110 human being
Would undertake to defend, and to found a prohibition of any article of
consumption upon its abuse is very illogical. Dr. Carpenter, there-
fore, has been arraigned before the bar of the profession for having
promulgated views respecting the exhibition of alcoholic stimuli, which
are not in accordance with sound principles of physiology and patho-
logy. The essay of Dr. Thomson is certainly written in a more
impartial tone; but both contain much valuable information, and they
^ay be considered valuable contributions to medical literature. The
Prohibition-principle Dr. Carpenter himself is, under certain contin-
gencies, unable to maintain ; lie is forced, with a reluctant grace,
to admit that "alcoholic liquors may be occasionally had recourse
to with advantagetherefore there is here a flaw in his indictment
a broken link in his chain of argument. Far more philosophical
Would it be to deal with the question in a more comprehensive spirit,
ai*d deter people from committing excess, by pointing out the moral
aad physical evils which every form of intemperance infallibly produces.
The deleterious chemico-physiological cfleets of alcohol on the blood
atul nervous system, and the lamentable disintegration and ruin which it
entails on the intellectual faculties, suggest a more awful warning to the
mind of a reflecting man, than the skeleton itself which was introduced
as a memento mori at the feasts of the Egyptians.
The physiological effects of alcohol 011 the system have been very
carefully investigated, and it is now clearly ascertained that the
spirit is absorbed by the blood-vessels of the stomach, and enters
into the current of the circulation; " owing to its volatility," says
Liebig, " and the ease with which its vapour permeates animal mem-
branes and tissues, alcohol can spread throughout the body in all direc-
tions."'- "We are informed by Dr. Ogsten of Aberdeen, that he examined
the body of a woman, aged forty, who had drowned herself when intoxi-
cated ; and in addition to the usual appearances found in drowned per-
sons, he and the other medical gentlemen present discovered in the
^ entricles of the brain four ounces of a fluid, having all the physical
qualities of alcohol.+ In the Illinois Medical and Surgical Journal, a
case is recorded of the examination of a man who was found drowned,-
after having been drinking many days, and a fluid giving out a strong
alcoholic odour was discovered in the ventricles of the brain. J
* Liebig, Op. cit., p. 230.
+ Edinburgh Medical aud Surgical Journal, 1833. vol. xl. p. 293.
J Medical Times. Vol. xii., p. 320.
104 MENTAL DIETETICS.
Dr. Percy injected a quantity of strong alcoliol into tlie stomach
of a spaniel, which immediately died; and afterwards succeeded m
obtaining, by distillation, a portion of the spirit from the brain. I11
order to discover whether drinks are absorbed with the chyle, Magendie
made a dog swallow a quantity of diluted spirit with his food; in half
an hour afterwards the chyle was examined, which exhibited no trace of
alcohol; but the blood exhaled a strong odour of it, and by distillation
yielded a considerable quantity.* There can be no doubt, therefore,
that when alcohol, whether in the form of wine or spirituous liquid, is
introduced into the stomach, it is immediately and rapidly aosorbed;
but this is not all?it is also clearly proved that, without entering into
the circulation, alcohol will, through the medium of the nerves, act
directly on the brain, and produce instant death. Or til a relates the case
of a soldier who drank eight pints of brandy for a wager, and died
instantly.f Only a few years ago a waterman, in attendance upon a
cab-stand in the Haymarket, drank, for a bribe of five shillings, a whole
bottle of gin at a single draught, and immediately dropped down in-
sensible and died. In some cases death takes place, as Dr. Ogsten well
describes, from asphyxia; the increased quantity of blood in the brain
produces pressure at its base; the functions of the respiratory nerves
thereby become suspended?the motions of the chest are impeded
the lungs congested, and the blood, 110 longer receiving the chemical
changes necessary for circulation, the heart, from the want ot its ordinary
stimulus, contracts more and more feebly, until its irritability becomes
exhausted, and life extinguished. J Bearing in mind these very import-
ant physiological facts, we must be prepared to expect that the alcoholic
elements introduced into the blood, and brought into immediate contact
Avith the tissues of different organs, will derange the functions which
they are severally destined to perform, and the amount and character of
the mischief so produced will correspond with, and be modified by, the
peculiarities of their individual organic structure. With these facts before
us, Avlien we consider the delicate structure of the brain, as revealed to
us by the progress of microscopic anatomy, Ave must be prepared for the
physical and mental derangement Avhich must arise, either from the
alcohol itself, or its elements, being brought into direct contact with the
vesicular neurine or granular matter entering into the composition of its
Avhite and grey substance. According to our most recent physiological
vieAVS, the vesicular matter is the source of nervous poAver, and asso-
ciated, as the material instrument of the mind, Avitli all its manifestations,
Avhether in the simple exercise of perception, or the more complicated
operations of the thinking principle. We are then to conceive the
* lliomson, Op. cit.y 43. + Toxicologic Generate. T. ii. p.
J Dr. Ogsten, loc. cit., p.
MENTAL DIETETICS. . 10^
simple or organic structure dedicated to tliis liigli function brought into
contact with irritating and noxious elements. The result must obvi-
ously be a disturbance in the manifestations of the mind proportioned
to the organic derangements so produced, and without, therefore, taking
a materialistic view of the changes which take place, the obliteration of
s?me, and the derangement of other of the intellectual faculties, are hereby
? . ?
satisfactorily accounted for. It is certain, tbat when the circulation in
the grey matter of the convolutions is retarded by congestion or accele-
rated by unwonted stimulation, there is a corresponding state of stupor
?r mental activity, amounting even to delirium, produced; and, indeed,
has been suggested by some of our most eminent physiologists, that
" every idea of the mind is associated with a corresponding change in
some part or parts of the vesicular surface. In the first stage of
intoxication, there is arterial acceleration through the brain; the coun-
tenance becomes animated, the face flushed, the eye sparkles with
brilliancy, and there is a general exaltation of nervous energy. It is
now, says the late accomplished Dr. Macnish, that " the thoughts which
emanate from their prolific tabernacle are more fervid and original than
ever, they rush out with augmented copiousness, and sparkle over the
Understanding like the Aurora Borealis, or the eccentric scintillations of
i'ght upon a summer cloud. In a word, the organ is excited to a high
^t not a diseased action, for this is coupled with pain, and instead of
pleasurable produces afflicting ideas. But its energies, like those of any
other part are apt to be over excited. "\\ hen this takes place, the balancG
broken; the mind gets tumultuous and disordered, and the ideas
^consistent and absurd."f Then follows the second stage of intoxication,
consequent on excessive stimulation; there is now venous retardation
characterized by stupor?languor, drowsiness, obscurity of vision and
au incapacity of exercising volition. The intellectual faculties are now
completely prostrated. Lastly comes the stage of cerebral compression
??-the head drops on the chest, the eyes lose their expression, the heart
labours, the breathing is stentorious, and a state of coma, more or less
complete, succeeds, which not unfrequently terminates in death. In
tins state some prognosis may be gathered from the condition of
the iris. Mr. Bedingfield has made this observation, " If the iris
retain its contractile power, the patient will generally recover, how-
ever overpowered the senses may be?if, 011 the contrary, it remain in a
state of extreme dilation when a strong light is directed upon it, only a
feeble hope of recovery can be entertained."^
?j,. Physiological Anatomy and Physiology of Man. By Robert Bentley Todd,
^?Jj-.und \v. Bowman. 2 vols. London, 1847. Vol. i. p. 004.
P llf/'6 Anat0my Brunkcnncss. By Robert Macnish, LL.D. Glasgow, 1838,
t Thomson, Op. cit.
10G MENTAL DIETETICS.
Independent, "however, of tlie symptoms produced by the disturbed
circulation within the brain, Dr. Thackrali conceived that the nervous
substance itself possessed some peculiar affinity for alcohol; and Dr.
Carpenter attributes a " selective power" as he terms it, to the cerebrum,
which may account for the intellectual powers being affected before any
disorder of sensation or motion manifests itself.* We do not apprehend
that this hypothesis is required to explain these phenomena which arc
consequent upon over-stimulation, for analogous effects are produced on
the nervous system by opium, hashish, tobacco, and other neurotic
stimulants.
The fact of alcohol being brought into contact, through the circulation,
with the molecular structure of the brain, and other nervous centrcs, is
quite sufficient to account for the series of pathological and psychological
changes which terminate in permanent organic lesion and insanity-
There can be no doubt, that the increased activity of the circulation
through the brain, gives rise, in the first instance, to that rapid flow of
ideas which seems to overwhelm the reflective faculties. Opportunities
have occurred of observing the effect of increased circulation upon men-
tal phenomena. Sir Astley Cooper relates the case of a young gentle-
man brought to him who had lost a portion of his skull just above the
eyebrow. " On examining the head," says Sir Astley Cooper, " I dis-
tinctly saw the pulsation of the brain Avas regular and slow; but when
he was agitated by opposition to his wishes, the blood was directly sent
with increased force to the brain, the pulsation became frequent and
violent.t Dr. Caldwell relates the case of a young woman who had
lost a large portion of her scalp, skull-bone, and dura mater, and a coi-
responding portion of brain was laid bare, and open to inspection-
"When she was in a dreamless sleep, her brain was motionless and la)
within the cranium; but when her sleep was imperfect, and she was
agitated by dreams, her brain moved, and protruded without the cranium,
forming cerebral hernia. In vivid dreams, reported as such by herself,
the protrusion was considerable, but when she was perfectly awake,
especially if engaged in active thought or sprightly conversation, the
protrusion was still greater."'! This increase in the activity of the cii-
culation through the brain, accounts for the intellectual excitement
observed, not only in the early stages of insanity, but on the accession
of inflammation, and to this cause may perhaps be ascribed the clair
voyance of the dying, so admirably described in the kuvooq of Aretseus-?
* Dr. Carpenter, Op. cit. p. 20.
+ Sir Astley Cooper's Lectures on Surgery. Edited bv Tyrrel. Vol. i. p-
London. b J "
J I lie I rinciples of 1 hysiology applied to the preservation of Health. By Andrei
Combe, M.D. p. 37. Edinburgh, 1841.
? Essays and Orations. By Sir Henry Ilalford. London, 1833, p. 81.
MENTAL DIETETICS. 107
In this state of mental excitement, a peculiar lucidity or conscious ex-
altation of many of tlie intellectual faculties occurs, which is attended
"With the most agreeable sensations.
Habitual tippling, or a systematic recourse to intoxicating liquids,
gives rise to a chronic form of mental disease, which is characterised by
a marked perversion of all the moral feelings. Such persons, without
betraying any positive symptoms of drunkenness, are, nevertheless, under
the influence of an excitement which produces in them an irritability of
temper and a waywardness of disposition, which prompts them to com-
mit acts of indiscretion which frequently become matters of judicial
investigation. Was he drunk, or was lie sober1? He was apparently
Perfectly collected, and rational; but notwithstanding this, he may have
been under the influence of alcoholic excitement, albeit the faculties of
the understanding may not manifestly have been deranged. This form
?f insidious excitement?this state, which is an intermediate condition
between sobrietv and insobriety?should be carefully watched and
guarded against in persons holding responsible situations and positions
trust and danger on board steam-vessels, and having the manage-
ment of railway engines, etc. In the recent report of the Committee
the House of Commons on the supply and use of spirits in the navy,
Captain Drew cites the case of a man who, in a state ot excitement, witli-
?nt drunkenness, was continually committing acts of insubordination, for
"Which he was so frequently flogged, that despairing of his reformation
the captain determined on invaliding him; but being advised by the
snrgeon that he was a fine healthy young man, and not a fit subject to
"e invalided, his allowance of grog was altogether stopped, and the
result was, that he became completely an altered man, and not a com-
plaint was made against him while he remained in the ship. Upon cross-
examination the captain stated, that " he had never had any suspicion
?f his being drunk; he never showed any indications of being in liquor,"
nevertheless, he was " in a state of constant excitement from his allow-
ance, which induced him to do nothing and constantly commit acts of
disobedience."* Captain Hamilton, in the same report, says, " that
drunkenness is the cause of nearly all the punishments on board a ship is
So Well known that I need not repeat what has so often been said; but
I Would go further, and add, that where people do not even get drunk,
habitual spirit-drinking produces an irritability of temper in the seamen
and the officers that is the cause of much evil in the daily routine of
duty."-)- This form of mental disease frequently terminates in homicidal
insanity; unless apoplexy, paralysis, or delirium tremens, supervene, and
Report of tlie Committee appointed to Inquire into the supply of Spirits in tlie
1850, p. 13.
+ Ibid, p 20.
jOg MENTAL DIETETICS.
lead to a fatal result. The case is still fresh in tlie recollection of the
public of a captain of a merchant-vessel, who, suffering under this form
of disease, wounded and cruelly maimed many of his crew, and who is
now an inmate of Bethlehem Hospital.
The practice of taking opium to exhilarate the spirits is not, "\\e have
reason to believe, so common now in this country as it was some years
ago. Fashion controls even vice in polished society. When it became
whispered abroad, that some few eminent statesmen and literary men o
distinction indulged occasionally in this pernicious habit, even lac ies
moving in the higher circles of the aristocracy imagined that this " fata
drug" must possess some Circean charm, and had recourse to it or t ie
purpose of enabling them to sustain the excitement necessary for o0111o
through the fatigue of midnight routs, and parties succeeding eac
other the same night with dazzling rapidity. The publication o
that charming and very remarkable work, " The Confessions o an
English Opium-Eater," contributed rather to extend than suppress the
pernicious practice; for, albeit the accomplished autlioi depictec in
fearful colours the "pains of opium," yet the pleasures and ti an scent en a^
happiness which he describes himself to have cxpciience unn^ 11
?reveries,?the visions which opened before him, the apoca )pse o
spiritual and inner world, are described with such fascinating e oquenc ,
that liis voice of warning was in reality that of the temptei, invi o
others to participate in his mystic and dread enjo) ment. c oui se v
knew many young men who injured their health by having, experime
ally, recourse to it, forgetting entirely that the chaiactei of t ic exci
ment so produced, must depend on the mental idiosyncrasy and pie\iou
habits of thought of every individual. "If a man, observes - r.
^uincev, " whose talk is of oxen, should become an opium-eater, 1
probability is, that (if he is not too dull to dream at all) lie will dream
about oxen;" so, too, it is not to be anticipated that Oriental imagery,
the pagodas of China,?the temples of Isis and Osiris,?the domes an
cupolas of Jerusalem,?and the solemn music of anthems celebrating
religious festivals, will crowd upon a mind which is habitually unimagi-
native. We regard the " Confessions of an English Opium-Eater as a
psychological romance, although it be a true autobiographical accoun
of those mental phenomena which occurred to a mind peculiarly con-
stituted, accustomed in its waking state to habits of profound thought,
and commanding a vast store of ancient and modern learning, tincture
with a certain degree of mysticism derived from the school of Ivant>
Eichte, and other German philosophers. We may truly say, that
De Quincey is one of the most remarkable men we ever had the plca~
sure of meeting; his conversation is always characterised by the cleares
reasoning and the happiest choice of language; he is a profound Grcc ^
MENTAL DIETETICS. 109
scholar, and liis erudition extends through the history of all countries;
few men are better acquainted with Eastern literature, and, although ifc
ls some five-and-twenty years since we Ave re in the habit of frequently
meeting him, it gives us unfeigned satisfaction to learn that he has
entirely given up the use of opium, and is in the enjoyment of excellent
health.
The psychological effects of alcoholic or vinous potations differ mate-
rially from those arising from the use, or rather, the abuse of opium.
" The pleasure given by wine," we quote the ' Confessions of an
Opium-Eater,' " is always mounting and tending to a crisis, after which
it declines; that from opium, when once generated, is stationary for
eight or ten hours: the first, to borrow a technical distinction from
Medicine, is a case of acute, the second, a case of chronic pleasure; the
?ne is a "flame, the other a steady and equable glare. But the main
distinction lies in this, that whereas wine disorders the mental faculties,
?pium, on the contrary (if taken in a proper manner) introduces
amongst them the most exquisite order, legislation, and harmony.
Wine robs a man of his self-possession, opium greatly invigorates it.;
wine unsettles and clouds the judgment, and gives a preternatural
brightness and a vivid exaltation to the contempts and admirations,?
the loves and the hatreds of the drinkers; opium, on the contrary,
communicates serenity and equipoise to all the faculties active or passive;
a_nd, with respect to the temper and moral feelings in general, it gives
simply that vital warmth which is approved by the judgment, and
Which would probably always accompany a bodily constitution of
primaeval or antediluvian healthWine constantly leads a man
to the brink of absurdity and extravagance, and beyond a certain point
Jt is sure to volatilize and to disperse the intellectual energies; whereas,
?pium always serves to compose what had been agitated, and concen-
trate what had been distracted."*
To counterbalance, however, these apparent advantages of the effects
opium over wine, opium-eating may be described as, strictly speak-
" a solitary vice."
" The opium-eater," observes our author, " naturally seeks solitxide
ai*d silence as indispensable conditions of those trances or profoundest
reveries which are the crown and consummation of what opium can do
tor nature;" but even in this state of sublunary bliss, it is confessed
that, " his intellectual apprehension of what is possible infinitely outruns
ls power, not of execution only, but even of power to attempt: he lies
gilder the weight of incubus, and night-mare; he lies in sight of all that
le would fain perform, just as a man forcibly confined to his bed by the
Mortal languor of a relaxing disease, who is compelled to witness injury
?r outrage offered to some object of his tenderest love?he curses the
spells that chain him down from motion;?he would lay down his life if
* Confessions of an English Opium Eater. London, 1S20. p. 93.
110 MENTAL DIETETICS.
he might get up and walk?but lie is powerless as an infant, and cannot
attempt to rise." *
A state very analogous to tliis is produced hy various preparations
of the Indian hemp?the Cannabio Indica, known under the name of
Hashish, from which are prepared Sidhee or Bang, Majoon, and several
forms of extract, t '
In a very interesting work recently published by Mr. Urquhart, the
psychological effects of this drug are thus described : " The first time I
took it was about seven in the morning, and in an hour and a half after
I perceived a heaviness of the head, wandering of the mind, and an
apprehension that I was going to faint. I thence passed into a state of
half trance, from which I awoke suddenly and was much refreshed.
The impression was that of wandering out of myself. I had two
beings; and there were two distinct and concurrent trains of ideas.
Images came floating before me?not the figures of a dream, but those
that seem to play before the eye when it is closed, and with those images
were strangely mixed the sounds of a guitar which was being played iu
an adjoining room; the sound seemed to cluster in, and pass away with
the figures on the retina. The music of the wretched performance was
heavenly, and seemed to proceed from a full orchestra, and to be rever-
berated through long halls of mountains. These figures and sounds
were again connected with metaphysical reflections, which also like the
sounds clustered themselves into trains of thought, which seemed to
take form before my eyes, and weave themselves with the colours and
sounds. I was following a train of reasoning, new points would occur
and concurrently. There was a figure before me throwing out corre-
sponding shoots like a zinc tree; and then, as the moving figures reap-
peared, or as the sounds caught my ear, the other classes of figures came
out distinctly, and danced through each other. 'J The effect of irrcgu-
lar and hurried circulation through the brain, and its immediate con-
nexion with these trains of thought, are here plainly indicated; so much,
however, has recently appeared on the effects of Hashish ? that Ave need
only point out the fact, that all these neurotic stimulants act upon
the same principle; they affect the mind through the medium of the
circulation.
Considered under the head of mental dietetics, the question recurs
* Ibid. p. 150.
+ Pharmaceutical Journal and Transactions. Edited by Jacob Bell, 1845. Vol. V-
p. 83.
+ _The, ?P'^ar? of Hercules, a Narrative of Travels in Spain and Morocco, in 184J>
By David Urquliart, Esq. 2 vols. London, 1850. Vol. ii p. 129.
? Du Hlls^sl;.e\d? Venation Mentale, par J. Moreau. Paris, 1845. BritisU
and Foreign Medical Review. By John Forbes, M.D. Vol. xxiii. 1847.
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. Ill
under what circumstances they ought to be had recourse to, and
whether as articles of diet, all alcoholic and vinous stimulants may not
he dispensed with. There can be no doubt that opium and hashish
should in this country be had recourse to only as medicinal agents, and
even then they should be administered with great care. The concur-
rent testimony, however, of the most approved authors on diet, we allude
i to Dr. Wilson Philip, Dr. Paris, Dr. Pereira, Dr. Mayo, Dr. Andrew
Combe, is in favour of alcoholic and vinous stimulants being occasion-
ally used with moderation.
