Commissions In Lunacy
======================

THE PORT OF THE BOARD OF VISITORS OF THE BOSTON LUNATIC
ASYLUM, IN THE MATTER OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THAT
INSTITUTION.

-Bostou, 18JL9.

It appears that Dr C. H. Stedman is the physician to the Boston Lunatic Asylum!
that in the month of December, 1849, he was culletl upon by a particular professional
friend, in his private character, to see a Mrs. Helen Kraitser, the wife of a physician
of that name; and, after instituting a proper examination into her state of mind,
signed a certificate of her insanity. It appears that the Board of Visitors oj the
Boston Lunatic Hospital received instructions from the Citj Council to institute an
investigation into the matter, and to request their medical officer (Dr Stedman), as
well as other parties connected with the transaction, to make a statement, in writing,
of such facts bearing upon the matter as they pleased to communicate. Dr Stedman,
with a very commendable spirit, denies the right of the Board of Visitors, at the instiga-
tion of the Common Council, to call upon him to explain any act of his, performed in his
private character as a physician, quite unconnected with his public duties as medical
superintendent of the Boston Hospital. The certificate in questiou was signed by
Dr Stedman, not as the physician of a public asylum, nor for the purpose of being
used there. He exclaims, and that with perfect justness, against the doctrine, that
individuals holding public appointments are to be subjected to arraignment and trial by
the legislative branch of a municipal government, upon charges or insinuations of
criminal offences, alleged or supposed to have been committed by them in their private
capacities, and not in the discharge of their public duties. Notwithstanding, however,
this temperate protest against what we conceive to have been an unwarrantable inter-
ference on the part of the Common Council with the private act of Dr Stedman, that
physician laid a statement of the facts of the case before the Board of Visitors; and
they placed themselves, we think improperly, in communication with the patient herself-
Mrs. Kraister directed the Board to her solicitors; and the solicitors, .after a little
coquetry, intimate to the Visitors, that Mrs. Kraister, acting on advice, declines sending
the proposed statement?and there, we presume, the matter rests.
