The Chancellor of The Exchequer and County and Private Lunatic Asylums
=======================================================================

257

We do not conceive that it falls within our province to record political events; but
such as bear upon that department of the profession to which this journal is dedicated
ought not to be passed over unnoticed. While we yet write, the ministerial crisis is
scarcely over; the Chancellor of the Exchequer has again to produce his budget; and
are therefore called upon to remark that some of his financial projects will, if again
.brought forward and adopted, very materially affect the interests of private lunatic
as)'luins. We believe the window tax presses grievously upon all classes of the com-
munity, but it must obviously fall more onerously upon the proprietors of lunatic
Asylums than upon any other class, because they are under the necessity of maiutain-
lng, at a very high rental, establishments which must be plentifully provided with
?windows. The proposal made by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in his late financial
statement is, to abolish the window duty upon all houses under the value of ?20 a
year; whereby as many as 120,000 houses occupied by the labouring classes will be
tempted altogether from this tax. All houses above the value of ?20 a year are, as
a substitute for the window duty, to have a house tax levied upon them equivalent to
two-thirds of the amount now paid for window tax. The Chancellor, however, pro-
Poses that houses, a portion of which may be used for exposing goods for sale, public-
houses, farm-houses, &c., on account of their being establishments for carrying on busi-
Dess> shall have the advantage of being taxed only ninepence in the pound. We by no
^eans complain of such houses enjoying this exemption as far as it goes, but why did
n?t the Chancellor of the Exchequer extend the same indulgence to lunatic asylums,
Which are avowedly places of professional business ? The new house tax, levied
According to the amount of the value or rental of these establishments, will fall upon
them very heavily. The argument that the value of a house or its rental is a fair test
the means of the owner or occupier, is by no means valid as respects this class of
houses, the rental of which is necessarily, on account of the extent of premises and
grounds required, exceedingly high. What possible criterion is it of the net income of
the proprietor? The Chancellor of the Exchequer proceeded to say?" The House is
?Ware that in some counties of England large lunatic asylums have been built, and
'hat considerable expense has been incurred for this purpose. I think, therefore, that,
such counties are more entitled to our consideration than those which have not incurred
such expenditure. I propose, then, to take a portion of the charge of the mainte-
nance of pauper lunatics, and to take a larger share of the maintenance of those con-
fined in county asylums than of those who are confined in private establishments. I
Propose to take such a portion of the expense as will leave the cost still to be borne
jjy the parishes little more than that of maintaining ordinary paupers. It is a reason
*0r taking some portion of this charge, that no foresight, no sacrifice, no care on the
Part of the ratepayers can prevent the charge from being thrown upon the parishes.
.1 is attributed to no neglect of theirs; it is the act of Providence; and I think it
ls desirable to encourage them to send unfortunate individuals to the asylums. On the
other hand, I think it very desirable not to encourage them to keep in the asylums
. Se who may safely be removed, because it is notorious that the probability of a cure
111 su^ cases depends almost entirely upon parties being sent to the asylum at the
"lest possible stage of the disease. I am acquainted with a case where there was
fefeat difficulty in clearing from an asylum a number of harmless idiots, in order to
ake room for those whose admission at an earlier period would, in all probability,
ave le(j t0 their speedy cure. I have not been able to make any precise inquiries on
? |s subject, because I did not, of course, wish to intimate to any persons the course I
s ended to take; but I estimated the charge for this purpose at ?100,000. I am
Peaking of the united kingdom. I propose to take a portion of the expense of all
uper lunatics confined in public asylums or private madhouses in England, Scotland,
* feland, upon the public funds." This sum of ?150,000 it is proposed to charge
tj n. 'he Consolidated Fund. But why, we would fain ask, should so invidious a dis-
ci Ctlon be drawn between public and private lunatic asylums? Upon this subject a
?cularhas been addressed to the proprietors of private lunatic asylums, by Mr. Coode,
le 0wner of Havdock Lodge, which establishment, at the commencement of the pre
ent year, appears bv the commissioners' last report, to have contained 4o private an
N0. XIV. * S
258 THE CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER
355 pauper patients, making a total of 400. "Tbe Chancellor of tbe Exchequer,"
observes Mr. Coode, "in bis explanation of bis intentions, proposes to take two steps
very decidedly unfair and injurious to tbe proprietors of private asylums.
" Firstly, as regards tbe window tax (from tbe mischievous action of which we have
at all times been great sufferers, on account of the large number of chargeable aper-
tures which our establishments require), he proposes, in abolishing it, to replace it by
a house tax, which, on houses above ?40 a year, already built, shall be two-thirds of
the amount of tbe previous window tax; thus perpetuating to the extent of two-thirds
the injustice and grievance of the repealed tax. It is clearly tbe interest of most of
us, as it is also but plain justice, that we should not be assessed to tbe house tax at a
higher rate than occupiers of new houses are to be?namely, at five per cent, on our _
rental. In my own case, tbe latter tax would not be one-third of what tbe Chancellor
of the Exchequer proposes. Indeed, it is not clear why we are not as fairly entitled as
the occupiers of farm-bouses, beer shops, and other shops, to be taxed at tbe lower rate
of ninepence in the pound of our rental, our premises being equally places of business,
and their extent and rental no indication of our personal means or expenditure.
In opposing the meditated injustice, we shall, as soon as we have spoken out, have the
aid of numerous other interests, especially of schools and boarding-houses, similarly
affected.
" Secondly, he proposes to pay out of tbe Consolidated Fund a part, equal to nearly
.?10 a year to each patient, of the expenses of maintaining lunatics in asylums. But
he proposes to pay more towards tbe maintenance of those in county than of those in
private asylums. This is evidently to afford an artificial and factitious inducement to
counties?apparently to be continued in perpetuity at the expense of the nation?to
provide county asylums. It is a bounty, partly to be paid at our cost, to counties, to do
that which their own simple interests should alone determine. It is manifestly to place
us at a disadvantage in comparison with county asylums, and to make it impossible for
us to do as well for our patients as they are to be enabled to do at the public cost.
"We have origiuated and carried on all the improvements in the treatment of the
insane, which the counties only have copied, and generally not copied successfully.
We have had but little encouragement, and we require no bounties from tbe public, to
induce us to proceed in this course; but it is not endurable that the public purse,
contributed to by ourselves, should be used to impede and crush us. It is for our
interest to display the unfairness of this proceeding, and to show (what we have
hitherto too much neglected) our, at least, equal merits with county asylums, and that
our personal interests and responsibilities for the proper treatment of the insane, and
the good order of our establishments, are incomparably stronger and more cogent, and
in practice more operative, than those of any persons concerned in the management of
county asylums: and in fine, that we deserve better treatment than we have at the
hands of the government, and at all events have a claim to fair play.
" I beg to suggest to all proprietors of private houses, that we should request the
Chancellor of the Exchequer to receive a deputation from us, to represent our claims
and our grievances under his proposed measure. If this be not at once successful, I
suggest that we should frame petitions to the House of Commons on the subject, set-
ting forth the matter clearly and truly. This will involve little cost in comparison with
the value of the object, though it is too much for one to incur for a benefit to be com-
mon to all. If all contribute, a few shillings from each will cover it. I am desirous
of lenruing from you whether you are willing to take a part, and if so, what part, in
these proceedings ; whether you can supply any useful information, either as to county
or private asylums; whether you will join in the deputation, or can influence any
members of the House of Commons; whether you will contribute to our expenses;
and if so, whether equally with all the rest, or to a limited amount. For my part, lam
ready to contribute my share to the expense, and to give any assistance which my legal
education, or my training to public business, or my personal influence may make avail-
able for the common object."
The unsettled state c.f the Ministry, and the uncertainty winch appears at present to
throw a cloud over all their measures, has doubtlessly prevented tbe proprietors of pri-
vate lunatic asylums responding as they would otherwise have done to this appeal-
The claims which private asylums have upon the government are entitled to the highest
consideration, for, until county asylums were bnilt (and many are only now in progress)
the public was indebted entirely to the enterprise of private individuals for the protec-
tion afforded to the lunatic poor of the kingdom, who would otherwise have remained
AND COUNTY AND PRIVATE LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 259
even to the present day pining in workhouses and gaols. Union is strength, and if so
manifest an injustice be inflicted upon them, the proprietors of private asylums will do
^ell to adopt Mr. Coode's suggestions. We shall, however, pause until we know defi-
nitely the course of legislation which may be proposed, and shall then return to the
subject. In the meantime, we advise the proprietors of private lunatic asylums to be
?n the alert.
