New York State
==============

Mental Hygiene Clinic, Brooklyn Hebrew Orphan Asylum: (373
Ralph Avenue, Brooklyn, New York.)
Jurisdiction: Brooklyn Hebrew Orphan Asylum.

Staff:

Director: Tendler, A. D., B.S., M.A., Ph.D.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 200 to 300.
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 19 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental
defects and abnormalities.

Source of reference: Children examined are all charges of the
Brooklyn Hebrew Orphan Asylum.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by the social workers on the staff of the Orphan
Asylum. Medical and psychiatric examinations are made by physicians from the Brooklyn Jewish Hospital who have charge of the
medical service of the institution.

Tests used: Intelligence, individual and group; Emotion Tests,
psychoneurotic inventory and emotional insight test.

Research is under the supervision of the Director of the clinic.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered to students
having an M.A. in psychology, with routine mastery of testing.
Training is offered in testing, diagnosis, report writing, psychological consultations and treatment of behavior difficulties, and
in vocational, educational and personality guidance.
Part time is required and no remuneration is given.
One student is accepted per year.
Psychological Clinic, Children's Aid and Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children of Erie County: (70 West Chippewa
Street, Buffalo, N. Y.)
Jurisdiction: Children's Aid and Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Children of Erie County, Buffalo, N. Y.
The Children's Aid Society of Buffalo, in its effort to adequately meet the needs of the children of Erie County, realized
the necessity of knowing, not only the facts concerning existing
conditions in a child's family and home, but also the facts concerning the child's physical and mental condition, and his physical and
mental potentialities.
In order to make it possible to ascertain these facts and study
them in their relations one to another, it was deemed necessary to
establish as integral parts of the organization a Medical Clinic and
a Psychological Clinic.

Staff:

Director: Town, Clara Harrison, B.S., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Assistant Psychologist (Part-time) : Beck, Elizabeth, B.A.
Assistant Psychologist (Volunteer, Part-time) : Zambrowsky,
Basia, M.A., examines Polish clients in their own tongue.
Consultant Psychiatrists: May, Herman F., M.D.; Beck, Gilbert M., M.D.
Physicians: The Children's Aid Society maintains a Medical
Clinic with Dr John A. Ragone, Pediatrician, Director, and
Dr Evelyn Heath-Jacobsen, as assistant. This Clinic is held
at the Children's Hospital, and the specialists of the Children's Hospital staff are available.
Research Workers: Claflin, Charlotte I., B.A., part-time;
Zambrowsky, Basia, Volunteer, part-time.
Social Workers: There is no social worker on the Clinic's staff,
but the Clinic works through a large staff of social workers
maintained by the organization's Departments of Investigation and Foster Home Care.

Clerk: 1.

Approximate number of persons examined annually: 700 to 800.
Age range of persons studied: Infant to adult.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: State, County, and City welfare organizations; State, County, and City social agencies; State, County,
and City probation departments; institutions; public schools;
Crippled Children's Guild; Department of Health; hospitals;
courts; Police Department; Immigration Department; State
Rehabilitation Committee; State Employment Agency; State
Travelers' Aid; Visiting Nurses Association; school nurses; visiting teachers; American Legion; churches; Church Mission of
Help; the general community, any person knowing of a child
who needs aid or protection for any cause may report the child
to the organization.

Facts concerning social history, environment, and schooling are
obtained by a large staff of social workers connected with the organization, from referring agencies, and by clinic interveiws.
Routine medical and eye examinations are made in the organization's clinics. Psychiatric and neurological examinations
are not routine. They are made, in some cases, by the consultant
psychiatrists.

Psychological tests used: Binet-Simon Intelligence, Stanford Revision, Binet Revision; Gesell Developmental?Kuhlmann?Infants; Merrill-Palmer; "Wallin Boards; Witmer Formboards;
Witmer Cylinders; Healy A and B; Wiggly Blocks; Manikin;
Knox Cubes; Profile; Color Blocks; Porteus Maze;. Stenquist
Mechanical; Detroit Mechanical; MacQuarrie Mechanical Aptitude; June Downey Will-Temperament; Personality Inventory;
Emotional Trends and Balance; Mirror Drawing; Goodenough
Drawing; Seashore Art Appreciation; Seashore Musical;
Lewerenz Art Ability; Clerical Aptitude; Educational Tests.
Clinical teaching is done by volunteer teachers.
Some piece of research is usually in progress, conducted by
regular staff members. One part-time research worker is now
making a study of 130 families in each of which there are two or
more feebleminded persons.

Training and practice in clinical service: No arrangement is made
for such training. At various times graduate students wishing
practical experience in a clinic have spent some time with us.
No affiliation with college or university. Approximately 25
talks per year are given by the Director to various types of community and educational groups.
Catholic Charities Guidance Institute: (181 East 68th Street, New
York City.)

Jurisdiction: Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York.
The clinic was organized in March 1922, under Dr Sylvester R.
Leahy, to meet the need for mental study of dependent children.
It includes a Traveling Clinic which serves the Catholic Institutions.

Staff:

Director: Brockbank, T. "W., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., M.D., Psychologist and Psychiatrist; Fox, Edna J., M.A., Psychologist; Sullivan, Catherine, M.A., Psychologist.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 85
Psychiatrist and Physician: Brockbank, T. W., M.A., Ph.D.,
M.D., Psychiatrist; Doody, W. M., M.D., Psychiatrist.
Social Workers: 3. All three are psychiatric workers; two
have the degree of B.A.

Clerks: 3.
Approximate number of persons examined annually: Guidance Institute, 392; Traveling Clinic, 130 plus 873 given group tests.
Age range of persons studied: One year to adult.
Reasons given for request for study in order of frequency: Conduct problems, guidance problems, placement problems, neglect
problems, educational problems, mental abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Social agencies, Catholic School Board,
private physicians and priests for the Catholic Guidance Institute; Institutions in Archdiocese of New York for the Traveling

Clinic.

The facts concerning social history, environment, and schooling
are obtained by the clinic social worker for the Traveling Clinic,
and through workers in referring agencies for the Guidance Institute.
Medical and psychiatric examinations are made by the Clinic
Staff.

Tests used: Stanford-Binet Intelligence; Performance Tests, Army,
Healy Picture Completion, Porteus Maze, various formboard
tests; Personality and emotional inventory; Pre-School Mental
Tests, Merrill-Palmer, Kuhlmann, Gesell; Vocational Tests,
Stenquist, I. E. R. Clerical, Thurstone Typing, Toops Assembly.
Clinical teaching is done during 5 or 6 hours per week.
Clinical and training and practice are given in field work and
research. Two students are accepted per year. Requirement is
candidacy for either a Bachelor's or Master's degree. Part time
is required. No remuneration is given.

Clinic Division, Bureau of Child Guidance, Board of Education of
the City of New York: (228 East 57th Street, New York City.)
Jurisdiction: Board of Education of the City of New York.
The Psychological Clinic is one division of the Bureau of Child
Guidance. The Bureau, including the Clinic, was organized as a
result of the study of retardation, truancy, and problems of personality and conduct, made by a committee appointed in June
1929 by Dr William J. O'Shea, Superintendent of Schools. This
committee recommended, among other things, the establishment of
a Behavior Clinic. The Bureau was organized as a separate bureau
of the Board of Education of the City of New York.

Staff:

Director of the Bureau of Child Guidance: Goldrich, Leon W.,
B.S., L.L.B., M.Pd., M.A., Ph.D.
Chief Psychologist: Krugman, Mossis, M.A., Ph.D.
Volunteer Psychologist (Part-time): Seyfarth, V. Elise, B.A.,
M.A.; Bearman, Sonia, B.A., M.A.
Psychiatrist: O'Brien, Frank J., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., M.D., Assistant Director of the Bureau and Chief Psychiatrist.
Physician: Jacobson, Milton B., M.D., Pediatrician.
Social Workers: Arnold, Charlotte, B.A., M.S.S.; Don, Viola,
B.A. M.A.
Visiting Teacher: March, Olive L., B.A.
Clerks: 5.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 642 (year
1931-32).

Age range of persons studied: 5 to 16 years; a few older.
Sources of reference: School principals and a small number from
social agencies which refer through the school principals.
Facts concerning social history, environment, and schooling are
obtained through office interviews, home and school visits, letters
to clinics, recreational agencies, etc.
Medical: Routine medical examinations are made by clinic physician.
Tests used: Stanford-Revision of the Binet-Simon, Pintner-Patterson Performance Scale, Merrill-Palmer Scale for Pre-School
Children, Stanford Achievement Battery, Primary and Advanced, Minnesota Mechanical Aptitude, Monroe Diagnostic
Reading; in addition, a great variety of specific educational,
achievement, diagnostic and prognostic tests.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is done by the psychologists.
About one-quarter time is devoted to such teaching.
Two lecture courses are given to teachers and principals in the
New York City Schools: (a) Fundamental principles of mental
hygiene applied to classroom work; (6) Promoting mental health
among children through hygienic teaching and learning.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 87
The following series of conferences and lectures are given to
mental health representatives of public schools: (a) Series of conferences in cooperation with the major social agencies of city; (&)
Series of lectures on the psychiatric phase of mental hygiene; (c)
Series of lectures on the psychological phase of mental hygiene;
(d) Series of lectures on social phase of mental hygiene; (e) Series
of lectures on the meaning and value of various aspects of mental
hygiene to education.

Various lectures are given to the United Parents' Association of
the City of New York and to individual parents' associations.
Dr Frank J. 0 'Brien, Chief Psychiatrist and Assistant Director
of the Bureau, independently of his position in the Bureau, has
conducted during the past year 3 courses: one at Fordham University, School of Sociology and Social Service; one under the
auspices of the Brooklyn Teachers Association; and one at the
College of the City of New York for attendance officers.
Clinical Service, Jewish Board of Guardians: (228 East 19th
Street, New York City.)

Jurisdiction: Jewish Board of Guardians.
The Jewish Board of Guardians is a social agency. The clinic
was developed to assist in dealing with delinquency, personality,
and behavior problems among Jewish children.

Staff:
Psychologist: Kovarsky, Marcel, M.A.
Psychiatrist: Broadwin, Isra T., M.D.
Social Worker: 1 medical social worker; 32 social workers on
staff of Jewish Board of Guardians, 27 have degrees.
Recreational Secretary: Bernheimer, Lillian.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 350.
Age range of persons studied: 6 years to adult.
Reasons given for study: Behavior problems, educational problems, guidance problems.
Sources of reference: Social agencies, health agencies, hospitals,
courts, settlements, schools, institutions, parents, relatives,
friends, self.

Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained from the social workers of referring agencies.
Medical examinations are secured by referring patients to other
clinics or physicians.

Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon and other intelligence tests, performance tests, educational tests, achievement tests, I. E. R.
Girl's Assembly Test, Thurstone's Typing Test, Thurstone's
Clerical Test, Meier-Seashore Art Judgment Test.
One to two hours per week is devoted to clinical teaching.
Training and practice in psychiatric case work is offered.
The average number of students has been 4 per year.
Department of Child Guidance, Hebrew Orphan Asylum: (1560
Amsterdam Avenue, New York City.)

Jurisdiction: Hebrew Orphan Asylum of the City of New York.
The Department of Child Guidance was organized to meet the
recognized need for a study of and placement recommendation for
children newly admitted to the Orphan Asylum.

Staff:
Psychologist: Lithauer, Donah B., B.A., M.A.
Assistant Psychologist: Greenblatt, Helen, B.A.
Attending Psychiatrist: Orgel, Samuel Z., M.D., Mt. Sinai Hospital (part-time).
Consulting Psychiatrist: Shoenfeld, Dudley, M.D., Mt. Sinai

Hospital.

Teachers: 2 (part-time).
Clerks: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 600 by Psychologist, 122 by Psychiatrist.
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 20 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational
problems, mental defects and abnormalities, guidance problems,
placement problems.

Sources of reference: All persons studied are either applicants to
the Hebrew Orphan Asylum, or charges of it. The charges are
either in the institution, in boarding homes, or under the supervision of the After-Care Department.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained in the first place, from the referring agencies at the time
of children's admission, and are later supplemented by reports concerning the child after admission, obtained from social workers
and school department.

Medical examinations are made by the Orphan Asylum physicians. Neurological examinations are made at the Mt. Sinai Hospital or Columbia University Medical Centre. Examination of the
eyes by visiting occulists.

Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon and other intelligence tests, performance tests?Porteus, Healy, Goodenough Drawing, Pintner
Non-Language, Educational achievement tests, special aptitude
tests, Stenquist Assembling, emotional stability?WoodworthMatthews, Pressey, Marston.
Remedial teaching is done by 2 part-time teachers under the
direction of the psychologists.

No time is assigned for research. The psychologists conduct
some, mainly in their leisure time.
Psyclio-Educational Clinic, Board of Education: (224 East 28th
Street, New York City.)

Jurisdiction: Board of Education, New York City.
The Clinic was organized by the Board of Education to meet the
need for differential diagnosis in the adjustment of retarded children.
Staff:
Psychologists: Berger, Arthur, M.S.; Conway, Catherine E.,
M.A.; Felk, Rita J., M.A.; Gillman, Etta C., M.A.; Granich,
Louis, M.A.; Guanella, Frances, M.A.; Jenkins, Marion P.,
Ph.D.; McElwee, Edna W., M.A.; Sargeant, Bessie B., M.A.;
Speevack, Morris, M.A.; Tow, Lillian, M.A.; Wood, Elizabeth T., M.A., Teacher assigned as psychologist.
Psychiatrists and Physicians: Hirsdansky, Sara, B.A., B.S.,
M.D., Medical Inspector; Bentley, Inez A., M.D., Medical Inspector.
Research Worker: Sherzer, Josephine, B.A., B.Pd.
Social Workers: Clark, Florence J., M.A.; Butts, Delight B.,
M.A.; Deutsch, Regina; Hebberd, Marion.
Clerks: 3.

Approximate number of persons studied annually: 8,000.
Age range of persons studied: 5 to 18 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defect and abnormality.
Sources of reference: Schools, Bureau of Attendance, courts, crime
prevention bureaus, social agencies, parents.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by the aid of information blanks provided by the
Clinic to the teachers and visiting teachers. This information is
supplemented by school records and statements from parents and
teachers.

Medical examinations are made by the Clinic physician, and are
also secured in special instances from the Board of Health and
cooperating hospitals and clinics.
Tests used: Stanford-Binet and other forms of intelligence tests,
Pintner-Patterson, Porteus Maze, Stutsman, Randall's Island,
Healy.

Group Intelligence: Terman, Otis, Kuhlmann-Anderson, PintnerCunningham, Haggerty, National Intelligence, Detroit, Pintner
Non-Language.
Aptitude: Stenquist, I. E. R. Girls' Assembly, Porteus Assemblying.
Educational: Reading, arithmetic, and spelling tests of various
types.

Psychological Service Center: (522 Fifth Avenue, New York City.)
Jurisdiction: Psychological Corporation.
Psychological Service Center is a private organization which
offers psychological service of various types to the public. Pees for
service are charged. It was organized in response to the recognition of the need for such service and the opportunity it offered to
demonstrate the wide range of usefulness which many psychological
tests and techniques had reached. The service demonstrates the
wide range of application of psychological techniques.

Staff:
Director: Link, Henry C., Ph.D.
Counsellor: Achilles, Paul S., Ph.D.
Director of child adjustment and school service division: Anderson, Rose E., Ph.D.
Music Division: Stanton, Hazel, Ph.D.
Research Workers: Bennett, Wilhelmina, M.A., Testing Division; Schultz, R. S., Personnel.

Clerks: 2.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 500.
Age range of persons studied: 5 to 60 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Guidance problems, educational problems, conduct problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Universities, institutions, public.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained by interviews.

Medical examinations are not made in clinic. They are secured
when desired by reference to physicians.
Tests used: No stereotyped procedure, but several hundred tests are
available.

Diagnostic or clinical teaching is done in some cases.
Research is conducted by Staff.
Psychological Laboratory, Children's Hospital: (Randall's Island,
New York City.)

Jurisdiction: Department of Hospitals, New York.
The department was organized under the initiative of the department of Public Welfare for the purpose of organization of
school groups in the institution and the study of the mental and
educational progress made by the children.

Staff:
Psychologist: Poull, Louise E., Ph.D.
Assistant Psychologist: Bristol, Ada S., M.A.
Social "Worker: Murphy, Margaret, B.A.
Clerks: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 1100-1200.
Age range of persons studied: 2 to 60 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Educational problems, mental
defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Board of Education, Children's Court, Guardian Securities, Crime Prevention Bureau.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained through interviews and the social service department
of the hospital. The children are examined by the hospital physicians and psychiatrists. Psychological clinic has access to their
reports.
92 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon, other forms of intelligence tests,
Pintner Non-Language, Kelley Trabue Language Completion,
Porteus Maze, Goodenough Drawing, Performance Test: Randall's Island, Kelley Construction, Stenquist Mechanical, Minnesota Spatial Relations.
Research is under the supervision of Dr Poull and is conducted
by graduate students from Columbia.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered. Requirements are a Bachelor's Degree with training in experimental and
physiological psychology and statistical methods.
Training is given in techniques of testing and observation and
psychological case work, including qualitative analysis and adjustment.
Four hours work per week is required.

About 12 students are accepted.

Educational Affiliations: Director of the clinic is an instructor in
the Columbia University Extension. Courses in clinical psychology are given in the clinic laboratory.
House of Refuge Psychological Clinic: (Randall's Island, New York
City.)

Jurisdiction: Bellevue Hospital, New York City.
This Clinic was organized for the psychological study of the
boys committed to the Institution from the Courts of the State.
Staff:
Psychologist: Tripp, Pauline P., B.A., M.A.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 500.
Ages of persons studied: 12 to 21.

Reasons given for request for study: Persons studied are primarily
conduct problems, but also present educational, neglect, placement, guidance and mental problems.
Sources of reference: Courts of New York State.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained by social workers of the Institution.
Medical examinations are made by the physicians of the staff of
the Institution.

Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon Intelligence, Pintner-Patterson
Performance Scale, Otis Self-Administering, Porteus Maze.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 93
Survey Clinic, Penitentiary: (Welfare Island, New York City.)
Jurisdiction: New York City Department of Correction.
The clinic was organized as a result of the desire of the Commissioner of Correction and the Deputy Commissioner to modernize
the treatment of short term prisoners under their jurisdiction.

Staff:
Director of Clinical Survey: Shulman, Harry M., Ph.B.
Psychologists: Babcock, Harriet, Ph.D.; Dutsch, Gladys, M.A.
Psychiatrist: Jewett, Stephen P., M.D.
Neuropsychiatrist: Burchell, Samuel, M.D.
Medical Examiners: 1.

Clerks: 4.
Number of persons studied annually: 1000.
Age range of persons studied: 19 to 60.
Reasons given for request for study: Study is made to assist in
formulating plans of segregation and classification for the New
York City Department of Correction. Those examined represent a 10% sampling of all short term prisoners admitted during 1932.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interview with person examined, through field
inquiries and correspondence with official and welfare agencies.
Medical examinations are all made by clinic physicians.
Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon Intelligence Test, group mental
tests, Babcock Mental Efficiency, Otis Classification Test, Stenquist Mechanical Assembling, Detroit Mechanical Aptitude
Test, Tendler Emotional Insight Questionnaire.
Research: The physical and mental status of short term prisoners
in relation to their penal segregation, classification and social
treatment. The entire staff under the direction of Dr Shulman,
devote full time to this problem.
Vocational Adjustment Bureau for Girls: (421 East 88th Street,
New York City.)
Jurisdiction: Vocational Adjustment Bureau for Girls. An independent philanthropic organization. Since 1929, the Board of
Education has granted it the use of several rooms in public
school buildings.

The Bureau was organized as a result of a realization of the
need for study of the individual problem girls who were referred to
the Big Sister Organization.

Staff:
Director: Burr, Emily, M.A., Ph.D.
Assistant psychologist: Friedman, Pauline, M.A.
Research Worker: Unger, Edna W., M.A., Director Industrial
Experiments.
Social Worker: Slootskey, Zulena.
Teachers: Zimmer, Rose; Bradley, Alvah.

Clerks: 4.
Age range of persons studied: 13 to 30 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational
problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities, vocational guidance, personality problems.
Sources of reference: Social agencies, schools, hospitals, churches,
courts and police, private physicians, parents, friends, self.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through referring agencies and schools.

Medical examinations are obtained by reference to various outside clinics.
Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon and other intelligence tests,
PorteusMaze, Healy Pictorial, Pressey's Classification and Verification, Personality Inventory, Tests of Emotional Insight,
I.E.R. Girls' Mechanical Assembly, Occupational Interests,
Thurstone Clerical and Typing.

Research is supervised by director and carried on by staff members, volunteers and students from Columbia University.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered. An A.B.
is required.

Training is offered in testing, industrial investigation, vocational
guidance, personality adjustments.
Eight hours per week are required.
Eight students accepted each semester.
The director offers two courses in Training in Vocational Psychology; these are Columbia University Extension Courses.
Guidance Laboratory, Teachers College: (Columbia University,
New York City.)

Jurisdiction: Teachers College, New York City.
Tlie Guidance Laboratory represents partly a centralization of
several small laboratories, bureaus and clinics previously existing,
and partly additions and extensions. Formerly there was a psychological organization in the Lincoln School and another in the
Horace Mann School, a clinic in the Child Development Institute,
a Speech Clinic, a Psychiatric Clinic, and several laboratories under
the control of the psychology group. The Guidance Laboratory
is a centralization, an integration of these various formerly independent centers.
The work is under the general supervision of a committee which
is in charge of all the college work in "Individual Development
and Guidance," under the chairmanship of Professor Arthur
Gates. Questions of policy regarding fees, types of cases accepted
and the use to be made of record material, etc., is in the hands of a
committee consisting of Professors Hollingworth, Reynolds, Lambert, Meek, Snyder, McDowell, Watson, Symonds.
The director of the Guidance Laboratory is Dr Esther LloydJones, who besides directing the clinic, acts as a coordination officer
dealing with all members of the staff interested in the central clinic
and in the smaller clinics, some of which still exist independently.
The Guidance Laboratory includes a number of test and class
rooms, a one-way vision room, a sound-proof room, and a lightproof room.
The clinic staff members include substantially all the physicians, the psychiatrists and other specialists in individual diagnosis
on the staff of the College, the Child Development Institute, and the
affiliated schools.

Staff:
Director: Lloyd-Jones, Esther, Ph.D.
Consultant Psychologists: Gates, A. I., Ph.D.; Pintner, R.,
Ph.D.; Hollingworth, L. S., Ph.D.; Symonds, P. S., Ph.D.;
Watson, G. B., Ph.D.; Hildreth, Gertrude, Ph.D.; Sartorius,
I. C., Ph.D.; Meek, Lois, Ph.D.; Jerseld, Arthur, Ph.D.;
Whitley, M. T., Ph.D.; Rust, Meta, Ph.D.
Consultant Psychiatrists: Lambert, Charles, M. D.; Kilpatrick,
Elizabeth, M.D.
Consultant Physicians: Williams, Jesee, M.D.; Rowell, H. G.,
M.D.
Research Workers: Bennett, Annette, Ph.D., Psychology; several graduate students.
Social Workers: 3 (part-time). Affiliated with the Guidance
Laboratory, but employed by Child Development Institute.
Consultants in education: Kitson, H. D., Ph.D., Vocational
Guidance; Shang, Ruth, Ph.D., Educational Guidance; Coy,
G., Ph.D., Disabilities in School Subjects; McDowell, Elizabeth, Ph.D., Speech Defects; Rust, Meta, Ph.D., Infants'
Tests and Problems; Spence, R., Ph.D., Statistics and
Tests; Sturtevant, S., Ph.D., Adolescent Problems; Zimmerman, C., M.A., Speech.
Approximate number of persons studied: About 50 in the first 5
months.

Age range of persons studied: Infancy to old age.
Sources of reference: Schools, hospitals, miscellaneous.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained by the social workers and through clinic interviews.
Medical examinations are made by the clinic physicians.
Tests used: The clinic list of tests contains 300 titles.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is done.
Research is supervised by staff members and is carried on by
the staff and graduate students. Opportunity for research based
on records of the Laboratory is offered to qualified students under
competent direction, in an effort to maintain the work of the Laboratory on a scientific basis.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered to students
who have attained the M.A. degree or a higher standing.
Training is offered in Mental testing, Psychological counselling,
Remedial teaching, Child development, Speech correction, Guidance
and Personnel, and in Students personnel administration and the
Social Sciences.

An effort is made to offer a practical and thorough experience in
the discovery and development of the potential possibilities of individuals.
The number of students varies.
No remuneration is paid.
This training is supplemented by a number of required and
recommended courses at Teachers College.
Psycho-Educational Clinic: (School of Education, New York University, 32 Waverly Place, New York City.)
Jurisdiction: New York University.
The Clinic was organized for the purpose of training students
as school psychologists.

Staff:

Director: Benson, Charles E., B.A., B.E., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologist: Yepsen, Lloyd N., B.A., M.A., Ph.D.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 150.
Age range of persons studied: Infancy to adult.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, guidance problems, mental defect and abnormality.
Sources of reference: Largely schools.
Medical and psychiatric examinations are secured at the New York
University Medical College.
Psychological tests used: Stanford Revision of Binet-Simon, performance tests; practically all tests are used in the training of
students to become psychologists.
Clinical teaching is done.
Research is conducted by graduate students under the supervision
of the staff.
Training and practice in clinical service: The purpose of this Clinic
is the training of school psychologists and the various types of
training necessary for such work are offered to students of New
York University.
Educational Clinic: (West 139th Street and Amsterdam Avenue,
New York City.)
Jurisdiction: College of the City of New York, School of Education.
The Clinic was organized in response to the realization of the
need for psychological service for the school children of New York
City. It is a part of the Department of Education of the College of
the City of New York.
Staff:
Director: Heckman, Samuel B., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist
Psychologists: Hutt, M. L., B.A., M.S., Clinical assistant
Goldberg, S., B.S.S., M.S., Clinical assistant; Lederman, N
98 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
R., B.A., M.S., Clinical assistant; Keiser, M. R., B.A., M.S.,
Clinical assistant; McGurk, B.A., Clinical assistant.
Physician: Resnick, Solis, M.D.
Clerks: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 900.
Age range of persons studied: 4 to 16 years.
Reasons given for requests for study: Educational problems, conduct problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Schools, social agencies, hospitals, other clinics,
Crime Prevention Bureau.

Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through a filling out of a history data sheet by the referring agency.
Medical examinations are made of every child studied by the
Clinic physician.

Tests used: Stanford, Kuhlmann, and Herring Revisions of the
Binet-Simon, intelligence tests, Merrill-Palmer Tests, PintnerPatterson, Arthur Point Scale, Kohs Block Design, Porteus
Maze, Healy Pictorial, Van Alstyne Picture Vocabulary, Army
Beta, Detroit Alpha and Advanced, Kuhlmann-Anderson, Otis
Self-Administering, Henmon-Nelson, Revised Army, a variety
of educational achievement tests, a variety of aptitude tests,
personality schedule.

Research is conducted by individual staff members on their own
initiative. Training and practice in clinical service is offered to
superior students qualified for the work by both personality and
ability.

Several courses on mental testing and one on the psychology
of exceptional children are offered in the School of Education by
members of the Clinic Staff.
Child Study Department, Board of Education: (13 South Fitshugh
Street, Rochester, New York.)
Jurisdiction: Board of Education, Rochester, New York.
The Department was first established in 1906 to aid in the selection of children who could not profit by the regular school work,
for special education. From 1906 until 1918, the Department was
a part of the special education division. In 1918, it separated from
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 99
the special education division and became purely a diagnostic and
advisory department. The City is districted and the psychologists on the staff of the Department are assigned for work in certain schools, one psychologist to two large schools or from three to
six smaller schools depending upon the need and demand for the
work in the schools. In addition to this district service, two psychologists are assigned for work with problem children, referred
from the schools directly to the central office.

Staff:
Director: Martin, A. Leila, M.A., Psychologist.
School Psychologists: Brooke, Margaret, M.A.; Burnside, Lenoir, M.A., Ph.D.; Casey, Mary, M.S.; Crowley, Agnes, M.A.;
Davidson, Helen, M.A., Ph.D.; Gorrie, Eda, M.A.; Hixson,
Edna, M.A.; Hulbert, Marguerite, M.A.; Keith, Lillian,
M.A.; King, Helen, M.A.; Larson, Ruth, M.A., Ph.D.; Moore,
Marjorie, M.A.; Long, Elizabeth, M.A.; Pease, Ethel, M.A.
Psychiatrists: Clarke, Eric K., M.D.; Collier, 6. Kirby, M.D.
One of these two psychiatrists conducts a clinic at the central
office one-half day per week.

Social Worker: Burnliam, Mary, B.S.
The 16 visiting teachers in the visiting teacher department work
very closely in connection with the Child Study Department and
from these teachers the department secures social histories for the
majority of the children studied.

Clerks: 3 stenographers.

Approximate number of persons studied annually: 3860. Many of
this number are educational and classification problems; only a
small number are given intensive individual study.
Age range of persons studied: 4 to 21 years.

Sources of reference: School principals, teachers, visiting teachers, nurses, social workers, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained from the visiting teachers, and from the school teachers,
and also from interviews at the central office.
General medical examinations are made by school physicians.
Psychiatric examinations by staff psychiatrists.
Tests used: Practically all the tests that have been standardized
for the various chronological age levels; diagnostic tests for all
lines of school abilities, Stanford Binet-Simon and other intelligence tests, Pintner-Patterson Series, Ferguson Formboards,
Porteus Maze Information Test, Emotional Stability Schedules,
Personality Tests.

A small amount of clinical teaching is done. One psychologist
gives one day per week to this work. As a rule the psychologist
makes recommendations to the remedial teachers and regular teachers in the school.
Research problems are confined to such as will help in directing
the procedure of the Child Study Department. They are conducted by the director.
Child Study Department, Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Children: (158 Plymouth Avenue, North, Rochester, New York.)
The Child Study Department was developed as the result of
a committee appointed in 1919 by the Mayor of Rochester to study
the need of facilities "to insure the wisest possible selection of
institutions or homes in which dependents, delinquents, and defective children are placed." The findings of the committee led
to the establishment of the Child Study Department as a branch
of the work of the S. P. C. C.
The Child Study Department is supported jointly by Monroe
County and the Community Chest. It serves all the children's
agencies, including the Children's Court.

Staff:

Director: Rogers, Carl R., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: Riley, Gordon L., M.A.; Barker, Margaret B.,
Ph.D.; Montgomery, Ruth P., M.A.
Psychiatrists: Clarke, Eric, M.D., Consultant; Jaenike, Richard, M.D., Consultant.
Physicians: Kaiser, Albert, M.D., Consultant; Passon, Donald,
M.D., Consultant; Nathan, Francis, M.D., Consultant.
Social "Workers: None on Clinic staff. The social histories are
obtained by the visitors in the other departments of the
S. P. C. C., or by social workers of referring agencies.
Clerks: 3.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: About 600.
Age range of persons studied: 12 months to adult.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational
problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 101
Sources of reference: Other departments of the S. P. C. C.; Children's Court of Monroe County; Probation Department of
Monroe County Court; City Court of Rochester; Board of
Child Welfare; Commissioner of Public Welfare; Children's
Court, Ontario County; Children's Agent, Ontario County;
County Nurse, Ontario County; Children's Agent, Livingston
County; Children's Court, Livingston County; Children's
Agent, Genesee County; various social agencies, various institutions, schools, hospitals, nurses, physicians, parents and relatives.
Facts concerning social history, environment, and schooling are
obtained through the social workers of referring agencies.
Medical and psychiatric examinations are sometimes made by
the staff consultant and sometimes secured from the referring
agency or from other physicians.

Tests used: Stanford Binet and other intelligence tests, developmental tests, formboards, Porteus Maze, Healy Pictorial, Kohs
Block, Pintner-Patterson, Personality Inventory, Stanford
Achievement, Goodenough Drawing, Gates Reading.
There are no special research workers and no definite time assigned for research, but members of the clinic staff have made
several studies concerning trends of juvenile delinquency in
Rochester, which have been helpful in guiding the work of the
clinic.

Training and practice in clinical service is not a regular practice of the clinic. Two graduate students have received training
in testing and the writing of records and reports.
Psychological Clinic of School Medical Department, Board of Education: (13 Elizabeth Street, Utica, New York.)
Jurisdiction: Board of Education.
The clinic was organized as the result of the initiative of the
Oneida County Mental Hygiene Committee, which interested the
School Department in psychological work and contributed the
salary of the psychologist for the first year.

Staff:
School Psychologist: Peterson, Alice H., B.S., M.A.
Physicians: No physicians on staff of clinic, but 7 school physicians are available.
Social Workers: There are no social workers on staff. Eight
school nurses secure information concerning children examined.

Clerks: 2.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 791 to 956.
Age range of persons studied: 4 to 20 years.
Reasons given for requests for study: Educational problems (740),
mental defects and abnormalities (85), conduct problems (20),
guidance problems (5), placement problems (3), neglect problems (2).
Sources of reference: School principals, teachers, nurses, physicians, Juvenile Court, State Hospital Clinic, City Dispensary,
Church Mission of Help, parents.

Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained by the school nurses through visits to home, school, and
cooperating social agencies.

Medical examinations are made by school physicians, and special
cases are referred to dispensaries for further examination and
special laboratory tests. Psychiatric examinations are sometimes
obtained by referring children to a Child Guidance Clinic held
once a month by the State Department of Mental Hygiene, and to a
Clinic once a week at the Utica State Hospital.
Tests used: Stanford-Binet Intelligence, Goodenough Drawing
Scale, Porteus Maze, Witmer Cylinder, Formboards, Picture
Completion, Henmon-Nelson, Kuhlmann-Anderson, PintnerCunningham, McCall Multo-Mental Scale.
Researches are conducted by the School Psychologist, but
routine work leaves very little time for research.
Clinic of Children's Court, County of Westchester: (County Office
Building, White Plains, New York.)
Jurisdiction: Children's Court of Westchester County, New York.
The clinic was organized as a result of the realization on the
part of the Judge of the Children's Court that further diagnostic
and treatment facilities were essential.

Staff:
Psychologist: O'Connor, Zena C., B.S., M.A.
Psychiatrist: Williams, R. R., M.D.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 103
Social Workers: None on staff of clinic. Clinic works in coperation with probation officers.
Age range of persons studied: Young children to 16 years, adults
studied in relation to children's problem, adults studied in relation to domestic relation difficulties.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Judge of Children's Court, Probation Department, Department of Child Welfare, Society for Prevention
of Cruelty to Children.

Facts concerning the social history, environment and schooling
are obtained through investigation made by the probation officers
or from social workers of referring agencies.
Medical examinations are made by the psychiatrists and when
indicated, by other specialists.

Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon, group intelligence (various
types), Pintner Non-Verbal, performance scales, I. E. R. Assembly Test, McQuarrie Mechanical, Stenquist Mechanical,
Thurstone Clerical, Interest Questionnaires, Personality Surveys.
Remedial teaching is done.

North Carolina
Bureau of Mental Health and Hygiene: (State Board of Charities
and Public Welfare, Box 632, Chapel Hill, N. C.)
Jurisdiction: State Board of Charities and Public Welfare.
The Bureau is a result of the realization by the Welfare Workers
of the State, particularly those of the State Board Staff, of the
importance of mental and behavior abnormalities in relation to their
work.

Staff:
Director: Crane, Harry W., Ph.D., Psychopathologist, Prof.
Psychology at the University of North Carolina.
Clerks: 1. M.A. in Psychology.
Approximate number of persons studied in last 2-year period: 621.
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 54 years.
104 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Source of reference: State Board of Charities and Public Welfare,
University, institutions, welfare agencies, probation officers,
physicians.

The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained from referring persons of agencies, and also through
clinic conferences. The usual neurological and psychiatric examinations are made by the clinic staff. When it is considered necessary, cases are referred for more detailed neurological study and
for general physical examination or visual or auditory examinations to private physicians or clinics.
Tests used: General intelligence, performance tests, personality
tests, achievement tests, special aptitudes and abilities, miscellaneous.
There are no facilities for conducting research in connection
with the clinic itself. Data concerning all the cases studied are,
however, very carefully recorded and filed, and much statistical
material in this way is collected.
Some research work is done by advanced students.
Clinical training and practice are offered to advanced students.
This work is supplemented by three courses given by the director
of the clinic at the University of North Carolina: (1) Psychology
of Feeblemindedness; (2) Psychology of the Psychoses and Psychoneuroses; (3) Methods of Mental Examination.
Ohio
The Psychological Laboratory of the Vocational Bureau: (Cincinnati Public Schools, 216 East 9th St., Cincinnati, Ohio.)
Jurisdiction: The clinic was originally organized under private
auspices. Later the Community Chest was the financing agent.
At present, the clinic is entirely under the jurisdiction of the
public schools.
The Psychological Laboratory is not an independent unit. It
is a division of the Vocational Bureau which supports, in addition
to the Laboratory, the following divisions: Visiting Teachers, Occupational Research and Counselling, Child Accounting, and Scholarship. These divisions supplement one another in many ways.
The Vocational Bureau and its Psychological Laboratory were
organized in 1911 for the purpose of obtaining facts regarding the
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 105
effects of the early entrance of children into industry. To this research function was added in 1916, its first important service
function, the responsibility for special class placement. There
has now developed a psychological clinic for the entire school system with a wide range of problems.
The Psychological Laboratory has the responsibility for arranging placements in special classes for defective children, for maintaining a waiting list for these classes, for filling vacancies as they
occur, and advising the need of new classes. It is also responsible
for excluding from school children of too low a mentality to profit
by school training.

Staff:
Director: Fernald, Mable R., B.A., Ph.D.
Assistant Director: Ph.D. (Temporarily vacant).
Psychological Laboratory Assistants: Lederer, Lora R., B.A.,
M.A.; Sluss, Rose R., B.A.; Gale, Rose, B.A.; Lantis, Mary,
B.A.; Lowenthal, L. Launcey, B.A.; Brewer, Laura, B.A.;
Godley, Catherine, B.A.; Euphrat, Frances B., B.A., M.A.
(% time) ; Schwab, M. M., B.A. (% time).
Research Worker: Grant, Albert, B.A., M.A., Statistician.

Clerks: 5.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 2942 in 193233. In addition, 10,760 persons were given group intelligence
tests.
Age range of persons studied: 4% to 21 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Educational problems (2800),
conduct problems (440), scholarship applicants, physical defects and miscellaneous (275), neglect problems (60), mental
defects and abnormalities (65).
Sources of reference: Various departments of public school, social
and medical agencies, courts, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interviews with child and parents, through reports from social agencies, teachers, principals, attendance officers,
and vocational counsellors, and by the visiting teacher staff of the
Vocational Bureau, on which the Laboratory depends for case
studies, having no social workers on the Laboratory staff.
As there are no physicians on the Laboratory staff, medical
examinations are secured through cooperation with clinics maintained by the Board of Health, hospitals, and Community Chest.
Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon and other intelligence tests,
Hayes Revision for the Blind; performance tests, Arthur, Randall's Island, others; Goodenough Drawing; Educational
Achievement Tests; group intelligence tests, Terman, Kuhlmann-Anderson, Carnegie.
Research is supervised by the director and conducted by the
director, the assistant director and the statistician. The heavy demands for practical service leave little time for the research studies
which the invaluable records would make possible. Several studies,
however, are in preparation.

Bureau of Psychology, Psychiatry and Visiting Teacher Service:
(Room 203, Board of Education Building, Cleveland, Ohio.)
Jurisdiction: Board of Education.

The work of the clinic was begun in 1917. Some mental testing was done in the schools by individuals who were not very
highly trained, and it was desired to continue the work under the
direction of thoroughly trained psychiatrists.
For several years the Psychological Clinic was controlled and
assisted by the person in charge of the medical work. The idea
developed that it would be more advisable to organize the Psychological Clinic as an independent unit, and this change was made.
In 1931 there was another reorganization and the Psychological
Clinic, the Mental Hygiene Clinic and the Visiting Teachers Department were united into one division, called "The Bureau of
Psychology, Psychiatry and Visiting Teacher Service." The services of the clinic are extended to both public, parochial and private
schools, to hospitals, courts, social agencies and other welfare groups
of the city.

Staff:
Supervisor: Luckey, Bertha M., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: Baxter, Mildred, B.A., M.A., Ph.D.; Brown,
Rosina M., B.A., M.A.; Hutchinson, Frieda, B.S., M.A.;
Lowell, Frances, B.A., M.A., Ph.D.; Muntz, Leonard, B.A.,
B.S., M.A.; Reamer, Jeannette, B.A., M.A., Ph.D.; Reigart,
Agnes, B.A., M.A.
Psychiatric Social Worker: Nixon, Mary H., B.A., M.S.S.
Visiting Teacher: Fairchild, Pauline, B.A.
Clerks: 2 (full time); 1 (part-time).
Approximate number of persons studied annually: Over 13,000.
Age range of persons studied: 2 to 21 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Schools, social agencies, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained from parents, teachers and home visits made by school
nurses.

There is no physician on the staff, but physical examinations
are secured through the school doctors and other agencies.
Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon Scale, Pintner-Patterson Performance Scale, other tests as indicated.
Research: Each year there is a problem carried on by the psychological staff as a whole, and as a rule each psychologist conducts a piece of research independently.
Psychological Clinic, Ohio State University: (Columbus, Ohio.)
Jurisdiction: Department of Abnormal and Clinical Psychology,
Ohio State University.

The clinic was established for the purpose of teaching and
demonstration.

Staff:
Director: Goddard, Henry H., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., LL.D., Psychologist.
Chief Clinician: Maxfield, Francis N., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Consultant Psychologists: Durea, Mervin A., B.A., M.A., Ph.D.;
Stogdill, Emily Leatherman, B.A., M.A., Ph.D.
Assistant Psychologist: Skodak, Marie, B.A., M.A. From 2 to
10 graduate student assistants.
Clerks: 1 (full time), several (part-time).
Age range of persons studied: Infancy to senility.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Juvenile Court, Children's Hospital, Welfare Organizations, parents, teachers.
108 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through clinic interviews.
Medical examinations are not made in clinic. Medical work is
done by volunteers among the physicians of Columbus.
Tests used: All of the standard tests are used as indicated.
No assigned time is given for research. Research is conducted
by all members of the staff.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered.
A Ph.D. degree is the usual requirement.
Number of students is not limited.
Training in clinic is supplemented by courses at Ohio State
University given by the Clinic Staff members who are also members of the University Faculty.
Bureau of Examination and Classification of Prisoners, Ohio Penitentiary: (Columbus, Ohio.)
The Bureau was recommended in 1930 by a Governor's Commission appointed to study the penal needs of Ohio. It was
created in July, 1930.
Jurisdiction: Department of Public Welfare, State of Ohio.
Staff:
Director of Bureau: Rogers, C. B., M.D., Chief Psychiatrist.
Chief Psychologist: Mursell, G. R., B.S., M.A., Ph.D.
Psychologist: Marzolf, Stanley, B.A., M.A.
Social Worker: 1. A.B. degree.
Clerks: 2.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 500.
Age range of persons studied: 16 to 80 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Parolability of Prisoner,
mental defects and abnormalities, conduct problems, educational
problems, guidance problems.

Sources of reference: Ohio Board of Parole, Superintendents of
various penal institutions, Department of Public Welfare.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through clinic interviews with prisoners and their relatives, through correspondence to verify information given. The
main dependence is upon copious correspondence.
Each prisoner is given a medical examination on admission by
the institution physicians. Psychiatric examinations are made by
clinic psychiatrists.

Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon, Kuhlmann revision
Binet-Simon, Morgan's Mental Measure, Army Alpha and
Data, Ohio Literary, Otis Intermediate, Formboards, KentRosanoff Association Test, Psychoneurotic Inventory.
Individual staff members conduct their own research.
There is no time assigned for research and as the routine work
is heavy, it has to be carried on during free time.
Bureau of Juvenile Research: (2280 West Broad Street, Columbus,
Ohio.)

Jurisdiction: State of Ohio, Department of Public Welfare.
The Bureau of Juvenile Research was established for the purpose of rendering clinical service to the Juvenile Court of the
state, to parents, child-caring agencies, and legal guardians, and
to other state institutions, and agencies.
The purpose is the study of children who are behavior problems or delinquents.

Staff:
Executive Psychologist: Calhoon, C. H., B.A., M.A., Ph.D.
Psycho-Clinicians: Baker, F. P., B.A., M.A.; Thrush, Hazel,
B.A., M.A.; Bell, Eric, B.A., M.A., Assistant; Wagner, P.
0., B.A., M.A., Assistant.
Psychiatrist: Gettrost, J. M., M.D., Attending physician.
Physician: Ochs, C. 0., M.D.
Research Director: Growdon, C. H., Ph.D. College and University students assist.
Attendants: 2 Supervisors; 8 men and women attendants, high
school education at least required.
Clerks: 6.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 2800 (1932),
3900 (1931).

Age range of persons studied: 3 to 21 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (60%),
mental defects and abnormalities (20%), placement problems
(15%), educational problems (3%), guidance problems (2%).
Sources of reference: Juvenile Courts, children's homes, schools,
child-caring agencies, parents, state institutions and agencies.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained from referring agencies. A complete social history is required before examination is made.
Medical examinations are made by the clinic staff.
Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon, Herring revision BinetSimon, Kuhlman Infant Test, Goodenough Drawing, Morgan,
Healy Picture Completion, Ohio Literary, Stanford Achievement, Stenquist Mechanical, Knox Lines, Witmer and Seguin
Formboards.

Teaching is done.
Research is supervised by Dr Growdon, and conducted by Dr.
Growdon and students.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered to graduate
students.

Training is offered in research and in practice in clinical psychology.
Not more than 4 students are accepted.
Affiliated Educational Institutions: Ohio State University, Ohio
Wesleyan University, Otterbein College.
There is an arrangement between the Bureau and the Graduate
School of the Ohio State University which permits graduate students in psychology to work at the Bureau, whether in research
or in practical clinical work upon the advice of the major advisor.
These students receive not to exceed a total of one-third of the
number of hours required for a Master of Arts degree or a Doctor
of Philosophy degree. The Sociology department, also, sends students for practical work or research, but there is no definite arrangement as outlined above and hours of credit are determined
by the professor in charge.
From time to time other Ohio colleges and universities refer
students whose work is outlined on an individual basis.
Pennsylvania
Department of Psychology, Lafayette College: (Easton, Pennsylvania.)
Jurisdiction: Department of Psychology, Lafayette College.
The Psychological Clinic was a natural development of the
work of the department of Psychology.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 111
Staff:
Director: Rogers, Herbert W., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologist: Rogers, Margaret C., Ph.D.
Psychiatrist (Part-time): Hoffman, Harry F., M.S., M.D., Assistant Superintendent of State Hospital.
Physician: College Physician.
Clerks: 1 (part-time).
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 40.
Age range of persons studied: 4 to 70 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, neglect problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Professors, school principals, physicians,
parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interviews with parents and teachers.
Routine medical examinations only are made. Psychiatric and
neurological examinations are obtained at the State Hospital.
Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon, Gesell Developmental Schedule,
Porteus, Pintner-Patterson, Thurstone, Pressey.
Training and practice in clinical service is given to a very few
students.
Child Study Department, Erie School District: (Erie, Pennsylvania. )
Jurisdiction: Board of Education, Erie, Pennsylvania.
The Child Study Department is the result of the consistent and
persistent effort of the Erie School System to meet the problems
presented by problem children in the schools. The problems presented by truants, by the under-nourished, by the retarded and
the deaf were dealt with successively, and in 1915 the method of
psychological study of these problem individuals was definitely
adopted. This was soon followed by the organization of classes
for children needing special training. Finally in 1925 a Child
Guidance Clinic was developed within the department.
Staff:
Director: Hirt, Zoe I., B.S. in Education, Psychologist.
Psychologist: Pooler, Mary H., B.S., M.S. in Education, Supervisor of Special Education, Psychologist.
112 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Visiting Psychiatrists: Israel, Robert H., M.D., Warren State
Hospital, Chief Neuropsychiatrist; Rosenweig, Leonard,
M.D., Warren State Hospital, Assistant Neuropsychiatrist.
Research Worker: Moore, Charlotte, B.A., Secretary-Assistant.
Social Workers: Field Worker, B.A. degree; Visiting Teacher,
B.A. degree.
Clerks: 2 (part-time), Secretary-Assistant.
Approximate number of persons studied: 763 in 10-month period,
Sept., 1932 to June, 1933. Of these 106 were studied by a
psychiatrist.
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 25 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Educational problems (494),
conduct problems (97), guidance problems (68), mental defects and abnormalities (42), neglect problems (33), placement
problems (29).
Source of reference: Public schools, parent-teachers association,
Juvenile Court, child-caring institutions, welfare agencies, family physicians, visiting nurses, parents and other relatives.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interviews and by the field worker and visiting
teacher.
Medical examinations are obtained through school doctors and
through family physicians. Psychiatric examinations are made
by the 2 visiting psychiatrists.
Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon; group intelligence
tests, National, Otis, Kuhlmann-Anderson, McCall; Formboards,
Witmer, Healy, Dearborn; Healy Pictorial, Color Cubes. With
the opening of each school year, a very brief test is given to
each child entering first grade, the purpose being to determine
reading readiness and to discover speech, hearing and visual
defects.
Some clinical teaching is done by the director of the department and the Supervisor of Special Education. More time is spent
in demonstrating to teachers how this is done.
Research is supervised by the director of the department and
is conducted by the director, the Supervisor of Special Education
and the Secretary-Assistant. Research work is usually achieved
during vacation periods as no time is assigned for it.
The chief neuropsychiatrist of the Child Guidance Clinic offers
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 113
a course in "Psychiatry and Mental Hygiene of Childhood" to
the public school teachers.
Department of Public Instruction: (Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.)
Jurisdiction: Department of Public Instruction.
The Department of Public Instruction does not maintain a
clinic but clinical service is available through the Director of Special
Education. This service is available to school districts contemplating the establishment of special classes and to school districts that
have conduct and educational problems.
Staff:
Director of Special Education: Reiter, Frank H., B.A., M.A.,
Ph.D., Psychologist.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 600.
Age range of persons studied: 6 to 16 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Schools, superintendents and other school administrative officers, County Juvenile Court.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through school nurses, teachers, visiting teachers and social workers.
Medical examinations are secured through school medical inspectors, and physicians connected with hospital clinics.
Tests used: Witmer Formboard, Witmer Cylinder, Healy Puzzles,
Healy Picture Completion, Dearborn Formboard, Knox Moron.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is sometimes done in individual cases.
Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania Training School: (Morganza, Pennsylvania.)
Jurisdiction: Pennsylvania Training School, Morganza (Institution for Delinquents).
The clinic was developed in response to the need for psychological study of the charges of the institution.
114 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Staff:
Director: Warner, La Vinia, B.S., M.A., Ph.D., in Clinical Psychology.
Physician: 1.
Psychiatrist (part-time) : 1.
Parole Officers: 6. Director of Parole Department has a Ph.D.,
1 member has an M.A., and others have some college training.
Social Worker: 1.
Clerks: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 800. New
cases, 375.
Age range of persons studied: 9 to 20 years.
Reasons given for request for study: All persons studied are conduct problems. Associated with these problems are: Educational problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities, psychotic,
epileptic, post-encephalitis.
Sources of reference: Juvenile Courts, higher courts and magistrates, social agencies, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interviews with child and parent, through reports of social agencies and through the members of the Parole Department who visit the homes and home communities.
Medical examinations are made by the resident physician also
by court physicians and court psychiatrists.
Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon, Stanford Achievement,
other tests in special cases, psychological interviews to discover
causes of difficulty, and to psychologically adjust conditions in
need of cure and treatment.
Child Study Department, Children's Aid Society: (311 Juniper
Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.)
Jurisdiction: Children's Aid Society of Pennsylvania.
For the past 15 years the Children's Aid Society of Pennsylvania has had on its staff a psychologist who works with Children's Aid cases exclusively, and who serves the various counties
of the state.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 115
Staff:
Director: Rothman, Anne Green, B.S. in Education, M.A. in
Psychology.
Social Workers: The social investigations are made by 55 case
workers located in the 16 counties of Pennsylvania and in
Philadelphia. The majority of these workers are graduates
of college and also schools of social work.
Clerks: 1 for psychologist. County agencies have their own
clerical staff.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 700 to 800.
Age range of persons studied: 2 months to adult. Majority are
under 16 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Placement problems (the
majority), conduct problems, educational problems, neglect
problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Social Workers of Children's Aid Society in
the various counties.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained by the Children's Aid Society workers.
Medical examinations are secured in Philadelphia at the Associated Medical Clinic, in the counties by the staff physicians.
Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon Test, Gesell Developmental Norms, Stutzman and Hallowell Pre-School Test, Pintner-Patterson Performance Test, formboards, Stenquist Mechanical, Army Alpha.
Philadelphia Public School Clinic: (Parkway at 21st Street, Philadelphia, Pa.)
The clinic was developed in response to the need of the Division
of Special Education for clinical study as a basis for the placement
of children.
Jurisdiction: Board of Education.
Staff:
Director: Ide, Gladys Genevra, B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: McCaulley, Selinda, Ph.D.; Gillet, Myrtle M.,
Ph.D.; Farson, Mabel, Ph.D.; Murphy, Genevieve, M.A.;
Stahl, Katherine, M.A.; McNally, Lorraine, M.A.; Townsend, Lorraine, M.A.; Butts, Louise, M.A.; Lightfoot, Jessie,
116 TEE PSYCEOLOGICAL CLINIC
M.A.; Ambler, Mary, M.A.; Carpenter, Mary, M.A.; Scoot,
Edith, M.A.; Vauglian, Anastasia, B.A.
Clerks: 6.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 7000.
Age range of persons studied: 1 to 21 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational
problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Schools, Compulsory Education Bureau, Social agencies, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interviews and reports from referring agencies.
Medical examinations are obtained by reference to hospitals'
service.
Tests used: Most of the well known psychological tests; tests developed in the clinic.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is done.
Research is supervised by the director and conducted by the
psychologists on the staff and the teachers in preparation for their
degrees. No time is assigned for research; what is done is accomplished as a result of personal initiative of staff members.
The Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania: (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.)
Jurisdiction: Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania.
The Psychological Clinic was a direct development of Dr Lightner Witmer's experimental methods of studying and teaching child
psychology. Through the "attempt to teach" the underlying
disabilities of children were disclosed to his students, and educational methods of meeting them were demonstrated. A course
called '' Clinical Psychology'' and a special department of research
in the Psychological Laboratory, called the "Psychological Clinic"
were developed. In 1907, the importance of the Psychological
Clinic and its relation to the Psychological Laboratory were recognized by the trustees of the University of Pennsylvania by organizing the Psychological Laboratory and Clinic as an auxiliary department, with Dr Witmer as director, and Dr Twitmyer as
assistant director.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 117
Staff :
Director: Witmer, Lightner, B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Professor of
Psychology, and Director of the Psychological Laboratory
and Clinic.
Assistant Director: Twitmyer, Edwin B., B.A., M.A., Ph.D.,
LL.D., Professor of Psychology, and Assistant Director of
the Psychological Laboratory and Clinic, Chief of Corrective
Speech Clinic.
Psychologists: Brotemarkle, Robert A., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Psychology, Examining Psychologist,
College Personnel Officer; Viteles, Morris S., B.A., M.A.,
Ph.D., Examining Psychologist; Nathanson, Yale S., B.A.,
M.A., Ph.D., Instructor in Psychology, Examining Psychologist; Murphy, Miles, B.A., Ph.D., Assistant Professor of
Psychology, Chief of Clinic, Examining Psychologist;
Sylvester, Mildred Loring, B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Examining
Psychologist, Executive Officer; Snee, Thomas J., B.A., M.A.,
Ph.D., Examining Psychologist.
Social Worker: 1, with B.A. and M.A. degree.
Clinic Teacher: 1, with B.S. and M.A. degree.
Clerks: 1, with B.S. degree.
Recorder: 1, professionally trained Keeper of Records.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 750.
Age range of persons studied: 1 year to adult.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational problems, neglect problems, placement problems, educational and vocational guidance problems, mental defects and
abnormalities, superior children, speech defects, determination
of mental status within normal range, personality problems.
Source of reference: Schools, hospitals, social agencies, private
physicians, general publicity.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained: 1. General information blank sent to person making request; 2. Personal conference at the clinic between various members of staff and other interested persons; 3. Reports of hospitals,
physicians, schools, etc.; 4. Visits to home and school by social
worker.
Medical problems are referred to hospitals of Philadelphia according to the nature of the problem. The medical advice so secured is carried out.
118 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Tests used:
Used in all Clinics as required:
1) Witmer Battery of Proficiency Tests:
(?.) Peg boards, various, including Wallin; (b) Witmer Formboard; (c) Witmer Cylinders; (d) WitmerDearborn Formboard; (e) Discernment Spans; (/)
Comprehension Spans; (g) Color Cubes; (h) Design
Blocks; (i) Healy Completion I, II; (j) Healy Construction A, B; (Jc) School proficiency?Reading
(Gray Reading Test, Monroe Reading Test), Spelling
(Philadelphia Public School Standards, Ayres),
Arithmetic (Philadelphia Public School Standards),
Writing; (I) Standard Binet; (m) Anthropometric
Measures?Height, Weight, Headgirth.
2) Otis Self-Administering Tests.
3) Minnesota Pre-School Scale.
4) Kuhlmann-Anderson Tests.
5) American Council in Education.
6) Stanford Achievement Tests.
7) Ferguson Boards.
Used in the Corrective Speech Clinic:
1) Witmer Battery of Proficiency Tests (as required).
2) Tests of speech efficiency: Toys; Reading material, etc.
3) Tests of breathing capacity: Spirometer; Tape measure;
Stethoscope; Sphygmomanometer, etc.
4) Tests of breathing proficiency: Pneumomanometer.
5) Tests of hearing: Watch; Tuning forks; Cricket, etc.;
Galton Whistle; Audiometer.
6) Reflex Tests: Hammer, etc.
7) Tests of mental status.
Used in Vocational Guidance Clinic:
1) Witmer Battery of Proficiency Tests (as required).
2) Otis Self-Administering Tests.
3) American Council on Education Examination.
4) Stanford Achievement Tests.
5) Bernreuter Personality Inventory.
6) Stenquist Mechanical Assembly Tests.
7) Girls' Assembly Test (Viteles Modification of I.E.R.).
8) Minnesota Paper Form Board Test.
9) Minnesota Spatial Relations Test.
10) Viteles Machine Feeding Test.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 119
11) Poppelreuter Work Samples.
12) Detroit Manual Ability Test.
13) Wiggly Block.
14) Interest Tests?Strong, Manson, Cowdery, Fryed, Miner,
McHale.
15) Woodworth Personal Data Sheet.
16) Lewerenz Fundamental Abilities in Visual Art.
17) Seashore Test of Musical Talent.
18) Stanford Motor Skill Unit.
19) Stanford Scientific Aptitude Tests.
20) Iowa Placement Tests.
21) I.E.R. Clerical Ability Test.
22) Viteles (T-100).
23) Roback Comprehension Test.
24) Terman Group Test of Mental Ability.
25) Morgan Mental Test.
26) A-S Reaction Tests.
27) Downey Will-Temperament Test.
28) Laird Personality Inventory.
29) North Carolina Rating Scale.
30) Pressey X-O.
31) Thurstone Personality Schedule.
32) Handschin Modern Language Test.
33) Iowa Silent Reading Test.
34) Thurstone Vocational Guide.
35) MacQuarrie Mechanical Ability Test.
36) Meier-Seashore Art Judgment Test.
37) George Washington University Aptitude Tests.
38) Taylor Number Test.
Used in the College Personnel Guidance Clinic:
1) Witmer Battery of Proficiency Tests (as required).
2) Battery of individual tests of fundamental abilities and
complex mental processes for the establishment of the
mental graph type. Performance tests: Witmer,
Dearborn, Ferguson, General Electric. Battery of
personality tests such as Pressey, Downey, Bernreuter,
Thurstone, Brotemarkle, and others leading to the
analysis of personality problems.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is in charge of an experienced
teacher who has the M.A. degree.
120 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
No one on the staff of the clinic is solely on a research basis. Research is carried on by members of the staff who are also on the
faculty of the University of Pennsylvania, and by graduate students under their direction. No definite time is assigned to research. Research is not supported financially except in cases of
occasional students holding University fellowships. Training and
practice is given in mental testing, diagnostic practice, vocational
and educational guidance, social service, industrial arts, clinic teaching, and speech training.
Academic requirement for such training is at least three years
of undergraduate instruction involving courses in general psychology which include laboratory work and courses in clinical psychology with demonstrations of diagnostic methods and clinical practice
and clinical tests and measures. For training as professional
clinical psychologists, not more than 5 or 6 students are accepted
a year. Of semi-professional students there are about 25 in clinic
teaching, 10 in clinic testing and diagnosis, 20 in corrective speech
training and 15 in social service.
Various courses are offered by members of the Clinic Staff who
are also faculty members of the University of Pennsylvania. They
include besides the prerequisite courses in general psychology,
clinical teaching, clinic testing and diagnosis, mental abilities and
defects, speech defects, tests and measurements, mental hygiene,
psychological measurements, vocational counselling, personnel work,
clinical field work, vocational field work, analysis of human personality and individual research.
The minimum requirements for a professionally equipped clinical psychologist is a Ph.D., the completion of the courses listed
above or their equivalent, and a proven competency as an examining
psychologist and diagnostician.
Temple University Psychological Clinic: (Temple University, Broad
and Montgomery Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa.)
Jurisdiction: Temple University.
The aim of this clinic is the training of clinical psychologists.
Staff:
Director: Ford, Charles A., B.Sc., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Clerks: 1.
Number of persons studied annually: 450.
Age range of persons studied: 1 month to 50 years.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 121
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational
problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Hospitals, social agencies, schools, day nurseries, parents and students.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interviews with relatives and other persons.
Medical examinations are obtained through local hospitals.
Tests used: Intelligence tests?Stanford Binet-Simon, Herring;
Group intelligence tests; Formboards?Goddard, "Witmer, Ferguson; Young Slot Maze; Healy Pictorial; Porteus Maze; Personality test?Bernreuter, Thurston; educational achievement tests.
Training is offered in theory and practice in giving tests and
drawing inferences from test data.
The academic requirements for such training are advanced standing in psychology.
Six hours per week are required.
Fifteen new students are accepted each semester.
Training is supplemented by courses given at Temple University.
Psychological Clinic, University of Pittsburgh: (Department of
Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pa.)
Jurisdiction: This clinic was organized as a part of the department
or school of Education of the University in 1904. It aimed to
serve the public, especially the public schools. It is now under
the jurisdiction of the department of Psychology of the college.
Staff:
Director: Root, W. T., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: Teagarten, F. M., Ph.D., in charge of women and
adolescent girls; Whitmer, C. A., Ph.D., in charge of boys,
men and University students; Held, 0., Ph.D., University
male adjustment cases; Giardini, G., Ph.D., Director of Psychology, Western Penitentiary, in charge of students working in penitentiary; Louden, M. V., M.A., handles pre-school
children and general testing; Burchard, E. L., M.A., Volunteer, handles pre-school children; Rhinehart, Mrs. J. B.,
M.A., Graduate assistant in pre-school and Binet testing.
Psychiatrist: Wholey, C. C., M.D., Consultant.
Clerk: 1.
122 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Approximate number of students studied annually: 621.
Age range of persons studied: 2 to 40 years (Majority 5 to 20
years).
Eeasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, guidance
problems, miscellaneous problems.
Source of reference: University hospitals, schools, and social
agencies.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through social agencies, schools and clinics interviewed.
Medical examinations are made by Dr Theodore Elterich and
assistants at Allegheny General Hospital and by various specialists
through hospital clinics.
Tests used: Stanford Binet, Merrill-Palmer, Minnesota Pre-school,
Porteus Maze, Woodworth Matthews, Illinois General, Stanford Group Tests, Arthur, Stenquist, Formboards.
The clinic aims to keep on hand all standardized tests. Clinical
teaching is done with occasional cases.
Training and practice is offered to graduate students in psychology. Training offered in clinical method and practice and
special training in preparation for clinical work in penal institutions. About 5 students are accepted at present: 1 receives board
and room at the Penitentiary; 2 receive $250 plus tuition; 2 receive about $700 above tuition.
Many courses directly and indirectly related to the clinic are
offered in the University by members of the clinic staff who are
also on the University faculty.
Psycho-Educational Clinic, Penn State College: (State College,
Pa.)
Jurisdiction: School of Education, Penn State College.
The Psycho-Educational Clinic was organized to fill two recognized needs: (1) An agency which would furnish practical experience in clinical psychology: (2) An agency to which public schools
could refer problem children for study.
Staff:
Director: Bernreuter, R. G., B.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: Moore, B. V., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Chairman, Dept.
of Education and Psychology; Lepley, W. M., B.A., M.A.,
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 123
Instructor in Psychology; Baker, H. K., B.A., Instructor
in Speech Education.
Social Workers: Graduate students are used as occasion demands.
Clerks: 1 (part-time).
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 106.
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 55 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Guidance problems (30),
personal adjustment (25), educational problems (27), conduct
problems (18), mental defects and abnormalities (6).
Sources of reference: Penn State College, public schools, Western
State Penitentiary, probation officers, parents, self.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interviews and by home visits.
Medical examinations are secured from school and college physicians.
Tests used: Intelligence tests?Stanford Binet-Simon, Group
(various types); Kent-Rosanoff; Goodenough Drawing; Bernreuter Personality Inventory; Manson Occupational Interest;
Strong Vocational Interest; Social-Psychological Data; Therapeutic Analysis; Woodworth Personal Data; Motor Coordination; Performance Intelligence; Educational Achievement;

Seashore Music.
Remedial teaching is done by graduate students.
Graduate students devote part time to research.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered to students
of graduate standing in a course entitled "Clinical Psychology."
Training is given in administration of tests, clinical teaching,
and in interviewing.
There is no limit to the number of students accepted.
This training is supplemented by courses offered in the Departments of Education and Psychology: courses in educational,
physiological, applied, abnormal and clinical psychology, tests and
measurements, diagnostic testing, speech education, mental hygiene, personnel, statistics, child development, and adolescence.
Rhode Island
Psychological Clinic, Emma Pendleton Bradley Home: (East Providence, Rhode Island.)
The clinic is supported by private endowment and works in
affiliation with the Department of Psychology at Brown University,
and Butler Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island.

Staff:
Psychologist: Jasper, Herbert H., Ph.D.
Assistant Psychologist: Keller, Margaret E., M.A. (part-time).
Psychiatrist: Ruggles, A. H., M.D., D.Sc.
Consulting Psychiatrists: McDonald, C. A., M.D.; Nichols, Ira
C., M.D.
Physicians: Bradley, Charles, M.D., Resident physician; Montgomery, M., M.D., Assistant.
Social "Worker: Cobb, Dorothy, B.A., M.S.S.
Approximate number of persons studied: 113 (April, 1931 to January, 1933).
Age range of persons studied: 1 to 12 years.
Problems presented: Convulsives (38), birth injuries (29), organic
disease of brain (14), post-encephalitic (5), chorea (4), unclassified (5), conduct problems (18), educational problems (5).
Sources of reference: Physicians.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained by the social worker.
Medical examinations are made by clinic physician.
Tests used: Intelligence Tests?Stanford revision Binet-Simon,
Kuhlmann-Anderson, Kuhlmann revision Binet-Simon; MerrillPalmer Series; Gesell Developmental; Arthur Point Scale; Eye
and Head Dominance; Kent-Rosanoff Association; Kent Emergency; Information tests; Achievement tests; Dearborn; Van
Alstyne Picture Vocabulary.
Diagnostic teaching is done.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered to under-graduates of Brown University, who devote various amounts of time to
the service. Dr Jasper and Dr Ruggles both conduct courses at
Brown University.
Juvenile Court Clinic?Child Guidance Clinic: (Mental Health
Clinic, Pawtucket, R. I.)
Jurisdiction: Rhode Island Society for Mental Hygiene, Providence.
These clinics are an outgrowth of the Mental Hygiene movement and they are supported from funds from 3 community chests,
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 125
Providence, Pawtucket-Blackstone Valley, and Cranston. Although
the clinics are considered as separate organizations, the actual working organization is a unit.

Staff:
Psychologist: Barlow, Madeline, B.A., Psychologist.
Medical Director: Corson, Harold F., M.D.
Social "Workers: Perry, Elizabeth; Cartwright, Dorothy E.
B.A.; Kiser, Martha Jane, B.A., M.S.

Clerks: 3.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 231 new cases.
Many old cases under treatment.
Age range of persons studied: 6 months to 18 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational
problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: Social agencies, schools, physicians, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained by social workers, referring agency and probation officers.
Medical examinations are made by clinic physician. Special
cases are referred elsewhere to specialists.
Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon, Arthur Scale, Ferguson
Formboards, Healy Pictorial, Porteus Maze, O'Connor Wiggly
Block, Stenquist, Trabue, Stanford Achievement, Personal Inventory, Thurstone Clerical Test, Furfey Developmental Scale,
Goodenough Drawing, Providence Drawing Scale, Infant
Scales?Gesell, Kuhlmann, Merrill-Palmer Series, formboards,
school achievement.
Providence Public School Clinic: (9 Exchange Terrace, Providence,
R. I.)
Jurisdiction: Board of Education.
The clinic was organized in response to the realization of the
need of a more accurate diagnosis in the cases of problem children
in the schools.
Staff:
Psychologist: "White, Helen, B.Ed., M.A., Assistant in Dept.
of Research and Guidance.
Psychological examiners: Cashman, Helen, B.Ed.; Munnagle,
Bessie, B.Ed.; South, Mary, B.Ed., M.A.
126 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Psychiatrist: Sanborn, Harvey D., M.D.
Social Worker: Seaman, Melissa, B.A.
Clerks: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 266.
Age range of persons studied: 5 to 20 years.
Sources of reference: School supervisors, principals and counsellors,
welfare agencies, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through the social worker and the school.
Medical and psychiatric examinations are made by staff. Vision
examinations by school physicians. Special examinations when indicated are secured through hospitals and private physicians.
Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon, tests for special abilities and disabilities, diagnostic testing for school subject disabilities, special tests for handicapped children.
Diagnostic teaching is done.
Research is supervised by Miss White and is carried on by the
psychological staff.
No special time is assigned for research.
Virginia
Mental Clinic: (Lynchburg, Virginia.)
Jurisdiction: City of Lynchburg.
The clinic was organized by the city to meet the need of the
courts and the social agencies for psychological study of their cases.

Staff:
Director: Friedline, Cora L., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Physician: 1, a volunteer.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 200.
Age range of persons studied: 4 to 50 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational
problems, neglect problems, guidance problems, mental defects
and abnormalities.
Sources of reference: City schools, courts (Adult and Juvenile),
charity organizations.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through a clinical questionnaire issued by the clinic.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 127
Medical examinations are not made in all cases. They are secured by volunteer medical service by special request for individual cases.
Tests used: Stanford revision Binet^Simon, Pintner-Patterson Performance, Porteus Maze, Woodworth Personal Data Sheet, Vocational Interest Blanks (varied types).
Washington
Child Study Department, Seattle Public Schools: (7th and Madison Streets, Seattle, Washington.)
Jurisdiction: Board of Education.
The clinic was the outgrowth of that department of the city
schools which originally supervised classes for deviate children.

Staff:
Director: Gaw, Frances I., B.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Laboratory Assistants: Burr, Margaret, B.S., M.A.; Mcintosh,
Elizabeth, B.A.; Granneberg, Dorothy, B.A., M.A.; Foster,
Helen, B.A.
Psychiatrist: 1.
Physician: Davidson, C. F., Specialist in Endocrinology.
Social Worker: Foster, Helen, of the Psychological Staff.
Clerks: 3.
Teacher: Hodges, Jo, Remedial reading.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 3899.
All persons studied are of school age.
Sources of reference: Public schools, Juvenile Courts, social
agencies, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through conferences with teachers, parents, etc.
Medical examinations are not made in all cases but every effort
is made to secure them whenever possible. They are frequently
secured through family physicians.

Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon, Herring revision BinetSimon, Strong Vocational Interest, Stenquist Assembling,
Mechanical Aptitudes, Porteus Maze, Cube Imitation, Adaptation Boards, Goddard Formboard, Manikin Test, Woodworth
and Wells Substitution, Diagonal Test, Triangle Test, Healy
Picture Completion, Dearborn Formboard, Healy Construction,
Cube Construction, Feature Profile.
Courses in Remedial Reading are held.
Training and practice in clinic service is offered to graduate
students or research workers.
Supervised practice in testing, the study of case records and opportunity to observe methods is offered.
The number of students varies.
A course in General Psychology is offered at the University of
Washington and courses in Parent Education are offered in cooperation with the Parent-Teacher association at centers in various parts
of the city.
Psychological Clinic, Child Welfare Department, University of
Washington: (Seattle, Washington.)
Jurisdiction: University of Washington, Seattle.
The clinic was organized as a result of the combined efforts of
the community and the departments of psychology and education.

Staff:
Director: Smith, Stevenson, Ph.D., Psychologist.
Associate Director: Gaw, Frances I., Ph.D., Psychologist; Seven
graduates and under-graduates, assistants in Psychology.
Physicians: 5, consultant.
Social Workers: 1, with B.S. degree.

Clerks: 1.
Number of persons studied: 663 (October, 1932 to June, 1933).
Age range of persons studied: Infancy to 82 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Guidance problems (220),
educational problems (100), placement problems (114), conduct problems (30), defects and abnormalities (20), neglect
problems (3).
Sources of reference: Schools, hospitals, courts, institutions, social
service organizations, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interviews by letter and by home visits.
Medical examinations are made by consultant physicians.
Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon, University of Washington Individual Tests, Pintner-Patterson Test, Group tests
individually used.

Diagnostic teaching is done.
Training and practice in all phases of clinic work is offered to
students of junior rank who are majoring in Psychology.
Part time is required.
$250 is paid to best students.
Eleven were trained last year.
Courses are offered by the Psychological staff at the University
of Washington.
West Virginia
Psychological Clinic, Marshall College: (Huntington, West Virginia.)
Jurisdiction: Department of Psychology, Marshall College.
The clinic was organized to meet the need realized by the community, the state, and the college for a clinic.

Staff:
Director: Bowers, E. V., Ph.B., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Clinician: Bowers, Stella M., B.A., M.A., Ph.D.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 75.
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 52 years.
Reasons given for study: Conduct problems (50), guidance problems (10), mental defects and abnormalities (8), educational
problems (4), placement problems (3).
Sources of reference: College, teachers, Juvenile Courts, parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained through interviews with the person studied, parents and
teachers, and through school and court records.
Medical examinations are not made in clinic; they are secured
through school, college and family physicians.
Tests used: Stanford revision Binet-Simon, Myers Mental Measure,
Porteus Maze, Goddard Formboard, Healy Picture Completion,
Knox Cube Imitation, Kent-Rosanoff Association, MerrillPalmer Series, Education Achievement Tests, Anthropometric
Measurements.

Training and practice in clinical service is offered to college
students with a minimum of 6 hours in Psychology.
Two to five students are accepted per semester.
Psychological staff offers courses in the college.
