Chapter II
===========

Summarized Facts Concerning Each Clinic
California
Claremont Colleges Guidance Center: (Claremont, California.)
Jurisdiction: Claremont Colleges; California Bureau of Juvenile
Research.
The Guidance Center was organized to meet the demands for
teachers, attendance officers, visiting teachers, clinical psychologists,
etc., who have had actual experience with children over a period of
time, and also to meet the need for child guidance clinic service in
communities surrounding Claremont.
Staff:
Director: Fenton, Norman, B.S., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Associate Director: Eyre, Mary B., B.A., M.A., Psychologist.
Psychologists: 11 graduate students working for the M.A. degree
in Psychology at Claremont Colleges.
Research Worker: Murray, Margaret E., M.A.
Associate Research Workers: 16 graduate students, candidates
for M.A. and Ph.D. degrees have developed theses from clini-
cal material.
Social Workers: 8 graduate students, candidates for M.A. and
Ph.D. degrees at Claremont Colleges.
Clerks : 3, also 1 library assistant.
36 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Number of persons studied: 392 (October, 1933-January, 1934).
Age range of persons studied: 4 to 18 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, guidance problems, mental defects and ab-
normalities.
Sources of reference: County coordinating council, county proba-
tion officers, public and private schools.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained by interviews with parents, teachers, and others who are
acquainted with the child.
Medical examinations are made in some cases by Claremont Col-
lege physicians but more often by family and school physicians.
Tests used: Stanford-Binet, Arthur Performance Scale, Stanford
Achievement, Monroe Diagnostic Reading Examination, Sten-
quist Mechanical Aptitude, Terman Group Test, other subject
matter and special ability tests, as indicated.
Research is supervised by Dr. Norman Fenton and conducted
by research associates and graduate students.
Students devote approximately one-third of their time to re-
search.
Training and practice in clinical psychology, teaching and social
work is offered to graduate students who have majored in psychol-
ogy or sociology in their under-graduate work.
From 15 to 25 students are selected on a basis of academic and
personal qualifications.
Tuition or maintenance is given to 13 students at a children's
institution. The clinical practice is supplemented by seminars in
educational tests and measurements, advanced clinical psychology,
behavior problems in children, exceptional children, research, etc.,
which are offered by Dr. Norman Fenton in Claremont College.
Traveling Child Guidance Clinic, California Bureau of Juvenile
Research: (Claremont, California.)
Jurisdiction: Department of Institutions, State of California.
A commission for the study of problem children was created in
California in 1927. As a result of the work of this commission,
the California Bureau of Juvenile Research was organized as a
part of the State Program to prevent Juvenile Delinquency.
Under this bureau of research a visiting Child Guidance Clinic was
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 37
organized for the purpose of studying children who present symp-
toms of maladjustment or serious behavior problems and to study
the causes of these difficulties in their early stages. These clinics
help communities to adjust children already presenting serious
behavior problems and offer an opportunity for parents, judges,
teachers, probation officers and others to gain an understanding
of the early symptoms of social conflict arising in the homes, the
schools, and the community, and lead them to cooperate in a pro-
gram to adjust the child in its own home and community.
The work of the clinic is two-fold in character: first, it offers a
regular clinical service to smaller communities by means of repeated
visits and follow-up work on the cases. Second, in larger com-
munities such as, Long Beach, San Diego, and San Jose, it acts as
a demonstration unit whose purpose it is to help the local communi-
ties to develop child guidance clinics of their own. The clinic has
visited eleven communities since December, 1929, and has also
served the city of Whittier and other nearby communities such as
Anaheim and Santa Anna. A regular four-day service with one
or two days of preliminary work in the community and several
return clinics have been held. In addition, follow-up visits have
been made by the psychiatric social worker in all communities
visited.
Staff:
Director: Fenton, Norman, B.S., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Senior Clinical Psychologist: Derby, Mary M., B.S., M.A.
Junior- Clinical Psychologists: Allan, Nan M., B.A., M.A.;
Davis, A. G., B.E., M.A.; Richey, Amytis, B.A., M.A.;
Spizht, Julia, B.A., M.A.; Tyson, Dorothy, K., B.A., M.A.
Psychiatrist & Chief of Staff: Jaeger, Ruth E., B.A., M.D.
Five psychiatrists from State Institutions contribute part-time
service.
Social Workers: 1, with a B.S. degree.
Clerks: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 575 (1932-33.',
Age range of persons studied: 4 to 18 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (250), edu-
cational problems (200), guidance problems (80), placement
problems (20), mental defects and abnormalities (15).
Sources of reference: Welfare agencies (public and private), Pro-
bation Department, schools, parents, prospective foster-parents,
physicians.
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
secured from referring agencies and by the social worker.
Medical examinations are made by local or family physicians.
Psychiatric examinations are made by clinic psychiatrists.
Tests used: Stanford Revision Binet-Simon, Arthur Performance
Scale, Stenquist Mechanical Aptitudes, Stanford Aptitude In-
terest Analysis, Neymann-Kolstedt, personality inventories,
formboards, achievement tests, analytic tests.
Research is under the direction of Dr. Fenton, and is conducted
by graduate students, with the Juvenile Bureau of Research.
Santa Rita Clinic: (2361 Bellevue Avenue, Los Angeles, Cali-
fornia.)
Jurisdiction: Catholic Welfare Bureau Relief Agency.
The Clinic was established to meet a need for medical and psy-
chological examinations of children in institutions governed by the
Catholic Welfare Bureau.
It is now installed in the Queen of Angels Hospital Building,
also under the jurisdiction of the Catholic Welfare Bureau.
Staff:
Director: Sullivan, Elizabeth T., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychiatrist: Steele, Edwin H., M.D., Member, Lunacy Com-
mission of Los Angeles County.
Physicians: The physicians of the Queen of Angels Hospital
staff are all available in consultation.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 75.
Age range of those studied: 4 to 14 years.
Reasons given for requests for study: Conduct problems (13), edu-
cational problems (14), neglect problems (5), placement prob-
lems (20), guidance problems (17), mental defects and ab-
normalities (36).
Sources of reference: Schools, relief agencies, physicians, etc.
Facts concerning social history, environment, and schooling,
are obtained from social workers of the referring agencies, and
clinic nurses. Medical examinations are not routine?are made
when requested.
Tests used: Intelligence, performance, and achievement tests.
Remedial teaching is done as time permits.
Research is conducted by Dr. Sullivan, Director of Clinic.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 39
No training is offered, though a few students are permitted to
observe.
Institute of Family Relations: (Consolidated Building, 6th and
Holl Sts., Los Angeles, California.)
Jurisdiction: An independent, non-profit, philanthropic organiza-
tion. Fees charged.
The Institute of Family Relations was established to meet the
generally recognized need of giving to the public the existing
information that will make for success in marriage and parenthood.
Its work consists of public education, personal service and re-
search. It represents the first organized attempt in the United
States to bring all the resources of science to bear on the promotion
of successful family life.
The General Director is Paul Popenoe, D.Sc.; the Medical
Director is John Vruwink, M.D.; the Educational Director Loran
Osborn, Ph.D.; and the Director of Psychological Service Kate
Brousseau, Ph.D.
The services of the institute include education for marriage,
family adjustment, assistance in problems of sex, heredity, child
training, adolescent behavior, disputed maternity and adoption of
children. It conducts a psychological clinic which offers a broad
psychological service. The Institute does not treat disease, but
refers its clients to their own physicians. Its work is primarily
diagnostic and educational. Transactions are wholly confidential.
It is operated on a non-profit basis as a public service. For
complete pre-marital conference and for cases of family malad-
justments a nominal fee of $10.00 is charged.
An extensive lecture service is maintained. Lectures are avail-
able on almost any topic concerning marriage and the family, and
a special series of six lectures in the choice of alternate subjects has
been arranged, in which experts cover the most important aspects
of the family. This course has been given under the auspices of
colleges, churches, christian associations, clubs and parent-teachers
associations.
Clinic Staff:
Director: Brousseau, Kate, Ph.D., Docteur de l'Universitie de
Paris, Psychologist.
Psychological Counsellors: Casselbury, William S., B.A., M.A.,
Ph.D.; Fenton, Jessie Chase, B.A., M.A., Ph.D.; Williams,
J. Harold, B.A., M.A., Ph.D.
40 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Medical Counsellor: Hunter, George G., M.D., Psychiatrist.
Medical Director: Vruwink, John, M.D.
Medical Counsellors: Belt, A. Elmer, M.D.; Frost, Kendal,
M.D.; Franklin, Dorothy, M.D.
Research Workers: Popenoe, Paul, D.Sc., General Director;
Brousseau, Kate, Ph.D., Director Psychological Service.
Social Workers: O'Reilly, Mrs. Juanita, Public Health Nurse,
Psychiatric Case Worker.
Teachers and Recreational Workers: 5.
Clerks: 3.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 3000; between
150 and 200 are given psychological tests.
Age range of persons studied: 6 months to 45 years.
Source of reference: State Department of Social Welfare, Court of
Domestic Relations, Children's Protective Association, Com-
munity Boys' Lodge, Council of Jewish Women, Children's
Home Society of California, physicians.
The facts concerning social history, environment, and schooling
are obtained from the case histories provided by the referring or-
ganizations and from conferences with the relatives and the indi-
vidual examined.
Medical examinations are not free, but are given at greatly re-
duced prices. Free medical service is obtained through the Gen-
eral Hospital, Children's Hospital and other clinics.
Tests used: Intelligence, word association, memory, color, person-
ality inventories.
Research is conducted by Dr. Popenoe and Dr. Brousseau.
Course in Clinical Psychology at University of Redlands: (Red-
lands, California.)
Jurisdiction: Department of Psychology, University of Redlands.
This clinic developed to meet the need of imparting the clinical
point of view to students. It was necessary to establish a clinic in
order to achieve this end.
Staif:
Director: Roberts, W. H., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 30.
Age range of persons studied: 6 to 18 years.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 41
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, guidance problems, mental defects and ab-
normalities.
Sources of reference: schools and parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained from teachers and from parents.
No medical examinations are made in the clinic; they are ob-
tained by referring to physicians in Redlands.
Tests used: Stanford Revision Binet-Simon, Arthur Performance
Battery, Woodworth-Matthews Personal Data Inventory.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered to senior
students who are admitted by permission only.
Training is given in testing and in interviewing.
Three to six students are accepted.
Clinical practice is supplemented by courses in Clinical Psy-
chology and Development of Personality, offered in the college cur-
riculum.
Juvenile Court Clinic of Stanford University Psychological Clinic:
(75 West St. James St., San Jose, California.)
Jurisdiction: Leland-Stanford University.
This clinic is associated with the Stanford University Psycho-
logical Clinic (No. 2 in this series). Its work is limited to Juvenile
Court subjects.
Staff:
Director: Merrill, Maud A., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Graduate students serve in capacity of mental examiners.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 100.
Age range of persons studied: 8 to 21 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (98%),
neglect and placement problems (2%).
Source of Reference: Juvenile Probation Department.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by experienced but otherwise untrained social workers.
Physical examinations are made, when indicated, by physician
appointed by the Judge of the Juvenile Court, or at County Hos-
pital.
42 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
No diagnostic or clinical teaching is done.
Research is directed by Dr. Maud A. Merrill. It is done by
graduate students in preparation of Master's degree.
Stanford University Psychological Clinic: (Dept. of Psychology,
Stanford Univ., Stanford University P. 0., California.)
Jurisdiction: Leland-Stanford University.
The Clinic was established in connection with the development
of a course in clinical psychology. The Clinic has always been
conducted by Stanford University and has had no other formal
connection except with the Juvenile Court of Santa Clara County
which connection has been maintained over a period of about
twenty years. Examinations are made on request for the Palo
Alto public schools, where a service is maintained, for the County
Charities Department, and for the Juvenile Court of San Mateo
County. The aim of the Clinic is primarily educational, i.e., it
serves as a training center for students in clinical methods and
practice.
Staff:
Director: Merrill, Maud A., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Graduate students serve in capacity of mental examiners. From
six to eight do mental testing in the schools and at the
Juvenile Court.
Psychiatrist: None. Service is rendered by members of the
staff of the Agnew State Hospital for the Insane and by
the professor of psychiatry at the Stanford Medical School.
Clerks: Two.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 500 (100 in some
detail).
Age range: Infancy through adolescence.
Reasons for requests for study: Conduct problems (50), educa-
tion problems (15), educational classifications (400), neglect
problems (15), guidance problems (10), mental defects and ab-
normalities (10).
Sources of reference: Juvenile Court, public schools, physicians,
parents and County Department of Charities.
Facts concerning social history, environment, and schooling are
obtained by student examiners and social workers who visit the
homes and the schools.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 43
Tests used: Intelligence, mechanical aptitude, achievement, educa-
tional, personality inventories, college entrance.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is done with a small number
of children. Research is supervised by the Director of Clinic. It is
done by graduate students in preparation of Master's theses.
Clinical training and practice is offered to major students in
psychology of senior or graduate standing. Training is given in
the application of psychometric techniques and their interpreta-
tion and evaluation in connection with the problems of adjust-
ment presented by children in the school, juvenile court, and
special situations.
Ten courses are offered at Stanford University as preparatory
for clinical practice, six are required and four are recommended.
Colorado
Department of Research, University of Denver: (Denver, Col-
orado.)
Jurisdiction: University of Denver.
The clinic was organized for the purpose of training students
in mental testing.
Staff:
Director: Garth, T. R., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Testers: Bechtold, Elsie, B. A., Graduate Student; Webster,
Anne, B. A., Graduate Student.
Clerk: 1. ,
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 50.
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 18 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, mental
defects and abnormalities.
Source of reference: schools and institutions.
Tests used: Intelligence.
Research is conducted by graduate students under direction of
Dr. Garth. Three students of the University of Denver accepted
for training in Binet testing.
Connecticut
The Yale Clinic of Child Development: (14 Davenport Ave., New
Haven, Conn.)
44 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Jurisdiction: Yale University School of Medicine.
The Yale Clinic of Child Development was founded by Dr.
Arnold Gesell in 1911. It soon became a section of the New
Haven Dispensary, affiliated with the Yale University School of
Medicine. The first work was the examination of backward and
exceptional pupils of the public schools; later emphasis was shifted
to the pre-school period and to special research concerning the
first year of life. The clinic has always been completely under
the auspices of the Yale University. It serves community or-
ganizations without charge.
Clinic Staff:
Director: Gesell, Arnold, Ph.D., M.D., D.Sc., Psychologist and
Psychiatrist.
Psychologists: Thompson, Helen, B.A., Ph.D., Research Asso-
ciate in Biology; Washburn, Ruth W., B. A., Ph.D., Re-
search Associate in Child Development.
Clinical Examiner: Castner, Burton M., B.A., Ph.D., Psy-
chologist.
Psychiatrist: Gesell, Arnold, M.D.
Physicians: Amatruda, Catherine Strunk, B.A., M.D., Clinical
Examiner and Research Assistant in Pediatrics; Ilg,
Frances, M.D., Research Assistant in Pediatrics.
Research Worker: Halverson, Henry M., Ph.D., Research As-
sociate in Experimental Psychology.
Social Workers: Bullis, Glenna E. (Part-time visitor), social
workers of referring organizations used.
Teacher: Jennings, Anne P., B.A., B.E., Guidance Worker.
Clerks: 1 (full time), 2 (part-time).
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 707 (2300 con-
tacts year 1932).
Age range of persons studied: 4 weeks to 16 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (34), edu-
cational problems (91), neglect and placement problems (416),
guidance problems (93), mental defects and abnormalities and
developmental research (73).
Sources of reference: Parents, physicians, State Bureau of Child
Welfare, other departments of the Medical School, visiting
nurse associations, nursery schools, social agencies (totaling
30).
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 45
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained through a blank which is filled out by parent or so-
cial agency and also by facts ascertained during interview.
Medical examinations are not always made by clinic physician.
They are sometimes obtained from other medical services.
Tests used: Yale developmental schedules, Stanford Revision of
Binet-Simon, Detroit, Standard performance and educational
tests, Merrill-Palmer.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching are done.
A few special cases of reading disability are cared for in the
clinical service department. Full time guidance work is done in
the Guidance Nursery. Research is conducted under the direction
of Dr. Gesell by research assistants and clinical examiners. Time
assigned for research is available. Training in the clinic is offered
for those holding college degrees or medical degrees. Number of
students accepted is 10. This training is supplemented by courses
given at Yale University.
District of Columbia
American University College of Liberal Arts Clinic in Psychology:
(American University Campus, Washington, D. C.)
Jurisdiction: American University.
The clinic was established in response to the need for psy-
chological service in the college and also to an appeal from outside
sources for such aid.
Staff:
Director: Bentley, John Edward, M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologist: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 50.
Age range of persons studied: Mostly children and adolescents.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, guidance problems, mental defects, and ab-
normalities.
Sources of reference: public schools, colleges, private individuals.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by case work methods.
Physical examinations including visual are made by the clinic
physician.
46 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Psychiatric examinations are obtained at St. Elizabeth Hos-
pital.
Tests used: Intelligence, educational, emotional, motor ability.
A small amount of diagnostic and clinical teaching is done.
The director offers courses at the American University, Wash-
ington, D. C., and the Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Mary-
land.
The Clinic for Mental and Nervous Diseases: (Providence Hospital,
2d and D Sts., SB., Washington, D. C.)
Jurisdiction: Catholic University of America, Providence Hospital.
The clinic was organized on the personal initiative of Dr. Moore.
Staff:
Head of Clinic: Moore, Thomas Verner, Ph.D., M.D., Psycholo-
gist and Psychiatrist.
Physicians: 2 (part-time).
Social Workers: The clinic is affiliated with the National
Catholic Social Service School and social service work is
done by students of the school under the direction of the
school staff.
Clerks: 1 (part-time).
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 216.
Age range of persons studied: 2 to 71 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guid-
ance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Sourees of reference: Schools, juvenile courts, associated charities,
parents.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained from referring agencies and special investigations by so-
cial workers.
Medical examinations are made by clinic physicians and special
examinations by reference to other clinics in the hospital.
Test used: Stanford Revision Binet-Simon, construction tests,
reasoning tests.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered to graduate
students.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 47
Training is given in Mental Measurements and Psychiatry.
Research is conducted by graduate students under the direction
of Dr. Furfey of the National Catholic Social Service School.
Georgia
University of Georgia Clinic: (Dept. of Psychology, University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia.)
Jurisdiction: University of Georgia.
The clinic was organized as a part of the Department of Psy-
chology on the initiative of the department.
Staff:
Director: Edwards, A. S., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: Green, J. E., Ph.D., Cooperating; Young, Flor-
ence, M.A., Cooperating; Ziegler, M. M., M.A., Cooperating;
Harrell, T. W., Student Assistant, Cooperating.
Psychiatrist: Echols, George L., M.D.
Physician: Reynolds, N., M.D. (University Physician).
Clerk: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 50 to 100.
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 62 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, guidance problems, mental defects and ab-
normalities.
Source of reference: Parents, teachers, judges, deans and pro-
fessors in the University.
Test used: Various forms of intelligence tests, performance, edu-
cational, special achievement, special tests as required by case.
Diagnostic or clinical teaching is done occasionally.
Research: A little is done as opportunity offers. No special re-
search workers.
Training and practice in examination and diagnosis is offered to
students in psychology. Number not limited.
Educational affiliations: Director of Clinic offers two courses in
senior college, in which there are discussions in clinical prob-
lems and clinical practice.
Hawaii
Psychological and Psychopathic Clinic, University of Hawaii:
(Honolulu, Hawaii.)
48 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Jurisdiction: University of Hawaii.
The clinic was organized as a result of the establishment of a
home for the feebleminded in Honolulu. This project made very
evident the need for a diagnostic service. "When the clinic was
established its services were extended to meet the needs of the
Juvenile Court and the other social service agencies, and a very
close cooperation exists between the clinic and the various agencies.
The clinic was organized in 1922 under legislative enactment, and
has been affiliated with the University of Hawaii from the begin-
ning.
Staff:
Director: Porteus, Stanley D., D.Sc., Psychologist.
Assistant Director: Babcock, Marjorie E., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Research Assistants: Leiter, Russell G., M. A.; Killon, Stewart,
M.A., Temporary Fellowship.
Clerks: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 600 to 1000.
Age range of persons studied: 3 years to adult.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (20%),
educational problems (50%), placement problems (5%), guid-
ance problems (10%), mental defects and abnormalities (15%).
Source of reference: Parents, school principals, Juvenile Court,
social service agencies.
The facts concerning the social history, environment and school-
ing are obtained from teachers, from parents, and from social
workers connected with the referring agencies. A very close con-
nection exists between the social workers and the clinic.
No physical examinations are made in the clinic; if indicated,
they are made at a community clinic or by family physician.
Tests used: Various types of intelligence, formboards, Porteus
Maze, Goodenough Drawing.
No diagnostic or clinical teaching is done.
Research is supervised by the Director of the Clinic, and is
conducted by staff members and by research assistants. One half of
the time of the Director is devoted to research and this is carried
on under a Rockefeller grant.
Educational affiliations: The Director and the Assistant Director
offer courses in research psychology and research racial psy-
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 49
chology and social psychology at the University of Hawaii.
They also offer psychological counseling to university students.
Illinois
Bureau of Child Study and Guidance: (Board of Education, 228
N. LaSalle St., Chicago, Illinois.)
Jurisdiction: Board of Education, Chicago, Illinois.
The Bureau of Child Study was organized in 1899 as the result
of the realization by the Board of Education that the School Sys-
tem needed an agency within its own control to properly deal with
individual variants of all types.
Staff:
Director: MacMillan, D. P., Ph.D., M.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: Barrett, Katherine, R.N., M.A.; Brett, Ellen P.,
M.A.; Chamness, Helen, B.A.; Geismeir, Ruth, B.A.; Ilouck,
Estelle M., M.A.; Huesman, Mary, M.A.; Lowe, Charlotte,
M.A.; Mueller, Willemina, B.A.; Spangler, Edna K., M.A.;
Thornhill, Judith, M.A.
Psychiatrists: MacMillan, D. P., Ph.D., M.D., Director; Bran-
nock, Karl, M.D.
Research Workers: Beckhour, Alfred G., Ph.D., Psychologist;
Rogers, Anna K., B.A., M.A.; Munson, Grace E., Ph.D.;
Meyers, Anna, B.A. Several persons connected with the
public school department give part-time to research in con-
nection with the Bureau of Child Study.
Clerks: 5.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 22,000.
Age range of persons studied: 3% to 22 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems (Lead in number), neglect problems, guidance
problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
The facts concerning the social history, environment and school-
ing are obtained from the truant officer, the visiting teachers and
vocational advisers connected with these public schools.
Medical examinations are made by the school medical examiners.
Research is supervised by the Director of the Bureau and is
conducted by all members of the staff.
No training and practice in clinic service is offered.
50 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Clinic of Jewish Social Service Bureau: (1800 Selden St., Chicago,
Illinois.)
Jurisdiction: Jewish Social Service Bureau.
The clinic was organized to meet the need of social workers for
intensive studies of the abilities and personalities of the clients in
order to rightly guide them educationally and vocationally.
Staff:
Psychologist: Grauer, David, B.A., M.A. (Part-time.)
Social Workers: None on Clinic Staff. Social Workers of
Bureau utilized.
Clerks: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 150 to 200.
Age range of person studied: 5 to 60 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Educational problems, place-
ment problems, guidance problems, mental defects and ab-
normalities.
Source of Reference: Jewish Social Service Bureau.
The facts concerning the social history, environment, and school-
ing are collected by the Social Case Workers of the Bureau.
No physical examinations are made in clinic. Medical and
psychiatric examinations are obtained by reference to various medi-
cal and psychiatric clinics.
Tests used: General intelligence, performance, mechanical, dex-
terity, educational, personality, interest, clerical.
No diagnostic or clinical teaching.
Research is done by the psychologists. No definite time is al-
lowed. Research deals with vocational, industrial, and educa-
tional problems.
No training and practice in clinical service offered.
Psycho-educational Clinic, Northwestern University: (School of
Education, Evanston, Illinois.)
Jurisdiction: School of Education, Northwestern University.
This is a psycho-educational clinic, the main function of which
is the diagnosis of cases of educational maladjustment. Remedial
measures are suggested to be carried out in the schools which origi-
nally referred them. The social histories and the reports of physi-
cal condition are forwarded to the clinic at the time of testing by
the agency which refers the case.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 51
Staff:
Director: Witty, Paul A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Assistant Directors: Lane, Howard A., M.A., Psychologist;
Wilkins, Leroy W., M.A., Psychologist.
Research Workers: The Director and Psychological Assistants.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 155 cases
(1930-32), 164 cases (1932-33).
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 19 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems (These lead in number), neglect problems,
placement problems, guidance problems, mental defects and
abnormalities.
Source of reference: Schools and parents.
The facts concerning the social history, environment, and school-
ing are obtained from referring persons or agencies and supple-
mented by facts secured during conference.
No medical examinations are made in the clinic, but simple
tests of vision, hearing, height and weight are made. Physical
examinations are secured from private or school physicians.
Tests used: Standard Survey and Diagnostic Tests, Porteus Maze,
Form Board, Pintner-Patterson, Arthur Scale, Educational
Tests.
Diagnostic or clinical teaching is used with about 50 children
per year. Research is under the direction of the Director of the
Clinic and the Director of Research of the School of Education of
Northwestern University. It is conducted by all members of the
clinic.
Training and practice in clinical service is offered to graduates.
The training is diagnosis of educational and conduct maladjust-
ments; application of remedial measures; and training in the ad-
ministration and interpretation of mental, educational and per-
formance tests. Number of students is limited to six. Regular
tuition fees are charged.
The Mooseheart Laboratory for Child Research: (Mooseheart,
Illinois.)
Jurisdiction: Mooseheart?The City of Childhood.
Mooseheart?the City of Childhood was founded in 1913 as a
home and school for children. It is supported by the Interna-
52 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tional Brotherhood of the Loyal Order of Moose. The citizens of
the city are all sons and daughters of deceased members of this
order. The school system extends from nursery school through
high school and includes industrial and vocational schools.
For the dual purpose of giving these 1300 children the best pos-
sible opportunities and for advancing scientific knowledge concern-
ing the growing normal child, the Board of Governors and Superin-
tendent of Mooseheart decided to establish a research laboratory.
After consulting with experts in child development, care and
training, the laboratory for child research was organized in 1930
with Dr. Martin Luther Reymert as Director and an advisory coun-
cil of eight scientists. An intensive, broad and varied research
program is at present in progress.
Staff:
Director: Reymert, Martin L., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Clinical Psychologist: Kuenzel, Myra W., M.A.
Assistant Clinical Psychologist: Hayes, Charlotte, M.A.
Fellow in Clinical Psychology: Carlson, Mildred, B.A.
Research Assistants in Psychology: Gulliksen, Harold, Ph.D.;
Ludwig, Kardos, Ph.D.; Meyer, Lorenz A., M.A.; Carrell,
James A., M.A., Ph.D.
Research Assistant in Physiology: Gulliksen, Dorothy, Ph.D.
Psychiatrist: Burling, Temple, M.D., Visiting Consultant.
Psychiatric Social Workers: Ortli, Mrs. Marjorie, M.A.; Run-
yon, Gertrude, Visiting.
The clientele of the clinic consists of the 1300 citizens of the
child city.
Tests used: Intelligence, achievement, mechanical ability, person-
ality inventories, vocational guidance, special abilities.
Research is under the direction of Dr. Reymert and is conducted
by Dr. Reymert and members of the staff. Seventeen research
projects are at present in progress.
Department of Educational Council, Winnetka Public Schools:
(Winnetka, Illinois.)
Jurisdiction: Winnetka Public Schools.
The organization of the clinic was the result of a special effort
to help the retarded group in the Winnetka Schools. Remedial
teachers affiliated with the Institute for Juvenile Research were
secured to handle this group. They stressed the necessity for
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 53
clinical diagnosis of the causes underlying the behavior of retard-
ates.
Staff:
School Psychologist: Voas, William H., M.A.
Psychiatrist: Rich, Gilbert J., M.D., Ph.D.
Physicians: Aldrich, C. A., M.D., Pediatrician; Munns, George,
M.D., Pediatrician.
Research Workers: Voas, William H., Psychologist, Director
(part-time); Morphet, Mrs. Mabel Vogel, Asst. Director
(full time).
Social Workers: McBee, Marian, M.S.S., Counsellor; Totten,
Helen, M.S.S., Counsellor; Belb, Trau, M.A.
Clerks: 1.
Age range of persons studied: 5 to 14 years; adults teachers, and
parents.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, guidance problems, mental defects and ab-
normalities.
Source of reference: Schools and homes.
The facts concerning the social history, environment, and
schooling are obtained by social workers through interviews with
members of the family, teachers and community workers and
schools.
Routine medical examinations made by clinic physician or fam-
ily physician.
Tests used: Intelligence, achievement, special ability, educational.
Research is supervised by Mr. Washburne, Superintendent of
Schools, and Mr. Voas, Director of Clinic. It is conducted by Mr.
Voas and Mrs. Morphet. Dr. Dorothy Van Alstyne of the Win-
netka Nursery School, also conducts research in nursery school
problems. Research deals with psychological and educational
problems.
Educational affiliations: Seminars are conducted by members of
the clinic staff at the Graduate Teachers College of Winnetka.
Indiana
Indiana University Psychological Clinic: (Bloomington, Indiana.)
Jurisdiction: Department of Psychology, Indiana University.
Established in 1922 as a part of the Department of Psychology
of Indiana University.
54 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Staff:
Director: Louttit, C.M., B.S., Ph.D., Psychologist. Much of
the clinical examining is done by graduate students under
the supervision of the Director.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 200.
Age range of persons studied: 3 to 20 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Educational problems, con-
duct problems, mental defects and abnormalities, speech.
Source of reference: City schools, social service agencies, physicians,
parents, individual studies.
The facts concerning the social history, environment and school-
ing are obtained by student worker.
Physical examinations whenever indicated.
Tests used: Binet-Simon, Witmer Formboard, Porteus Maze, Mer-
rill-Palmer.
Clinical teaching offered in a few cases.
Research is supervised by the Director and conducted by the
Director and students.
Training and practice in clinic service is offered to Juniors,
Seniors, and Graduate students.
Educational affiliations: Courses are given in Indiana University by
the Director of the Clinic.
Indiana University Psychological Clinic: (Indiana University Med-
ical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.)
Jurisdiction: Indiana University Medical School and Hospitals.
The clinic was established with the Hospital in 1923.
Staff:
Director: Louttit, C.M., D.S., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologist: Frith, Gladys D., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., M.D.
Psychiatrists 1
Physicians j- Hospital Staff are used in clinic service.
Social Workers j
Approximate number of persons examined annually: 350.
Age range of persons: 2 years to adult.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational
problems, speech.
Source of reference: Hospitals, schools, public health nurses, social
workers, courts, physicians.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 55
The facts concerning the social history, environment and school-
ing are obtained either during the interview from patients, family
and friends, or by hospital social worker.
Physical examinations are made by hospital physicians.
Tests used: Binet-Simon, "Witmer Formboard, Porteus Maze, Mer-
rill-Palmer.
Speech training given by members of staff.
Research is supervised by the Director and conducted by stu-
dents.
Educational affiliations: A course in child behavior problems is
offered for the graduates in the School of Nursing.
Iowa
Psychological and Speech Clinic, University of Iowa: (Iowa City,
Iowa.)
Jurisdiction: Interdepartmental unit supported by the departments
of psychiatry, psychology, and speech. It functions as a unit
of the out-patient department of the Psychopathic Hospital,
Iowa City, Iowa. It was organized in response to the need for
an interdepartmental unit to handle deviates who were not
sufficiently abnormal to be referred to the Psychopathic Hospital.
Staff:
Director: Travis, Lee Edward, B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Clinician in charge of stutterers: Johnson, "Wendell, B.A., M.A.,
Ph.D.
Clinician in charge of reading disability cases: Robinson, Frank,
B.A., M.A., Ph.D.
Psychometrist: Herren, Grace, B.A. (Psychopathic Hospital.)
Psychiatrists: Malamud, William, M.D., Asst. Director, Psycho-
pathic Hospital; Miller, Wilbur R., M.D., Instructor, Psy-
chopathic Hospital; Hill, T. S., M.D., Asst. Professor, Psy-
chopathic Hospital.
Social Workers: McCreery, Agnes, B.A., M.A.; Rasmus, Flor-
ence, B.A., M.A.
Teachers: Barnes, Harry, B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Asst. Professor in
Speech; Rasmus, Bessie, B.A., M.A., Clinician in charge of
articulatory cases, Instructor in Speech; Blattner, Helene,
B.A., M.A., Instructor in Speech.
Clerks: 1.
56 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 300.
Age range of persons studied: Pre-school years to adults.
Reasons given for request for study: Defective voice and speech
(250), reading difficulties (20), conduct problems (10), edu-
cational problems (20).
Source of reference: Psychopathic Hospital, University Hospital,
schools, University, orphanages, social workers, physicians, par-
ents.
The facts concerning the social history, environment and school-
ing are obtained by social workers.
Medical examinations are made by clinic physicians.
Tests used: Intelligence, Pintner-Patterson, Arthur Point Scale,
achievement, personality, placement, speech-sound discrimina-
tion, speech comprehension, silent reading comprehension.
Research is supervised by Drs. Travis, Malamud, Johnson, and
Barnes, and is conducted by them with the assistance of graduate
students.
Clinical training and practice are offered to about 12 to 15 stu-
dents per year. Requirements are a Ph.D with special training in
clinical psychology and psychiatry, or an M.D. with special training
in psychiatry.
Training is supplemented by courses offered in the Psycho-
pathic Hospital, the departments of Psychology and Speech, Zool-
ogy, the Child Welfare Research Station and the Medical School.
Psychological Clinic of Des Moines Health Center: (Jewett Build-
ing, Des Moines, Iowa.)
Jurisdiction: The Clinic functions as a part of the Des Moines
Health Center. It is governed by a board of directors made up
of representatives from the medical, dental, hospital and social
welfare agencies of the community, and of the juvenile court.
It is financed by the community chest.
The clinic was established in 1919 through the joint efforts of
Drake University, the County Medical Society, and the Public
Welfare Bureau.
Staff:
Psychologist: Sylvester, Reuel H., Ph.D.
Psychiatrists: Henry, H. B., M.D.; Hill, Julia, M.D., Child
Guidance Specialist.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 57
Physician: Smythe, E. Z., M.D., Medical Examiner.
Social "Worker: 1 with B.A. degree.
Clerks: 2.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 500.
Age range of persons studied: All ages; majority under 18 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (200),
placement problems (200), mental defects and abnormalities
(160), guidance problems (150), neglect problems (125), edu-
cational problems (50). Several reasons were given in many
cases.
Sources of reference: Welfare agencies, attendance and guidance
departments of schools, courts, hospitals, physicians, miscel-
laneous.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained by clinic interviews, by the social worker and from re-
ports made by referring agencies.
Medical examinations are made by clinic physicians and psy-
chiatrists.
Tests used: Stanford Revision Binet-Simon, performance tests,
analytic tests.
Students from Drake University use clinic data for research pur-
poses. Training and practice in clinical service is offered to Drake
University students and to social workers. The training is not
standardized. No definite number of students are accepted. No
remuneration is given.
Kansas
University of Kansas Educational Clinic: (Lawrence, Kansas.)
Jurisdiction: Part of School of Education, University of Kansas.
The clinic was organized in response to the need for specially
trained teachers for counselling and also for handling of special
educational and behavior problems of school children.
Staff:
Director: Nash, Bert A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologist: Turney, A. II., Ph.D., Consultant.
Psychiatrist: Harrington, G. L., M.D., Consultant.
Social Workers: Graduate students.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 250.
58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Age range of persons studied: 2 to 50 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (50), edu-
cational problems (50), mental defects and abnormalities (150).
Sources of reference: Public school, social service organizations,
institutions.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by graduate students through visits to the home and
school.
Routine physical examinations are not made. Parents are re-
ferred to specialists when necessary.
Tests used: Intelligence, performance scales, personality rating
scales, special aptitudes.
Remedial teaching is done by graduate students under super-
vision.
Research is done by graduate students under the direc-
tion of the clinic staff. Clinical training and practice are
offered to 12 graduate students per year. Preliminary work in
clinical and educational psychology required. Students are trained
for educational counselling, clinical psychology and special edu-
cation.
In connection with this training, the following courses are of-
fered in the University of Kansas: General and educational psy-
chology, Mental testing of school children, Psychology of elementary
school subjects, Adolescent psychology, Educational clinic, Special
problems, Non-typical children.
Wichita Child Research Laboratory: (Friends University, Wichita,
Kansas.)
Jurisdiction: Friends University and a Community Board.
This clinic was organized as a joint project of the University
and a group of interested women?the Wichita Child Research
Laboratory Board. It is located at the University; was at first
financed by money raised by the Board and later by the Community
Chest.
Staff:
Director: Cowan, Edwina A., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Research Assistant: Pratt, Bertha, B.A., Psychologist.
Clerks: 2.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 59
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 150.
Age range of persons studied: 6 weeks to 12 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educational
problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guidance prob-
lems, mental defects and abnormalities.
Source of reference: Parents, schools, physicians, social agencies,
Probate Court.
The facts concerning the social history, environment and school-
ing are obtained from the referring agencies.
Physical examinations are made by arrangement with clinics
or family physicians.
Tests used: Intelligence, developmental schedules, Binet for Blind,
Binet for Deaf Mutes, motor coordination, vocational, educa-
tional, personality, speech.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching are done.
Research is supervised by the Director and conducted by the
Director, the Research Assistant and University students. Time
devoted to Research: Director, 2 afternoons per week; Research
Assistants, 3 days per week; Students, from 4 to 10 hours per week.
Clinical training and practice is offered to senior students, with
training in elementary and genetic psychology. Training is of-
fered in testing and handling of minor problems, also in the theory
of diagnosis and handling of major problems. From 4 to 10 hours
a week is required.
Training is supplemented by courses offered by the Clinic Staff
at Friends University.
Kentucky
Psychological Clinic, University of Kentucky: (Lexington, Ken-
tucky. )
Jurisdiction: Department of Psychology, University of Kentucky.
The clinic was organized as a result of the personal initiative
of members of the Department of Psychology who are especially
equipped for and particularly interested in clinical service.
Staff:
Director: Miner, M. B., Ph.D., Professor in Psychology.
Psychologists: Dimmick, G. B., Ph.D., Asst. Prof, in Psychology;
White, M. M., Ph.D., Assoc. Prof, in Psychology; Beaumont,
Henry, Ph.D., Assoc. Prof, in Psychology.
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Research Workers: Gordon, Mary Agnes, M.A.; Watson, W. E.,
M.A.; Mullins, R. E., Graduate Student; Berg, S. E., Grad-
uate Student.
Social Workers: Graduate students and social workers from re-
ferring agencies.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 150.
Age range of persons studied: 5 to 50 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (50), edu-
cational problems (70), guidance (20), mental defects and ab-
normalities (15).
Source of reference: University officers, Juvenile Court, Family
Welfare Society, public schools, state institutions.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained from clinic interviews.
Medical examinations are not routine, but are secured when
indicated from local clinics and physicians.
Clinical teaching is done by graduate students.
Research is supervised by the staff and conducted by graduate
students. Training and practice are offered to graduate students
and those in senior standing who have sufficient credit in psy-
chology.
Training in clinical practice and testing is offered. This train-
ing is supplemented by courses given at the University by the
clinic staff.
Psychological Laboratory, Bureau of Research: (Louisville Public
Schools, Louisville, Kentucky.)
Jurisdiction: Board of Education.
The Bureau of Research is an administrative organization of
the Educational Department of Louisville Public School system
under the Board of Education. It has a three-fold purpose: ad-
ministrative research, supervision and interpretation of group test-
ing programs throughout the school system, and administration and
interpretation of psychological tests. It serves the school system
upon request of the principal of a school. The Psychological
Laboratory of the Bureau of Research was established in 1914, for
the purpose of selecting children for special class training, and
for the study of guidance and placement problems.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 61
Staff:
Assistant Superintendent in charge of reseach: Blom, E. C.,
Ph.D. in Education.
Psychologists: Modeson, Gertrude, B.A., M.A., Assistant in
Research; White, Dorothy, B.A., M.A., Assistant in Re-
search.
Clerks: 2.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 300.
Age range of persons studied: 5 to 18 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental
defects and abnormalities.
Source of reference: Public schools.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained from family studies prepared by visiting teachers.
No routine medical examinations are given. Cases are some-
times referred to medical clinics.
Tests used: Stanford Revision Binet-Simon, Goodenougli Drawing,
Arthur Point Scale.
Louisiana
Clinic of the Psychological Department of Louisiana State Univer-
sity: (Baton Rouge, Louisiana.)
Jurisdiction: Louisiana State University.
The clinic was organized as the result of the initiative of the de-
partment of psychology.
Staff:
Director: Bean, C. H., Ph.D., Psychologist; Young, Paul C.,
Ph.D., Psychologist.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 160.
Age range of persons studied: 18 months to senility.
Reasons given for study: Educational problems (65), guidance
(35), mental defects and abnormalities (30), placement (28),
conduct (12).
Source of reference: Louisiana State University, public schools,
parents, University students, individuals wishing guidance.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained through interviews with patients, relatives and teach-
ers.
62 TEE PSYCEOLOGICAL CLINIC
There are no routine physical examinations. Patients are some-
times referred to University medical school.
Test used: Intelligence, Goodenough Drawing, personality in-
ventories, Formboard, Free Association.
Clinical teaching is done in about 10% of cases. Clinical train-
ing and practice are offered and are supplemented by courses given
in the University.
Maryland
Child Guidance Clinic, Children's Aid Society: (Baltimore County,
Towson, Md.)
Jurisdiction: Children's Aid Society, Baltimore, Maryland. The
Johns Hopkins University and the Sheppard and Enoch Pratt
Psychopathic Hospital cooperate by contributing services of
specialists but neither assume other obligations.
The clinic was organized on the initiative of the Children's Aid
Society of Baltimore County. This society realized the need for a
clinical study of children whom they place in foster homes. The
service was requested of the psychological department of the Johns
Hopkins University and of the psychiatrist at the Sheppard and
Enoch Pratt Psychopathic Hospital, and finally a regular clinic
service was organized. The clinic is held at the Sheppard and
Enoch Pratt Psychopathic Hospital. The psychological staff is a
permanent one, headed by Dr. Buford Johnson. The psychiatric
service varies, different physicians serving as assigned by hospital.
Staff:
Director: Johnson, Buford, B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Members of psychological staff of Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity and graduate students assist in psychological testing.
Psychiatrist: One psychiatrist from staff of Sheppard and
Enoch Pratt Hospital serves for set time, then another is
appointed.
Social Workers: Workers on the staff of Children's Aid So-
ciety are utilized.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 50 to 80 per
year.
Age range of persons studied: 6 months to 18 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, placement problems, guidance problems, mental
defects and abnormalities
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 63
Source of reference: All persons studied are charges of the Chil-
dren's Aid Society.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained from the social workers and supplemented by facts
gained during interviews with psychologist and psychiatrist.
No routine physical examinations are made, but if indicated
children are referred to other medical clinics.
Tests used: Intelligence, performance, developmental schedules,
Porteus Maze, others as indicated.
Clinical training and practice are offered to students who have
completed a course in mental measurements and one in child psy-
chology offered at Johns Hopkins University.
Massachusetts
Judge Baker Guidance Center, A Service for Childhood and Youth:
(38y2 Beacon Street, Boston, Massachusetts.)
Jurisdiction: A Massachusetts corporation supported entirely by
private contributions and bequests, and functioning under a
Board of Trustees.
The Judge Baker Guidance Center, formerly the Judge Baker
Foundation, was established by Judge Frederick Pickering Cabot
in 1917 as a memorial to his predecessor, Judge Harvey Humphrey
Baker. As Judge of the Juvenile Court, Judge Cabot realized
that it was necessary to understand before judging, to know the
basic reasons for delinquency by studying offenders from psycho-
logical, psychiatric, and social points of view. To make such
understanding possible, he established the Judge Baker Founda-
tion. Instituted to study the juvenile court cases, the clinic soon
extended its service to include a great variety of charitable agen-
cies, and although at the present time the Juvenile Court supplies
more cases than any other agency, the Center serves the general
public.
Staff:
Directors: Healy, William, M.D.; Bronner, Augusta, F., Ph.D.,
Psychologists.
Psychologists: Wood, Louise, M.A.; Bashlow, Muriel, B.A.; four
volunteer psychologists.
Psychiatrists: Moulton, Bryant, M.D.; Skinner, Anne, M.D.;
four volunteer psychiatrists.
64 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Research Workers: Shimberg, Myra E., Ph.D.; four volunteers.
Social Workers: Garrett, Annette, M. A.; Dewey, Mildred, M.A.;
Lewenberg, Martha P., M.A.; six volunteers.
Publicity: Seabury, Mrs. Mortimer; three volunteers.
Executive Assistant: Bronner, James D.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 919.
Age range of persons studied: 6 to 18 years, average age 14.
Reasons given for request for study: Educational problems, be-
havior problems, personality problems, guidance problems, fam-
ily problems.
Source of reference: Juvenile Courts, other courts, child welfare
agencies, family welfare agencies, settlements, hospitals and
? health agencies, state departments, schools, physicians.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by social workers.
Physical examinations are given, and children are referred to
other clinics and laboratories for special diagnoses.
The need of expert treatment of the mental and emotional life
of children and of families has steadily grown clearer.
The Center maintains a treatment unit, which functions in co-
operation with the psychiatric and psychological staff, utilizes
psychiatric social workers from Smith College during a year of
training and workers-in-training assigned from other agencies. It
offers intensive work with selected families and special problem
children. It is supported by special appropriations from the God-
frey M. Hyams Fund. It carries approximately 214 families per
year. Volunteer tutors have added much to the efficiency of this
work.
Research is supervised by Dr. Shimberg and is conducted
largely by volunteers. Clinical training and practice are offered
in the departments of Psychiatry, Psychology, and Social Service.
The staff conferences are attended by large numbers of pro-
fessional people who come in classes or individually. They include
groups from Brown University, Framingham Normal School,
Wellesley College and students from Harvard and Yale.
Educational affiliations: Dr. Bronner and Dr. Healy offer a weekly
class at the School of Education of Boston University. Dr.
Healy offers a course on "The Bases of Personality Formation"
at the Harvard Theological School. Members of the staff give
many addresses before groups of various types and also con-
tribute radio talks. Seminars for social workers are conducted.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 65
The Department of Child Study, New England Home for Little
Wanderers: (161 South Huntington Avenue, Boston, Massa-
chusetts.)
Jurisdiction: New England Home for Little Wanderers, an inde-
pendent organization.
The Department of Child Study was organized in 1915, when
the Home for Little Wanderers established a Study Home. It was
believed that children who were accepted for foster home care
could be placed more satisfactorily after preliminary observation
in the Study Home. The advantages of the Study Home became
more and more apparent, and an increasing number of applications
were received from cooperating agencies and individuals. A large
proportion of the children admitted to the Study Home represent
behavior problems. About 50 children are accommodated.
Staff:
Psychologist: Hardwick, Rose S., Ph.D.
Psychiatrists: Anthonisen, Margaret, M.D.; Solomon, Harry C.,
M.D., Consulting Psychiatrist; Ordway, Mabel D., M.D.,
Consulting Psychiatrist; Taylor, Mary Anna, M.D., Con-
sulting Psychiatrist.
Pediatrician: Emerson, Paul F., M.D.
Social Workers: The Social Service Staff of the organization is
utilized.
Teacher: Slade, Mary A., Director of Experimental School.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 164.
Age range of persons studied: Early infancy to late adolescence.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, neglect
problems, guidance problems, placement problems, mental de-
fects and abnormalities, physical problems.
Source of reference: Other child-caring agencies, schools, courts,
churches, Mental Hygiene Clinics, hospitals, social agencies,
individuals from all parts of New England and beyond.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by the social field workers.
Physical examinations are made at the home by the Medical
Director or his assistants and consultants.
Tests used: Intelligence, developmental schedules, performance,
achievement, other tests as indicated by case.
66 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Clinical teaching is done by volunteers.
Research is a matter of individual initiative and is carried on
by students in training in social work. The records of the organi-
zation have been utilized in a number of research projects and are
made available insofar as possible to qualified workers.
Psycho-Educational Clinic: (Palfrey House, Rear 50 Oxford St.,
Cambridge, Mass.)
Jurisdiction: Graduate School of Education, Harvard University.
This clinic was organized by Dr. Walter F. Dearborn in 1913 as
a department of the School of Education of Harvard University in
order to study educational problems of school children.
Staff:
Director: Dearborn, W. F., M.D., Ph.D., Psychologist; Comfort,
F. D., M.Ed., M.A., Psychologist; Elliott, D. M., S.A., Psy-
chologist; Cattell, P., D.Ed., Research Associate, Psycholo-
gist; Knight, J. B., M.S., M.Ed., Psychologist, Administra-
tive Officer; Hobson, J. R., M.Ed., Research Assistant,
Psychologist; West, E. D., M.Ed., Research Assistant, Psy-
chologist; Wheeler, J. A., Research Assistant, Psychologist;
Lincoln, E. A., Ph.D., Assistant Professor in Psychology.
Psychiatrists: Dearborn, W. F., M.D., Ph.D.; Greene, R. A.,
M.D., Consultant, Supt. of Walter E. Fernald State School
for the Feeble-Minded.
Research Workers: Psychological Staff; Seymour, H. C., M.Ed.,
Assistant in Research.
Teachers: West, E. D., Psychological Staff; Wheeler, J. A.,
Psychological Staff, Remedial Teaching; Seymour, H. C.,
Research Staff; Comfort, F. D., Psychological Staff, Reme-
dial Instruction.
Clerks: 6.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: About 100;
also about 2500 examined annually in a special study of growth.
No age limit.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (6 or 7),
educational problems (90), guidance problems (3 or 4), mental
defects and abnormalities (3 or 4).
Source of reference: Largely private schools, public schools, clinics.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 67
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by staff members through conferences with teachers,
parents and home and school visits.
Only psychiatric and visual examinations are made by the
clinic staff. Other examinations secured from family physician or
medical clinics.
Tests used: Stanford Binet-Simon, Dearborn A, B, C, and D.,
other tests as indicated by case.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching are done.
Research is supervised by Dr. W. F. Dearborn, the Director of
the Clinic, and is conducted by members of the staff and advanced
graduate students. The main purpose of this clinic is research.
Clinical training and practice is offered to students of graduate
standing. Training is offered in the giving of mental tests and the
interpretation of results, examining, remedial instruction and re-
search methods. This training is supplemented by many courses
in the department of psychology at Harvard.
Department of Personnel and Research, Perkins Institution and
Massachusetts State School for the Blind: (Watertown, Massa-
chusetts. )
Jurisdiction: Perkins Institution and Massachusetts State School
for the Blind.
The Department was organized in September, 1932, in response
to the realization of the trustees and directors of the institution,
that the visually handicapped child needs special help in making
the necessary adjustments to life and that this school is especially
well qualified to initiate such work. The Department serves all
the New England States upon request.
Staff:
Director: Maxfield, Kathryn E., M.A., Psychologist.
Social Worker: Swinerton, Louise, B.S., R.N.
Clerks: 2.
The approximate number of persons studied annually: 275. Many
cases, this being a residential school, followed over a long
period of years.
Age range of persons studied: A few months to 30 years.
The reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, edu-
68 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
eational problems, placement problems, guidance problems,
mental defects and abnormalities.
Source of reference:/Teachers, principals, Medical Department,
matrons.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained from conferences, home visits, reports from school
departments, and from admission records.
Physical examinations are made by the Institute Physician.
Neurological and psychiatric examinations are made by consult-
ants.
Tests used: Intelligence tests, Hayes-Binet-Simon, Stanford Binet-
Simon.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is done.
Research is supervised by the Director of Personnel and Re-
search and conducted by a secretary and psychometrist.
Michigan
Mental Hygiene and Health Education Clinic: (Battle Creek,
Michigan.)
Jurisdiction: W. K. Kellogg Foundation.
The psychological section was first organized as a part of the
Ann J. Kellogg School, a special experimental school and later
incorporated into the activities of the Foundation, which had a
health unit in this school.
Staff:
Director Mental Hygiene: Street, Roy F., B.A., M.A., Ph.D.,
Psychologist.
Associate Director: Rosebrook, Wilda, B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psy-
chologist.
Teaching Nurses: Nine who are on staff act in the capacity of
social workers.
Clerks: 5.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 800.
Age range of persons studied: 5 to 18 years.
Source of reference: Schools, courts, parents, physicians.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by teaching nurses.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 69
Medical examinations are obtained through local physicians.
Tests used: Intelligence, achievement.
Detroit Psychological Clinic: (453 Stimson Avenue, Detroit, Mich-
igan.)
Jurisdiction: Detroit Board of Education.
The clinic was established in 1911 for the purpose of examining
and selecting children for classes of mentally retarded.
Staff:
Director: Baker, Harry J., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: Carter, Alice B., M.A.; Church, Frank, M.A.;
DeMartino, Angelina, B.A.; Jordan, Blanche, B.A.; Koepke,
Margaret, B.A.; Krumliolz, Louis, M.A.; Leland, Bernice,
M.A.; Nielson, Ruth, B.A.; Oakley, Catherine, B.A.; Selaver,
Maude, B.A.; Yoelker, Paul, B.A.
Physicians: 3.
Social Workers: 7. One has an M.A., six have a B.A. All are
experienced.
Clerks: 7.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 5000.
Age range of persons studied: 5 to 20 years or older.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (1000)
educational problems (500), neglect problems (150), placement
problems (150), guidance problems (200), mental defects and
abnormalities (3000).
Source of reference: The staff visits all the schools on scheduled
dates. Children to be examined selected by the teachers and
finally chosen by principal and staff representative.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by the staff social workers from interviews with
pupils and parents, schools and agencies.
Physical examinations are made to detect sensory defects.
When complete examinations are needed, children are referred to
private physicians or to public clinics.
Tests used: Intelligence, Pintner-Patterson, Porteus Maze, Form
Board, Kohs Blocks, Picture Completion.
A certain amount of research is conducted on individual initia-
tive. This is a service agency and no regular time is allotted for
research.
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Educational affiliations: The Director of the Clinic and members of
the staff offer courses at the Detroit Teachers College (Evening
Courses).
The Director also offers courses at the summer session of the
University of Wisconsin.
The Children's Center: (660 Frederick Street, Detroit, Michigan.)
Jurisdiction: The Child Guidance Division of the Children's Fund
of Michigan.
The Children's Center was established September 1, 1930, under
the Child Guidance Division of the Children's Fund of Michigan.
This clinic was the direct outgrowth of the Neuro-psychiatric Clinic
at Harper Hospital, Detroit, which had been in existence for five
years under the direction of Dr. A. L. Jacoby, Psychiatrist, who
died in April, 1927. The Neuro-psychiatric Clinic proved the im-
portance of preventive work with problem children, and the new
clinic decided that only children of average intelligence and above,
who were beginning to show problems of behavior, would be ac-
cepted for study. The clinic does not handle severe delinquents
nor children who are markedly ill mentally. If presented, such
children are studied by the psychiatrist, and if the prognosis is
sufficiently good, they are carried by the psychiatric social workers
under his direction.
Staff:
Director of Child Guidance Division: Watson, Maud E., Ph.D.,
Psychologist.
Psychologists: Aclieson, Eunice M., Ph.D.; Ridenour, Nina C.,
M.A.
Psychiatrist: August, Harry, M.D., B.S., D.P.M.
Physician: Hamil, Brenton M., M.D., Pediatrician (part-time).
Social Workers: Denecke, Helen, B.A.; Alpern, Estelle, B.A.;
Madsen, Frances, M.A.; Talbot, Mira, B.A.; Boynton, Alice,
M.A.; Hilton, Esther, B.A.; Bird, Elsie, M.A.; Turner, Flor-
ence, B.A.; Struthers, Eleanor, B.A.
Volunteer Social Workers: 3.
Clerks: 3.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 600.
Age range of persons studied: 2 to 16 years.
Source of reference: Schools, social agencies, physicians, parents.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 71
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by social workers through interviews with parents,
physicians, school teachers, etc.
Physical examinations are made by clinic physicians but are also
often referred to other physicians.
Tests used: Intelligence, developmental schedules, Arthur Point
Scale, Form Board, Vocabulary, Information, achievement, edu-
cational, interest, personality schedules, Goodenough Drawing.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is done by psychologists and
by graduate students.
Clinical training and practice is offered to those having an A.B.
degree, preference being given to students from New York or
Smith School of Social work.
Training is given in psychiatric social work. Full time is re-
quired. Usually 8 students.
One year of this training plus two summers' work at New York
University is accepted for an M.A. degree.
Educational affiliations: The director offers courses in mental hy-
giene at the City College. Students are principals, assistant
principals, counsellors, teachers and social workers.
Merrill-Palmer School Advisoy Service for College Women: (71
Ferry Ave., East, Detroit, Michigan.)
Jurisdiction: Merrill-Palmer School.
The service was established in response to a need for knowl-
edge of effect of college training upon life of college women.
Staff:
Psychologists: Vincent, E. L., Ph.D.; Stutsman, R., Ph.D.;
Roberts, Katherine, Ph.D.; Nesbitt, Margaret, M.A.; Camp-
bell, E. H., M.A., Research Supervision.
Physicians: McGuire, Ruth, M.D., Gynecologist (Part-time);
Wilson, Charles, M.D., Pediatrician, Consultant.
Research Workers: Foster, Robert, Ph.D., Director of Research;
Wilson, P. P., M.A., Social Secretary; Sweeney, Mary E.,
Director Department of Physical Growth.
Parent Education Worker: Tilson, Agnes, Ph.D.
Nutrition Specialists: Sweeney, Mary E., M.A.; McGuire, Lelia,
M.A.
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Clerical Assistants: Stenographers and Statistician.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 300.
Age range of persons studied: College women and their children,
husbands, etc.
Reasons given for request for study: Personal application for as-
sistance and advice on personal and family problems.
The facts concerning social history, environment and school
are obtained by staff through interviews.
Physical examinations are either made by clinic physician or
obtained by reference to other physicians.
Tests used: Intelligence, developmental schedules, mechanical apti-
tudes, diagnostic reading, personality inventories.
Research is supervised and conducted through committee or-
ganization. Three persons devote full time to research, three per-
sons part time, and there is one research fellow.
Clinical training and practice are offered. The selection of stu-
dents is based upon the capacity to do the work, not upon academic
standards. Training is offered in the study of normal children, in-
fants, pre-school and pre-adolescents, and observation of clinical
procedure. The training is supplemented by courses given in the
Merrill-Palmer School on mental hygiene of children, mental
measurements, physical growth and development of young chil-
dren and parent education.
Merrill-Palmer Special Behavior Clinic of Children's Hospital:
(Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan.)
Jurisdiction: Merrill-Palmer School and Children's Hospital of
Michigan.
The clinic was organized in response to the need of the Chil-
dren's Hospital for such a clinic in its training of internes and
supervisors, and in response to the need of the Merrill-Palmer
School for contacts with children from poorer homes.
Staff:
Psychologists: Vincent, E. L., Ph.D.; Stutsman, R., Ph.D.;
Roberts, Katherine, Ph.D.; Nesbitt, Margaret, M.A.
Pediatrician: Wilson, Charles, M.D., Head of Out-Patient De-
partment, Children's Hospital.
Parent Education Workers: Williams, Mrs. Charles, M.A., Psy-
chologist; Tilson, Agnes, Ph.D., Psychologist.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 73
Nutrition Specialists: Sweeney, Mary E., M.A.; McGuire, Lelia
M.A.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 50.
Age range of persons studied: 0 to 18 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guid-
ance problems, mental defects and abnormalities.
The facts concerning social history, environment, and schooling-
are obtained through interviews by parent educational workers.
Physical examinations are given by clinic physician or children
are referred to other physicians or clinics.
Tests used: Intelligence, mechanical aptitudes, diagnostic reading,
personality inventories.
Wayne County Clinic for Child Study: (1025 East Forest Ave.,
Detroit, Michigan.)
Jurisdiction: Juvenile Court and the State Psychopathic Hospital
at Ann Arbor.
In 1916 the Juvenile Court Judge found that there were many
recidivists whose particular problems were not fully met by or-
dinary institutions nor by probation. He secured the services of
a psychiatrist who was able to give considerable help to a limited
number of cases. The Judge then decided that a clinic should be
established as a regular part and function of the Court.
Staff:
Director: Hirsch, Nathaniel, M.D., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: Peterson, Ivis, Ph.B.; Hewson, Louise R., M.A.;
Milstein, Freda, B.A. (part-time).
Psychiatrists: August, Harry E., M.D. (part-time); Dorsey,
John M., M.D. (part-time).
The psychiatric service totals two and one half days per week.
Physicians: Taylor, Nelson, M.D., Examining Physician; Klein,
Louis, M.D., Consulting Endocrinologist.
Social Workers: Silliman, Marguerite, M.A.; Adler, Rose, B.A.;
Baxter, Margaret, M.Ed.; Papworth, Patricia, B.A. (part-
time) ; Meredith, Esther T., B.A. (vounteer) (part-time).
Clerks: 5.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 1000.
74 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Age range of persons studied: 2 years and older. Mostly adoles-
cents.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (majority),
neglect problems (few), placement problems (few), guidance
problems (few), mental defects and abnormalities (few), edu-
cational problems (practically none).
Sources of reference: Juvenile Courts, social agencies, parents, in-
terested persons.
Facts concerning social history, environment and schooling are
obtained from interviews with members of the family and other
interested persons from court files and from social agencies.
Medical examinations are made by clinic physicians.
Tests used: Stanford Revision Binet-Simon, Herring Revision
Binet-Simon, Kohs Blocks, Ferguson Formboards, Healy II,
Porteus Maze, Pintner-Patterson Performance Scale.
Some tutoring in remedial reading.
Research in delinquency, heredity and environment is con-
ducted by Dr. Hirsch. The time assigned for research is theoreti-
cally 50 days per year.
Training and practice in clinic service is offered to senior col-
lege students. Training is offered in the primary aspects of both
personality studies and social history.
Two or three students per year are accepted. No remuneration
is given.
Minnesota
University of Minnesota Speech Clinic: (Minneapolis, Minnesota.)
Jurisdiction: Department of Speech, University of Minnesota.
The clinic was organized in response to the need for adequate
handling of personality problems discovered in speech students.
Staff:
Director: Bryngelson, Bryng, B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Assistant: Hull, Catherine, B.A., M.A., Psychologist.
Research Workers: 2 graduate students.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 150.
Age range of persons studied: 18 to 40 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Educational problems (20%),
guidance problems (20%), mental defects and abnormalities
(60%).
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 75
Source of reference: Faculty, counsellors, departments of English,
Sociology, Psychology, and Medicine.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained through personal interviews with parents and per-
sons studied.
Physical examinations are obtained through the Health Service
and at the University Hospital.
Tests used: Intelligence, personality inventories. Testing service is
supplied from the University Testing Bureau.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is offered. From 5 to 6 hours
per day is devoted to such teaching. The main work of this clinic
is corrective speech, in which both psychological and neurological
therapy are used. Many stutterers are handled.
Research is supervised by the Director and carried on by grad-
uate students in preparation for theses.
Clinical training and practice are offered to majors in speech
pathology or clinical psychology.
The students are trained to handle behavior problems, mental
testing, vocational guidance and all types of speech correction.
Four or five students are accepted each year.
Clinical practice is supplemented by many courses offered in the
Department of Speech, University of Minnesota.
Division of Research, State Department of Public Institutions:
(State Capitol, St. Paul, Minnesota.)
Jurisdiction: State Department of Public Instruction.
The bureau was organized for the conducting of research in the
State School for the Feeble-Minded, and later the work was ex-
tended to include the examination of children for the State Board
of Education in connection with the organization of special classes
for the training of the mentally subnormal, and for other state
institutions.
Staff:
Director: Kuhlman, Fred, B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Mental Examiners: Kyle, Eileen, B.A., M.A., Psychologist;
Probst, Cathryn, B.A., M.A., Psychologist; Elonen, Anna,
B.A., M.A., Psychologist; Ewert, Josephine, B.A., M.A.,
Psychologist; Frandsen, Arden N., Ph.D., Psychologist;
76 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Malmstron, Hilda J., M.A., Psychologist.
Clerks: 2.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 4000 to 5000.
Age range of persons studied: 6 months to old age.
Source of reference: State Reformatories and Penal Institutions,
State School for Feeble-Minded, State Institution for depend-
ent children, State Institution for crippled children, County
Child Welfare Board, State Department of Education, private
charities and welfare agencies.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained through referring agency.
No medical examinations are made by clinic. They are secured
through agency referring the case.
Tests used: Kuhlman Handbook of Mental Tests, Kuhlman Ander-
son Intelligence Tests, Hayes Stanford Binet Scale for Blind,
Arthur Performance Scale, miscellaneous tests occasionally.
Research is supervised by the Director of the Division. It is
conducted by the various members of the staff. All members of
the staff have the opportunity to devote some time to research, if
they so desire. No research is required and no definite amount of
time is set aside for it.
Nebraska
Psychological Clinic, Lincoln Public Schools: (15th and M St.,
Lincoln, Neb.)
Jurisdiction: Board of Education.
The clinic was established to meet the need for selecting chil-
dren in preparation for the organization of special classes for
defective children.
Staff:
Psychologist: Slade, Clara M., B.A., M.A.
Research Workers: Goodrich, T. V., B.A., M.A., Director of
Research.
Visiting Teachers: 2.
Clerks: 1 (part-time).
Approximate number of persons studied annually: Number varies
each year.
Age range of persons studied: 4^2 to 18y2 years.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 77
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, guidance problems, mental defects and ab-
normalities.
Sources of reference: Superintendent of Schools, supervisor or
principal, Juvenile courts, parents.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by visiting teacher through interviews and home visits.
Medical examinations are made by school physician, and chil-
dren are referred to specialists when necessary.
Tests used: Intelligence tests (individual and group), academic
tests, formboard test, aptitude scale, special ability test, miscel-
laneous tests, when necessary.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching is done. Amount varies with
problems.
Research is conducted by the Director of Research, the Primary
Supervisor and the Psychologist.
No specified time is assigned for it.
Psychological Clinic, Creighton University: (25th and California
Streets, Omaha, Nebraska.)
Jurisdiction: Creighton University.
The clinic was established in response to the interest and desire
of the staff psychologists and of the social agencies.
Staff:
Psychologists: Kelly,William, B.A., M.A., LL.D., Ph.D.; Ken-
nedy, Leo R., B.A., M.A., Ph.D.
Psychiatrists: Houlton, Thomas, B.S., M.D., Consultant; Neu-
haus, George, M.D., Consultant.
Social Worker: Brown, L., B.A., M.A.
Clerk: 1.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 60.
Age range of persons studied: 9 months to 40 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems (40), edu-
cational problems (5), mental defects and abnormalities (15).
Source of reference: Schools, school nurses, family welfare or-
ganizations, parents.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by staff and from referring agency.
78 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
When medical examinations are needed, patient is referred to
medical clinic of medical school.
Tests used: Intelligence, performance scale, Goodenough Drawing
Test, Mechanical Ability Test, Seashore Tests.
Some diagnostic and clinical teaching are done by specially se-
cured teachers. Clinical training and practice are offered. There
are no regular requirements. Courses are given in Mental Hy-
giene, Mental Deficiency and in the giving of various individual
tests. Each student is required to give a minimum of 30 exam-
inations under the personal direction of Dr. Kennedy.
New Jersey
Psychological and Mental Hygiene Clinic of Rutgers University:
(Rutgers University, New Brunswick, N. J.)
Jurisdiction: Rutgers University, New Brunswick, N. J. Partial
subsidy from New Jersey State Department of Institutions and
Agencies.
Dr. Starr was called to establish a department of psychology at
Rutgers University. This he has attempted to do along the lines
followed at the University of Pennsylvania, which included the
establishment of a clinic. Furthermore, the Commissioner of the
State Department of Institutions and Agencies wished a clinic
established at the State University to function as both an examina-
tion and training center. The clinic was established in October,
1929, as a distinct department of the University.
Staff:
Director: Starr, Henry E., Ph.D.
Assistant Director: Starr, Anna S., Ph.D.
Psychologist: Sanderson, Sidney, Ph.D., Consultant.
Psychiatrist: Means, Paul B., M.D., Consultant.
Physicians: Johnson, F. C., M.D., Consultant, Pediatrician;
Kler, Joseph H., M.D., Consultant, Ophthalmology; Marvin,
Dorothy H., M.D., Consultant, Gynecology; Ridgeway, E. H.,
O.D., Consultant Optometrist.
Research "Workers: 4 Graduate Students.
Teachers: Orthogenic teaching done by advanced students
under direction.
Clerk: 1.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 79
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 250.
Age range of persons studied: 1 to 60 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, neglect problems, placement problems, guid-
ance problems, mental defects and abnormalities, personality
problems.
Source of reference: Persons come of their own volition or are re-
ferred by parents, teachers, physicians, friends, schools and
various social agencies.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by requiring the filling out of preliminary case his-
tory sheets by parents or other persons responsible for the case.
Neurological, psychiatric and visual examinations are made
when indicated by the consultant specialists, but regular physical
examinations are made by family and school physicians.
Tests used: Intelligence, developmental schedules, Form Board
Test, Pintner-Patterson, Rutgers Drawing Test, mechanical
aptitude tests, memory, information, personality schedules, mis-
cellaneous tests when indicated.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching are done when necessary by
advanced students. Research is supervised by the Director of the
Clinic and is conducted by staff and advanced students.
Clinical training and practice are offered, and a bachelor's
degree with the basic courses in psychology is a requisite.
Training is offered in the fundamentals of clinical psychology,
test administration and interpretation of results, diagnosis, prog-
nosis and treatment. Six students are accepted for training.
This training is supplemented by courses given by the clinic
staff in the Graduate School, the College of Arte and Sciences,
School of Education of Rutgers University.
Mental Hygiene Institute, State Teachers College: (Upper Mont-
clair, N. J.)
Jurisdiction: The Department of Psychology, State Teachers Col-
lege, Upper Montclair, New Jersey.
The clinic was established in response to the need for a demon-
stration clinic that would give class room teachers a better under-
standing of the dynamics of behavior.
80 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Staff:
Directors: Zachey, Caroline B., B.A., M.A., Ph.D., Psycholo-
gist; Lloyd, Wilma F., R.N., B.A., M.A., Psychologist;
Speyer, Helen, B.A., M.A., Psychologist.
Psychiatrist: Jewett, Stephen P., B.A., M.A., M.D.
Research Worker: Jaeger, Martha, B.A., M.A.
Social Worker: Roberts, Helen, B.A., M.A., M.S.S.
Clerks: 1 full-time secretary; part-time student assistants.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 500.
Age range of persons studied: 5 to 25 years.
Reasons given for request for study: Conduct problems, educa-
tional problems, guidance problems, mental defects and ab-
normalities (very few of these).
Source of reference: Students at State Teachers College, neighbor-
ing public schools, demonstration high school, two private
schools.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained by social worker, assisted by graduate students.
Medical examinations are made by clinic psychiatrist and a
college physician as consultant. Special cases are sometimes re-
ferred to Neurological Institute, New York City.
Tests used: Intelligence, developmental schedules, Kolis Blocks,
Porteus Maze, Form Boards, Assembling, Knox Cubes, Witmer
Cylinders, Healy Picture Completion, group tests.
Diagnostic and clinical teaching are carried on by students
under staff supervision.
Research is supervised by the Director of the Clinic and pro-
fessors under whom graduate students are conducting research.
Clinical training and practice are offered to students who have
a B.A. or B.S. The training is preparatory for work as a Psy-
chologist, Visiting Teacher, Guidance Worker in school.
Fifty-two students are accepted.
The clinical training and practice are supplemented by the fol-
lowing courses which are given by the Director of the Clinic and
her assistants: Educational psychology and mental hygiene, Educa-
tional psychology and tests and measurements, Analysis of case
histories, Treatment planning, Physical health problems of ad-
justment, administration of a guidance program.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF CLINICAL SECTION 81
The Vineland Laboratory: (The Training School, Yineland, New
Jersey.)
Jurisdiction: New Jersey State Department of Institutions and
Agencies.
The Laboratory was organized as a department of the Training
School in order to promote research in mental deficiency.
Staff:
Director: Doll, Edgar A., B.A., M.Pd., Ph.D., Psychologist.
Psychologists: Krezer, George, B.A., Ph.D., Research Associate;
Mclntire, J. T., B.A., Chief Clinical Psychologist; Long-
well, S. Geraldine, B.A., M.A., Research Asst.; Emerson,
Marion, B.A., Research Fellow.
Research Workers: All staff workers give full time to re-
search, three of them the major portion of their time.
Clerks: General Secretary, Clinic secretary and librarian, Edi-
torial secretary.
Approximate number of persons studied annually: 750.
Age range of persons studied: All ages.
Reasons given for request for study: Mental defects and abnor-
malities.
Source of reference: Courts, schools, homes, physicians, individuals.
The facts concerning social history, environment and schooling
are obtained through the use of blanks, correspondence, inter-
views and some visiting by psychologists and through routine insti-
tutional service.
Medical examinations are made by institution physicians and
by consultation service when required.
Research is supervised by the director and conducted by di-
rector and staff. The general plan is to devote half time to re-
search. In practice this depends on ability and interest of staff
members.
Training in clinical methods and practice, study and research
are offered. The degree of B.A. is a requisite.
One to five students are accepted, and maintenance is provided.
