Obituary. Sir James Coxe
=========================

341

"VVniLST the Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy for
Scotland was passing through the press one of the most eminent
members of the Board was carried off by death. Sir James Coxe
died at Folkestone on the 9th of May last, as he was on his way
home from a holiday of a few weeks on the Continent.
He was born at Georgie in 1811. He was the son of Robert
Coxe and nephew of George Combe, author of the " Consti-
tution of Man." The entire family seem to have been gifted
with considerable talents. Both he and his brothers distinguished
themselves in their respective vocations. Sir James was educated
at Edinburgh, Gottingen, Heidelberg, and Paris. When twenty-
four years of age be graduated M.I), at Edinburgh, and subse-
quently practised there. In 1841 he married the daughter of
Robert Cumming, Esq., of Logie. He now devoted much of his
leisure time to literature, chiefly in connection with Mr. George
Combe's works. In 1855 a Royal Commission was appointed
to investigate the state of Lunacy in Scotland. Sir James (then
Dr.) Coxe was a member of this Commission and, in consequence
of the representations made by him, showing the wretched con-
dition of the insane in the country, an Act of Parliament was
passed establishing the General Board of Lunacy for Scotland.
In the doings of this Board Dr. Coxe always took an active part.
To provide a better system of managing the insane he frequently
visited both Continental and English asylums. His experience
and the attention he gave to the subject enabled him to sug-
gest several practical reforms. These reforms excited strong
opposition from the parochial authorities, inasmuch as they
clashed with the local views of economy, and an attempt was
made in 18G2 to prevent the continuance of the Board, which
by the Act had been created for five years only. The attempt
happily failed, and the Board was allowed to go on with its
good work. In 1863 Dr. Coxe was rewarded for his services with
the honour of knighthood. The annual reports of the Commis-
sioners for Scotland, with the exception of the last two or three,
were all drawn up by him; and they form a most valuable
series, showing the progressive improvements and the reforms
342 OBITUARY.
that have taken place within recent years. In 1877 Sir James
gave evidence before the Dillwyn Committee ; and in the present
year he published an able pamphlet on "Lunacy in its Ilelations
to the State." Looking on his life as a whole, we find that the
good work he has done in regard to some of the most pitiable
members of the community mark him as one of the benefactors
of our race.
