Analysis of the Evidence Op The Dill- Wyn Committer In So Far as it Refers to The Scotch Lunacy Acts and their Administration, with Remarks Thereon
=====================================================================================================================================================

44
Art. IV.?.#
BY JAMES ROME, M.I). &c. Medical Superintendent Dundee Royal Lunatic Asylum, Dundee.
This voluminous Report?which consists of 582 pages, quarto
size, of closely printed matter, contains 11,645 different questions
and their replies, and weighs nearly 31bs. 8oz.?is the result of
the examination of 63 witnesses by a Select Committee of the
House of Commons, under the chairmanship of Mr. Stephen Cave.
As the object of the present paper is not to consider the whole
evidence, but only as much of it as concerns the Scotch Lunacy
Laws and their administration, it will be necessary to take
notice of the evidence of those witnesses only who refer to this
subject, and who would appear to be five in number?namely, Sir
James Coxe, Dr. Arthur Mitchell, Dr. Cameron, Dr. Gilchrist,
and Mr. William Balfour.
The evidence, however, naturally arranges itself into two
divisions, which will be considered separately?1. As showing
how far the present law in Scotland is satisfactory, in what
respects defective, and the suggestions made for its further
amendment; and 2, as exhibiting the results of the application
of the present law as shown in the condition of the patients in
asylums and poorhouses, and of those boarded out with friends
and relatives and strangers, and the other effects of its adminis-
tration generally.
Information on the former of these heads is afforded
principally from the examination of the Commissioners in
Lunacy, Sir James Coxe and Dr. Arthur Mitchell.
Both Commissioners begin by referring at considerable length
to the differences existing between the Scotch and English laws
as to the admission of patients into Asylums; and Dr. Mitchell
particularly speaks to the guarantees that are afforded by the
Scotch law in preventing persons being improperly received into
these Institutions. The first subject that appears worthy of
mention, however, in regard to the admission of patients is the
fact disclosed by Sir James Coxe in answer to questions 1949,
1950, and 1951?namely, that there is no limit laid down by
the statute as to the time within which the petition and certificate
* Read at meeting of the Modico-Psycliological Association, held in Edin-
burgh, November 2, 1877.
ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCE, ETC. 45
must be presented to the sheriff for the purpose of obtaining
his order; that " in fact the certificate may be given to the
sheriff six months after the patient has been seen by a medical
man," "provided the petition is also dated as far back." This
is certainly a curious omission and?although, as stated in reply
to question 2109, that "in practice the sheriff would never
grant his order upon old certificates "?there can be no difference
of opinion that the suggestion there also made, " that the medical
certificates should be within a certain time of the application to
the sheriff, instead of within a certain time of the date of the
petition," would be a satisfactory amendment of an evident
defect in the law as it now stands.
A subject of greater importance, however, is raised by question
1958, namely?"To secure admission into an asylum in Scotland
can the medical certificates be granted by English practitioners
as well as by Scotch ?" To this Sir James Coxe replies, " No ;
they must be resident in Scotland under the Scotch law. It
is the same in England; Scotch certificates are not accepted in
England." It woidd seem, however, that this opinion must be
received with a certain amount of reservation, as the question
has not been decided in any of the law courts. In answer to
question 9961, Dr. Mitchell states that, "in the year 1807, an
opinion was obtained from the law officers of the Crown to the
effect that certificates of lunacy granted by medical men resid-
ing in Scotland could not be accepted in England, and in like
manner that certificates of lunacy granted by medical men
in England and Ireland could not be accepted in Scotland."
" So far as I know, all the sheriffs of Scotland act on this
opinion, except Mr. Sheriff Hope, who holds that lie is entitled
and bound to interpret the law for himselt. I express no view,"
continues Dr. Mitchell, " as to the soundness of the legal opinion
given by the law advisers of the Crown ; but I think that the
practice founded on it tends in some measure to prevent the
improper committal of persons to asylums, and I also think that
it causes no serious inconvenience to any one." In corrobora-
tion of the above Dr. Gilchrist, in reply to question 4244, says
" that as regards the Sheriff ot Dumfries, he is perfectly willing
in all cases signed by either Irish or English medical men to
grant his warrant; he entirely opposes the Commissioners of
Lunacy on the subject; he says it is perfectly legal." It is
obvious that it. would be extremely desirable that this unsatisfac-
tory state of matters should be definitely settled, but when
members of the legal profession differ so widely it would be to
be guilty of more than presumption to offer any opinion as to
which side is in the right. I may mention, however, that my own
practice has been to insist on Scotch certificates being obtained
when the patient has been brought from beyond Scotland.
46 ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE OF TIIE
The emergency certificate would seem to have attracted
considerable attention, and to have been considered on the whole
beneficial, although open to abuse. In reply to question 2202,
Sir James Coxe thus defines its nature : "As it was originally"
intended, a certificate of emergency was meant to be acted upon
if a man were in a state of violent excitement which made it
necessary to remove him immediately to an asylum. It is of
course still made use of in this way, but in many cases the
patient is sent into the asylum without any urgent necessity
for immediate removal, and the sheriffs order is then got in a
leisurely sort of way;" and in reply to question 2203?" Is not
that a practice which is liable to the greatest abuse ? "?says," It
is liable to abuse, but I do not think it ever has been abused, I
mean to the detriment of the patientand adds: " When the
Act was brought before the House I pointed out the risk to Lord
Moncrieff, who was then Lord Advocate, and he said he thought
that the action of damages, which would be sure to be raised upon
any man getting out who was improperly confined, would be a
sufficient guarantee against abuse." Dr. Mitchell, in reply to
question 9898, in pointing out that this certificate may be granted
by the medical officer of the asylum into whicli the patient is
to be received, adds: " I think it would be a sounder principle to
prohibit every medical man connected with an asylum from
granting any certificate on which would depend the admission
of any patient into the asylum with which he was connected."
Few will deny the soundness of this principle. It has certainly
often appeared to me to be a curious sort of legislation that
enables a person by his own certificate to confer on himself
the power of depriving another of his liberty, but the practical
difficulty is to find a better arrangement. It frequently happens
that owing to many circumstances, such as the ignorance of the
relatives, or the nature of the case itself, a patient is driven into
an asylum without certificates or papers of any kind, in such a
condition that practically he cannot be sent out and kept out
till these are procured ; say, for example, furiously maniacal and
denuding himself of liis clothing, or with his throat cut, or
otherwise seriously injured. In such cases, were the power of
granting emergency certificates withdrawn from the medical
officers of the asylum, they would evidently be left in a very
unenviable dilemma; because they must either act illegally, and
detain the patient without any authority whatever until the
services of the nearest medical practitioner unconnected with
the asylum could be procured, or they must outrage every
principle of humanity by turning the patient out of doors.
The extent to which this certificate is made merely a certificate
of convenience is great, as may be seen from the fact that of the
DILLWYN COMMITTEE. 47
last 05 pauper patients admitted into the Dundee Royal Asylum
the emergency certificate was granted in 42 instances. One
curious point connected with this subject may be referred to,
namely, that, so far as I can make out, there is nothing in the
statute to prevent a patient from being detained in an asylum
for an indefinite period by means of a repetition of the emer-
gency certificate ; that is by discharging the patient at the end of
every third day and having him immediately readmitted on a
new certificate.
Another of those questions which must be left to the legal
profession to settle satisfactorily, is the relation in which the
duties of the sheriff stand to the facts indicating insanity em-
bodied in the medical certificates. In reply to question 1954,
Sir James Coxe says : " The practice of different sheriffs varies.
Some are particular, and object if the certificates are not satis-
factory ; in that case the sheriff calls upon the certifier to
amend the certificate; other sheriffs take less pains and are
apt to adopt the certificates just as they are presentedand,
in answer to question 2086, expresses his opinion that if " it were
made incumbent on the sheriff by statute to examine as to
the competency of the certificates that are granted by the
medical men, and judge of their validity and competency, that
it would be an additional protection to the subject." To this
might have also been added, and a great protection to the
medical profession in granting certificates of lunacy, as it
would to a certain extent transfer the responsibility of deciding
that the person certified was really a lunatic according to the
common law of Scotland?which is the essence of the whole
matter?from the medical man granting the certificate to the
sheriff, who undoubtedly ought to be the judge of the question.
As I already pointed out in a paper read before this Society
in 1875,* this difference in the practice of the sheriffs has
probably arisen in consequence of the confusion which was
introduced into the statute by the alteration made in the
statutory definition of lunacy by the Amendment Act of 1862.
I then pointed out that, " according to the definition clause of
the Act of 1857, it was evidently the duty of those certifying
persons to be insane, to satisfy themselves that the patient was
a lunatic in terms of the common law of Scotland; and al-
though this in many cases may prove no easy matter, in con-
sequence of the obscurity which surrounds the subject, still
great assistance was afforded to those granting certificates under
this Act in so far as the certificates were, in a measure, subject
to revision by the sheriff or his substitutes, whose duty it was to
* Published in The Journal of Psychological Mcdicinc, Vol. ii., Part I.
48 ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE OF THE
see that the facts mentioned in the certificates amounted to
evidence of insanity in the legal sense, before granting their
warrant for the transmission of the patient to an asylumthat
"the definition adopted in the Act of 1862 may simply be said
to have conferred on the general medical profession a power of
manufacturing lunatics; for all that is now required under this
Act is that the individual be duly certified by two medical
persons to be a lunatic, an insane person, an idiot, or a person
of unsound mind, and, whatever may be his real state of mind,
a statutory lunatic he forthwith becomesand that " it does
not even appear to be obligatory on the sheriff or his sub-
stitutes to examine the evidence of insanity given in the
certificates ; it would seem to be sufficient that they satisfy
themselves that the certificates are drawn up in due form."
An important part of the evidence now under consideration
has reference to the removal of the so-called harmless and in-
curable insane to the lunatic wards of poorhouses. In answer
to question 1966, Sir James Coxe explains "that all the pauper
lunatics in Scotland, wherever they are placed, are under the
authority of the Board of Lunacy ; whether they are in asylums
or in lunatic wards of poorhouses, or in private dwellings, the
Board of Lunacy takes cognisance of them; the Board grants
its license to lunatic wards to receive patients of a certain class."
1968?That they are harmless patients, " generally after being
discharged from the asylum, but sometimes they are admitted
directly from their parishes?for instance, if helpless idiots."
1969?That " evory patient is admitted upon special permission
from the Board of Lunacy. Every case is investigated and j udged
upon its own merits." 1970?That " no person can be detained
in the lunatic wards of a poorhouse " " not only not without the
cognisance but not without the sanction of the Board. It is the
sanction of the Board that then comes into play instead of the
sheriff's order. The sheriffs order is not in use for lunatic wards
of poorhouses. Although patients may be admitted upon a
sheriff's order, yet in practice they very seldom are." And again,
in reply to question 1986?" What is the certificate for detention
for poorhouses ? What is the duration and the scope of it ? "?
replied, " That is generally granted by the medical officer of the
poorhouse; the patient is sent into the poorhouse, and as it re-
quires the sanction of the Board to detain him, there is a certifi-
cate which lasts for a week, which is granted by the medical
officer of the poorhouse, or by any medical man, to the effect
that the patient is in his opinion a fit subject to be placed in the
lunatic wards, and authorising his temporary detention for a week
until the decision of the Board of Lunacy can be had." 1989?
That " there is only one medical certificate required for admis-
DILLWYN COMMITTEE. 49
sion into the lunatic wards of poorhouses;" and (2192) further
explains?" We (the Board) examine the lunatic wards and
license them ; they must receive a license; the in then case of
ever}' patient who is admitted, the papers are submitted to us;
we here take the place of the sheriff;" "our control over the
lunatic wards of the poorhouse is simple hut sufficient."
Dr. Mitchell gives similar evidence. After replying to
question 9941, " That the relieving officer cannot take a person
into the poorhouse in Scotland and when there place him in the
lunatic ward without the previous consent of the Commissioners,"
he further explains, in reply to question 9942, as to whether it is
upon certificates in the same way as regards all other patients?
" No, there is a difference in that respect, which I should like
to point out. If these establishments are to be regarded as
asylums, the uniformity of the Scotch procedure, to which I
have alluded as an important feature, is so far broken. Pauper
lunatics may be received into these institutions either on an
order of the sheriff, or on an order of the Board of Lunacy, and
in either case the order may be granted on one medical cer-
tificate. In nearly all I have hitherto said, I have not re-
garded these establishments as asylums. All kinds of mental
disease cannot be received into them. Only patients Avho are
incurable and inoffensive are admitted, and the single certificate
which accompanies the application for their admission is
specially designed to show that they are of this character, and
suitable for admission into such institutionsand, after stating
that 75 per cent, of the patients received into lunatic wards of
poorhouses are cases transferred from asylums, he adds (9946):
" It would not, in my opinion, be a bad provision of the law, if
no person could be admitted into the lunatic wards of the poor-
house otherwise that by transference from an asylum."
Even were the practical effect of the law in regard to the
admission of lunatics into poorhouses so satisfactory, that none
but harmless and incurable cases are ever received into them?
and it will be presently shown that this is far from being the
case the most cursory examination of this evidence is
enough to satisfy any one that the state of the law in regard
to this matter is capable of considerable amendment. The
clauses of the Act of Parliament which rule the licensing of
lunatic wards of poorhouses and the admission of patients into
them (iii. and iv. clauses, 25? and 26 Vic., cap 54) provide that
the lunatics shall be only those " who are not dangerous and do
not require curative treatment,'' and that their admission into
these wards, and their detention therein, shall be " according to
forms and subject to regulations approved of by the Board."
In other words, their admission and detention is not regu-
PART I. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. E
50 ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE OF THE
lated by direct statutory enactment, but as it has been termed
by a sort of bye law of the general Board of Lunacy.
Looking then at the condition of patients in the asylums
proper, and of those in the lunatic wards of poorhouses, from a
legal point of view, we have this curious anomaly presented to
us. In both cases the Act amounts to the deprivation of the
subject of his liberty for a longer or shorter period, it may be
for life ; but in the former case this can be done only on two
independent medical certificates and the authority of the
sheriff, while in the latter the same result may be arrived at on a
certificate of the medical officer of a poorhouse and the sanction
of an irresponsible Board ; for in judging of this matter it has
also to be kept in mind that by clause viii., 20? and 21? Vic.,
cap. 71, it is specially provided that the Commissioners
shall not be personally responsible for anything done bona fide
in the execution of the Act. As illustrating a further differ-
ence in which the liberty of the subject is treated in these
two cases, it may be observed that, while all the patients who
have been resident in an asylum for more than three years
have to be thereafter certified annually by the superintendent
as requiring continued detention, no such certificate is granted
in the case of patients detained in these lunatic wards, although
it is difficult to see why any difference should exist in practice.
No doubt lunatic wards of poorhouses are not specially men-
tioned in the clause of the Act referred to (vii. 29? and 30? Vic.,
cap. 51), the terms being " any asylum or house " wherein any
patient is received and detained by a sheriff's order; but we
have already seen that Dr. Mitchell at least would appear to
entertain doubts whether these wards should not really be
regarded as asylums.
When the subject is looked at from a medical point of view,
the defects of the present state of the law are even more
apparent. Although the control of the Board of Lunacy over
the lunatic wards of poorhouses may be simple and sufficient,
yet the mode in which patients may be selected for these wards
must be regarded as open to grave objections. Where the
wards are licensed for only a few patients the selection of suit-
able cases is generally made by the superintendent of the
asylum whence they are to be transferred. But when the
license has been granted for a large number, as has been the
case in Dundee, the following different modes of procedure have
been adopted. The patients in the asylum have first been
examined by the inspector of poor and governor of the poor-
house ; the patients regarded by them as suitable have been
taken note of, and the parochial medical officer afterwards sent
to re-examine them and to certify as to their fitness for the
DILLWY.V COMMITTEE.
51
wards of the poorhouse ; a sub-committee of the parochial board,
accompanied by their medical officer, have taken the place of
the inspector and governor with the same results ; while on other
occasions the governor of the poorhouse, accompanied by the
medical officer of the parish, have examined the patients, and
those approved of by the former have been there and then
certified by the latter. When the patients thus transferred to the
poorhouses are found unsuitable, prove troublesome, or become
dirty and degraded in their habits, they are replaced in the
asylum on new certificates and the sheriff's order?and a fresh
examination of the patients is then made, and more patients
selected until a sufficient number of manageable cases have
been obtained to fill the lunatic wards to the extent for which
they have been licensed. Frequent references have been made
to the unsatisfactory nature of this system in the annual reports
of the Dundee Asylum, and as far back as 18t>6 it was pointed
out that "the requirements of the statute would have been
more fully satisfied, had the Board extended to the parochial
medical officers the restriction of incompetency which they
imposed on the attendant medical officers of the poorhouse.
One parochial medical officer at least has freely admitted that
he loiks upon his certificate as a mere matter of form, and that
the selection of the patients might as well be left entirely in tlie
bands of the inspector of the poor or the governor of the poor-
house. The effect on the asylum is obvious ; an undue propor-
tion of paralytics, epileptics, and patients of degraded habits,
accumulate; the percentage of recoveries is lessened in conse-
quence of many of the patients removed being more or less
convalescent, and often serious mischief is done to the recent
and curable patients from the annoyance to which they are
thus subjected and the fear they often have of being selected
for transference. If the system of lunatic wards in connection
with poorhouses is to be contim.ed-and from Dr. Mitchells
reply to question 9971 it would appear that they may even bo
increased in number-it seems to me imperative that some
alteration in the present state of the law should be made A
more satisfactory state of matters could he easily brought about
?1. By more stringent legislation as to the nature of the cases
to be received into these wards. 2. By adopting Dr. Mitchells
suggestion that no cases should be admitted into them unless
they have previously been under treatment in a regular asylum.
3. By enacting that no cases shall he eligible for examination
unless they have been under treatment in the asylum for a
period not less than three years ; and 4. That the medical officer
selecting the cases shall be alike independent both of the asylum
E 2
52 ANALYSIS OP TITE EVIDENCE OF TIIE
and the parochial authorities, say one of the Commissioners in
Lunacy.
A subject of considerable importance not only to those
concerned in the detention of the insane but also to the general
public, is the evidence given relative to powers conferred by the
statute for the removal of patients from asylums who are harmless
but not absolutely sane; and in considering' this the remarks made
by the witnesses examined as to the nature and operation of the
prescriptive certificate determining the duration of the sheriff's
order required to be granted by the superintendents or medical
officers of asylum in terms of vii. 29? and 30? Vic., cap. 51, may at
the same time be discussed. In answer to question 2034?" What
provision is there for taking patients out of custody or detention
and restoring them to liberty ? "?Sir James Coxe replies: " In
the original Lunacy Act, the only person who could take persons
out of asylums was the sheriff. The sheriff had and still has
the power, upon receiving certificates from two medical men
that the patient had recovered, or that the patient was in a state
fit to be discharged, to order the removal of the patient. A
like power was given to the Commissioners but restricted to
recovered patients. They could not order any unrecovered
patient to be taken out of an asylum. Of course the party who
places the patient in an asylum can take him out at any time,"
(2035) " unless the superintendent certifies that he is in a
dangerous state," (2036) when "reference is made to the general
Board of Lunacy to decide whether he is in a fit state," (2037)
and " in the case of private patients the matter is referred to
the fiscal, and the fiscal proceeds to take evidence upon it."
And in reply to question 2043, which certainly must be regarded
as the most extreme view possible to take of the subject?" Sup-
posing the superintendent considers that the patient ought not to
be let out, and the relations do not want him to come out, but
still he is sane; in such a case as that what chance is there of
the patient being taken out ? " ? replies : " He would appeal to
the Commissioners at their visits, and if they saw reason to think
that he was sane, they would send two medical men to examine
him; it is a frequent procedure with us. The difficulty with us
is that we seldom get certificates of complete sanity, and then
we fail to get the patient out;" and in answer to question 2046,
"though he is an improper person to be there? " adds " that he is
not, perhaps, an improper person to be there, but he is a person
who might be out. It is difficult to say exactly what is a proper
person to be in an asylum, there is statutory reason for his
detention ;" and further, in answer to question 2052??' But in
fact, if the patient is perfectly harmless and might be at large
without injury to himself, or anybody else, yet cannot be
DILLWYN COMMITTEE.
53
certified as entirely sane, lie may be detained in an asylum all
liis life ?"?states, " Yes, there is no doubt he may." This witness
further thinks that it would be " an advantageous alteration of
the law" and " an additional protection to the liberty of the
subject, if (2054) the "Board should have the power which
is given to the sheriff, of allowing a man to get out upon
certificates that he is harmless."
Dr.Mitchell,in his evidence on the above subject,corroborates
the opinion given by Sir James Coxe. Thus in his reply to
question 10092 he says, " the very fact of restoration to sanity
makes the detention of a patient illegal. No particular
procedure, however, is laid down by the law foi such a case.
The superintendent simply discharges the patient as recovered,
and gives notice of the discharge to the Boaid. If the patient
thinks that he is still detained though he has reached a state of
sanity, he can appeal to the Board, who can order his discharge
on being satisfied by the certificate of two medical persons,
whom they may think fit to consult, of his recovery or sanity.
The Board cannot order the discharge of any patient of whose
complete restoration or sanity they are not thus satisfied; but
it is a provision of the law that any person having procured
and produced the certificate of two medical persons approved
by the sheriff, either of the recovery of any patient, or bearing
that the patient may, without risk of injury to himself or the
public, be set at large, may petition the sheriff to order his
discharge, which order the sheriff is empowered to grant This
procedure relates both to recovered and unrecoyered patients.
The Board can thus only discharge recovered patients, but the
sheriff can discharge both recovered and uncovered The
Commissioners and the sheriff alike require to have the condition
of the patient testified to by medical men of whom they approve
And in answer to question 10095- " 1 on think that it is a defect
in the Scotch law that the Commissioner have not the same
power as the sheriff to order the discharge of people who they
think ought to come ont ?"-says, ?1 es we feel that it would be
an advantage if we had that power, though we may often
manage to obtain our end by other means.
With regard to the certificate which is required by the statute
to continue the force of the sheriffs order after the patient has
been three years in the asylum, Sir James Coxe observes 2059):
" I think, too, that it would be well to consider whether the
present law which limits the duration of the sheriffs order is
sufficient, because at present it is continued in force by the
certificate of the superintendent or the proprietors of the asylum.
I do not think," he continues, " there is any temptation to detain
pauper patients : I think superintendents may be very well
54 ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE OF THE
trusted to grant a certificate for pauper patients, but I am not
sure that the proprietor of a private asylum should be trusted
to continue the sheriff's order in forceand (20(51) suggests as
an improvement on the present practice that the power of
continuing the sheriff's order "should emanate from a medical
man appointed by and acting for the sheriff."
Now, with all due deference to the Commissioners, whose
opinions this evidence represents, it seems to me that many,of
the apparent obstacles which they declare to exist in the Scotch
lunacy laws, against the discharge or removal of patients,
both private and pauper, arise from a misconception of their
true tenor and spirit. It is quite true that an apparent
difference seems to exist between the powers of the Board
and those of the sheriff, for while according to xcii. clause
of 20? and 21? Vic., cap. 71, in regard to the sheriff's powers,
it is enacted that " It shall be lawful for any person having
procured and produced the certificate of two medical persons,
approved by the sheriff, of the recovery of any lunatic, or
hearing that such lunatic may, without risk of injury to the
public or to the lunatic, be set at large, and also an order from
the sheriff for the liberation of the lunatic, to require the
superintendent of the asylum in which such lunatic is to
liberate such lunatic, and such lunatic shall be liberated ac-
cordingly ;" in regard to those of the Board, the same clause
says: " It shall, in like manner, be lawful for the Board, upon
being satisfied by the certificate of two medical persons, whom
they may think fit to consult of the recovery or sanity of any
person confined as a lunatic, to order the liberation of such
person." It is here evident that the whole question at issue
hinges on what is to be considered as the legal interpretation of
the term "recovery " or restoration to sanity, and nothing
appears clearer to my mind than that, as it is necessary that a
patient should not only be insane in the ordinary sense of the
term, but also in some measure dangerous to himself or others,
offensive to public decency, or in fact in such a state as would
render him amenable to the operation of the ordinary protec-
tive laws of Society, before he can be sent into an asylum; so
these dangerous or offensive elements of the case must be in
existence before he can be legally detained, and that as soon as
they cease to be operative, the patient should be discharged,
even although he may manifest delusions or other symptoms of
what is popularly known as insanity, provided these delusions
or symptoms be of a harmless nature. That such is really the
case will be evident from a consideration of the xvii. clause,
2o? and 26? Vic., cap. 54, where it is enacted that " when it
shall appear to the superintendent of any asylum or house that
DILLWYN COMMITTEE. 00
any lunatic detained therein has so far recovered that he may
he safely liberated without risk or injury to the public or the
lunatic, such superintendent shall grant a certificate to that
effect, or procure one from the ordinary medical attendant of
such asylum or house, and shall transmit a copy thereof to the
person at whose instance such lunatic is detained ; or in the
absence of such person to the nearest known relative of the
lunatic, and in the case of a pauper lunatic to the person or
pari si 1 by whom the expense of the maintenance of the lunatic
is defrayed; and on the failure within fourteen days from the
despatch of such copy certificate of the person to whom the
same was transmitted, to take steps for liberation of such re-
covered lunatic, such superintendent shall intimate the facts
to the Board, who may direct such inquiry into the circum-
stances as they deem necessary, and if satisfied that the lunatic
has recovered, or that he may be safely liberated without risk
or injury to the public or himself, the Board may order his
discharge forthwith." It is clear from this clause that when a
patient reaches such a state of convalescence that he may be
safely intrusted with his freedom, that he is a recovered case
in terms of the statute, and that if the Board can produce a
certificate signed by two medical men, that any patient,
private or pauper, may be liberated without risk or injury to
the public or to himself, there can be but little difficulty in
enforcing his discharge from any asylum. It was from a
consideration of the light which this clause throws on the
whole of the Scotch Lunacy Acts, that I was led in the paper
already referred to to express the opinion that the clause
terminating the power of the sheriff's oider after the expiry of
three years, unless continued by an annual certificate, was an
extraordinary, impracticable, and an unnecessary piece of legis-
lation, and this opinion would appear to be fully confirmed by
the comparatively negative results which have followed its
operation during the eleven years in which it has now been in
force. The proposal to have this certificate granted by a
medical man appointed by the sheriff, and who can have no
practical acquaintance with the history and nature of the cases,
instead of by the medical superintendent under whose care
they are, appears to me also so clearly impracticable that it
need require no further notice.
If it should, however, be thought by the Legislature ad-
visable to take into consideration the question of granting
exactly the same powers to the sheriff and Board of Lunacy, it
might then be advisable to ascertain how far it would be an
improvement that the medical men selected to examine any
doubtful patient should be to the satisfaction of the superin-
56 ANALYSIS OP THE EVIDENCE OF THE
tendent of the asylum in which the patient is detained, as
well as to the satisfaction of the sheriff and the Board. In this
manner the case would be resolved into one simply of arbitra-
tion, and would no doubt prove more satisfactory to all con-
cerned.
Amongst what may be called the curiosities of the evidence
may be noticed the subject raised by question 2077?" Can the
police arrest an escaped lunatic ? "?The answer given is that
the Board " have never been able to decide exactly what powers
the sheriffs order gives to the police, whether the police would
be justified or not in arresting him. I do not think the question
has ever been decided in a court of law. If a man were to get
across the border into England, I believe he would be free :
that the sheriffs order, whatever power it may have in Scotland,
does not extend into England." The presumption, however,
is that, viewed legally, a lunatic being an individual dangerous
to himself or others, or unable to look after himself, the police
would be justified in taking in charge any one answering that
description found at large.
Another is the question whether all letters written by
lunatics in asylums should be sent to those to whom they are
addressed. After explaining (10071) the statutory powers
regulating the correspondence between patients and the Board
of Lunacy, Dr. Mitchell adds : " I can scarcely see how there
could be any compulsory forwarding of letters beyond this,
though I think the grounds for not forwarding any letter should
be well considered and strong. Where there is a free admis-
sion of visitors, there will always be a free forwarding of letters.
In Scotland it is seldom a subject of complaint that letters are
not forwarded. I should like to add that, as regards the for-
warding of letters to the Board, there is no difference whatever
in Scotland between private patients and pauper patients, and
no difference between private asylums and public asylums;" and
in reply to question 10078?"Two proposals have been made :
one is to adopt what I believe is the plan in some asylums in
America, to have a post box in the asylum which is cleared by
a regular postman, and from which every letter is sent, and the
other is that all letters should be sent to the Commissioners, who
would have a clerk who might sift the correspondence, and send
on what he thought was fit to be sent on, retaining the rest,
what is your opinion about that ? "?replies: " I do not think any
change is necessary, but of these two proposals, I think the
second is the better. It would be a little hard to forward
every letter, because by so doing you would pain a number
of people; you would forward letters which would give
p-reat distress to people ; and I think that if any change is
DTLLWYN COMMITTEE.
57
resolved on, the second would be the better." It is very
doubtful how far even this would be an improvement. The
propriety of sending letters written by patients depends so
much on the individual circumstances of each case that it seems
to me impossible that any clerk attached to the General
Lunacy Board could discharge a duty at once so delicate and
requiring so much discrimination, in anything like a satisfactory
manner.
I will now conclude this portion of the subject by consider-
in^ the evidence given on the question, whether any change
seems desirable in regard to the medical attendauce on the in-
sane in asylums, as some considerable attention has been already
excited elsewhere on this matter. In reply to question 2092,
{Sir James Coxe refers to the district asylums of Elgin and Banff
"as beino- under the charge of laymen, non-medical men," but
visited sfTmany days a week, or daily, by a medical man froiv
outside; and in reply to question 2093, whether these asylums
are as well managed, and the patients as caiefully tieated, as
they are in asylums where medical men hav e chaige, answers : " I
think they are just as well: I think the Banff Asylum is a model
asylum in every way." Again, in answer to question 2094-" Do
you think in that respect, with inference to the curative treat-
ment of patients, that the visit might be made by medical men
resident in the district, without having medical men specially
appointed as managers or superintendents . les, where you
have a large asylum ; of course as the numbers increase there is
always a greater demand for medical visits. In a small asylum
a resident medical man is not necessaiy; in a arge asylum it
becomes necessary from the frequency of ca h w it- l might be
made upon him." In further reference to the Banff Asylum,
after stating that the number of patients 98 or 99, was as close
to the extreme number as was permitted by the statute without a
resident medical officer, he adds : ? There was a resident medical
man originally. He had so little to do that upon the petition
of the District Board to try how it would work with the
appointment of a non-medical man as superintendent, we made
the experiment, and the experiment has answeied remaikably
well." (2234) ? I think there is a great deal m the manage-
ment of asylums that is non-medical. ^ I think the mode of
management of this Banff Asylum, foi instance, depends very
much upon the natural qualities of the superintendent, and his
being a man who is well acquainted with the management
of land. He employs the patients upon the land in a
very satisfactory manner." In reply to question 2243
" Do I understand you rather to lessen the importance
of medical treatment in asylums ? "?he answers: "No, but I
58 ANALYSIS OF TIIE EVIDENCE OP THE
think a great deal of the supervision of a good asylum is not
medical. I think it is like the management of a large hotel,
or something of that kind, and medical men are not necessarily
the best hotel or farm managers." He further explains his
views on the special treatment of insanity in reply to question
2246?"\ou have not much faith in the medical treatment
of insanity as a special thing?"?when he states, "I have
great faith in the medical treatment of insanity, by restoring
the bodily functions to health, but I think you cannot treat
insanity as a special entity. I think you must set to work
to restore the health of the body, and that the mind then rights
itself."
In like manner, in answer to question 10000, whether he
considers there is any necessity for a resident medical officer
in a poorhouse with lunatic wards containing from 90 to 100
patients, Dr. Mitchell replies: " No, I do not think it is necessary.
I am not quite certain that there is not a resident medical
officer attached to the Edinburgh city poorhouse, but, if there
is, his duties are chiefly with the ordinary paupers, and the
medical officer whom we consider responsible for the patients
is the superior officer of the poorhouse;" and in answer to
question 10146?" You share the opinion of your colleague, Sir
James Coxe, that the mode of supervision of an asylum, provided
there are not 100 patients, need not necessarily be of a medical
character?"?says: "I think experience lias put it beyond
question that it can be satisfactorily done. The experience has
been acquired by circumstances which we did not initiate; the
experience is there, and it shows, I think, that it can be done
very satisfactorily." And in answer to 10147?"Why limit it
to the number of 100; if 99 can be managed, why not 101 ?"?
adds: " We have no experience beyond this ; therefore I cannot
go farther."
The opinion here expressed would therefore appear to be
that, although a number of carefully selected patients not
exceeding 100 may be satisfactorily managed in lunatic wards
attached to a poorhouse, or the same number of ordinary cases
entrusted to the care of an exceptionally intelligent lay super-
intendent, there does not exist any necessity for an alteration of
the present law in this matter. There is no doubt a good deal
of truth in the remarks which Sir James Coxe makes in regard
to lay superintendents in asylums, especially those of small
size, and that the successful management of even a large asylum
does not essentially depend on the medical qualifications of the
superintendent; for after all the medical wants of the patients
have been attended to, no doubt much of the harmony of the
Institution is the result of powers of general discipline and good
DILLWYN COMMITTEE. 59
management, which may unquestionably be possessed by persons
not belonging to the medical profession. But, while this is
admitted, it has to be kept in mind that the insane, taken as a
whole, are not only mentally, but physically, below the average
of the general community, and therefore entitled to a greater
share of medical attention. Besides, there are no reasons for
assuming that greater success in the management of asylums
would result from the necessary absence of special medical
qualifications. Complaints are continually made of the ignorance
ot the general medical profession on the subject of insanity and
the necessity urged of their being more thoroughly educated in
this form of disease. It is, therefore, but reasonable to suppose
that those who have made this subject their study, and by
experience acquired a far more thorough knowledge of it than
the general profession can ever possibly do by the most
thorough tuition, should be the persons to whom the care of the
insane ought to be committed, especially when it is kept in
mind that in exceptional cases of illness?exceptional when
regarded from an asylum point of view?the assistance and co-
operation of physicians and surgeons of eminence can at any time
be procured and indeed are frequently made use of. The difficulty
is how to satisfy these two demands?experienced medical atten-
dance and at the same time thorough discipline and general
good management. In a large asylum, say containing over 200
patients, to adopt, the system of a lay superintendent and daily
visits from an ordinary medical practitioner would evidently
now not be tolerated, as it would be simply placing asylums in
the position in which they were some 50 years ago. A
satisfactory solution may, however, be found if a broader and
more comprehensive view be taken of the whole subject than
would appear to have as yet been entertained. In considering
the whole matter, the fact must never be lost sight of that the
question is not whether a limited number of the more manage-
able lunatics can be kept in a satisfactory manner in wards
attached to poorliouses specially ornamented for their reception,
or whether a number of similar cases may not be boarded out
among the peasantry without seriously violating the ordinary
rules and principles of morality; but what really is the best
system that can be adopted to maintain and supervise the
insane poor with the greatest benefit to themselves and the least
expense to the general community. A recent writer on this
subject observes :* " The extreme poverty of the inventive faculty
in devising means for the reception of the insane is very striking.
Of course this limit is imposed by pecuniary considerations, but
it is very doubtful whether?first, the construction of a village
* The Journal of Psychological Mcdicine, Vol. III. Part 2, page 322.
60 ANALYSIS OF TIIE EVIDENCE OF THE
for the incurable industrious around an asylum of ordinary
dimensions would prove more expensive than a multiplication
of blocks; second, whether the addition of farms or convalescent
homes within a certain area, and at a short distance from the
hospital for acute cases, might not prove more economical than
the palatial structures at present provided; or, third, whether
even the addition of large tenements of simple, unornamental
form for chronic cases, within the grounds of the asylum proper,
all these being under the superintendence of the same medical
and other officers, might not meet the wants and the wishes
alike of the curators of the insane, the ratepayers, and the
general public." While strongly in favour of some system such
as is here indicated, it appears to me that the advantages of a
lay superintendent referred to by Sir James Coxe might still
be incorporated with it, and with the advantage of relieving
the medical officers of much unprofessional work. Were the
general management and economy of the asylum and surround-
ing buildings confided to a lay superintendent, the medical
officers would then be enabled to direct their attention without
distraction to the more thorough performance of what must be
considered as their proper duties, the medical treatment of the
patients. Even in a large asylum this would not prove so
onerous, but that similar duties might be engaged in beyond
the boundaries of the asylum, and by none could the functions
of local inspectors, as laid down in clause lsx., 20? and 21? Vict.,
cap. 71, be more thoroughly or efficiently performed than
by the medical- officers of asylums. By this clause, which,
so far as I am aware, has never been put in full operation,
it is enacted that " it shall be lawful for the District
Board, in each of the several districts constituted by this Act,
to appoint medical persons, one or more, as may from time to
time be sanctioned by the Board, to be the inspector or inspectors
of such district, and such inspector or inspectors shall hold their
offices respectively at the discretion of the District Board, and
shall be paid such fees as the District Board, with the sanction
of the Board, may fix ; and it shall be the duty of such inspectors
to visit the public, private, and district asylums and houses in
terms of this Act, within their respective districts, at all such
times as they shall be called upon to do so by the District
Board, or the Board, or the sheriff, and otherwise in terms of
this Act, &c." In other words, were the duties of the medical
officers of the central asylum extended to the district wherein
it is situated and from which the patients are received, the
harmless and imbecile patients residing with their friends or
boarded out with strangers could be more frequently visited and
consequently more thoroughly watched than they can possibly
DlLLWYiNT COMMITTEE. 01
be at present. When they became violent or unmanageable, or
otherwise unsuitable for being thus disposed of, they could at
once be brought into the asylum and their places filled by more
suitable cases, and thus the whole of the insane of the district
supervised and controlled with much greater uniformity of
principle and system than at present obtains. In this manner
the efficiency of the General Board of Lunacy would also be
increased and at a diminished cost to the community. On the
one hand, this Board, relieved from the harassing and unprofit-
able work of constant visitation and inspection, would naturally
acquire higher and, as it were, quasi-judicial functions, and
become, in fact, a sort of final Court of Appeal in all matters
concerning the interests and welfare of the insane. On the
other hand, the necessity of visitation and inspection, on the
part of any members of the Board, becoming limited to those
occasions only in which their interference might be called fox-
by the local inspectors, directors of asylums, or District Boards,
a much smaller staff of officials would be required than is found
to be necessary under the present system of administration.
Whether or not it would be a further improvement were the
local inspector appointed by Government, as it is suggested
in question 10181 superintendents of asylums might be, is
also a matter well worthy of consideration.
