A Case of Moral Insanity
=========================

276
Art. V.?*
By A. C. MUXRO, M.B., M.R.C.P.E., Soutliorn Counties Asylum, Dumfries.
It is one of the first observations made by the tyro in the study
of mental diseases, that in insanity the moral powers are almost
invariably affected as well as the intellectual. The selfishness,
the ingratitude, and the animal propensities of the insane
constitute one of the great discouragements of alien practice.
It is further observed that in certain forms of disease the
moral faculties are those principally affected. Thus Epileptic
Insanity is, of all varieties, the most repulsive in its mental
manifestations: in very many cases where the congenital
existence, or long continuance, of the disease does not forbid
any mental activity, the moral nature is seen to be entirely
warped and distorted, all perception of right and wrong fades
away as the disease progresses, the patient lies unblushingly,
steals what he or she may, is shamelessly erotic, ravenously
gluttonous, malicious, frequently homicidal, often assuming the
next moment after an almost demoniacal outburst the demeanour
of a saint and the loudest protestations of piety, such complete
perversion being of most frequent occurrence in the female,
predisposed to it by her dominant emotionalism. All this, as
the asylum physician has often to point out to the indignant
attendant, is purely the result of disease, and is no more, or
very little more, under control than the preceding or succeeding
convulsion. -It strikes one, in reading reports of medico-
legal proceedings in which questions of epileptic responsibility
have to be discussed, that sufficient prominence is not given to
this consideration; while the automatic theory of the action of
the patient or criminal which may have made them the objects
of medico-legal attention, is pushed to its extremest limit. In
Dipsomania, the most recently differentiated form of mental
disease, the unhappy victim, while retaining his intellectual
power, unimpaired or not noticeably affected, while indeed he
may earn his living by good intellectual work, loses all sense of
moral rectitude, all domestic affection, all sense of decency; he
is typically a romancer ; his solemn word of honour is worth
nothing; he heeds not though he knows his auditors disbelieve
every word he says ; he cares not if the whole world go to rack,
provided his own selfish wants are satisfied. Again, in that
* Read before the Border Counties Branch of the British Medical Association,
July 1878.
A CASE OF MORAL INSANITY. 277
borderland of insanity, Hysteria, the most characteristic feature
is the entire perversion of the moral nature : a girl of the
highest intelligence and most affectionate disposition, whose
training has been unexceptionable, under the blight of this sad
malady takes the most intense pleasure?it is the one end and
aim of her existence?in practising all manner of deceptions on
her friends and medical attendant; formerly of the most truth-
ful nature, she now, from the morbid craving for notice and
sympathy, lies without shame, and supports her cunningly-
devised tales of imaginary disease by the most ingenious and
at the same time loathsome stratagems; and she often exhibits
an entire want of natural affection. In the grosser and more
marked cases which are generally held to have crossed the
boundary line, she resorts to incendiarism, or, it may he, to the
destruction of life itself, to gratify her perverted sensibilities.
We are prepared, therefore, a priori, to anticipate the
existence of a distinct form of insanity, characterised " by a
morbid perversion of the natural feelings, affections, inclinations,
temper, habits, and moral disposition, without any notable
lesion of the intellect or knowing and reasoning faculties, and
particularly without any hallucination." And we are perhaps
inclined to wonder that it was not differentiated as moral
insanity before Dr. Pritchard's time.
Moral, Affective, or Emotional Insanity has been too long
recognised as a distinct psychological entity to render argument
of mine in favour of its separation necessary. At the same time,
I cannot think the report of one more well-marked case can be
an unprofitable task, considering the number of so-called cases
which have been rejected by outside sceptics, as being either
mere developments of viciousness, or as involving some im-
pairment of the intellect, and being consequently referable to
previously existing subdivisions of insanity. And the case I
am about to record has the additional interest of being one in
which acute ideational insanity has been again and again
feigned with success, for the purpose of procuring admission to
lunatic asylums all over the country, thus furnishing a satis-
factory answer to the query put in an interesting paper on
Feigned Insanitvby Dr. Nicholson (Journal of Mental Science,,
January 1820) : " Can a man, morally insane, while in one of his
impulsive moods, counterfeit symptoms of ideational insanity?"
and I indeed feel some compunction at not having sooner exposed
the imposture, for I find that after leaving this asylum the hero
of the tale at once renewed what I may call his profession of
feigning insanity. If in the record of the case I may seem to
descend to trivial details, and adopt a rather gossiping style of
narrative, I must plead that without these the portraiture of
278 A CASE 0F moral insanity.
the case would be incomplete?it would be impossible to bring
out all the lights and shadows of the mental constitution of the
subject.
Tiiomas Nuttley was admitted to the Southern Counties
Asylum, Dumfries, on the 3rd of February, 1877. Little or
nothing could be ascertained as to his previous history. He
had been found, the day before admission, in the market-place
of Annan, where he was entirely unknown, stripping himself
naked, and " capering with all the antics of a monkey," as the
Inspector of Poor described it. He was brought before the
sheriff, who, with the aid of two medical men, pronounced him
insane, and sent him to the asylum. The medical certificates
set forth that he had an " insane appearance," was restless,
refused to answer questions, talked incoherently, " saying that
heaven and hell were all nonsense," and that he was chewing
coals while being examined. He had written down several
names on a slate, but finally adhered to the one given above.
He was reported as having taken no food since apprehended.
On admission his condition was as follows:?Of middle
height, he is stoutly built and broad-shouldered; weight, 12
stones, 5 pounds; muscular system excessively developed; fat-
ness considerable. He is a typical example of the sanguino-
neurotic temperament; complexion, ruddy; teeth, white and
regular; face fringed with luxuriant brown whiskers; hair,
brown ; looks like a well-conditioned farm servant; aged ap-
parently about 24 ; pulse, 80; temperature, normal; tongue,
slightly coated ; appetite, deficient; special senses, normal;
pupils dilated but mobile ; has lost the two terminal phalanges
of the middle finger of the right hand. He sits silent and,
apparently, self-absorbed?unconscious of and undisturbed by
all around him?refusing to speak a word or be roused to
attention. It is noticed that his eyes have a restless, furtive
look. He could not be roused from his state of stupor to take
any food on the day of admission. He slept well from the first,
attended to the wants of nature, and was cleanly. Our concep-
tion of the case was that it was one of Acute Dementia succeeding
Mania a jjotu.
On the evening of the day after admission he had begun to
brighten up a little, answering in a contused way to questions
(speaking with an English accent), and appeared, to some extent,
cognisant of his surroundings : he had taken his food on pressure.
From this time improvement was rapid; day by day he brightened,
and in a week or two was evidently as well as ever lie had been,
and was the liveliest and brightest patient in the house. He
A CASE OF MORAL INSANITY. 279
had a frank, open, pleasant face, and most ingenuous air: was
obliging and cheerful: sang comic songs with considerable
effect, and distinguished himself as the most agile dancer at
the weekly balls, and soon became a general favourite in the
house. He read and wrote with ease, and was fond of reading,
was alert and intelligent, and had some musical talent?playing
mostly by ear, however. He had, nevertheless, no taste for steady
work, and on one occasion entirely rebelled against it. It was
observed that he had great personal vanity, and was extremely
fond of decorating his person and eager for admiration. As
time passed a singular hysterical and emotional temperament
discovered itself. He shrank from pain, even that of a scarified
gum, in abject fear, while the extraction of a tooth was an
impossibility?I believe he would have died from the shock.
Often he would be found in some out-of-the-way spot bathed in
a flood of hysterical tears, sobbing as if his heart were broken
without being able to assign any cause as a rule, sometimes in
consequence of an absurd trifle. Again, he would burst into an
uncontrollable paroxysm of laughter on the least excuse or at some
passing fancy; and lie was extremely hyper-aesthetic, easily
tickled into a state of utter helplessness. Then, while usually
good-natured and pleasant, a trifling insult would provoke a
tremendous outburst of passion.
From the time lie awoke out of his stupor he became very
communicative. He was a native, he told everyone, of an
adjoining parish in the same Highland county as the reporter,
and, on being questioned, he volunteered a narrative of various
episodes in my family history, such as only one knowing my
family well would have done: and he spoke familiarly of per-
sons I knew and recent events of which I was cognisant. He
had, he said, lost his knowledge of Gaelic and his Highland
accent from long residence in Birmingham. He was, however,
ignorant on some points where his want of knowledge seemed
inexplicable ; but his frank, open face dispelled any half-formed
suspicion.
Clouds, in time, began to form on the horizon. Suspicions
as to the real nature of the case would insinuate themselves,
and the likelihood of its turning out a case of feigned insanity
was discussed. We failed entirely to obtain any clue to his
previous history; no corroboration of his tale could be obtained;
his letters to relations were returned by the Post-office autho-
rities, the parties being " unknown;" a portmanteau containing
all sorts of valuables which he had lost in the train could not be
heard of. So that everything about him was enveloped in mystery,
and patient did not throw light upon it. His inveterate men-
dacity could not be restrained; lie amplified his story by fictitious
280 a CASE OF MORAL INSANITY.
details which were either on the surface contradictory or could
easily be disproved ; he romanced about everyone be came in
contact with, even when he knew his fiction must be exploded
the first time two people came together. He luxuriated in the
fictions he created. He exhibited no shame when detected in
falsehood, but coolly, as if playing a game of chess, withdrew it
and replaced it by another equally unfounded. The climax of his
mendacity was reached in a " History of my Life " which he
volunteered to write. Here his extraordinary talent for inter-
weaving fact and fiction was displayed to the best advantage.
From this veracious chronicle it appeared he had been pretty
nearly everywhere in Great Britain and in France, everywhere
distinguishing himself in athletic sports, attending which he
had made his profession. So skilfully was this done that it was
impossible to find a single discrepancy or inaccuracy. As an
illustration of a kleptomaniac tendency he manifested I may
mention the incident of his stealing a ring from one of the trades-
men, which was a well-known ornament among the staff, and
then went about showing it to everyone with childish glee, and
telling half a-dozen different stories about its acquisition.
I need not detail the manner in which his former history was
elucidated. Suffice it to say that the following facts were ascer-
tained :?His proper name was Thomas Barton, and he had been
born in a Liverpool workhouse. He was sent, in the early part
of 1875, I think, to the Lancaster County Asylum from
Lancaster Castle, whilst awaiting trial on a charge of felony, at
the instance of the Secretary of State as an insane prisoner.
His insanity was soon pronounced feigned, and he was discharged.
He was next admitted, in June 1875, to t]ie Cumberland and
Westmoreland Asylum as Daniel O'Neale. He had been found
very excited and quite naked, and was reported as having
hallucinations and delusions. When admitted to the asylum he
was dull and stupid, and would only ahswer questions when
hard pressed. During the first part of his residence he was
noisy, tricky, and ill-conditioned, but soon quieted down, and
was discharged September 1875. He is next heard of as Daniel
Barton, under which name he was admitted to the West Hiding
Asylum, Wakefield, in December 1875. After a few hours, it is
distinctly recorded, he manifested no symptom of insanity, and
was discharged in the course of a month. Again he was sent
from Lancaster County Gaol to the county asylum. Once more,
while awaiting trial for a felony, his insanity was at once pro-
nounced an imposture, and he was sent back to gaol to serve out
his sentence. Next he turns up at Woodilee Asylum, Lenzie,
in the end of the year 1876. While here he distinguished
himself by his erotic propensities, and also by charging an
A CASE OF MORAL INSANITY. 281
attendant with an indecent assault. His insanity was recog-
nised as feigned and he was sent adrift. But he was very soon
picked iip again by the police at his old game of stripping
himself naked, in the streets of Glasgow, and behaving, in
popular phrase, " like a madman." Sent to Woodilee Asylum
again, lie was at once discharged. He put in his appearance
in Annan the day after. I found that he had carefully questioned
some of the staff at Woodilee about me, and then determined
to see what use he could make of the information he had
acquired. Last entrance of all those known to me was at the
West Riding Asylum again, where he was again admitted as
Thomas Scott on the 24th of August 1877, with a well-marked
history of maniacal excitement. He settled down in a few
hours after admission. His case was diagnosed as one of Mania
apotu. Feigning was not suspected, but he was taxed with
having been formerly in the asylum as Daniel Barton. This
he denied, giving a plausible story about that individual being a
brother of his, and very like him. I believe he is at present
" wanted " by the county police of Lancashire.
Most of the cases of feigned insanity on record are those
of criminals who have resorted to this ruse in order to escape
from the consequences of their crime. This one was no doubt
similar in its beginning, but it would seem as if?once having
tasted the sweets of deception?patient was unable to exist
without the excitement of a life of imposture. No doubt a
natural vagabond tendency, and an indisposition for steady
occupation, conspired with this craving; but these would be
more than counterbalanced, one would think, by the irksome
restraints and exacting discipline of asylum life. And it no
doubt was the absence of apparent motive which led to the
imposture being so often unsuspected. At Lancaster, where a
possible motive lay on the surface, the bubble was at once burst.
The form of alienation simulated bears testimony to the
shrewdness and ideational soundness of the patient. Nothing
could be better calculated to attract public attention and ensure
the prompt attention of the authorities than the popularised
form of mania which he adopted?stripping the clothes is a
frequent and easy commencement of such impostures. And the
chewing .pieces of coal in the presence of the general practi-
tioners I regard as a masterpiece. It is to be observed that
on each occasion he adhered to the same role, by practice,
hoping, no doubt, to attain perfection in it. He recognised,
282 A CASE OF MORAL INSANITY.
however, that it was hopeless to carry out a simulation of mania
with any hope of success under the eye of skilled observers, so
on each occasion we find him relapsing into the negative state
of stupor or acute dementia, which, from the absence of positive
symptoms, may be regarded as the easiest to counterfeit. The
one discrepancy in his representation was the restless look of his
eyes. Finally, we have to observe the slow, steady, natural
waking up out of his sluggish condition to alert brisk health?
no doubt also the result of careful design.
I think, taken as a whole, the case is a typical illustration
of Moral Insanity, pure and simple. That in intellectual ca-
pacity he was above the average, the cleverness of the deception
might be taken as sufficient testimony. Very few in his
position in life could have written so intelligent a narrative as
his autobiography. That there was utter want of moral sense
is, I think, equally apparent. That lie was simply criminal
cannot for a moment be pled before a scientific audience. He
lied?sometimes, no doubt, to his own advantage, but oftener
far his insatiable faculty of mendacity could not be pulled \ip at
the point of expediency;?he lied apparently for the mere
pleasure of the thing, and quite regardless of the inevitable
detection : and the exposure of his frauds he received unabashed
and shameless. So he stole, but for the mere charm of stealing,
and without any idea of ulterior profit. The hysterical mani-
festations above related complete the evidence of the entire
alienation and instability of the emotional side of his mental
constitution.
The differentiation of moral insanity has been characterised
by the sceptical, that is, in this matter, the legal, section of the
public, as " an apology for crime devised by the cunning of the
mad-doctors," and it is by them believed that alienist physicians
have a tendency and desire to shut up pretty nearly everybody
in asylums. This is, of course, entirely a misconception : it is
true that specialists are able to recognise the beginnings of
insanity, and its development in milder form, where its existence
has been unsuspected. But I am not aware that they arrogate
to themselves the right of decision as to the disposal of those
more or less insane. That is the function of the public at
large. Therefore, when I proceed, in conclusion, to say a word
as to the disposal of the morally insane, I give my opinion as
one of the general public only. I believe that dipsomaniacs
and the morally insane should not be grouped for treatment in
ordinary lunatic asylums. I have seen a good deal of the
results of the intermixture of dipsomaniacs and, as they have
been called, by way of distinction, "decent lunatics," and I am
convinced that the system is entirely an erroneous one. It is
A CASE OF MORAL INSANITY. 283
greatly to the disadvantage of the proper inmates of asylums
in many ways?their moral natures suffer from the contact, and
the liberties the others, safely enough, obtain engenders persistent
discontent. On the other hand, I am satisfied that the chance
of eure (real cure) of dipsomaniacs is infinitesimal. Temporary
improvement, resulting in discharge, docs take place, and on
that basis no doubt the recoveries are generally calculated.
But permanent recovery is a very rare occurrence. I am equally
convinced that no system of treatment will give satisfactory
results, either in dipsomania or moral insanity, until compulsory
detention?let it be on the verdict of a popular jury on evidence,
lay and medical?in an institution of a directly reforma-
tory nature is adopted. The strictest discipline should prevail.
The inmates should earn their bread, each one, and relieve
their friends or the taxpayers of the burden of their maintenance
by the labour of their heads and hands, and the sweat of their
brows, while all infractions of the regulations should be treated
by distinctly punitive remedies. It is not to be expected that
even by such means the more marked cases shall develop
a healthy, moral disposition: in some cases it has been con-
genital^ absent; but at any rate, an artificial regulating power
of control may be produced which will ride the patient's future
life to his own advantage, and no more to the detriment of
society.
If the record of the present case be of no further use it
will at least serve to put the medical officers ot asylums on
their guard in view of a probable visit from one who apparently
intends making a profession of feigning insanity. That he is
not, though insane, a fit subject for asylum treatment is clear;
nor do I think that his ultimate disposal in penal servitude is
the proper, though it is the probable, solution of the difficulty,
as the law at present stands.
