Fourteenth Annual Report of the Board of State Charities of Massachusetts
==========================================================================

154 REVIEWS.

January 1878.
It appears that fourteen years ago the Legislative Act
establishing this Board enjoined upon its members the following
charge : " They shall investigate and supervise the whole system
of the public charitable and correctional institutions of the
Commonwealth, and shall recommend such changes and ad-
ditional provisions as they may deem necessary for their eco-
nomical and efficient administration." Many changes have
since then been made by legislation by which new duties and
powers have been imposed. In the last Annual Eeport a re-
construction of the Board was recommended to the Legislature,
and the governor, when bringing the subject before the Legisla-
ture, advised the appointment of a commission. A commission
was consequently authorised to inquire into the " expediency
of revising the system of administration of the public charities
and reformatory institutions of the Commonwealth, and all the
existing statutes in regard to pauperism, crime, and insanity,
with a view to secure greater simplicity, economy, and efficiency
in said administration." Some general considerations were pre-
sented in the earlier Reports of this Board, which may be summed
up as follows :?
" 1. All possible means should be employed to prevent the
increase of pauperism, crime, disease, and insanity.
" 2. The most fruitful cause or source of these evils is found
in the laws of inheritance.
" 3. Special pains should be taken to diffuse information
concerning these evils throughout the community, in order to
enlist sympathy and co-operation.
"4. That those remedial agencies which exist in society,
such as the family, the ordinary social influences, industrial
occupations, benevolent organisations, &c., should be employed
as much as possible.
"5. That, as a general principle, it is better to separate
and diffuse the dependent classes than to bring them together
in large numbers.
" 6. That provision should be made whereby these classes,
whether confined in institutions or living outside, may as far
as possible help themselves by work of some kind.
" 7. That public institutions should be established only as
a last resort, and should be kept as small as is consistent with a
wise economy.
" 8. That these institutions should not be constructed on
REVIEWS. 155
an extravagant plan, and should be placed under the best
management, which should be held to a strict account."
When the Board commenced its labours numbers of chil-
dren were found in the three State almshouses mingling with
the vicious and degraded of all classes ; the following methods
were therefore adopted. First, to place the majority of children
in a school by themselves to be educated for self-support; and
secondly, to place them in private families, as soon as they could
go out, and as quickly as homes could be found for them. Dis-
tinction is made in the almshouse between the vicious or criminal
pauper, and the virtuous or unfortunate ; a large class of poor
now find support in the localities in which they live, in place
of going to the State almshouse.
The laws of life and health have been vigorously investi-
gated by the " State Board of Health," and it is now an esta-
blished fact that a great amount of disease may be prevented by
the application of sanitary laws. Fruitful sources of ill-health
are found in bad air, imperfect drainage and sewerage, impure
water, and hereditary influences and predisposition produce a
large amount of disease.
Crime and insanity inevitably develop a great amount of
pauperism; and in proportion as these increase, so will
pauperism increase, though not of necessity at the same time.
Hereditary relation has in all probability a far greater agency
in the production of social evils than has been generally
imagined. Amongst the most deleterious agents operating
upon the human system is alcohol, and it undoubtedly stands
foremost as a cause of pauperism and other evils. It poisons
the blood and produces a diseased or morbid condition of almost
every organ of the body. It affects the brain, impairs the
intellect, perverts the moral sentiments and the will, and
increases unduly the activity and strength of the worst propen-
sities. It prostitutes the higher to the lower nature of man,
changing what should be the true aims and objects of life to
those of a low animal nature.
Syphilis is a very powerful agent in the production of vice,
pauperism, and diseases, and in some respects is more destruc-
tive to life and health than even alcohol. In addition to these
two last causes, narcotics, over-medication, and stimulation
injure the body and weaken the mind.
The statistics on pauperism from New York furnish the
following information:?More than 12,000 persons in town,
city, and county almshouses of the State were examined; of
these 6,566 were foreign born, 422 were born in the almshouse,
3,106 could neither read nor write, 6,133 had been intemperate.
Of the 4,147 chronic insane, 44 per cent, had been intempe-
156 REVIEWS.
rate; of the whole 12,000, 2,030 were homeless children, 1,750
of whom had pauper fathers or mothers. The average stay of
all the paupers in the almshouses was 4*88 years?almost five
years' residence. More than 30 per cent, of the paupers had
intemperate parents; few were found paupers by misfortune in
business or sudden loss of property. Immoral and sensual
habits long indulged, or habits of idleness and shiftlessness,
were the prime movers in the production of the pauperism.
The New York Eeport concludes with the following state-
ments :?
" 1. The examination has made it clear that by far the greater
majority of paupers have reached that condition by idleness,
improvidence, drunkenness, or some form of vicious indulgence.
It is equally clear that these vices and weaknesses are very
frequently, if not universally, the result of tendencies which are
to a greater or less extent hereditary.
" 2. The element of heredity enters so largely into the pro-
blem of pauperism that it should receive special attention.
The degraded, the vicious, and the idle, who, at the approach
of poverty, illness, or old age, inevitably become paupers, are
continually rearing a progeny who, both by hereditary ten-
dencies and the associations of early life, are likely to follow in
the footsteps of their parents.
"3. It was found that large numbers had been trained and
educated for the poorhouse by outdoor relief administered^ by
law or private charity.
" 4. Pauperism had been largely increased by defective
systems of poorhouse management and want of employment.
" 5. Neglected insanity, neglected injuries, and diseases
have greatly tended to increase the list of paupers."
Amongst the results of an investigation into the causes of
crime and pauperism among the inmates of the jails and
prisons of the State, the history of an extraordinary family is
given by the name of "the Jukes," extending back six genera-
tions, where, from one woman, nearly 1,000 persons, by birth,
relationship, and association, became criminals or paupers.
The facts gathered in New York appear to show that in
addition to hereditary influence, " ignorance, idleness, prostitu-
tion, and intemperance are prime factors that enter into the
complex product of pauperism and crime."
In regard to sanitary agencies, the kind of soil, the lay of
the land, the advantages of good air, the supply of pure water,
and the healthiness of the region are primary considerations,
and a most important agent for the production of health and
prevention of disease is food. The diet must be carefully
regulated, the nature of the food and its elementary proportions
REVIEWS 157
adapted to the particular wants and ages of the users. The
best hours of the day for meals must be considered, and there
should be from five to six hours between each meal. The
insane are in need of a more nutritious diet and of better
quality than those whose nerves are less subjected to " wear
and tear." Those leading a sedentary life require a diet dif-
ferent from that designed for the more actively engaged.
The air may be made impure from particles of dust or
effluvia, induced by malaria, from decayed vegetable or animal
matter, from cesspools, vaults, drains, etc. The most common
cause of vitiation of the air is the carbonic acid exhaled from
one individual to another. For perfect health each individual
should be furnished with 3,000 cubic feet of air each hour.
In the supply of water we must consider its abundance and
purity. The amount of water necessary for each person in
institutions or cities should average daily between 30 and 35
gallons. Wells and springs are often impregnated with poisons
either from decaying animal vegetable matter, or from drains,
vaults, and sinks. Fevers and dysentery have been thus com-
municated. Ponds, streams and lakes are not always free from
poison of some kind.
Work begun early in life is one of the most effectual
preventives of want and dependence. Laziness begets crime,
vice, and poverty. Exercise is of considerable importance, and
may be varied ; it may consist in walking or riding. By exercise
appetite and digestion are improved, sleep and rest are more re-
freshing. All persons feel the better for having something to do.
W ork and employment should be applied in all public
institutions, since, by these means the condition, habits, and
character of the inmates will be improved, and pauperism,
insanity, and crime diminished.
We learn that the charitable institutions under the super-
vision of the Board of State Charities may be divided into four
classes: Lunatic Hospitals, Schools, Prisons, and Almshouses.
All the lunatic hospitals have been exceedingly crowded, having
in the aggregate about 500 patients more than their normal
capacity. On September 30,1876, the whole number of inmates
was 1927, and on September 30, 1877,2025, an apparent increase
of 1 38 patients.
The most important change has occurred at Worcester
Hospital. An act passed the Legislature last spring " establish-
ing an Asylum for the Chronic Insane," providing that the
building at Worcester should be temporarily used for that
purpose. This asylum started last October with 325 patients;
December 1 it had 375 ; and it now has probably the full
complement of 400.
158 REVIEWS.
Great improvements have been made in the buildings and on
the grounds of the Idiot School, Boston. No class of persons are
so helpless and dependent as the feeble-minded and idiotic, and
surprising improvement can be made in the character and
habits of the individuals by education and early training.
During the past year there have been 115 pupils in the school,
with an average of 81. These pupils are instructed by teachers
peculiarly adapted for teaching such charges, and a workshop
is provided, by which trades may be acquired.
The Report before us concludes with an Appendix, setting
forth a financial statement including the expenses of the Board,
the Secretary's office, the general agents' department, etc. There
can be no question that the Board of State Charities of Massa-
chusetts have been engaged upon a work of the highest interest
and importance, the difficulties of which they have grappled
with most successfully and admirably.
