The Colony of Gheel Effects of War and Present Problems
========================================================

:Author: A. RADEMAEKER, M.D.
Medical Director
Gheel, the town of lunatics

To the outsider Gheel is the town of lunatics.
Here they go about freely, they can roam as they
please, without any interference on the part of the
public. The people of Gheel have a happy way of
dealing with them and nobody objects to their
presence. In fact they live and dwell with the
families of Gheel, who take charge of them, as they
give them board and lodging.

This popular picture of the Colony is essentially
true, although it needs to be completed. Since
motoring and sightseeing have become an asset
of modern life, it is no exceptional event, especially
in the summer, to see touring cars stopping on the
Market Place. Large groups of visitors can be
watched, pouring out of them. Of course they
want " to see the lunatics " and how they get along.
The medical staff of the Colony does not encourage
such visits which are too often inspired by mere
curiosity, but they cannot guard against them,
nor keep visitors from interviewing patients in the
streets.

Therefore, if the visit has been announced before-
hand, one of the nurses, or even one of the doctors
will take charge of the group and show them
around the town.

Visitors will then get acquainted with the history
of this unusual and original community. They
will be told the story of Dymphna, the Irish Princess,
who long ago took refuge in this place and was
beheaded by her "possessed" father. They will
see St. Dymphna's Church, with the relics of the
saint and her treasures of old art; also the " sick-
room ", an annex of the church, where the insane,
who came to Gheel as pilgrims in the Middle
Ages, had to stay for prayer in expectance of their
cure.

In the meantime they will learn that a lunatic
is not necessarily the wildly gesticulating, noisy,
boisterous or raving individual, whom they are
looking for; that a lunatic is to be considered as
a sick person, who besides is often physically ill
and that mental disturbance does not mean that the
person afflicted with it, will never get well again;
that malady of the mind is the most pitiful of all
and should never be laughed at; that most mental
patients are absolutely harmless, if they are treated
with understanding and some consideration; that
many such invalids need not be confined and that
their suffering can be much relieved in a regimen
of properly supervised freedom.

Finally visitors will be allowed to enter a few
of the foster-homes so they may realize that, besides
the more conspicuous type of patient who is occa-
sionally met with in the streets, there are living in
Gheel many others, leading an active and useful
life. On superficial examination, they can hardly
be distinguished from the ordinary inhabitant,
or from any other normal person. It is sometimes
difficult indeed to say who is who ! Even the medical
director himself, who does not personally know
all his patients, may occasionally be somewhat
embarrassed. He may have to take certain
precautions, as he does not wish to offend people
whom he is addressing !

When the time comes for them to leave, visitors
may have learned something about the real nature
of mental disease; they may have lost some of their
preconceived judgements about insanity and, what
is still more important, they will have caught a
glimpse of the work of charity that is being done
in a community of simple and kind hearted people
for the most unfortunate and the most destitute
of their fellow creatures.

Therefore the doctor or nurse, who has con-
ducted the visit, will not regret the time thus spent,
although more urgent work has sometimes to be
postponed on this account.

Some hundred years ago Gheel colony had only
700 patients. Since the development of psychiatry
as a medico-social science, the system of organized
family care has been acknowledged as a method
of treatment for a considerable proportion of the
mentally ill. Being supported by public authorities,
as well as by the medical profession, the system has
prospered and been widely extended. In the last
fifty years the colony has also been much visited
by psychiatrists, nurses and social workers. A
new sort of pilgrimage has come into being. This,
in return, has stimulated the development of family
care in other communities. In some instances and
in various countries, these efforts have proved
successful, regardless of the many difficulties
involved in this kind of work.

The Effects of War
-------------------

At the International Congress of Mental Health
held in Washington in 1930, Dr. F. Sano, former
Director of Gheel Colony, was able to make the
following statement: " In Gheel 3,000 patients live
under supervised family care." In later years
this number still increased so as to reach 3,750 in
* Paper read at Specialist Meeting organized during International Congress on Mental Health by Association of
Mental Health Workers.

August, 1939. Since the outbreak of the second
world war however, the population of the colony
went down rapidly, at the rate of 200 a year. But
near the end of the war, in December, 1944, the
number had risen again to 2,600 patients. From
an inquiry, made in 1945, about the status of similar
institutions in France and Holland we gathered
that they had also lost about one-third of their
patients.

As yet the fate of family care in Germany and other
states of Central Europe is still unknown, but we
can safely assume that losses there have been even
more severe.

It has been demonstrated, as one might expect,
that war conditions are most unfavourable to family
treatment. The manner in which war events
affect the living conditions of a Colony for mental
patients is evident from our own experience in
Gheel.

The effects of War Events and Military Operations
When the Germans invaded Belgium, in May,
1940, about one-half of the inhabitants of the town
of Gheel fled for safety. Some families took their
patients with them to various parts of the country.
Some went even as far as Southern France, where
they stayed as refugees for several weeks or months.

Others, before their flight, brought their patients
to the Central Hospital. For some time this
hospital was heavily overcrowded, as it had to
accommodate more than 1,000 patients, whereas
its normal capacity is only 200.

No outstanding events occurred in 1941 and 1942,
but later on, in September, 1943, the larger part
of the Hospital was taken by German S.S. troops,
who stayed in it for a whole year. Most of the
patients had to be moved to smaller quarters in
the town, or to " closed " institutions elsewhere.
In September, 1944, the town of Gheel, which is
situated near the Albert Canal, occupied a strategic
position. A battle went on for more than two
weeks between British and Germans. There was
shelling and street fighting for several days. As a
result of this, 140 civilians were killed, amongst
whom were 35 patients. Some 200 foster-homes
were destroyed and several hundred damaged.
The Central Hospital itself suffered considerable
damage, equally the Church of St. Dymphna and
her annexe " the sickroom" which was com-
pletely wrecked. From the standpoint of tradition
and history, this is to be regretted as a loss.
The Effects of unfavourable Conditions accompanying
war
These conditions can be summarized as follows;
the shortage of all necessaries, such as food, clothes
and fuel, as well as various discomforts and hind-
rances resulting from the state of war, furthermore
the instability and insecurity in every respect.
The consequences were even more important than
those of war itself. From the beginning of the
war the food was severely rationed. Official food
rations were cut to 1,200 calories. Supplementary
" black market food " had to be paid for at ten
to twenty times its normal price. Fees to foster-
families were not calculated to meet such enormous
expenses. Therefore many families, unable to keep
their patients any longer, had to bring them back
to the Central Hospital. From here they were
forwarded to the "closed" institutions.

The lack of fuel was particularly severe in the
cold winters of 1941 and 1942. It had a cumulative
effect, together with the food shortage, so as to
produce a high rate of bodily disease and an
increased death rate. This went up to 10 per cent,
instead of 4 per cent, as it is normally.
The frequency of infectious diseases as a result of
under-nourishment and cold was noted, especially
tuberculosis. In normal conditions this disease
is comparatively rare amongst our patients as they
live in the open air and are provided with plenty of
healthy food.

Some twenty cases of hunger oedema were
observed; most of them had a fatal issue.
In the struggle against starvation, many patients
had to be moved from the central part of the town
to the more distant farmhouses. Here accommoda-
tion was less comfortable, but food supplies less
critical. The effect of this shifting is still noticeable
now, as there are comparatively more patients to
be found on the outskirts, than in the town itself.
For the farmer families, producing their own food,
it was of course less difficult to keep their patients,
when other classes of society had to dismiss them.
Another reason for this was their ability to make a
better use of the patient's handy work. In this
period of hardship the farmer class has been
indeed the backbone of the institution.

In a densely populated Colony, fast and easy
communication between the foster-homes and the
Centra! Hospital is essential. Our service of motor
ambulances, worn out and lacking fuel, had to
be cut out. It was replaced by a horse and carriage,
as used some fifty years ago !
A shortage of accommodation in the foster-
homes was experienced, because of the influx
of refugees, as well as an increase in the local
population. This was aggravated by war destruc-
tion and the housing problem continues to remain
unsolved. The emotional stress of war events,
the feeling of insecurity, the restriction of liberty,
the new regulations of all sorts imposed by war,
were other handicaps. Affecting the foster-families,
as well as the patients, they were a common cause
of maladjustments on both sides, producing as a
final result the dismissal of the patient.

Our Present Problems
----------------------

Since the end of the war the population of Gheel
Colony has remained unchanged, about 2,600.
The downward movement of wartime has come to
a standstill, but as yet there is no progress. The
rate of admission of new patients, which varied
from 400 to 500 a year in normal conditions, is
markedly reduced. In the meantime the " closed "
institutions in Belgium have regained more patients
and they have thus largely made up for their war
losses. As they are taking charge of about 23,000
inmates, they show a definite tendency to over-
crowding. Present conditions remain unfavourable
to family care, chiefly because of economic
difficulties.

(a) Allowances for foster-families are insufficient
Many families, especially those of the working
class, refuse to keep patients, because the fees are
too low to meet the expenses. Allowances for an
ordinary patient now vary from 13.50 francs to
20 francs a day. The difference depends on whether
he is able to do some work, or not, or whether he
requires any special attention.

Fees have been doubled as compared with the
pre-war period, but living expenses have increased
much more. No official index-number of the cost
of living is being issued as yet, but this can be safely
estimated at four times its pre-war rate. As
mentioned in a recent paper {La Libre Belgique,
30 Juin, 1948) this number would now be 396,
instead of 100 before the war. Some two years
ago, the cost of maintenance of an ordinary normal
person?a labourer for instance?or a domestic
servant?was officially stated to be 35 francs a day.
This included only board and lodging, regardless
of all other necessaries, such as clothing, etc.,
but since then prices have again gone up. Mean-
while the families of Gheel are being asked to keep
mental patients for half as much. This seems
quite unreasonable and somehow or other the
interests of both patients and their foster-families
have been overlooked. We may assume that public
authorities have been busy in attempting to solve
other perhaps more urgent problems in this post-
war period, e.g. the restoration of the pre-war
rate of production, as well as the desire to satisfy
the social needs and demands of the normal popu-
lation. Still in any well organised society the
welfare of the mentally ill should equally be kept
in mind : the manner in which the sick are cared
for is indeed to be taken as a measure of the degree
of culture which prevails in that same community.

(b) The rise of the standard of living of the
Community as a whole
In the last forty years the standard of living of
the foster-families has been rising steadily, not so
much because they have had boarders, but more so
on account of the increase of wages. In comparison
to this, the advantage of keeping patients has been
getting smaller progressively.

This is to be illustrated as follows: In 1910 an
ordinary unskilled labourer was earning two francs
a day. If at the same time he had two patients,
at one franc a day for each, this meant doubling
his income. Now this same labourer earns about
100 francs a day. If he keeps two boarders, his
income will be increased by only 40 francs, which
is even less than half of his salary. So there is
considerably less advantage in keeping boarders
than there was some forty years ago. Allowances
to foster-families should be reconsidered on this
basis, while also taking into account that the
patient, who is the guest in the home, equally
partakes of the improvement of living conditions
of the family as a whole.

(c) The lack of any regulation as regards the distribu-
tion of the mentally ill

Another difficulty with which we have to contend
is the lack of any rule or regulation as regards the
proper distribution of the mentally ill among the
various institutions throughout the country. Most
mental hospitals in Belgium are private and they
are run by religious orders. Patients are admitted
directly, without any previous observation or
sorting in a general hospital. As a consequence
therefore, many quiet and peaceful invalids remain
confined, instead of being sent to the Colony.
Private interests seem too often to predominate.
This consists in keeping the " good " patients,
which means those, who are able to undertake
some work constituting a profit to the institution.
The interest of the patient should be the only
guide in choosing the place where he is to be sent.
Therefore it has been suggested that they should
be sorted beforehand. It is convenient to do this
sorting in the psychiatric services connected with
general hospitals, such as already exist in Brussels
and in Antwerp. Such sorting centres should also
be created in the other larger cities.

These are the main problems, which are our
share in this post-war period. We are convinced
that they will be solved, as conditions gradually
become more normal.

In this respect a hopeful event has been the recent
transfer to the Department of Health of everything
connected with the mentally ill. By a curious
anachronism, mental patients had stayed until
then under the supervision of the Department of
Justice, together with delinquents and vagrants.
This change, which took place on January 1st of
this year is indeed to be considered as an advance
and a result of a movement which has steadily
gained ground in Belgium in the last fifty years.
More freedom is advocated for the mentally ill
and also their assimilation to the ordinary hospital
patient. This implies a revision of the law on
lunacy, as well as simplifying the legal procedure
of certifying the patient, and restricting this pro-
cedure to those cases, where it can not be avoided.
Are Traditional Standards of Family Ethics losing
their value?

A final point remains to be discussed briefly.
This concerns the psychological or rather the moral
aspect of family care. To be performed successfully,
such work requires a special environment, a parti-
cular atmosphere, in which a high ethical standard
should predominate. On the part of the foster-
families the desire to assist, the willingness to deal
with other peoples' misfortunes, the acceptance of
some inconvenience or some discomfort on behalf
of the patient, are important requirements. Toler-
ance is needed, also patience and understanding;
in other words, the spirit of charity is essential.
In Gheel this spirit is an inheritance of the
middle ages; it is backed by an old tradition,
based on religious belief. This is embodied by the
Church of St. Dymphna and her annexe " the
sick room ". Unfortunately, both of these were
badly wrecked, the latter even being completely
destroyed. Are these ruins to be taken as a symbol
of an old belief, which is disintegrating ? It has
been argued that tradition is weakening, that the
patriarchal spirit is fading, that family ties are
loosening?that modern man is less concerned with
ethical or spiritual values than with his own material
interest, and that the idea of " serving " others has
lost its value. If so, the time might come when the
people of Gheel would stop their humane work.

As stated in one of the preparatory bulletins of
this Congress, " the breakdown of family ties and
standards is a common observation in many
nations It should be no surprise, indeed, that
the present Congress has made this phenomenon
a topic for study and discussion.

Even in a country town like Gheel, the signs of
regression should not be overlooked, especially
since the war, although they are undoubtedly less
marked than in the larger towns and cities. If
this moral impairment is to spread further and to
affect still larger numbers, it may of course become
a serious, and probably also, the only menace to
the future of this institution. But in the meantime
the work is being carried on with the aid of those
families, which have remained loyal and are main-
taining rigid standards of ethics. It is our good
fortune to be able to declare that there are still
living in Gheel many families of this type; so that
as yet there seems to be no reason to despair.
