Psychotherapy in Child Guidance
=================================

By Gordon
Hamilton. Columbia University Press. 1947.
pp.340. $3.50 (22s.).
Sometimes one wishes that the paper shortage
would reach America. Here is a book which sets
out to be an authoritative book on the social
worker's role in psychotherapy. The field studied
is the network of clinics and social organizations
for the welfare of children provided by the Jewish
Board of Guardians. In a foreword, Dr. Nathan
Ackermann claims here "that positive commitments
are made in both the theory and practice of child
psychotherapybut there is a good deal of
repetition and the material is not presented in a
very orderly fashion. Professor Gordon Hamilton
describes for example the methods used by psy-
chiatric social workers who are undertaking very
much more than family casework, and are in fact
carrying the main burden of psychotherapy. But
it is not until page 214 that it becomes absolutely
clear that in many cases the same social worker
treats both parent and child. Not only in the
U.S.A., but here in England all practising psy-
chiatrists know that they are faced with what is
virtually a breakdown in the provision of therapy,
owing to the large number of cases requiring
treatment. The solution is usually to put patients'
names on the waiting list. It must be a common
experience at many clinics that some situations
improve during this period of waiting, so that one
is led to wonder whether something was wrong
with the diagnostic procedure: and some situations
become very much worse, so that children have to be
handed over to Juvenile Courts. Their problem
might never have reached such dimensions had
treatment been given at the appropriate moment.
Thus an authoritative word on the selection of
patients for treatment and the points which guide
the psychiatrist in deciding whether this case must
be carried jointly by psychiatrist and social worker,
or whether it could be carried wholly by one or
the other, would have made a very interesting
chapter in this book. But nowhere, except in the
most general terms, are we given a picture of what
principles guide the plan for treatment.
In a general way, it appears that the most severely
disturbed cases are treated by a psychiatrist
working jointly with a social worker, but many
of the cases cited, and recorded material is given
very fully, are by no means only lightly disturbed.
After a broad description of the development of
psychotherapy in relation to children, beginning
with the early treatment by Healy and others of
delinquents, following on to the rise of psycho-
analysis in the thirties, and from there to an under-
standing of the relationship and development of
the modern psychotherapeutic situation, the author
makes it clear that for the last 20 years workers
in the field of social psychiatry, particularly with
children, have had to deal with not only disorders
of personality, but with disordered situations
associated with difficult or defective personality in the
child's immediate environment. On page 20 the
author remarks, " especially with the shifting
picture of the growing child and immediacy of his
home and family problems was it impossible to
distinguish one as wholly the province of the
psychiatrist, and the other of the social worker
With this view there could be little disagreement,
the point being only to decide whether the work
should be divided between the psychiatrist and
social worker on the basis of conference and
exchange of material, or whether with the extreme
shortage of personnel, one would not have to find
techniques in which one worker could carry both
parent and child. Professor Hamilton is at pains
MENTAL HEALTH ? 53
to explain that psychotherapy and analysis are not
the same thing, although most psychotherapists
will have had a close acquaintance with the practice
of psychoanalysis in their training, and many
will have had a training analysis, whether they are
medically trained or not.
The book then deals in considerable detail with
individual case histories, illustrating the impulsive
child, the neurotic child, the primarily anxious
child, and the severely disturbed child, some of the
latter with definite psychosis.
The remainder of the book is given over to a dis-
cussion of treatment, divided up into treatment
of younger children, treatment of the older child,
treatment of adolescents, and treatment for the
family. Here one feels that the significance of
the parent-child relationship is not always brought
out clearly enough, and it is particularly in this
section that one would have liked a more succinct
analysis of what Allen calls the " movement "
in the progress of the case. The chance remark
on page 219, " after only six months of treatment
leads one to suppose that treatment is universally
regarded as needing to be thorough, deep and
involved, which is all the more reason for making
the exposition of it less involved by careful selection
and careful analysis of the different stages of
treatment.
A rather clearer picture is given later, of the
requisite training for a social worker undertaking
psychotherapy. Whether this be psychotherapy
in the strict sense, working directly with the child,
or whether it be what is often equally difficult
handling of a not very co-operative or understanding
parent, it is good to see that the social worker of
the future is to be a recognized factor in dealing
with these two aspects of psychotherapy.
E.M.C.
