News and Notes
===============

:Author: Dr. Kenneth Soddy

The National Association for Mental Health announces
with great regret the resignation of Dr. Kenneth Soddy?
who has been its Medical Director since the beginning
of 1946?on his appointment as Assistant Physician
in the Department of Psychological Medicine, University
College Hospital.

As the first Medical Director of the three amalgamated
bodies constituting the National Association, Dr. Soddy
has given invaluable service in making its work known
throughout the country and in establishing contacts
with Government Departments, Local Authorities and
professional groups. His lectures to audiences of
varied types?professional and lay?have been received
with much appreciation and their success has demonstrated how eagerly authoritative information on Mental
Health subjects is sought.

Dr. Soddy's interest in Child Guidance is well known,
and it is a matter for satisfaction that his appointment
by the North-Western Metropolitan Regional Hospital
Board as Psychiatrist to the Child Guidance Training
Centre, ensures the continuance of his close connection
with its work. We are also very glad to be able to record
that he hopes to keep in touch with the National Association and will be ready to help in a voluntary capacity
when the opportunity arises.

We know that the readers of this journal will join with
us, and with the many friends he has made during his
term of office with the Association, in wishing him every
success in his new work.

We would add, as another news item of particular
interest to our readers, that Dr. Roger Tredgold, the
journal's Editor, has also been given an appointment at
University College Hospital, as Assistant Physician
in the Department of Psychological Medicine.

Other Rccent Appointments
Professor D. R. MacCalman

Professor MacCalman is leaving Aberdeen, where
he has held the chair of Mental Health for the last two
years, to take up an appointment as Nuffield Professor
of Psychiatry at Leeds University. Dr. MacCalman
was at one time general secretary of the Child Guidance
Council, and was the first medical director of the Notre
Dame Child Guidance Clinic, Glasgow.

Dr. Kathleen B. Cobb

A Fellowship in Paediatric Psychiatric at the Colorado
Psychopathic Hospital (University of Colorado) has been
awarded to Dr. Kathleen Cobb for one year from
July 1st, 1948. Dr. Cobb, who in 1941 was awarded a
Fellowship in Child Psychiatry by the Child Guidance
Council in Britain, spent the year 1946-7 in the United
States with a Girton Scholarship and a grant from the
American Medical Research Council for Psychiatric
Studies. Additional financial help provided by the
Commonwealth Fund through the American National
Committee for Mental Hygiene in August, 1947, enabled
her to spend another three months at psychiatric centres
in the West and Middle-West.

Obituary
---------
Colonel Jacob Waley Cohen
We have to record with deep regret the death on
July 21st of Colonel Jacob Waley Cohen, C.M.G.,
C.B.E., D.S.O., who was one of the original members
of the late National Council for Mental Hygiene.
During the whole period of its existence, he served as a
member of Committee and throughout maintained a
keen interest in its work. Despite the many calls upon
his time owing to the large amount of other public
work which he undertook, he could always be relied
upon for help and advice, and his loss will be deeply felt.
The Association offers its sincere sympathy to his relatives
and friends in their bereavement.

Courses and Lectures organized by the National Association
for Mental Health

For Workers in Occupation Centres and " School'*
Departments of Institutions

The 1948-9 Training Course begins on September 7th.
The number of students so far enrolled still leaves
vacancies, and later applications can be considered.
In view of the increasing demand for Supervisors for
Occupation Centres due to the fact that in their plans
for carrying out their duties under the new Mental
Health Service many Local Health Authorities include
the development of existing Centres or the opening of
new ones, it is urgent to increase the supply of trained
personnel and the Association is making every effort
to secure further recruits. Particulars of the Course
(which lasts one year) will gladly be supplied by the
Education Secretary, 39 Queen Anne Street, W.l.
A Refresher Course is being held by the Association
from August 28th to September 4th, 1948, at the Daneshill Training College, near Retford. An unexpectedly
large number of students have enrolled although the
Course was arranged at short notice due to the unexpected offer of accommodation.

For Staffs of Children''s Homes

At the request of the Home Office a Refresher Course
for Workers in Children's Homes is being held in
London from October 4th to 29th, 1948. The general
subject of the Course is " The Care of Deprived Children " and in addition to lectures, there will be ample
opportunity for discussion both in Groups and by
individual students with the tutor and lecturers. Visits
of Observation will include a Children's Hospital,
Child Guidance Clinic, and the Juvenile Department
of an Employment Exchange.

For Transferred Relieving Officers
---------------------------------
The second of these Courses, held in London, ended
on May 28th and the report of the Tutor (Miss M. K.
Sykes) refers to the keenness of the students in absorbing
new knowledge and particularly in coming into touch
with what was described by them as " the new approach "
to Mental Health problems. The fact that the majority
of the students had already been appointed as duly
Authorized Officers and were not therefore in a state of
anxiety as to their future, contributed appreciably to the
success of the Course and a particularly happy atmosphere prevailed throughout, despite an overcrowded
lecture room due to delay in structural alterations at
the Child Guidance Training Centre's premises in
Osnaburgh Street, where the lectures were given.
The Third Course, held in Liverpool in conjunction
with the Extra-Mural Department of the University
which took a large share of responsibility including the
provision of premises?ended on June 25th. The
number of students, owing to unforeseen contingencies,
was small but this was possibly a factor which contributed to the success of the Course and the friendly
atmosphere noted by the Tutor (Miss V. M. Voller).
It is hoped to hold a Fourth Course in the late autumn
?probably in London.

Public Lectures
---------------
The National Association is arranging to hold courses
of Eight Weekly Lecture-Discussions at Bournemouth
and Hastings next autumn on the main theme of '' Frustration and Fulfilment in Adult Life ". The Bournemouth course, which is being organized in conjunction
with the Bournemouth Association for Mental Health,
will commence on October 20th, at 7.45 p.m., and
continue on successive Wednesdays, ending December
8th. The Hastings course will be run on successive
Thursdays, at 7.30 p.m., commencing October 21st.
The titles of the lectures are as follows:

1. Understanding Human Nature.
2. The Unmarried Woman.
3. The Married Woman.
4. The Married and Unmarried Man.
5. The Family Unit.
6. Frustration and Fulfilment in Work.
7. Growing Old Gracefully.
8. Freedom, Discipline and Responsibility.

The speakers will include: Dr. Mary Capes, Dr.
H. V. Dicks, Dr. Isaac Frost, Dr. J. A. Hadfield, Dr.
Laura Hutton, Dr. Nora Johns, Dr. Alan Maberly,
David Mace, Esq., M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D., Dr. Doris
Odium, and Dr. R. F. Tredgold.
Tickets for the Course, ?1 each, and copies of the
printed syllabus may be obtained on application to the
Secretary, Public Relations Department, Maurice Craig
House, 39 Queen Anne Street, London, W.l. Single
tickets (as far as accommodation permits), 3s. 6d. each,
will be available at the Hall before each lecture.
The University College of Hull (Department of Adult
Education), in conjunction with the National Association
for Mental Health, will be holding a course of Ten
Weekly Lecture-Discussions at University College,
Cottingham Road, Hull, on successive Wednesdays, at
7.30 p.m., commencing October 6th. The main theme
of the course is " The Family and Problems of Mental
Health and Happiness The title of the lectures
are as follows :

1. The emotional development of the child during
the Nursery Years.
2. Adjustment in School Life.
3. Sexual Difficulties in Adolescence.
4. Helping your child to choose a career.
5. Happiness in Work.
6. The Psychology of the use of Leisure.
7. Ideals and Reality in Marriage.
8. What the Wife can contribute to Marriage.
9. What the Husband can contribute to Marriage.
10. The Contribution of Age to Youth.

The speakers will include: Dr. Jean Biggar, Dr. H.
Edelston, Dr. Isaac Frost, C. H. Jackson, Esq., M.A.,
Ph.D., W. S. Porteous, M.A., B.Ed., Joan Wynn-Reeves,
Ph.D., Dr. Winifred Rushforth, Dr. J. H. Sheldon,
Dr. Kenneth Soddy, and G. Westbv, Esq., M.A.
In response to requests, a course of Ten Lectures on
The Individual and his Emotions, held at Hull in 1947,
will be repeated at York, on Tuesdays, at 7.30 p.m.,
from October 5th, under the auspices of the ExtraMural Department, Hull University, in conjunction
with York Educational Settlement and the National
Association for Mental Health. The syllabus is as
follows:

1. The Baby. Dr. Mary Burbury.
2. The Toddler.
3. The Nursery Years. ? ?
4. The Parents'
Contribution. Dr. Irene Turgel, M.D.
5. The Middle Years
of Childhood. Edna Johns, B.A., Dip.Ed.
6. Adolescence. Dr. J. Valentine.
7. The Adult and the
Community. G. Westby, Esq., M.A.
8. Marriage Rev. H. Guntrip, B.A., B.D.
9. Celibacy. Dr. H. Edelston.
10. Old Age and our
Society. Dr. J. \^. Affleck.

In conjunction with the Workers' Educational Association, arrangements are being made to hold a peries of
eight lectures, under the general heading of " The art
of Living", at Reading on successive Thursdays,
beginning October 7th and ending November 25th, and
the Windsor Mental Health Association are planning
a series of four public lectures on Tuesdays in October.
Further particulars of the above courses, and copies
of the syllabus may be obtained from the Public Relations
Dept., N.A.M.H., 39 Queen Anne Street, London, W.l.
The Birmingham and Midland Branch of the National
Association for Mental Health will be holding a course
of six lectures on "The Adolescent and the Modern
World " on Wednesdays, at 6 p.m., commencing
October 13th, 1948. The subjects to be discussed are
as follows:

1. Youth in Industry.
2. Youth on the Land.
3. Vocational Guidance.
4. Student Health and Selection.
5. Youth and Leisure.

6. What Youth can contribute to the Community.
The speakers will include: Dr. R. H. Bolton, Dr.
F. M. Earle, A. T. Flynn, Esq., Miss I. E. P. Menzies,
M.A., and T. W. Rumsby, M.A. Further particulars
may be had on application to the hon. Secretary, T.
Jefferson Cottrell, Esq., 29a Fredeiick Road, Edgbaston,
Birmingham 15.

National Assistance Act, 1948
Now that this Act has come into operation, parents
of mentally defective or other seriously handicapped
boys and girls over 16 who are unemployable, are
entitled to receive an allowance in respect of them without
reference to the income of the family as a whole. It
may be remembered that during the Committee on the
Bill, the Minister of National Insurance in a discussion
on Clause 7 (Aggregation of Requirements and
Resources) said:

" So far as those who are crippled or menially
defective are concerned, the view we have taken is
that we should not impose any income limit or say
that where an income is beyond that limit, it is the
parents'1 duty to keep this poor child.''''

This is good news for many parents struggling with
economic difficulties occasioned by the presence in the
family of someone too handicapped to be able to earn,
but it will necessitate?in the cases where the handicap
is due to mental deficiency?close co-operation between
the Officers of the National Assistance Board and the
Local Health Authority if the most effective use is to be
made of the provision?particularly as normally grants
of the kind will be made as a matter of routine, through
the Post Office.

We understand that the Board is fully aware of
this necessity and that it is also alive to the dangers
inherent in making more or less permanent money
grants to mentally handicapped persons who are subnormal in intelligence (though not certifiably defective)
or who are psychoneurotic or of the mentally unstable
type. Every effort, we are assured, will be made to see
that the importance of attempts at rehabilitation is borne
in mind by the Board's Officers in dealing with such
cases, and close co-operation with Disablement Resettlement Officers is contemplated.

Under the new Act (Section 22), for all residential
accommodation provided by Local Authorities,?e.g.
for persons who are aged or infirm though not suffering
from " illness "?a charge of One Guinea per week
must be made. Where the total weekly income of the
person concerned is less than 26s., application must be
made to the National Assistance Board for this amount
plus 5s. a week allowed for personal requirements.
Payment will be arranged direct to the applicant, usually
through the Post Office. This provision also applies
to persons placed by Local Authorities in Homes run
by Voluntary Organizations, but does not affect arrangements made under the National Health Service Act for
treatment in hospitals.

In a Circular of June 30th, issued to Local Authorities
by the Assistance Board, on the subject of "Reception
Centres for Persons without a Settled Way of Living,"
it is stated that the Re-Establishment Centres provided
for under Section 16 of the new Act, cannot be set up
at the present time and before attempting to start them,
the Board is of the opinion that further study is required
on the extent of the need for such Centres and the type
of rehabilitation which should be attempted in them.
With the two existing voluntary Hostels for rehabilitating
young wayfarers?at Norton Fitzwarren, Somerset,
and at Ferryhill, Co. Durham, the Board has made
arrangements for their receiving suitable cases.

Mental Deficiency Administration

A Circular (No. 111/48), dated June 28th, has been
issued by the Ministry of Health drawing the attention
of Local Health Authorities to certain changes in the
Revised Mental Deficiency Regulations now in force,
most of which are consequential on amendments to the
Mental Deficiency Acts made by the National Health
Service Act.

The Circular also instructs Authorities on the new
procedure in connection with defectives ordered to be
sent to Institutions now under the control of the Regional
Hospital Boards. For the time being, they are informed,
they should continue to apply direct for vacancies in
the institutions formerly used by them, and only if they
are unsuccessful should application be made to the
Regional Hospital Board who will consider " what
arrangements can be made to facilitate the allocation
of vacancies ". For expenses of " Place of Safety "
cases, the Boards will be responsible, and Authorities
will receive from them a list of the places which may be
used for this purpose.

A further change to be noted is that Local Authorities
will no longer be asked by the Board of Control for
reports on the home circumstances of defectives in
institutions when discharge is being considered, but
where there is no social worker employed by the Institution concerned, it is hoped that some satisfactory
arrangement may be made for co-operation with Hospital
Management Committees in connection with home visits.
As treatment in all institutions covered by the term
" hospital " will now be given free of cost to the patient
as part of the National Health Service, Local Authorities
are precluded from calling upon parents or guardians
to contribute towards the expense of maintaining
defectives in institutions and Sections 13 and 14 of the
Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, are repealed. It should
be noted that the term " Certified Institution " is now
reserved for places run for profit or with private (paying)
beds.

For the expenses of defectives under Guardianship,
the Local Authorities continue to be responsible. A
new Regulation provides that such cases shall be visited
at least once a year by a medical practitioner experienced
in menial deficiency. Ordinary medical and dental
services are arranged through the National Health
Service.

In connection with the notification to Local Authorities
of defectives placed privately in single care, under
Section 51 of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, it is satisfactory that the Board express the hope that Authorities
will in future arrange for periodical visiting, although
this is not a statutory obligation under the present law.

Voluntary Associations for Mental Welfare

A glance at the inside front cover of this issue will
reveal one of the changes brought about by the
" appointed day " on which the National Health Service
Act came into force. But the absence of the names of
many familiar Associations need not be taken to mean
that the work which they have carried on for so many
years has come to an end.

In the majority of areas with the taking over by the
Local Health Authority of the statutory work for
defectives formerly entrusted to the Associations,
provision has also been made for the continuance of the
service they have always given in voluntary cases, e.g.
mental defectives not " subject to be dealt with " and
mentally subnormal or unbalanced individuals not
certifiable under any Act. With the wider powers given
to statutory bodies under Section 28 of the National
Health Service Act, no restriction need in future be
placed in their developing this type of service.
It is moreover satisfactory to know that the great
majority of members of the staffs formerly employed by
Local Associations has been transferred to the Health
Authorities and that their experience and unique knowledge of the Mental Health field will thus continue to
be available.

The assimilation of so many voluntary bodies cannot,
however, take place without something of great value
being lost to the community, and all the more it becomes
important that the National Association develops its
own regional activities so that new voluntary societies
are formed not primarily with the object of helping
individual cases, but in order to stimulate and educate
public opinion so that the whole country may become
alive to the need for mental health services and that some
intelligent grasp of their scope and purpose may be
acquired.

A Guide to the Mental Health Service

The attention of our readers is drawn to a very useful
booklet, " Provisions relating to the Mental Health
Services " originally issued by the Ministry of Health
for the use of Local Authorities and now made available
through H.M. Stationery Office (price 9d.).

It is designed " to explain the changes in the organization of the Mental Health Services and the effect of the
amending provisions of the National Health Service Act
upon the already complicated provisions of the Lunacy
and Mental Treatment Acts and the Mental Deficiency
Acts

The tortuous maze into which the provisions for the
new Mental Health service have thrown pre-existing
legislation is not one which can be penetrated without
the closest study and concentration. But no one
wishing henceforward to embark on such a journey
should attempt it without this indispensable little guide.
Handicapped Children. Some Statistics
In Chapter VI of the Report of the Ministry of
Education for 1947?the first issued since 1939?some
interesting statistics are given dealing with handicapped
pupils.

The following figures relate to the three groups of
children which particularly concern workers in the mental
health field:
Percentages or
Estimated No. per 1,000 Ascertained
Numbers. Registered Numbers.
Pupils.
Epileptic 1,000 0-2 1,709
Educationally
Subnormal 500,000 10% 38,377
Maladjusted 50,000 about 1% 5,795
The reader is, however, cautioned against drawing
inferences from these figures, as ascertainment rates
vary so widely from area to area showing differences in
standards adopted, as well as in the machinery used.
The lack of adequate provision for certain types of
handicap is also a factor in the thoroughness with which
ascertainment is carried out.

During 1946, additional accommodation was made
available for 400 educationally subnormal children in
five new Special Schools (one residential) and for 139
maladjusted children in five new Schools (four residential).
One new Boarding Home for 22 educationally subnormal children and two new Homes for 50 maladjusted
children, were also opened.

As a result of a series of regional conferences held by
officers of the Ministry with groups of local education
authorities, it is expected that adequate provision for all
categories of handicapped children will, in future, be
planned on a regional basis. The willingness of
authorities to co-operate in this way with each other,
is noted with satisfaction.

For the Welfare of Epileptics
Larks Hill Convalescent Home, Fairwarp
This Home, in a beautiful part of Ashdown Forest, was
opened by the National Association for Mental Health on
March 31st, and up to the time of writing, bookings
have been made for approximately 69 patients in parties
of 9 at a time.

It was originally intended to take men and women in
separate parties but force of circumstances led the
Committee to agree to mix the sexes, and the arrangement
has proved to be an exceptionally happy one.

The Home is becoming known to hospitals all over
England and Wales, although the large majority of
patients have so far come from London and the Home
Counties. The maximum stay is four weeks. The
fees are ?3 3s. a week, but these can be reduced if absolutely necessary, if it is quite impossible for this amountv
to be raised.

The patients received are all recovering from illnesses
of various kinds. So far only three applications have
had to be refused on grounds of (a) mental deficiency,
(b) mental instability and (c) advanced pregnancy.
Three patients have had to be returned home before the
end of their stay, two because of aggressive and disturbing behaviour and one because of the development of
acute and constant fits.

Arrangements are being made to receive a few longterm patients during the winter months, and applications
for these vacancies should be addressed to the Secretary,
Homes and Hostels Department, N.A.M.H., 39 Queen
Anne Street, London, W.l.

A Birmingham Project for Epileptics
-----------------------------------
An interesting new venture has been originated in
Birmingham arising out of a letter to the local press on
the need for a special Clinic for Epileptics, signed by
Miss Mona Thomas (a nurse and herself suffering from
epilepsy), Mr. H. Halstead (Vocational Psychologist,
All Saints' Psychiatric Clinic, Birmingham), Mr. T. G.
Rankin (Psychiatric Social Worker, N.A.M.H. Regional
Office), and two industrial medical officers. In answer
to this letter, 104 epileptics wrote of their difficulties and
offered help, whilst other cases were notified by the
Midland Nerve Hospital, and the Labour Exchange,
resulting in a total of 300 names.

The aim of the proposed Clinic is social adjustment
through individual treatment and careful assessment of
each patient's fitness for employment in factories, in
sheltered industry or at home. Cases are being investigated by Miss Mona Thomas herself and by the
National Association's Regional social workers, and
when necessary arrangements are made for examination
at All Saints' Clinic by a psychiatrist and a vocational
psychologist.

Meanwhile other preliminary steps have been taken.
The Regional Hospitals Board have been approached
with the request that they should sponsor a special
clinic for epileptics. The Warwickshire Agricultural
Committee has agreed to employ suitable epileptics
for harvesting and have been supplied with 22 names.
Lastly, by special request of the patients themselves, a
project is in hand for the opening of a Club on the
premises of All Saints' Clinic.

This is a striking example of the part which can be
played by voluntary enterprise in promoting services
for the welfare of handicapped members of the
community.

Letchworth Mental Health Discussion Group
A group of people who had attended several courses
of lectures on psychology felt the need for further study
and formed a discussion group whose aims are "The
promotion of mental health through the dissemination
of knowledge and the extension of preventive and curati ve
social services

The members are county councillors, teachers in
nursery, elementary and progressive schools, parents,
and social workers, all of whom are actively engaged in
matching theory to practice.

Up to date there have been four monthly meetings,
and new ideas for future discussions, activities and projects arise spontaneously in the easy informal atmosphere
of the nursery school where meetings are held, so different
from that of the lecture hall. The membership is 25
with an average attendance of 17.

At the first meeting, Miss McCall, the Regional
Psychiatric Social Worker, spoke about the International
Congress on Mental Health, and a plan was drawn up
to study various aspects of '' The Family in relation to
the Community ".

Subsequent meetings have dealt with :
(a) Some research work by a group of psychiatric
social workers into their own reactions and experiences on becoming mothers themselves.
(b) A study and analysis of a county council survey
on the need and desire for nursery schools in
Letchworth.

(c) A talk by Mr. P. A. Barons on his work with
difficult evacuees and delinquent boys, in association with David Wills of the " Barns Experiment
The matron of a mental hospital will lead the next
discussion on " The Psychological Effects of Hospitalization, Medical and Dental Treatment, etc. in Infancy
and Childhood " and the following points are suggested
for research during the summer holidays :
1. Preparation of patient by parent, doctor and/or
nurse.

2. Child's reactions to hospital, staff, etc.
3. Parent's reactions to child's illness; influence
on child of parent's attitude.
4. Awareness on the part of hospital staff, etc.,
of emotional needs of child and parent.
Instances where the psychological implications
were understood and suggestions as to what
might be done.

Regional Hospital Boards
-------------------------
The following is a complete list of the present addresses
of Regional Hospital Boards throughout the country,
which may be found useful for reference :
Region Address
Newcastle (Area 1) " Dunira", Osborne Road,
Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Leeds (Area 2) 29-31 Eastgate, Leeds.
Sheffield (Area 3) Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield.
East Anglian (Area 4) 117 Chesterton Road, Cambridge.
North-West Metropolitan^
(Area 5)
North-East Metropolitan
Soffi Metropolitan ,!>lla P?"la"d W1(Area 7)
South-West Metropolitan |
(Area 8)
Oxford (Area 9) 43 Banbury Road, Oxford.
South-Western (Area 10) 6 Elton Road, Bristol 8.
Wales (Area 11) Westminster House (2nd
Floor), 95-97 St. Mary's
Street, Cardiff.
Birmingham (Area 12) 10 Augustus Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham.
Manchester (Area 13) Room 6, 3rd Floor, Sunlight
House, Quay Street, Manchester 3.
Liverpool (Area 14) Alder Hey Hospital, Eaton
Road, Liverpool 12.
A list of the districts comprising each Area is given
in the National Health Service (Determination of
Regional Hospital Areas) Order, which may be obtained
from H.M. Stationery Office, Kingsway, London,
W.C.2, price 3d. post free. (Reference: Statutory
Rules and Orders, 1946, No. 2158.)
The National Mental Health Act, U.S.A., 1946
The purpose of this Act?which is an amendment of a
general Act covering a National Public Health Service?
is:

" the improvement of the mental health of the
people of the United States through the conducting
of researches, investigations, experiments and
demonstrations relating to the cause, diagnosis
and treatment of psychiatric disorders.''''
The Act provides for the establishment of a National
Research Institute in the vicinity of Washington, which
will be comprehensive in scope and in personnel, and on
which an expenditure of approximately ?2,000,000 has
been authorized.

In addition to this central research project, the Act
authorizes federal grants to individual States, and 'each
State has been invited to submit a plan for Mental
Health activities for which money is required. Grants
will also be made to individuals, colleges or hospitals
for research projects and for training of personnel.
The majority of States have now applied for grants
and the Federal Government is prepared to give every
help in assisting them to carry out their programmes.
There is, however, no power by which a State can be
compelled to take advantage of the provisions of the
Act or to initiate any particular reform. The scope
and nature of the projects decided upon is entirely a
matter for the State itself to decide. There is, therefore,
wide scope for the operation of voluntary effort in
educating public opinion and in stimulating new enterprise.

The American National Committee for Mental
Hygiene has not been slow in taking advantage of the
opportunities opened up to it in this direction. For
the last two years it has conducted an experiment in
vocational re-training of patients discharged from
mental hospitals, in order that the practical routine may
be available to all the States operating the new Act.
In addition, the Committee is conducting an investigation in a number of States for the purpose of evaluating
the work carried out by them, as a guide for the formulation of future programmes.

We hope to give further news of developments resulting
from the new Act in a later issue.

N.A.M.H. Homes
The Hill Nursery, Westerham
This Nursery for maladjusted children, lately moved
from Pewsey, Wilts, has been temporarily closed, owing
to technical difficulties in the way of its continued recognition by the Ministry of Education as a " Boarding
Home
The future of the Nursery is under discussion at the
time of writing, but it is hoped that it may be re-organized
and re-opened at a later date, in view of the useful
experimental work achieved in it, and the undoubted
demand for its services.

St. Paul's House, St. Leonards-on-Seci
During the war years St. Paul's House was one of the
Emergency Homes for mentally defective children for
which the Association made itself responsible.
It has now received the approval of the Minister of
Health as an Approved Home for 35 trainable mental
defectives (14 boys and 21 girls) under the age of 16.
Cases are received from any area at a charge of two
and a half guineas per week, and although at present
the Home is full, applications for the waiting-list can be
considered. These should be addressed to the Secretary,
Homes and Hostels Department, N.A.M.H., 39 Queen
Anne Street, London, W.l.

Joint Committee for the Study of the Cinema
--------------------------------------------
The National Association for Mental Health has
recently formed with the British Film Academy a Joint
Committee for the study of the Cinema. It includes also
representatives of British Documentary, the National
Association of Girls' Clubs and Mixed Clubs, Film
Exhibitors, and various technical experts serving in a
private capacity. The work of the Committee is at
present of an exploratory nature. An enquiry has been
made concerning research which is being done on the
psychological effect of films on children under 16, and
a memorandum containing recommendations on the
subject has been drawn up and submitted to the Committee on Children and the Cinema, appointed by the
Home Secretary, the Secretary of State for Scotland
and the Ministry of Education.

The Committee also has under consideration the
publication of a book with contributions by experts,
on the psychological aspects of the cinema.
The National Association's Film Visiting SubCommittee, many of whose members also serve on the
Joint Committee, will continue in being, but its activities
will be confined to viewing and reporting on films,
especially on those with a predominantly psychological
interest.

Travels Abroad
--------------
The Editor recently was able to visit North Italy and
Hungary, where he was invited to speak in Venice, Verona
and Budapest, on Industrial Rehabilitation?dealing
mainly with the psychological aspect. The interest in
this subject in both countries was very real, and the
audiences which included doctors from various industries
and ministries showed great interest in the preventive
and social aspects of industrial medicine. It was perhaps
noteworthy (if hardly surprising to those experienced in
group behaviour) to find the most exacting and profitable
discussion arise in the smallest and most informal
audience, consisting of a group of young doctors and
girl students in Verona; but the requests from the
larger audiences for more information showed a desire
to keep in touch with the progress of British medicine.

London University Extension Courses
The University of London offers to part-time adult
students an opportunity to qualify for an Extension
Diploma in Social Studies by attending courses of evening
lectures and classes. These courses are held at a
number of different centres in London and the Home
Counties. The subjects prescribed for the Diploma
are:

1. Social Structure and Social Conditions in England.
2. Social Psychology.
3. Social Philosophy.
4. A study of some specialized aspect of social
science. In the forthcoming session the following
alternatives are offered.
(a) The Social Services, Community Organization
and Case Work.
(b) The Child at Home and in the Community.
(c) Social Problems of Industrial Life.
(d) The Psychology of Delinquency and Criminology.
(e) Youth in Society.

In addition there are a number of forthcoming Extension Courses not recognized for the Diploma, but of
great interest to social workers of all kinds, personnel
officers, and local government employees. All these
courses take place in the evenings and the lecturers are
appointed by the University.

For full particulars of Extension Courses in Social
Science in London and the Home Counties, enquiry
should be made to the Director of Extra-Mural Studies,
University of London, Senate House, W.C.I.
