Some Problems Concerning Adolescent Psychiatric Patients
=========================================================

MENTAL HEALTH 59

r
By R. W. PICKFORD, M.A., Ph.D.(Cambridge), D.Litt.(Glasgow)
Lecturer on Psychology in the University of Glasgow
introduction
It is easy for the psychiatrist to refer young
patients who come his way to a child guidance
clinic, and this is done regularly. With adolescents
who are too old for child guidance treatment,
and who are not old enough to be sent to an ordinary
clinic for treating nervous disorders in adults,
there is a problem of considerable magnitude, and
it is specially to this, and to the large influence of
the transition from school to employment as a
precipitating factor in " nervous " troubles, that
attention is drawn in this paper.
Seven cases will be mentioned very briefly,
one third of the 21 children and adolescents referred
to a psychiatric out-patients' clinic in the year
1944. In these seven cases transition to employ-
ment was a large factor in causing " nervous "
difficulties. The main part of the article will be
devoted to a discussion of some practical problems
about the approach to such patients and their
treatment, and of the interest of mental tests to the
psychiatrist.
Case Histories?Brief Summary
(1) A boy, aged 16 years, a " hand " in a lard
works, refused on two occasions to go to work
and also disobeyed his mother. He was "jumpy "
in bed and at times failed to notice things happening
in his environment. He was under the probation
officer, because when 13 years of age, some boys
from another school had stolen some coats which
they made him pawn in his name.
(2) The second case was of a girl, aged 13? years,
and still at school. She was sent to a psychiatric
out-patient clinic by her family doctor because
she felt sick and was unable to go to school. This
proved to be an hysterical resistance against the
need to choose an occupation. Six months later
she gave up a music examination because anxiety
interfered with her practice.
(3) A boy, aged 15A years, was referred by his
family doctor because he was " afraid of things "
and was not attending to his work. He was
worried because he was shown how to do tasks
only once, and this was not sufficient' for him.
He was told he was " daft " because he could not
do the work, but it was by no means clear that
lack of intelligence was the real difficulty. He was
very depressed and spoke only in monosyllables.
(4) A boy, aged 16 years, a munition worker,
had been referred to a psychiatric out-patient
clinic, for deafness, by a neurologist who found
no physical cause for his trouble. The deafness
had developed suddenly one night when he returned
from work, and he knew in addition of blanks
in his memory, one of which lasted four days.
At the time of examination he was normal again,
but the psychiatric report suggested an hysterical
condition.
(5) A girl, aged 16, a biscuit tin labeller, referred
by her doctor for lack of concentration during the
previous six days. She had been a normal child
and got on well at school, but had difficulties at
her work after leaving school. In one job as a
typist she was too lonely. In another job as a
saleswoman, she found it too trying to set out
goods for the customers when nothing pleased
them. In a hairdresser's establishment she burnt
her hand and left precipitately. Her present job
she liked quite well.
(6) A girl, aged 15 years, previously employed
in the office of a hospital. She was referred by
her doctor for leaving her work without explanation.
She started to take days off and later took a whole
fortnight off work, going out and coming in at the
usual times, but going to friends' houses and
saying she was on holiday.
(7) A girl of 15 years of age, Intelligence Quotient
124, a typist. Her family doctor had referred her
for " telling lies for being lazy and for failing
to keep up a normal standard of personal cleanli-
ness, through which she had lost her job. This
was a very interesting patient. She was the illegiti-
mate child of a girl of 16. Her father was 19 at the
time. Her mother had married since, and she
hated her step-father. Unwanted, this child had
been petted and made much of by her mother and
grandmother, and had been told stories about her
parentage which must have been unconvincing
to a child of her intelligence. Subsequently they
were found to be untrue, but she had much imagina-
tion and learned to tell fantastic stories from her
grandmother's example.
Suitability of Clinics
The question of suitability of clinics for dealing
with adolescent patients, who are just starting work,
is important. Most of them will be too old for an
ordinary child guidance clinic. They cannot be
placed satisfactorily in the normal therapeutic
playroom, with children between 5 and 10 years
of age. They require a more adult type of therapy ?
than the usual playroom provides. A new type
of approach might be invented, and many of these
* I am indebted to Dr. Angus MacNiven for permission to publish this article. R.W.P.
60 MENTAL HEALTH
patients could be handled more easily at a clinic for
adults. At the same time it is probable that therapy
for such adolescents would be more likely to take
the form of co-operative games and projects,
which are developed from the essential principles
of the therapeutic playroom, but which are more
systematic and purposeful. It would be best if
such activities were in the hands of supervisors
who are not direct representatives of the home,
of the school or of the employment, because these
are the very institutions against which the child
rebels or upon which it is unduly dependent.
Supervisors must have psychological insight and
be able to understand when discipline on the one
hand and indulgence on the other would be helpful
and when harmful to each individual. It would be
easy to envisage the development of a special clinic
for adolescents, in a town of say 50,000 inhabitants,
and perhaps attached to an adult rather than to a
child guidance clinic, but certainly not to a school.
Such a clinic might take the form rather of an
instructional and social centre, which could be
worked into the normal steps from school to employ-
ment for children of unstable temperament. With
the raising of the school leaving age, institutions of
this type might become even more valuable, and
might be parts of the scheme for transition to
employment from school and home.
The problem is different from that of handling
malefactors or delinquents, and is one concerning
the maladjusted rather than the anti-social, though
it is closely allied to 'these problems. None of the
patients mentioned here had appeared in court,
was uncontrollable or had come into the hands of
the police, with the exception of one boy whose
contact with these officers was due to other boys'
delinquency and not to his own. Nevertheless,
if their physicians had not had the wisdom to refer
them to a psychiatrist, contact with the police, and
possibly appearance in court, might have been the
next development for any of them. They were
more inclined to escape into neurosis than into
delinquency. If seven out of 21 children and
adolescents under 17 years of age who were referred
to a psychiatric clinic were in difficulties over
employment, there must be a great number who
could be helped if attention could be directed to their
problems. As it is, they drift unsatisfied from one
occupation to another, a worry to their employers
and parents, they add to the bulk of wasteful
labour turnover and often end in unhappy situa-
tions of a serious nature Thus it would seem that
methods of group therapy might be developed and
adapted to meet the needs of such children, but a
psychologist able to grasp and handle their peculiar
attitudes and difficulties would be needed to do it.
? The Need for efficient Mental Testing
The mental testing required in a psychiatric
clinic is chiefly intelligence testing, though diag-
nostic and temperament testing would be useful,
and vocational aptitude testing would soon become
important where suitability of work was under
consideration. With certain exceptions every
patient should be given intelligence and projection
tests. These exceptions are the patients whose
anxiety, depression, excitement or other symptoms
are so severe 'as to make the test impracticable or
its result unreliable. However, they should be
tested as soon as they are well enough, and in spite
of the difficulties it would often be instructive and
useful to carry out a test while the patient was too
ill for it to be reliable, and to compare its result
with that of the same test under better conditions.
Those who come to a clinic more than once, or
who are in hospital for a period, may be tested at
intervals, and the changes in result may be con-
sidered in relation to the improvement or deter-
ioration in mental condition. To carry out all
this work efficiently would call for a special psycho-
logical unit in every mental hospital.
Testing is important for adults, but for children
and adolescents it is essential. The writer would
be the last to suggest that tests will ever be sub-
stitutes for the skilled interview or the intuitive
approach to the patient, and in psychiatry this is
less likely to happen than in any branch of medicine,
but mental tests, especially intelligence tests,
contribute something very important to the approach
to the patient, while projection tests lead naturally
into therapeutic treatment.
From a brief consideration of the seven cases
mentioned in this article, it is clear that the intellig-
ence of every patient is a factor which bears on the
problems of his treatment. Until we know the
intelligence quotient we cannot tell how far diffi-
culties with work are caused by intellectual and
how far by emotional factors. Difficulties with
work caused by intellectual inadequacy might lead
to the production of neurotic symptoms. In
treatment it is clear that a better response may
be expected from those patients with higher
intelligence, other things being equal.
Projection tests and other diagnostic and tempera-
ment tests are valuable supplements to the
psychiatric interview. The war has led to the
discovery that, where large numbers of individuals
have to be examined for training, simple pencil and
paper tests taken by groups will serve to select
a large proportion of those who are unstable or
temperamentally unfit. Even homosexual tend-
encies may be revealed by comparatively simple
verbal tests. In civilian practice the use of pro-
jection and temperament tests will be mainly
individual, and they will serve to give a background
of objective data to support the clinical findings.
Mental testing is not an end in itself, and it can be
overdone very easily. The psychological tester
should certainly not be relegated to the position
of a machine for producing test results as a pure
routine. He should be expected to have as much
insight into the clinical problems as the psychiatrist
should have into those of testing, so that co-
operation between them may be sufficiently close
to be of a constructive character.
MENTAL HEALTH 61
Effect of Entry upon a Career in certain Individuals
The next problems are how and why the entry
upon a career or employment should have a dis-
turbing effect sufficient to precipitate neurotic
or even psychotic conditions in certain individuals.
The entry upon a career is a form of developmental
transition, involving separation to some extent
from home and school influences and the partial
breakdown of these dependencies, or the threat
of such breakdown. In addition, the adolescent
phase is one of considerable disturbance and of
threatening emotional changes. Hence, it may be
that the confidence given by the patient's customary
supporting attachments to school and home are
partially withdrawn at a critical phase in his life.
Not only is the pressure brought to bear upon
him to accept the coming transition towards
maturity in himself, by going into the world of
careers and occupations, but also he is expected
to accept this pressure along with a reduction of
his normal emotional supports. The result may
be a very considerable disturbance of the balance
of impulses and emotions within the personality.
This is a special risk in persons whose childhood
or infancy has been marked by disturbances or
inadequacies, or whose home life has been broken
and inharmonious. Just as thpre is nothing
which succeeds like success, so there is nothing
which fails like failure, and the result of a disturb-
ance in adolescence may be a repetition of previous
failures in a new setting, often coupled with com-
pensatory neurotic tendencies. Such tendencies
arise because there is a compulsion to restore the
balance in any possible way when it has been upset,
and the individual may turn unconsciously towards
childish or infantile regressions which offer even
temporary and inadequate compensation. Hence
the neurotic and even psychotic symptoms. They
are the product of the repetition of infantile failures
and of the craving for a restoration of the emotional
balance, and they are abnormal in the sense that
they do not provide an adequate mature adaptation.
The aim of therapy will, therefore, be neither to
moralize (which has usually been tried to excess
before the patient appears in a clinic at all and which
brings thereby even more pressure to bear where
there is already too much), nor to attack the
symptoms themselves as if they were the illness,
but to bridge the gap in some temporary way while
the individual makes the necessary re-adjustments
for himself. The natural tendency of the mind
to create its own re-adjustments is the psychiatrist's
greatest remedy, just as the work of the physician
and of the surgeon's consists mainly in setting up
conditions in which spontaneous physical healing
can take place.
Treatment of these and Similar Cases
There are three points of application of treatment:
(a) to the patient personally; (b) to the patient's
home; (e) to his employment, or, if he were at
school, to the school. In general the order of
importance of these points of application is the
order given. If the patient is intelligent and
co-operative, much can be done by discussing the
conditions of the breakdown with him and by
guiding his ideas into a direction of greater toler-
ance of the anxieties involved. In doing this, the
therapist in reality proceeds by taking upon himself
to some extent the burden of dependencies which
the patient has been forced to withdraw from home
and school and has failed to attach to his work.
The therapist must grasp that, whatever overt
technique of treatment is exploited, even if it
involves hypnosis or the use of sedative drugs or
reassurance, this acceptance of the patient's free-
floating dependencies is the essence of the treatment.
This is interesting, because modern medicine tends
to be very materialistic, and this is one of the
main reasons why so many people like to go to
" quacks " of various kinds, who are often experts
in manipulating personal sympathy in exactly the
right manner. The physician only too often looks
upon treatment as a mechanical process like
replacing or repairing broken or worn parts in a
motor car, and the favourite dictum, " Mens sana
in corpore sano is in many cases precisely the
opposite of the truth. The exact manner in which
the patient's dependencies are to be handled varies
greatly from case to case, and no specific rules can
be laid down. The method must be determined
by the therapist's own insight. It must always be
kept clearly in mind that subsequent detachment
of the patient and the re-orientation of his emotions
about his work is essential and must be the real
aim of treatment, to be achieved as soon as possible.
The therapist is merely a stepping-stone.
With many cases, such as those described in this
article, where the illness is not very severe or
incapacitating, there is much hope for the use of
group therapy, a form of which would be excellent
for adolescents if it included games and social
projects of a constructive character, and avoided
influences emanating too strongly from the home,
school or employment. Such treatment could be
approached through the family physician and the
psychiatric clinic much more successfully than
through the school or business. The treatment,
whether group or individual therapy, must be able
to tolerate and even to exploit aggressive and hostile
attitudes and feelings on the part of the patient,
and to meet them with the requisite indifference,
sympathy or humour, and not with repressive
discipline. It is likely that some aggressive patients
will be unconsciously craving for punishment in
certain ways which must be understood.
Next, the patient's home, is always likely to be
a difficult problem. Not only have the conflicts
of the home necessarily been (at least in part) the
causes of the patient's difficulties, but also members
of the family will be sensitive about the patient's
illness and his delinquencies, if any. They will
need some re-assurances, which will be the first
steps in the therapy applied to the home. This
62 MENTAL HEALTH
therapy will have two aims, the first of which is
to help the patient through the home and the second
to help the home itself, because the patient cannot
be helped through the home unless the anxieties
and conflicts of the latter are to some extent reduced.
Treatment of the home for its own sake would
become a further aim if the members of the family
came forward for help. Treatment of the patient
through the home will always be a very difficult
matter unless exceptional understanding is met
there. An expert social worker will have to co-
operate with the psychiatrist and psychologist
in order to deal with the home, and there is no
doubt that this kind of work is very important
and ought to be developed. A thorough grasp
of modern psychology and its methods will be the
foundation of the social worker's training. Not
only psychiatry, but also mental testing, social
psychology and many aspects of educational and
industrial psychology will be relevant and cannot
be overlooked. The part played by the social
worker will be more than to visit, investigate and
report. She must be able to help the family to
express and discharge anxieties and hostile feelings
excited by the patient and directed upon him, and
perhaps upon the psychiatrist and the clinic as well.
To do this requires much insight into human
emotions and their conflicts, projections and
repercussions, and an ability to remain detached
herself and sympathetic without being uncon-
sciously manoeuvred into position (possibly against
the psychiatrist and patient) by members of the
family. Many and complex problems are raised
by these observations, and they cannot be dealt
with here.
The final consideration is the approach to the
patient's employment. This will involve two
problems, first the manipulation of the employer's
sympathy or hostility to the patient, and secondly
the question of vocational guidance. The
employer's sympathy should certainly be won
wherever possible. There will be various complica-
tions. Often it may be helpful to advise that a
patient should escape from the family by going into
an institution, or that he should leave home for the
more co-operative custody of an aunt or more
distant relative, or even that he should leave the
aunt's or grandmother's protection so that his
parents shall shoulder their own responsibilities.
On the whole, the home and relatives are more or
less immovable stepping stones or barriers to
progress, and the patient must be helped in his
dealings with them.
The employer (or school) is generally a less fixed
quantity, and it may be fortunate that both he and
the kind of work can be changed. Sometimes
it may be an advantage to encourage the patient to
persist in the same work, and then the attitude of
the social worker will be that of winning sympathy
for him from the employer, always explaining in
a way which can be understood the nature of the
illness and the extent to which sympathy is likely
to be helpful. Where it seems better to advocate
a change of employment, then selection of a suitable
job becomes an important problem. All the
resources of vocational guidance, depending on
appropriate interview techniques, intelligence and
diagnostic tests and tests of special abilities, con-
sideration of preferences and temperamental quali-
ties, must be brought to bear on the matter. With
the selection of a more suitable occupation a better
adjustment to work will be gained and will play an
important part in the treatment, because suitable
work will sublimate and dispose of conflicts instead
of aggravating them. The re-assurance of a success-
ful transference of the patient's dependencies to
a useful and interesting occupation will play the
most important part in the cure.
Conclusion
This article deals with seven adolescent patients
referred to a psychiatric out-patients' clinic for
"nervous " symptoms which interfered with their
work. They formed one-third of a group of
21 children under 17 years of age, taken consecu-
tively during 12 months, the remaining 14 of whom
were referred for other difficulties not connected
with employment. It is pointed out that the phase
of transition from school to employment is liable
to bring emotional stresses which can precipitate
disorders of a neurotic or even psychotic character.
This transitional phase and its possible consequences
are worthy of special study, and a development of
child guidance and play therapy, organized along
more adult lines, might be worth attempting.
This would be a form of play therapy, and would
meet the difficulty of handling difficult adolescents
who are too old for child guidance and too young
for clinics for adult nervous patients.
It is suggested that the reason why the transition
to employment is sometimes a traumatic event
may be due to the disturbance of the balance of
dependencies between home and school, which
it may upset at a critical time. The patients liable
to this form of disturbance will be those who have
an unfortunate background in infancy and child-
hood, broken homes or the failure of an adequate
balance of emotional attachments at an early age.
The therapist's aim will be to restore the balance
in such a way that the employment becomes a
valuable sublimation instead of a threat to security.
The patient, his home and work will be approached
in a therapeutic way, and occupational guidance
will be a special interest. This article stresses the
need for adequate mental and diagnostic testing
by psychologists in co-operation with the psychiatric
clinic.
