Northern Ireland's Mental Health Act
====================================

The Mental Health Act (Northern Ireland)?which
has just received the Royal Assent?reflects a state
of public opinion well in advance of that which has
so far received legislative embodiment in this
country, and is of special interest in that it surely
outlines the shape of things to come.

The Act deals both with mental illness and mental
deficiency and is strikingly uncomplicated in its
provisions. It is, to quote from the Explanatory
Memorandum:

"... a health measure, and the predominant considerations are the promotion of
mental health and the proper treatment and
cave of the persons who need the aid the
Bill is designed to provide.''''

Part II, concerned with " Mental Illness
re-enacts the principal provisions of the Mental
Treatment Act (Northern Ireland), 1932, modelled
on the British Act of 1930, but there is one almost
revolutionary innovation to which attention should
be drawn. Previously there were recognized three
classes of mental patients?voluntary, temporary
and certified. These categories remain, but the
meaning attached to them is very different. In
future all patients in need of mental treatment
(other than " voluntary " patients) will be admitted
to Mental Hospitals without certification, as " temporary " patients. Only one medical certificate
will be necessary and treatment in such temporary
capacity may continue for a period up to two years,
or slightly longer in certain circumstances. At
the same time, power of detention is given. At any
time during the period of treatment, if the medical
superintendent considers that recovery is improbable, it is his duty to inform the relatives to that
effect. Unless they plan to provide some other
means of care, they must then present a petition
for the patient's certification; if they do not do so,
such a petition will be presented by a duly authorized
officer of the Authority.

In Part III, dealing with Mental Deficiency (under
the heading '' Arrested or Incomplete Development
of Mind "), the new concepts find equal recognition. It is noted in the preamble that Northern
Ireland is 35 years behind Great Britain in having
hitherto made no special provision of any kind for
mental defectives, but?in theory at least?the Act
now gives her a front line place.

In accordance with the recommendations of the
Mental Health Services Advisory Committee which
issued its report in September, 1946, considerable
divergence is made in the Act from the provisions
of our own Mental Deficiency Acts, particularly in
the following directions :?

(1) The terms " feeble-minded " imbecile "
and " idiot "?as well as the generic term " mentally
defective"?are replaced by the expression " person
requiring special care " defined as
" A person who has in accordance with the
provisions of this Act been ascertained to be
suffering from arrested or incomplete
development of mind (whether arising from
inherent causes or induced by disease or
injury) which renders him socially inefficient
to such an extent that he requires supervision, training or control in his own interests
or in the public interest.''''

The term " socially inefficient " is further elucidated (using some of the terms of our own Acts) as
including a mental condition rendering the persons
concerned to be {a) unable to guard themselves
against common physical dangers, or (b) incapable
of managing themselves or their affairs, or, being
children, of being taught to do so, (c) children
reported as being incapable of receiving education
at school or (d) in need of care, supervision and
control for the protection of others.

(2) Provision is made for the voluntary admission
of defectives to institutional care, and it is intended
as with mental patients, that certification involving
judicial orders, shall be used only when there is
opposition on the part of the parents or of the
defective himself (if over 21), and in cases of defectives found neglected, abandoned or cruelly treated
or charged with an offence. At the same time,
power of detention is given in all cases.

(3) In the case of defectives in institutions by
voluntary consent, the initial period of care will
expire at the end of one year but may be ended at
any time on giving 14 days' notice to the Authority.
If it is considered that such withdrawal would not
be desirable, the Authority may then, if necessary,
apply for a judicial order. (Only one medical
certificate is required for this.)

(4) In accordance with the emphasis laid throughout the Act on voluntary care, there is a provision
whereby any person over the age of 16 who "is
of opinion that he stands in need of special care "
may present himself for examination. If under the
age of 21, the receipt of such application must be
notified by the Authority to the parent or guardian.
(5) The duty of notifying defectives to the Authority is laid not only upon local education authorities
and health authorities, but also upon medical
practitioners.

Further, local education authorities are required
to notify to the Authority, all school-leavers who
have received special educational treatment, making
special reference to those likely to need institution
or guardianship.

The types of care included in the Act?Institution,
Guardianship and Supervision?are of the familiar
pattern, but the provision of suitable training or
occupation in the case of the last two categories,
is permissive only?a divergence from our own Act
of 1927, to be regretted but due no doubt to the
lack of the necessary personnel, premises and other
facilities inevitable in a country introducing such
legislation for the first time.

Finally, it should be noted that the Authority
under both parts of the Bill is the Northern Ireland
Hospitals Authority upon whom is laid the
responsibility of
"providing or securing the provision of,
services designed to maintain and improve
the mental health of the people of Northern
Ireland.''

The functions of Local Health Authorities in the
scheme are limited to the notification of persons in
need of special care and they will not be required to
appoint Mental Health Officers of their own.
Provision is, however, made for the use of any
Services or Officers provided by them on an agency
basis if this is found to be expedient.
Correspondence on this subject is invited.?editor.
