Speech and Voice Correction
==============================

Edited by Emil
Froeschels, M.D. Philosophical Library, New
York. 1948.
There are nineteen contributors to this sympos-
ium, so it is not astonishing that it is a patchy piece
of work. In his Foreword, the Editor states that
the "... purpose is to offer to persons scientific-
ally and/or practically interested in speech and
voice correction the latest developments in the
field. I have tried to include as many modern
trends as possible so the reader will not be sur-
prized if he finds divergent opinions expressed ..."
It is not so much divergence of opinion amongst
the various authors that arouses comment as the
discrepancy in the quality of their contributions.
The fact that English is a foreign language to the
editor and to some of the contributors accounts for
the lack of lucidity in several of the articles and for
the inadequacy of the proof reading. It is a pity
that here and there in the text a German word is
used?not even italicized?though it is quite
MENTAL HEALTH 55
feasible to find an English equivalent. It is, how-
ever, not only the foreign contributors who are at
fault?with the honourable exception of Auguste
Jellinek, whose articles on Accoustic Education
for Children and for Adults are well written and
serve a useful purpose; some of the Americans
equally fail to use language that makes their meaning
clear, and is free from solecisms. Before writing
their articles each of them ought to have read that
by C. P. Bontrager on " Remedial Reading and
General Semantics " (pp. 249-69), and taken it to
heart.
The book does not always offer enough to those
who are " practically interested ", doubtless owing
to lack of space; most chapters only indicate the
general principles of therapeutic procedures. Those
by Samuel Robbins on " Dyslalia ", and by
Charles Strother on " Voice Training after Laryng-
ectomy are by far the most satisfying for the
reader who seeks practical guidance.
The aim of supplying something for those
" scientifically interested is not really achieved
either; there is a great deal of recapitulation of
previous knowledge, and sometimes vague expres-
sions of opinion are offered instead of well-
documented proof of what the writers postulate.
The article entitled " The Education of the Speak-
ing Voice " apparently intends to strike a highly
scientific tone; the author never uses a word of
one syllable if he can find one of five or six to
replace it.
Annie Molenaar-Bijl's observations on " Stutter-
ing ", and its differential diagnosis from stammering,
is a valuable piece of work, for in practice there is
still much confusion on this subject.
The account of " Hearing Rehabilitation " as
carried out at Hoff General Hospital (a military
hospital) and Dr. William G. Peachor's summary
of the nature and treatment of speech disturbances
arising from " Gunshot Wounds of the Head and
Neck", justify the editor's claim to lay the latest
developments before the reader. It is a pity that
these two chapters were so brief.
Emil Froeschels showed creditable restraint in
allocating so little space to himself for his article
on " Stuttering Surely this aspect of the subject
warrants more attention than has been given to
it here. The whole book would probably have
been of greater value if so much had not been
crammed into so little space; several of the con-
tributors would no doubt have done their subject
greater justice if they had been able to write at
slightly greater length. J.H.V.T.
