Child Health Services in Portugal
==================================

By Professor VITOR M. FONTES, M.D. V
Director, Institute Antonio Aurelio da Costa Ferrina, Lisbon
The meeting of the Mental Hygiene Congress in
August of this year in London, with its sections on
Child Psychotherapy and Psychiatry, presents
a splendid opportunity at the present time.
It is essential that the nations be represented to
their fullest and that the Congress occupy itself
with the major problems which are found in those
countries most tragically assailed from the Mental
Hygiene point of view.
In addition to this viewpoint, which is funda-
mental, and by its side as a problem for solution,
it might be as well to create a census of working
conditions existing in the countries represented
there, so that those conditions which are beneficial
may be utilized for the common good, in a spirit of
collaboration independent of other circumstances
not those which are the moral principles of
humanity.
With this sentiment in view and within the
framework of the specialty which we practise
officially in our country and also because we feel
great pleasure at the request which was made to
us by Dr. Tredgold, we will set forth below a brief
resume of what takes place in the realm of Child
Hygiene in Portugal.
Until 1941 treatment and help extended to
abnormal children was limited to those labelled
delinquents, to those who underwent malforming
influences through the circumstances in which they
lived (children in moral danger), to some followed
up by the educational services, to minors and to
children whose senses were affected, namely the
blind and the deaf, looked after in special establish-
ments. Before this date there were only two
schools for mental defectives, one for males founded
by Doctor Costa Ferreira, physician and school-
master, and one for females, the Medico Pedagogic
Institute of Condessa Rilvas. These two founda-
tions catered for little more than a hundred boys
and girls.
In 1941, the Portuguese Government began the
organization of Child Mental Health Services in
the country with the founding of the " A. A. da
C.F. " Institute, established in the re-education
school referred to above, but amplified and re-
modelled in its aims and functions.
This institution which functions in Lisbon is a
dependent of the Ministry of National Education
(Order No. 31,801 of 1941, and new re-organiza-
tion Order No. 35,401 of December, 1941). It
comprises a psychological observation clinic for
children with mental abnormalities and the centre
for study, organization of treatment services,
re-education and aid to all those mentally affected
in the country.
In order to carry out these functions the Institute
has three aims:
(a) Selection of children with mental abnormali-
ties.
(b) Setting up of training courses for the technical
personnel to be engaged in the work.
(c) To prepare and organize the various Child
Mental Health Services of the country.
To carry out its first aim the Institute possesses
a dispensary with an external consulting service,
social domestic welfare and the organization of
technical brigades who go to the schools or official
and private establishments for child aid treatment
or education, in order to observe children brought
to notice for the above reasons.
Some children may also come for consultation
free. Observation of the child begins by being
made by a nurse, who watches its behaviour
in the waiting room. Toys are provided for the
children while they await their turn for examina-
tion. Children and parents (or those accompanying
the child) then pass on to the Social Service depart-
ment where a social worker takes down particulars
of conditions of family life (as much from the
economic as the moral aspect) and of general
health. The child then goes into the medical
psychiatrist's room, who performs a clinical
examination, employing all possible methods used
* Translated from the Portuguese.
MENTAL HEALTH
in this type of examination, i.e. tests (Termann,
Fay, C. Buhler), neurological examination, psychia-
tric and physical examinations, direct observation
by conversation, free drawing and whatever other
means the case demands.
The case sheet, drawn from these three sources,
accompanies the doctor who examined child and
family, to the director for discussion of diagnosis,
and where possible the future handling of the case.
The characteristics of examination concentrate
on two major points: paying the greatest attention
to information obtained socially and at the same
time paying great respect for the feelings of the
patient and his family, sparing them as much as
possible questionnaires carried out in public by
numerous inquisitors, a grievous trespass on the
closest secrets of their lives, perhaps those most
secret. To avoid this both doctors and social
workers are alone with the examinees, and the
utmost efforts are made not to duplicate questions,
bearing in mind that the essentials are to be found
in a case sheet compiled from the various sources
of the respective services. And above all condi-
tions of family life (of great importance in child
psychiatry) are compiled only by social workers
who are, as a rule, more welcome by the families
in enquiries as to their more intimate affairs.
When the examination is complete it then remains
to indicate the ultimate course to be followed in
treating the child. A final decision cannot always
be made as the result of one examination; to guard
against this difficulty there exists in the Institute
building, a boarding school specially set up for
those requiring further observation. When
admission is decided upon, before the child enters
the boarding house, the Social Service, through
the medium of its workers, visits the child's family
in their own home and there take a careful history;
this is taken with all possible discretion and caution
but is nevertheless full and well informed.
When the history has been taken the child enters
the boarding house which admits boys from 5 to
15 years of age (the female section functions in
another building, the Medico-Pedagogic Institute
Condessa Rilvas).
The regime of the boarding house is by necessity
the most liberal possible, within a framework of
discipline readily accepted by the children; familiar
surroundings, and an atmosphere into which
teachers, doctors and above all prefectorial staff,
enter, gives them a truly family life.
The opportunities for observation in the boarding
school are multiple ; various tests (in addition
to those mentioned, the manual labyrinth of Rey,
Ozeretzky, etc.) clinical pathology laboratories,
X-rays, observation classes and especially observa-
tion of the children in the untrammelled life of the
boarding school, that is in their amusements,
refectories and dormitories.
As we said observation classes also function in
the Institute ; infant classes and those of the various
grades of primary education. Nevertheless these
classes are not intended primarily for the education
of abnormal children. While he teaches, the
master (himself a specialist in this type of observa-
tion) continues to watch his pupil and to appreciate
the causes of his mental abnormality or inability
to learn.
The various workers in the boarding house,
doctors, teachers and prefects have each their own
case sheets where all information in regard to the
child under survey are noted down. This ranges
from laboratory analyses to psychiatric examina-
tions, from neurological examinations, detailed
and repeated, to notes on improvement in school
work, i.e. reading, writing and arithmetic. Also
noted are performances in manual work, games,
etc. and finally in great detail, the notes made by
workers in regard to the daily life of the boarder,
the behaviour of each child, in his milieu, in the
dining room, in the dormitories, how he comports
himself at table, how he sleeps (night terrors,
dreams), if he is violent at play, cunning, lying,
loyal, a coward, a cheat, aggressive or co-operative.
Every fortnight the technical personnel have a
clinical meeting in which the children's case sheets
are read and weighed up. The case is discussed
by everyone and when it is considered that the case
is complete the ultimate destination of the child
is marked down on the case sheet, whether it be
re-education, treatment or simply help.
During the observation, which in general is con-
sidered completed in a term of one to two months,
the Social Services pay return visits to the minor's
house and also to his school or office where he was
working ; * it not only continues to collect all
elements which may perhaps help completely to
clear up the case but also continues to solve as
much as possible the family situation, by re-organiza-
tion of broken homes, attempts to place unemployed
fathers and to hospitalize any member of the family
who requires one or other form of treatment.
The child is then discharged from the boarding
house and if his continued treatment is possible,
when it is indicated, it is proceeded with on this
understanding and the family continues to visit
the dispensary or Social Services in whatever form
suits them best. If the child cannot be admitted
to the recommended institution by reason of lack
of accommodation or because what exists is not
sufficiently differentiated, then he remains under
surveillance at close hand and the best transitory
solution is sought.
Since the organization of the Institute and by
its direct intervention, there have already been
created in Lisbon several institutions for com-
plementary treatment. Thus, in the suburbs,
a re-education school, the " Albergavia de Lisboa "
has been founded with a large estate and buildings
for mentally abnormal children who while they are
unable to proceed to elementary studies, are
nevertheless able to absorb and learn simple tasks
fitting to their mental capacity, the teaching being
carried out by personnel trained to teach this type
of child.
The re-education school carries one hundred boys.
MENTAL HEALTH
In Lisbon a re-education school for seventy-five
girls functions in collaboration with the Institute,
with gardens, and training centres in dressmaking
and other domestic work, well fitted for the pupils
boarded there.
In the " Julio de Matos " Hospital (Psychiatric
Clinic for Adults) a building for children was opened
in 1943 for forty boys for cases of psychopathic
personality who require treatment in this type of
speciality.
Finally by the initiative of, and organized through
the Institute, twelve classes with a maximum of
fifteen pupils each, will begin work this year beside
the primary schools of Lisbon and the Public
Assistance Institutions for Infant Education; these
are for backward scholars who require individual
teaching. These classes work under the technical
direction of the Institute and employ personnel
trained there.
Besides children boarded in these institutions
and those who are accommodated in special classes,
the Institute also assists, treats and re-educates
numerous children either as boarders (cases of
childhood neurosis, caused by bad home influences,
psychopaths with familial reactions which a few
months as boarders and some family re-education
may help) or as out-patients where many cases for
motor re-education by reason of neurological
disease are cared for: there is also an Orthophonic
section which has many patients.
This then is the function of recuperation of
mental abnormalities carried out by the Institute.
The other function is the training of technical
personnel for these specialized Services.
To cover this an order was published (32,607 of
December, 1942) regulating the founding of a
specialization course for teachers of abnormal
children in the Institute. The course consists of
two subjects, Psychology and Paediatrics, orient-
ated for the purposes of the specialty. Primary
school teachers or anyone with a University degree
can matriculate in this course. The certificate of
this course is the indispensable legal condition by
which one can be employed as a teacher of abnormal
children.
The course is essentially practical: it extends over
one year, and its theory is orientated in the direction
of observation and recognition of the known facts
of abnormal psychology applied to abnormal
children, taught also with this end in view; what is
more stressed is the practical side of teaching
through the medium of apprenticeship, both in the
classes which are taught in the Institute itself and in
those attached to the primary schools.
Each pupil-teacher has some weeks of apprentice-
ship in the first, second and third infant classes.
These classes are attended by the Institute masters
and by the pupil-teachers' colleagues. At the end
of each apprentice week, the lessons taught by
each pupil-teacher are discussed by the technical
personnel of the Institute, including the director
and the other pupil-teachers themselves. This
teaching technique has shown itself of great use
as it has allowed of a singularity of viewpoint most
convenient in a subject so specialized.
The final examinations of the course consist of
theoretical tests, practical tests (lessons given on a
chosen subject) and the writing of observation notes
relative to abnormal children selected for the
examination.
Preparation and organization of the various
mental health services is carried out by means of a
propaganda directed towards the non-lay public
(doctors and teachers) and the general public.
For this the Institute has brought into being
conferences on Neuro-psychiatry and has publica-
tions on aspects of the specialty. Thus the organ
of greatest circulation published by the Institute is
a Bulletin entitled the " Portuguese Child" of
which already six volumes have appeared, corres-
ponding to the six years' existence of the Institute.
In addition to the Bulletin, four volumes of mono-
graphs, treating of more limited subjects and more
searching in their intrinsic sense are published.
The Institute also has in its possession much
valuable material within the sections in which they
are made up. Thus in the Museum there are 250
brains of still-born and new-born Portuguese
children. Each brain has its case sheet with all
possible information obtained by the Services who
came by the brains.
The Institute possesses also a collection of records
obtained from its patients suffering from speech
troubles, from orthophonic defects, from stammer-
ing, etc. There is also a selection of films showing
patients with motor and other affections. The
Library of the Institute is rich in reviews of special
subjects, as it receives 119 national and foreign
publications, 116 of which are obtained by exchange
with its own Bulletin. In the six volumes of
" AC. CR. PORT", psychological, pedagogic,
morphological and social aspects of the Portuguese
child are treated, with valuable foreign collaboration.
We may mention in honour the names of collabora-
tors, Tramer, Baumgarten, Cesell, Hanselmann,
Schachter, Maragas and Planchard.
Of the four volumes of " monographs " two are
on the subject of neuro-psychiatric conferences
concerning children: Volume No. II is a study
of " The development of the cerebral cortex " by
V. Fontes and No. IV is a work on Pestalozzi,
published in 1946 on the second centenary of his
death.
The " Organization of Psychiatric Aid in the
Country " Law, published in 1945 (Law No. 2006)
included the Institute in its services, giving it the
title of Dispensary of Mental Hygiene in the country
with the powers already described.
The child section created in the three psychiatric
centres in which the country was divided, namely
North, in the city of Oporto, Central in Coimbra
and South in Lisbon, are under the technical
direction of the Institute.
To date since its organization in 1941, 4,894
minors have passed through the various branches
of the Institute 617 as boarders, 4,277 through
MENTAL HEALTH
the other branches. Of these last 2,203 were
admitted to the Public Assistance teaching centres,
as they showed no evidence of mental abnormality,
175 were placed in the existing re-education schools,
180 are taught in the special primary classes, 40 are
gathered in the infant section of the Psychiatric
Hospital and the remainder continue to be assisted
by the Institute or are at home awaiting considera-
tion of their cases.
What remains to be done is to build asylums for
large numbers of irrecoverable patients, to enlarge
the special schools, and to attempt to extend to the
whole country the benefits of assistance, re-education
and child treatment.
