Psychiatry. A Short Treatise
=============================
 
:Author: William O'Connor,
L.M.S.S.A. John Wright & Sons, Ltd., Bristol.
35s.

It is a little difficult perhaps when presented with a
General Treatise, especially when the subject matter is
Psychiatry, to see what anyone could find new to say.
There already exist many good text books and a mass
of other literature on the subject. The aim here, how-
ever, is not exactly anything new; it is rather to fill
(effectively) a gap that exists in psychiatric literature
and which has never really been properly filled, that
this book has been compiled.

Actually the matter is not quite so simple as it sounds,
for medicine like the law, speaks a language of its own.
More so does this apply to Psychiatry?the difference
being as great to a medical student as medicine is to a
lay person. Moreover to cover the whole of psychiatry
in any one volume is too much like trying to swallow
the ocean at one sitting. This volume has anticipated,
as far as it can, most of these difficulties. The theme,
as it develops, is so framed that once one's interest is
aroused, the author, without ever abandoning us,
shows the many intriguing paths still awaiting develop-
ment and provides a continuous stimulus to our imagina-
tion and a challenge to further investigation.

The chapter on Analytical Therapy is bold, but well
chosen. It draws attention to the fact that although the
mechanists and the analysts continue along completely
dissociated paths, yet in fact the two are slowly con-
verging and in many cases are only using different
terminology to describe similar conditions. Treat-
ment is perhaps least discussed?possibly a wise step?
as it is only through a thorough knowledge of human
problems, inter-relationships and character differences
that such should be attempted, and the subject and scope
is such as can never be fully appreciated in such a
volume.

The Author's aims and hopes as mentioned in the
Preface are, I believe, fully realized and I can recommend
this treatise in the belief that it will have a wider cir-
culation than is at first suggested.

The book is most suited, perhaps, to those who having
a certain familiarity, profess an interest in psychiatry
and who claim something more which is readable and
instructive, and who will then turn to other specialized
sources of information. It is a generalized survey of
Psychiatry as the name implies, and in its concept is
refreshingly alive to the present possibilities and problems.
The form of lay-out follows, more or less, the traditional
style. Special emphasis, however, is paid to the sequence
so that each page prepares one for what is to follow,
logically, well reasoned and clearly formulated. Parti-
cular stress is given to cause and effect ; symptoms are
not just tabulated to be accepted or forgotten, rather
every stage follows upon a clear exposition of psycho-
pathological processes in its relation to symptoms and
diagnosis. The subject matter is remarkably compre-
hensive, but at the same time is so worded that the major
issues stand out clearly. Closer reading, however,
unearths a wealth of valuable additional matter. The
author is writing from a clinical standpoint, drawing
from a wide personal experience, both of mental hospital
and extra mural work. It is not surprising, therefore,
that it is a more intimate study of the finer innuendoes of
mental illness than can be achieved in more formal
works.
R.B.M.
