U and Nobody Cares for me!
============================

:Author: Eeward  Lightowler 
Headmaster, Joseph Rowntree School, New Earswick, York

Jimmy W. is an agreeable enough boy with a
disarming smile and a natural gentleness of manner
toward those who have not his unusual physical
strength. He was admitted to my school in late
1944 and I soon learned that he came from Sunder-
land, had proved a headache to those in authority
over him, was aged between thirteen and fourteen,
and had no particular aim in life except to get back
to Sunderland and, in his words, " do for " his
stepfather. This may have been a quite laudable
ambition, I don't know, I never met the stepfather.
At the same time it was quite clear that society
would not approve and that Jimmy must, in some
way, be brought to see that there are other aims in
life. But, before going further, perhaps a few words
about the school and Jimmy's place in it may not
come amiss.

Secondary Modern in type, and built jointly by
the North Riding of Yorkshire Local Education
Authority and the Joseph Rowntree Village Trust,
the school was opened in 1942 by the Right Hon.
R. A. Butler, M.P., then President of the Board.
The Trust's connection with it has enabled the school
to undertake some work of an experimental nature
including exploration of the possibilities of handi-
craft as a factor in the education of non-academic
boys, the workshop is unusually well equipped.
There is also a good garden and a pleasant area of
park-land surrounds the building. The children,
approximately 400 boys and girls over the age of
eleven, come from numerous quiet villages to the
North-east of York and from New Earswick in
which the school stands. The last named is some-
what different from the other, older villages. It
has been built entirely in this century as a " model
village it has a very good primary school, its
social standards are unusually high and it lies only
just outside the city boundary.

In one of the villages was a small hostel for
difficult evacuees. We had no contact with them
as all those attending were educated together as an
isolated colony. Most people regarded them with
a mixture of curiosity and suspicion and if, in the
village where they lived, any petty theft took place
or windows were broken it was convenient to put
the blame upon them. Sometimes they were
guilty but not always so.

In the summer of 1944 the local authority took
a very courageous and, as it now appears, a very
wise decision, although most of us at the time had
grave misgivings. It was decided that all boys at
the hostel should, on reaching the age of 11 plus,
be transferred to this school. Ten boys were to
arrive at the start of the new term in September.
Parents protested, the School Governors were,
not unnaturally, perturbed as were the staff and
myself. But, as there seemed to be no sign of any
reversal of the decision, I turned to my books to
find what others had to say and was cheered to find
that Lane, Duncan, Neill, and other pioneers all
agreed on one point?children branded as backward
and/or difficult were scarcely ever as bad as one
expected them to be. The reports on the boys
included such passages as?" Dirty habits at the
table " Slashes the table-cloth with a razor
blade." " Hysterical in billet," etc., and viewed
against the general background of the school, the
prospect seemed unpleasant. As a staff we had
all kinds of queries?should we keep them in one
group, should we allow any contact with the girls,
should we put them all at one table for lunch, and
what about those razor blades ? We were more
than a little worried and I decided to visit the
hostel.

That visit was most enlightening. The boys
were at play in the grounds. Attempts at con-
versation they regarded with suspicion but, eventu-
ally, one boy showed me his rabbits with some pride.
I was suitably impressed and he then went on to
show me his garden. Thus encouraged two other
boys showed me their gardens after which, one,
greatly daring, asked me if I would care to see his
" homeThis puzzled me, but I followed
his lead down some roughly cut steps into a large
hole in the ground. The hole had been roofed over
with old timbers, tin, linoleum, and finally with
turf. Inside it was clean and tidy. The walls
were decorated with magazine pictures, all manner
of boyish treasures were fastened up in a box,
there was a rough seat. After this surprise I saw
several more homes, almost every boy had one,
no two were alike. Their craving for security,
love, protection, all that "home" means to the
normal child was distressingly obvious and I began
to get a glimmering of the wisdom behind the
decision to send them to a normal school to mix
with other, more fortunate, children. Later I was
to reach the conclusion that hostel life can never
replace home life and that, wherever possible, a
foster-parent should be found.

A week later the boys arrived, being accompanied
by the warden of the hostel. He also paid in their
dinner money and arranged to collect them. They
seemed quiet, abashed, fearful of what might be
about to happen. What did actually happen was
that the head boy took them around the school,
allowing them to dally wherever they wished. The
other children knew about them, of course, from
their parents, but had been asked to treat them as
ordinary, normal, new boys. Later, the boys all
came to my office, two were aged 11, six were 12,
one was 13 and one 14 years of age. Following up
a line decided at a staff conference I welcomed
them to the school and told them they would be
treated as normal boys in every way. They would
be placed in suitable forms, drafted into school
houses, allowed to sit where they pleased at lunch
and not be watched in any special way. We would
try to make their time in school both profitable
and enjoyable but, if they wanted to run away,
the doors were always open and we were all, really,
far too busy to be always watching to see they
didn't go, at the same time we should think they were
babies if they did. The whole group then went
to the workshop to carry out pre-arranged tasks
the while each boy had an interview of a more
personal kind. Each was told of his record,
nothing was concealed, the whole sorry story was
laid bare, forgiven and forgotten and the boy told
that, from that moment onward, the record ceased
to exist except as a personal secret between himself
and me, it would not be considered further and he
started again from scratch. Any special favours
would be considered sympathetically, materials or
tools wanted for work at the hostel would be loaned,
there would be no need at all to steal them but,
having made all this clear, it was also made clear
that the reverse also held good. All children in
the school were subject to school discipline and
rules were meant to be kept by them as by everyone
else without exception or favour, the only special
dispensation to be given was that, as they had no
parents to turn to, we would all be glad to advise
whenever any boy found himself in difficulty.

The approach was personal and varied a little with
the boy, of course, some had no record of delinqu-
ency, the trouble being emotional, due to anxiety
complex, etc., but every single one had a history of
difficulties in behaviour. Next they were given
various tests, their intelligence quotients were
ascertained (two of under 70, three between 70 and
80, three between 80 and 90, and two between
90 and 100) and they were placed in suitable
forms.

From the first the arrangements worked well.
Their suspicion and hostility eased gradually and so
did our fears. The workshop was their Mecca,
although Gardening and Physical Education were
also popular, they welcomed any opportunity for
indulging in useful and creative work, they ceased
to band together and played normally with other
boys, one took a part in a school play. Of their
conduct in the dining room we never had to com-
plain, either they had been well taught before we
got them or their records were sadly wrong. The
razor blades became a joke, they never showed any
viciousness, in fact it all seems, looking back, to
have been too easy. Very soon afterwards they were
complimented on playing up to our trust in them,
told that the warden would now cease to accompany
them, told that each would be required to bring
and pay in his own dinner money and sent away
rejoicing. From that day on everyone ceased to
regard them as being in any way unusual. Before
the hostel closed in February, 1947, we had passed
28 boys through the school and not one caused us
any real worry, although one of them, Douglas C.,
was a bit of a nuisance. He used to follow first
me and, later, other members of the staff around,
while enquiring plaintively if we had a job for him,
which would help us. We had quite a time invent-
ing tasks to satisfy his craving to express his
gratitude.

Only this week one of them wrote to me, he was
classed as " noisy, hysterical, moody, highly strung,
very frightened in raids, shows violent temper,
sister, M.D." May I quote from his letter ? " Just
a few lines to let you know I have not forgotten
you or the school I used to attend. I think you
know I am in an approved school because you sent
me a good record to A., but do not think I have been
stealing'''' (whatanxious pride is in that sentence !?
E.L.). " When I left the hostel I went back to Hull
because my Mother claimed me. When I was
two weeks old my Mother left me to her twin
sister and she then left me to her husband's mother,
nobody wanted me. I lived with her until I was
eight and then war broke out and I was evacuated
and in 1946 went to the hostel and attended your
school. All that time I had never heard of my
Mother until 1946 and then T had to leave the hostel
and go back to her. I did not like her so I ran
away. Altogether I ran away three times but now
I find myself in a school again." The story in
that letter is too clear to need comment. Unloved,
unwanted, insecure, these boys craved a home and
all that the word implies and the school helped to
give them something of what they wanted. Out-
casts and pariahs they craved the opportunity to
prove they could be useful members of a community.
There is no need to dwell upon the lessons to be
learned from the experiment.
