Not Like Other Children
=========================

:Author: a Mother
We started on our career as parents exactly
as thousands do every year; a little apprehensive, tremendously happy, unaccountably proud
and more than a little at a loss. But whereas
in the usual case the child manages to survive
the first fumbling, weeks, thrives and learns
and becomes wholly a joy, our little son did
not thrive or learn, and remained for nine
months a worry, as well as a joy. He did not
gain properly, he did not eat, he did not learn
to play or sit up alone as he should. The only
thing he did on schedule was to produce teeth
at the right times. When, at nine months,
we took him to another doctor, we found that
he had not learned, had not thrived for the
reason that he was feeble-minded. He would
never be like other children. If he lived to
grow up, he probably could never earn even
* Reprinted from " The Parents' Magazine ", 52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York 17, by kind permission.
a part of his living even in a special home.
No, his trouble was not hereditary. We could
and should have other children.

The verdict was so overwhelming, so final
and complete, we felt as though our baby had
died. He was, we felt, so lost to us. We
thought of the plans we had made for him,
of the books we wanted him to have, the
music we would help him know and love. It
hurt us to realize, now, that none of this could
be.

Then, gradually, it dawned on us that most
of our bitterness and agony were for ourselves.
We began to see that there were compensations.
If our little son was never to know the heights
of life, he also would never know the depths.
Perhaps he would have to go through his life,
provided he lived past infancy, with a child's
mind iij a man's body. But he also would
have a child's heart, and a child's happy faculty
of living in a world where play is the reality.
Not that we would not have given anything
to have made him whole. But since it must
be this way, we could see a glimmer, at least,
of a silver lining. Perhaps our experience will
have value for other mothers and fathers. I
know that when we were groping for the
light, back in the beginning of our trouble,
"we would have been glad to know of someone
else's experience, if only to help us realize that
we were not alone with a different child.
Gradually, because we had to, we began to
get used to the idea that our child would never
be normal, then we began to remember other
things the specialist had said that dark afternoon.
We came to understand the word " microcephalic " ; found that it was a term which
meant that our child's skull was, through some
error in prenatal development, too small ever
to house a normal brain. Just as there are,
occasionally, children who are born club
footed, or without an arm or hand, so our
child did not have a skull of the right size. It
was nothing we or any of our ancestors were
responsible for and there was no birth injury.
In fact, nobody knows what causes such a
thing, and so it cannot be foretold or prevented.
Nor could it be cured. But at any rate, there
seemed no reason why we could not have other
children who would be normal.

There are all sorts, degrees and types of
mental retardation carrying with them their
differences in appearance as well. Our son is
very small, so that his small head is not noticeable to the casual glance. People who don't
know him think he is normal; often we have
been complimented on his appearance, because
he not only acts six or eight months younger
than he is, he looks that much younger. We
are thankful for that blessing, and we know that
many parents must choose between not taking
a child out with them, and braving the curious,
pitying stares of the passers-by. There are
other differences between our problem and that
of others; our baby is docile and sweettempered and fairly easily trained; we have
no other children to consider. In spite of the
differences, however, I feel that in some ways
all parents with defective children are faced
with the same decisions and perplexities.
Arranging for the child's future is one of them;
training, even though it may differ widely to
fit the individual cases, is another.

When I searched for books to help in the care
of a mentally defective child, they were not
available to me. The best the library could
offer was books on mental development containing tests, such as Dr. Arnold Gesell's
Mental Age of the Preschool Child. Layman
that I am, and with only average education,
I found that book helpful. Reading the tests
and the conclusions drawn, and applying some
of the same tests to my youngster, I could
come fairly close to the mental age of the child.
As he is very young, his age was reckoned in
months rather than years, but the same idea
could be worked out whatever the child's age.
After using the tests I could decide on my plan
for training according to his mental age, not
his actual age. I would try to get him to do
the things he should be able to do according
to his mental age, neither more nor less. Other
books on child care helped me from there
on.

However, my baby was not only about six
months behind his normal development, he
continued to develop at a much slower rate of
speed than the normal child. At a year and six
months, mentally, he showed a gradual development, but at a much slower rate than a normal
six-months-old child. I had to learn not only
to set the clock back, but to slow it up. This
was hard, almost impossible, at first, but now
that we have grown used to the idea, we find
we accept it completely. What is more, our
friends do too. It is as though our baby were
ageless. That point of view is a big help in
our effort to accept him as he is and to be
happy.

But the first job was to improve my baby's
physical condition and that meant building
up his appetite. He was badly undernourished
and underweight and he had skin trouble. In
spite of my adherence to the rules of baby care
and feeding he did not thrive. However, he
rarely had upsets or colds, and his teeth erupted
painlessly and at the proper time. I began
to wonder if with patience and the help of
all I would find in books on child training,
feeding, food habits, and other related subjects
I could help him to build a strong healthy body.
A few persons to whom I mentioned my
problem said quite frankly that they thought I
was taking a good deal of trouble for nothing.
" It would be better if he didn't live, poor little
thing," they said. I was suddenly thoroughly
angry. Who can say which life is of use,
or importance ? Was I to neglect the health
of a child in my care, even perhaps shorten that
life by not doing what should be done, because
I could not see of what use that life would be ?
My job was to care for my child, to help him
to be strong and to grow. So I set about
making a strong body out of an ailing, weak
one. It called for the hard, concentrated effort
I needed to pull me through the heartache and
bitterness.

My baby was taking orange juice, cod-liver
oil, cereal, vegetables, milk, all as he should?
but in such minute quantities that he barely
stayed alive. He was also exceedingly nervous
and tense; his legs actually did not relax
enough at any time to lie apart, he held them
together and held his arms at his sides in an
unnatural, strained posture. Even in sleep,
he did not relax entirely. I felt that his need
was for rest, sleep, quiet and more quiet, and so
arranged his schedule fairly rigidly and saw
to it there was little or no outside stimulation.
At the same time, I followed the advice of the
authorities on feeding a reluctant child?don't
coax, urge, or force. Don't show any emotion.
If he eats nothing, remove the food and say and
do nothing. When a child is just skin and bones
not showing any emotion, when he persistently
refuses his food is difficult, but it can be
done.

The doctor prescribed thyroid extract for a
while, and we tried various wheat-germ compounds to try to stimulate an appetite. It
all seemed fruitless, but suddenly, for no
apparent reason, the baby began to eat. He
not only increased quantities but accepted a
much wider variety of food. I cut his meals
down to three a day, and held my breath for
fear the spurt of appetite would disappear.
It didn't. At twenty months he eats nearly what
any child of that age would, except that he has
some trouble handling food that isn't smooth,
and he does not hold his bread or toast and eat
by himself. When he began to have a better
appetite his tenseness disappeared, whether
because of improved nourishment I do not
know. Today at twenty months he is relaxed
and supple and as healthy as any child his age.
Less than a year ago the doctor predicted he
would die before his second birthday. Today
he is stronger, more resistant to colds and
infection than a good many of his contemporaries. His teeth are strong and straight and
they came in easily. His colour and skin
texture are excellent. His sleep is sound and
more regular. We are proud of his strong,
straight little body, and we cannot feel that our
efforts and patience were wasted.

Along with our determination to make a
normal child, at least physically, out of our
defective baby, was a determination not to let
all the sweetness and enjoyment and even nonsense die out of our lives. His father and I
are both young and so haven't the habit of
thinking about or brooding over the past,
and that is a help. We do not think of our baby
as different from others except when we are
forced to. That may be cowardly but we feel
it is the only way in which we can hope to have
any happiness in a situation of this kind. It
is literally true that for days at a time we do
not think of our son's subnormality. We are
as pleased with the little things he learns to do
as if he were perfectly normal. Perhaps more
so. We have had our emotions and our perception sharpened to the point where we enjoy
everything about him, and are keenly aware
of his emotions and wishes. It's as if because
we love him so devotedly and so specially, and
because we know we will not always have him
with us, that we are somehow closer to our baby
and he to us than is normally the case. We are
hoping that we can remember what we have
felt and learned from him, so that if we have
other normal children, we can understand and
help them more easily and perceptively.
Just as we have learned through this different
child that careful attention to diet through and
past babyhood has its rewards, he has also
taught us that there are things which it is wiser
to be careless about. Little naughtinesses, such
as tipped-over waste baskets, investigations
into forbidden territory such as mother's
sewing basket, spilled and messed-in food, are
to us not naughty at all. We have watched too
hopefully for the awakening of our baby's
curiosity and his desire to investigate to regret
the consequences of that curiosity and desire.
My relation to my child is more important
than any detail of housekeeping ever could be.
That does not mean that we have spoiled our
baby. To refrain from spoiling our son was
the hardest lesson we had to learn, I think.
For if it is hard not to spoil a perfectly normal
intelligent child, how much more difficult it
is to be firm with a little child who perhaps
does not understand what you mean at all,
who has no place in life, who is more than
ordinarily helpless. Add to this the fact that
at the first signs of discipline, relatives and friends
are apt to be horrified and consider you a
monster of cruelty. Luckily for us, our baby
is naturally amiable and easily handled, at
least so far. Nevertheless we did have our
battles to fight, yet now, none of the friends and
relatives who thought us stern would wish to
exchange our well-behaved youngster for a
screaming little tyrant. We felt it was a kindness to teach him early that he could not have
his own way all the time, that other persons
must be considered. And he must learn to
do as he was told without undue fuss. He has
learned this lesson well, and I am not afraid to
take him anywhere. I know he will not make
a scene in stores, or in friends' homes. In
spite of his sub-normality, he is always welcome.
And so he has taught us that good manners and
unselfishness begin early and at home, and make
a child well-liked and acceptable everywhere.
I firmly believe that the mentally defective
child needs even more than the normal one,
the security that a regular schedule gives. I
do not mean that everything must be sacrificed
to schedule, but that, on the whole, the child
must be able to expect the same things at the
same time each day.

Even for his sake we have not been sorry
that our child was born. And we are learning
many things from him. He has improved our
sense of values. We cannot find many things
to be upset or tragic about since we have learned
to live with our personal tragedy and make the
best of it.

It is only by reckoning what you gain from
a bitter experience, as well as what it costs,
that you can place a proper value upon it.
We honestly believe that our next baby will be
unusually lucky because of our experience
with our first child. We haven't much money,
and we aren't especially wise or talented, but
we are now prepared to welcome a child with
all our hearts. We will be ready for him with
our minds as well as our hearts, with a full
realization of what it means to be responsible
for a child, and of what we owe him. We want
a child now more than we did before Mickey
was born, because we know what a child can
bring into the lives of his parents. And we
say to ourselves, " If this little one can give
us so much joy, how thrilling it must be to
watch the development and growth of a normal
child ! "

We know that the hardest part of all is ahead
of us. For if ever we have other children,
we must make provision to have our "different "
little boy live away from home. It is too
bitterly unfair to let a normal child face the
pity, the curiosity, the whisperings about a
defective child that we, as adults, find it hard to
meet. Then, too, we know that our handicapped child would be miserable if he had to
compete, though it might be only on the playground, with normal children. He has the
right to be among his own kind, where he need
face no unfair competition. Only so can he
possibly be happy as he grows older. Anyone
who doubts this need only think back to his
own childhood, to remember with shame how
heartlessly the neighbourhood idiot was teased.
Those are plain words, but this is a situation
that calls for plain thinking. We may gloss
the facts over to ease our hurt, but the world
won't. The time will come when it will be best
for our child to go to a special institution.
We will see him there often, but the privilege
of doing things for him ourselves will be over.
It is our hope that he will adjust himself very
quickly and be happy almost at once. Yet it
hurts to realize that he will forget us almost
entirely, as we know he will. Always he will
be in the back of our minds and hearts,' and as
long as we live he will be what he is now, at once
a source of joy and love, and of pain. We
don't think about the parting from him any
more than we can help, but when it comes we
hope to be able to do it quietly, and then to begin
the job of building life and happiness in our
home without him. Thousands of mothers and
fathers will know exactly what I mean, and
with them, with understanding hearts, we join
in knowing that though it is a heavy burden to
carry, still we have lightened it by doing honestly
what we thought was right and best for our
little " different " child. After that we can
only commend him to God, and who knows
but that He has special care and regard for these
little ones whose clocks stand still ?
