No Orchids for Miss Blandish 
==============================

Film Reviews
(Featuring Linden Travers,
Jack La Rue, Hugh McDermott.)

With London at the moment divided between those
queueing with eager anticipation at the Plaza and those
clamouring with strident indignation for the removal
of this film, it is difficult to make any moderate comments
without being accused by the anticipators or the indignant
of belonging to the opposite group.

For a beginning I can side wholeheartedly with the
indignant by regretting that this film was ever made.
When the quality of British films is rising and the demand
for them abroad is growing, what folly to jeopardize
that reputation with such a bad film. With money short
and the expense of film making nearly prohibitive,
what wicked waste to squander it on such a subject.
There may be too a sense of wonder in those who have
seen the spate of psychological films in the last year that
a story in which motives and feelings are of importance
could have been produced in such a crude and unsubtle
form today. One has become a little tired of the film
psychiatrist recently, but after a surfeit of revolvers,
one began to long for his arrival.

Having unreservedly regretted that such a British
film should ever have been made, it may perhaps be
suggested that the outcry against it is unwise and possibly
even a little exaggerated. If the film was made in the
belief that safe box office returns would accrue from the
repressed Englishman's hankering to be shocked, then
the outraged cries of the indignant are so much grist to
the mill. I must admit that I have seen other films
(mostly " B " ones, certainly) that contained the same
sort of contents, but they died a natural death?the very
fate that its opponents are keeping from No Orchids by
the advertisement they give it. Whether the outcry is
exaggerated or not may be debated, but I am inclined
to doubt the harm that the film will do. Brutality and
violence are certainly there in abundance, eight murders
and one suicide besides indiscriminate killing. But if
"sadistic" implies an enjoyment in brutality, then I
think the adjective is wrongly applied here and the
absence of that quality makes the film less dangerous.
(In a way, the film of the concentration camp at Belsen,
or a fine picture like the Italian Open City with its
terrifying portrayal of the Gestapo's delight in cruelty
might rouse more dangerous feelings in the audience.)
Then too, as well as being brutal, it is certainly vulgar
but if it is the vulgar episodes that are to be censored,
then the music halls and concert parties all over the
country had better take care. There is a third way in
which it seems to me that indignation has been exagger-
ated and defeated its purpose. Many of the criticisms
imply that the film is full of horrifying sex incidents,
but one may guess that the audience having been led
to expect such enormity will come away disappointed.
Rape in the novel has become romantic love in the film;
the " gangster chief " love is the " real thing " and Miss
Blandish never ceases to be refined?in the American
slang of this British film, she remains throughout a
" classy dame ".

It will be interesting to see how long a run this tenth-
rate film has. Though misguided clamour has probably
lengthened its life, the taste of the public will probably
vindicate itself by proving that a film like No Orchids
for Miss Blandish cannot rival the popularity of The Best
Years of Our Lives.

P.E.W.
Corridor of Mirrors. (Featuring Eric Portman and
Edana Romney.)

This film is an outstanding example of pure celluloid
in which the characters are entirely artificial and never
come to life for a moment. It is suggested that the hero
is pathological in that he prefers to live in the past rather
than the present, but he is merely used as a peg on which
to hang the story, and there is no attempt at any elabora-
tion of his personality from the psycho-pathological
point of view. The housekeeper is obviously mentally
subnormal and her behaviour is predominantly dictated
by her jealousy. This character could have been made
interesting, but she is treated merely as a lay figure.
What the film lacks in quality is made up for in the
quantity of horrific situations, and it is unlikely that the
film would have very much effect on any hardened film
goer as it has very little emotional depth and relies
entirely on the bizarre and its over elaborate scenic
design for its effect.

D.M.O.

The film industry is one of the largest and most important in the world. It is the only art which
the twentieth century has evolved, and it is the fault of the well meaning as well as of the commercial
magnate, that what might have become, and may still become, an enormous socializing influence in the
lives of the community, should have been allowed to degenerate into a racket.
J. Macalister Brew. "In the Service of Youth."
