A School Psychological Service in Action
=========================================

:Author:  Agataha H. Bowley, Ph.D. yf

Psychologist, Leicester School Psychological Service
I think it is true that a conference may be said to
have succeeded in some measure if it stirs the
participants to some small fury of thought. It is
of value to the individual and to the institution or
organization which the individual may represent
if it stimulates a scrutiny of method and motives,
an analysis of achievements and shortcomings,
and if the individual returns to his centre of action,
whether in the backwoods or at the hub of the
universe, in a mood of complacency tempered by
self-criticism.

The Annual Conference on Mental Health held
in January this year proved stimulating to me
personally, and brought home to me the fact that
we live indeed in an interesting age, that the
world is passing through a critical period, that the
National Association for Mental Health has an im-
portant contribution to make to local, national and
international affairs, and that one may well feel proud
to belong to this Association and proud too of one's
profession these days. Stirred by these thoughts, I
am tempted to describe the various ways some of us
in Leicester are seeking to build up the mental
health of the future generation in a small way,
partly because this may be helpful to others working
in similar circumstances, partly because it will
be helpful to my staff and myself to scrutinize
the work we are doing, and to estimate the degree
to which we succeed and the degree to which we
fail in what might be termed broadly preventive
work and re-education of parents and children in
difficulties.

A School Psychological Service is primarily
a community service. Its function is to co-operate
with all individuals and agencies who are endeavour-
ing to fulfil the psychological needs of children,
and to bring psychiatric, psychological and social
aid to those parents and children who for one
reason or another are experiencing difficulties in
living, and who need specialist assistance in matters
of personality adjustment.

The Functions of the Psychiatrist and Psychologist
Before describing the organization of this service,
which is under the aegis of the local education
authority and for which an educational psychologist
is responsible, I want to comment briefly on this
rather vexed question of the functions of psychiatrist
and psychologist in the field of Child Guidance.
In my experience, I have never found it possible
to give adequate assistance to parents and children
in this type of work without the services of a
psychiatrist being available for treatment, for
consultation, and for advice and guidance. At
the first stages of my career I worked in Child
Guidance Clinics directed by medical psychologists,
and I have since found this experience invaluable.
I think psychologists who find themselves respon-
sible for Child Guidance Services without this
type of preliminary experience, and with insufficient
psychiatric assistance in their area, are bound to
find themselves in very great difficulties indeed,
unless they confine themselves strictly to " educa-
tional " matters only, which is almost impossible
to do. I have now spent some 16 years in Child
Guidance work, and I find that, with increasing
age and experience, one learns more fully one's
own potentialities and one's own limitations.
One learns how much and how little one can do !
It is, I think, psychologically wrong to undervalue
the contribution a psychologist can make, but it is
surely equally wrong to underestimate the contribu-
tion that a psychiatrist and a psychiatric social
worker can also make in this vital matter of building
up good mental health ih parents and children.
A psychologist, by means of his training and experi-
ence, should be able to recognize when the mental
condition of the parent or child requires the treat-
ment that only a qualified psychiatrist can give, and
be eager and willing also to accept guidance and
help from a medical psychologist in regard to
problems of minor maladjustment in children.
If the training of a psychologist fails to help him
to recognize his own limitations in this matter, it
has failed indeed. On the other hand, it is important
to remember that a psychologist has usually a wide
knowledge and experience of normal children
and normal children's normal difficulties, and a
special understanding of the educational needs of
children in the widest possible sense. A knowledge
of the emotional development of children, supple-
mented also by a personal psycho-analysis, is, in
my opinion, of very great value to the educational
psychologist.

These preliminary' remarks will serve to show
that in Leicester we recognize that a School Psycho-
logical Service needs a fully qualified staff, and I
should not consider it possible to carry out my
duties effectively if I did not have the assistance of
psychiatrists and psychiatric social workers. The
psychiatrist acts primarily in a consultative and
advisory capacity in our department, but carries
out a great deal of therapeutic work with children,
concerning whom we have consulted him, at the
Francis Dixon Lodge Child Guidance Clinic
attached to the City Mental Hospital, and psychia-
tric out-patient treatment is available for parents as
required. The services of psychiatric social workers
are available on a full-time basis in the School
Psychological Service.

Early Ascertainment and Treatment
----------------------------------

Recognizing the importance of the early years of
childhood and the value of preventive work, we
try to start at the beginning. We have not yet
taken an effective part in the field of Maternity and
Child Welfare, but we encourage medical officers,
and nursery and infant teachers to send us children
as yourg and as soon as possible. Individual and
group play therapy is undertaken with these children
by the psychologists, and the psychiatric social
workers do as much intensive work as is practicable
with the parents. These children are not seen as a
matter of course by the psychiatrist, but his advice
and help may be called in at any stage of this work.
Many of the problems the children present are
quite minor ones, often merely an exaggeration
of normal development caused by a mildly disturbed
home background, and usually the parents need far
more help than the children. With the growing
demand for the employment of married women,
it is often difficult to arrange regular appointments
during the day, and the social workers have con-
sequently to undertake a great number of evening
visits.

Infant Adjustment Classes
-----------------------------

Another method of tapping potential early
maladjustment is that of organizing Adjustment
Classes in Infant Departments which will cater not
only for the needs of the dull and backward child,
but more especially for the needs of the emotion-
ally and socially ill-adjusted child of normal or
superior intelligence. In Highfield's book,* The
Young School Failure, now in the press, the function
of these classes and the educational method is
described in some detail. The main purpose of
these classes, which are of course much smaller
than the ordinary class (never more than 20, and
preferably only 15), is to give the child security,
an opportunity to build up affectionate relationships
more readily, and to work through earlier stages of
social emotional development through play and
creative activities. Home adjustment is aided
as well as school adjustment by the work that the
Psychiatric Social Worker is able to do with the
parents. Very great care, of course, is necessary
in the selection of teachers able to carry out this
work, and at the moment, owing to the shortage of
infant teachers in general, we are unable to develop
this part of our work as much as we should like.
When it may be possible to set up these types of
classes in all large infant departments, I feel we
shall be able to do a great deal of preventive work.
School for Maladjusted Children

A day school for maladjusted children, now
called the Manor House School, was set up by the
Education Committee in 1932, and can now be
considered to have passed the experimental stage.
The School Psychological Service is responsible
for the selection of the children, and fulfil an
advisory role in connection with the school.
Intelligent children (I.Q. from 95 upwards), who
are backward in school work, who are nervous,
who are failing to adjust to the ordinary school,
or who are presenting problems of behaviour of
greater or lesser degree, are recommended for
admission by the psychologists, and, subject to the
agreement of the Director of Education, are trans-
ferred for a period of a year or two. The co-
operation of the parent is obtained by the psychiatric
social worker, who keeps in touch with the home
while the child is at the school, and follows up
after the child has been transferred back to the
ordinary school. Educational methods used in this
school are described fully in The Education of
Retarded and Difficult Children in the Leicester
Schools (published by the Leicester Education Com-
mittee). The great value to the child is the small
size of the classes, the remedial methods suited to
his attainment level and his special educational
difficulty, the friendly, informal atmosphere of the
school, and the understanding and skill of the
teachers in handling the difficulties in adjustment
as they arise.

Rather full record cards are kept, the school
staff are supplied with full information about the
child's home background and the history of his
difficulty, and regular fortnightly conferences are
held at the school when the staff of the School
Psychological Service and the school staff can meet
and discuss new pupils, or problems concerning
children already attending. After-care work shows
again and again how valuable this type of environ-
mental therapy can be to the child, for the percentage
of success is high. Psychiatric treatment can be
arranged if necessary for any child, and one of the
psychologists undertakes some play therapy at
the school. Recently we have started a Parent-
Teacher Association, run on group therapy lines to
some extent, at this school and the response of the
parents has been most encouraging. We found
there was no difficulty at all in persuading them to
express their opinions, which is an indication of the
confidence they feel in the goodwill of the school
staff, and the psychological staff.

There are, of course, many other aspects to the
work of the School Psychological Service; the
organization of Special Classes for the dull, and the
backward child, remedial teaching with the assist-
ance of Training College students, diagnostic and
advisory work on a fairly comprehensive scale in
connection with school problems, and home
problems, and by request of probation officers and
the magistrates of the Juvenile Court. The number
of children referred each year is between 600 and
700 (the total school population of Leicester is
about 40,000). In addition, there is a good deal
M. E. Highfield. " The Young School FailureOliver & Boyd. To be published shortly.
of lecture work to groups of teachers, parents,
nurses, doctors for instance, and training work
with social science students and educational
psychologists.

Hostel for Maladjusted Children
--------------------------------

The most recent development, which is proving
of very great value already, is the provision of hostel
accommodation for maladjusted children. A
hostel used during the war for evacuees has now
been acquired by the Education Committee.
Selection for admission rests with the staff of the
School Psychological Service, subject to the Director
of Education's approval. Very unstable children,
and children with I.Q.s below 80, are not admitted.
A total of 20 children, roughly two-thirds boys
and one-third girls, is accommodated, who are
presenting difficulties of behaviour or personality
adjustment related to disturbed home conditions.
The warden is a trained teacher and his wife a
trained nurse, both of whom have had considerable
experience in this type of work during the past war,
and they are assisted by three other adults. Their
own child lives in the hostel, and thus the children
have the very great advantage of a background of
a good family unit. A full case history is furnished
to the warden, frequent discussions are held with
the psychological staff, home visits are made
constantly by the psychiatric social workers, and
psychiatric treatment is arranged as required. The
children attend the ordinary schools in the city,
although the hostel is in the country outside Leicester,
or the Manor Hou e School, if school maladjust-
ment is part' of their problem. Contacts with
the parents are preserved so far as possible, and
visits to the hostel are encouraged. After a period
in the hostel, and if the tension or friction in the
home has been greatly reduced, a return home is
recommended. If the home situation is intolerable,
and incapable of improvement, a foster home which
will satisfy, the special needs of the particular
child is found, and we are just now embarking on
the interesting project of building up a register of
foster homes in the locality which, on the basis of
psychological criteria, are considered suitable for
the care of the maladjusted child.

It would, of course, be quite impossible to carry
on work on such an extensive scale if the service did
not have behind it the support and very real interest
of a progressive Education Committee and of an
enlightened Director of Education, if the co-
operation of the schools in the city was not genuine
and constant, if the School Medical Department
did not appreciate the importance of our work,
and if the staff of the School Psychological Service
were not able to work as a team in co-operation
with the hostel staff and the school staffs in this
form of community service.

It is important, as I said before, to estimate our
shortcomings as well as our achievements.
Development will lie in the sphere of parent guid-
ance and teacher guidance, I think. There is much
yet to be done in the general emotional education
of the teacher and the parent, in working towards
greater emotional maturity in themselves and in
producing psychologically good conditions in the
schools. The 1944 Education Act has given to local
authorities powers and opportunities hitherto
unknown. The Children's Charter, when it becomes
law, will extend these still further. Let us hope
that those of us who have training in psychological
work will not fail to use the very great opportunities
open to us, and that our own level of emotional
maturity will not fall below that which we expect
in others.
