The International Congress on Mental Health, and the Layman
============================================================

:Author: J. H. WALLIS
Hon. Secretary, Windsor Mental Health Association
Men and women whose daily work is not in the
field of Mental Health are looking to the forth-
coming International Congress* with increasingly
hopeful interest. Why is this and how far are
they justified ?

Firstly, the very concept of Mental Health
represents to the layman something constructive.
Beset by specialists, bureaucrats and planners,
all emitting their own jargon, he longs to hear
someone talk sense about things which matter in
his daily life, someone who realizes we are still
individuals and not mere hypothetical units. And
the layman knows something the experts sometimes
forget, that common-sense is only talked by those
who understand human nature. If Mental Health
means anything at all, he reflects, it must surely
mean just that, understanding human nature.

Next, the layman has noticed that at any rate
three of the agencies concerned with human nature
have successfully amalgamated. In an age of
analysis, specialization and splitting-up of know-
ledge, he regards this achievement as almost
* International Congress on Mental Health organized by the National Association for Mental Health, to be held in
London, August 11th to 21st, 1948.

portentous. At the very lowest it must signify a
common objective and that, in a period of post-war
disillusion, strikes him as decidedly encouraging.
Thirdly, he has noticed that two oltf ding-dong
controversies have been quietened, namely, mind
versus body and individual versus environment.
The word Psychosomatic has sent the former back
to the detached realms of philosophical and abstract
dispute (where it is harmless), and the trend of
interpreting human affairs in terms of relationships
has unclenched the fists of the latter arguments
and joined their hands. Mental Health seems
to whisper that, after all, we are not entirely battle-
grounds or resultants but men and women to whom
creative co-operation is still a possibility.
Fourthly, psychiatrists themselves have been seen
and heard on the public lecture platform and have
even entered into discussion with laymen on matters
of equal importance to both. They have been heard
to talk common-sense, to be undogmatic and yet
constructive and helpful. Most important of all,
they have been seen to be human and their
influence has enormously widened. Moreover, social
workers have come on the scene, to help in practical
ways and to act as interpreters in theoretical
matters. The idea of a team, as in Child Guidance
work, reinforces in the layman the growing feeling
that Mental Health has an intelligible contribution
to make to our difficulties and that its workers
mean business. We have advanced far from the
widespread feeling among the uninitiated that is
expressed by a quip of Mr. Noel Coward's, about
" enduring months of expensive humiliation only
to be told at last that at the age of four one fell in
love with the rocking-horse ".

Unfortunately, however, knowledge that emerges
from laboratory, clinic or consulting-room to
" capture the imagination " of laymen has a way
of being over-valued and misrepresented as a
panacea. That mankind is today searching not
so much for a solution to its problems but for a
direction in which solutions may be found, is
obvious. That the field of Mental Health holds
some promise is certain. The coming International
Congress gives point to the question: How much
help can we reasonably expect from Mental Health,
not only in individual difficulties, but in sociological
problems that are inseparable from them ? This
is the question behind the public attention which
will presently bear upon the deliberations of the
delegates. What are the prospects ?

A glance at the provisional programme must at
least absolve the organizers from any charge of
lacking courage. Topics for the Mental Hygiene
conference include Problems of World Citizenship
and good Group Relationships and also The
Individual and Society. These are the two whose
implications are widest and least sectarian. It is
to be hoped that the organizers will not allow their
vision to be limited by those who shrink from such
vast issues. Unless it is to be a misnomer, Mental
Health must attempt to grasp these vital sociological
issues and point a way.

The controversial nature of such a project can
already be seen in the Bulletins issued by the
Preparatory Commissions. It begins with a plea
by Dr. Henry A. Murray from America for " an
orienting principle on the top level, that is, a positive
conception of health?in terms of energy, develop-
ment and happiness ". Some perhaps will feel that
such an " orienting principle " cannot be achieved
deliberately any more than society can be forced
into a religion because it is seen to lack spiritual
values. Dr. Murray continues "This positive
conception should be discussed in terms of its
determinants?for a society and for the individual.
One of the most important determinants is an over-
all ideology ..."

Now this might threaten to turn at least one or
two sessions into something savouring of a revivalist
or political meeting. A word of sympathetic
interest and caution is added by Professor J. C.
Flugel. He comments that " while the Mental
Health of any individual or group implies the
existence of values ", . . . " the sphere of Mental
Health, widely as we have ventured to define it,
is yet not co-terminous with that of religion, moral
philosophy, politics or economics ". Moreover,
he says, in healing a patient's body the doctor does
not question the purpose for which it will be used
nor is the psychotherapist usually concerned with
the ends for which the patient's mental powers will
be used. He suggests that there is enough to do
in removing obstacles to health and that human
beings can be left to discover and pursue their own
ends.

Our interested layman, one feels, will expect
something between the ideology of Dr. Murray
and the cautious detachment of Professor Flugel.
The conception of Mental Health, by embracing
relationships in its study, cannot evade sociological
values. In fitting a person for life in the community,
the psychotherapist as much as the parent or
educator must do something more than remove
obstacles to health and leave the individual to find
his own values. There are surely real values which
can be believed in and proclaimed without evolving
an external ideology. The attitude to the individual
or the group can be one of an invitation to co-
operate, neither detached nor authoritarian. One
recalls a remark from J. S. Mill: " What more or
better can be said of any condition of human
affairs than that it brings human beings themselves
nearer to the best thing they can be ? Or what
worse can be said of any obstruction to good than
that it prevents this ? " Surely our layman can
reasonably expect that Mental Health will have
something to say on how human beings may be
brought " nearer to the best thing they can be ".
If not, who can ?

Whether we like it or not, our layman next
August will be asking with Dr. Murray: " If social
scientists cannot rise above their little group
concerns and rivalries?and give an example of real
Collaboration on an over-all level?what hope is
there for the world ? "
