How can the Mental Nurse Contribute to the Recovery of the Depressed Patient?
=============================================================================

:Author: Joan Evans
Staff Nurse, Hayes Park Nursing Home
Winner " Lord " Memorial Essay Competition Prize, 1947
The doctor gives his orders?the nurse carries
them out, but it is the way in which they are carried
out, with all the considerations a nurse can give,
which contribute to recovery.

Firstly, most mental patients are physically as
well as mentally ill and the points to consider are :
rest, nourishment, careful supervision and
occupation.

From the time of admission the cause of the
depression must be ascertained, as this may save
the patient from a great deal of distress by avoiding
a subject which brings back memories which are
best forgotten. This will depend on the ability
of the nurse to get into contact with the patient's
mind. To do this, she must be interested enough
to learn facts about the patient, her ordinary life
and surroundings, and to make the patient feel
that she is talking as one human being to another.
Admission to a patient is a very bewildering time.
To put one at her ease, explain that it is routine and
will soon be over. But it is an excellent time to
ask the patient a few questions, and you will be
able to tell whether conversation is going to be
difficult. If the patient is being admitted to a
room, endeavour to have fresh flowers there and,
if cold weather, a hot bottle in the bed?don't
let it be a day that is looked back on with dread,
but one?when recovery comes along?that is
remembered as not so terrible after all.

A patient is sometimes reluctant to go to bed,
but by tact this will be accomplished?then take
a cup of tea along and allow the relatives in to see
the patient for a few minutes before leaving, and
assure the patient that recovery will not be long?
although with this type of illness it sometimes takes
a little while?and that by carrying out all she is
asked to do not only will she help herself, but also
help her relatives to realize that everything possible
will be done for her and relieve their anxiety.

If it is possible for a nurse to remain with the
patient on the first day, so much the better. This
is possible in a ward, but in a private room more
difficult, but it really is necessary, as the nurse can
study the patient's reactions and observe anything
of importance. Some are very difficult in settling
down to rest for a few days?concentration will be
lacking so don't give books to read ; take along
a few magazines?something that does not need
deep thought. The nurse who can forget herself
and think first of the patient is invaluable?generosity will react on her behaviour and help recovery
more than anything else. There must never be any
display of sentiment, and authority must never be
abandoned ; there must be an attitude which will
inspire the patient with trust, confidence and the
hope needed.

With the depressed client meals are sometimes a
difficulty?refusal of food so often being made.
Now it is very important to serve meals attractively
find out the patient's likes and dislikes and never
serve large portions?more can be asked for,
^whereas a plate overfilled will probably turn the
patient from the meal altogether. If there is complete refusal of food, see if a tonic could be given
before meals, and if this has no effect explain that
she is under your care and you cannot let her go
without meals ; explain that this will have to be
reported to the doctor who, if he thinks necessary,
will resort to other methods and a little feed by a
tube will be given. Don't alarm the patient,-but
just explain as simply as can be about this, and by
great tact the patient will realize how foolish it is
not to eat, and will like her food. But, on the other
hand, some patients will think they know better
and will find some reason for not doing what is
asked ; it is a good plan then to try and strike a
bargain and give in to her in small matters as, may
be, a different arrangement of the food tray or any
similar details regarding meals ; it is also perhaps
a good plan to refer such matters to the doctor in
the presence of the patient so that she knows
exactly the doctor's decision on the matter.

Strict supervision is sometimes needed, depressed
patients being treated, at first anyway, as potential
suicides. If this is necessary, it must be carried
out in such a way that the patient will not feel she
is always being watched. The nurse can?if in
a ward?always be on duty there doing various jobs
about the ward ; if a private room, suggest that
patients are always with a nurse for a few days so
as not to feel lonely, suggest that you do some
mending for the patient, or perhaps take in a jigsaw puzzle. Try and keep her occupied as this
will take the mind off morbid subjects and thoughts.
If the patient will do her own mending so much
the better, as it will show that interest is being
taken. If the doctor has suggested any form of
treatment, the patient will turn to the nurse, and
will confide in her her nervousness regarding it.
You can do such a lot to alleviate this by explaining
as much as you possibly can about it, and assurance is always needed on the fact that she will
not be left alone and that you will be there. To see
a nurse she knows and can rely on is such a comfort
to her.

Many patients worry very much when they know
one nurse?the nurse who has done a lot got them?
is going " off duty " ; they are worried that the
nurse taking over will not understand them or give
them the same consideration. Make a point, when
handing over, of reporting all the little things you do,
and the patient's little faddy ways ; this will be
much appreciated by the patient, and you will
always have the knowledge that just the same will
be done for her by any nurse taking over from you.
When the patient is allowed up, this is the time
to see that she is occupied all the time, and to see
that interest is taken in her personal appearance.
So many lose this interest and it is up to you to see
that it is not lost. In a large hospital there is
always a hairdresser on the premises?arrange a
visit there. See the doctor regarding a daily visit
to the therapeutic department where various forms
of sprays and douches are given ; this will exhilerate
the patient and help her very much.

Occupation and recreation are very necessary
and, if the patient is pronounced physically fit by
the doctor, should be encouraged as much as
possible. In a large hospital the patient is handed
over to the Occupational Therapist and Recreational Therapist in charge of either department,
and from there various lessons in handicraft and
sports are arranged ; but in a Nursing Home this
falls on the nursing staff and is more difficult, but
a very necessary item of treatment.

The patient, by this time, will have been introduced to someone whom she can look upon as a
companion, and if fond of walks, outings can be
arranged?of course the nurse accompanying
them?but for the patient to " get away " from the
surroundings of the home or hospital even for a
short time during the day in the company of another
patient who is suitable so that they can discuss everyday things, will do so much good ; also a visit to
the cinema to see a suitable film ; looking at the
shops. When they return their minds think in
a different trend and interest will again be awakened.
Let the patient help make her own bed, arrange
the flowers and any suitable jobs which she would
like to do. It is very essential to keep the mind
occupied, but not overworked. See that letters
received are answered and so keep the interest
to the fore, and the patient will feel herself getting
back to normal once more. Many patients like
to go to church, so do arrange for her to be taken
by a nurse of her religion?many feel so uncomfortable when taken by one not of their religion.
There are social clubs arranged in many places,?
take the patient along?she may be shy at first,
but when she sees all the others joining in and the
nurses, she will herself gradually be doing the
same. These evenings which last about an hour
are a great help to shy patients and they should be
encouraged to join in.

During the course of the patient's illness the
relatives may be difficult, but try to treat them with
the,same quiet confident manner hoping that they
will follow your example, and ask them to avoid
giving the patient any bits of news which will distress
or irritate in any way.

Although any treatment given to the patient by
the doctor will speed up recovery, it is the little
things and acts of kindness done by the nurse that
helps to make life in hospital for the patient not
something to look back on with dread, but something to feel for ever grateful for.

A depressed patient is often difficult over medicines, but never deceive them by putting anything
in food. Explain what it is given for and why it is
given.

The task, which confronts the nurse is not an easy
one, but by tact, constant kindness and perfect
firmness the reward of seeing the patient discharged,,
recovered, should be won.

"Community Care" in a Barnardo Village
---------------------------------------
" Slow or feeble-minded girls, were our joint responsibility. Mother, as well as the older more
understanding people, felt them to be an added special care, and the encouragement and sense of personal
responsibility for our ' Potty ' was a marked feature of our lives. Woe betide any other ' corrage'
who flurried or called out after our ' potty '/ She was ours and that was that
From " The Likes of Us By G. V. Holmes (a Barnardo child).
