The Snake Pit
===============

:Author: Mary Jane Ward. Cassell & Co.
8s. 6d.

Any attempt to depict a medical illness in a biographical form is difficult enough to a trained observer
if it is to remain a true likeness ; to attempt such from
the sufferer's point of view of a fully fledged psychosis
and at the same time maintain that semblance of coherence which is necessary if it is to remain intelligible,
is well nigh impossible. It is not surprising, therefore,
on commencing this book to find oneself at a loss?
our orientation is disturbed, and until the mind of the
reader is attuned, it gropes about in a motley of impressions as confused as is indeed the sufferer. The initial
resistance of trying to make sense out of confusion
gradually yields to a passive absorption?at times misty,
at times clear?but with increasing fascination, so that
we follow closely the strivings of this tormented mind
on its vacillating and irregular path slowly upwards
towards recovery,?especially so, as our understanding
increases.

It is a good book and well written. It is good from
two points of view. First what we learn about the patient
and mental illness as a whole, and secondly about
Mental Hospitals. We realize that this patient is a sick
person?ill, and yet perhaps to many, rather different to
what we would visualize an insane person to be. We are
able to feel acutely for her without that sense of repugnance which is so easy to adopt on a superficial contact.
In fact in some passages, one is almost tempted to believe
at first sight she is the subject of victimization, until we
realize her lack of insight, and that not only does she
view things differently, but to her they are different.
Despite her loss of contact and strangeness, she yet
realizes early that she is in a Mental Hospital and how
impossible it is for her to convey to others how she
actually feels?that even when she may appear well,
she knows that things are not quite what they should be
and that finally?even when better?the dreadful problem of readjusting to an outside existance is not the
simple process that is expected.

As to the hospital (even though American), I think
I can say it is very representative in the main, or at least
from the patient's point of view, of those here-?that
human relations being what they are, it is impossible to
expect a large community under enforced conditions,
to live as one big happy family. In fact, many Mental
Hospital patients are not happy ; they do miss their
liberty and other amenities and few are so insensible to
their surroundings not to long for home. Equally too,
it must be realized that being ill they are in as much pain
as their counterpart, the physically sick ; perhaps even
more so, as a mental anxiety, fear or whatever it may be,
is of long duration and inescapable. The days of the
manacling of patients may be over, but it is easy to see
that even though no patient is ever badly treated, the
problem is far from solved and will remain so until
further treatments can promise an even higher degree
of cure, especially for those who, at the moment, become
long-term residents.

I have hardly been able to touch the fringe of the many
problems raised in this book?the more discerning will
find much food for thought, and even the psychiatrist
will find the study enlightening.
R.B.M.
