Hypnotism Today
===============

By L. M. Lecron, B.A., and J.
Bordeaux, M.A. Foreword by M. H. Erickson,
M.D. Wm. Heinemann Medical Books Ltd. 25s.
This is a timely and most useful book. Written by
two consulting psychologists and introduced in a
foreword by a psychiatrist, Dr. Milton A. Erickson,
it covers the whole ground of the subject in fifteen
closely packed chapters. Outstanding among these are
the chapters on " Principles of Suggestion " Post-
hypnotic Suggestion, Autohypnosis and Autosugges-
tion " Theories of Hypnosis " A System of Brief
Hypnoanalysis " and " Research in Hypnotism
There is also a tolerably complete bibliography.
It may be a matter of surprise to many analytical
psychotherapists at the present day, who have assimilated
the teachings of Freud and other leading exponents of
deep mental analysis, that there could still be a public,
and a need, for such a book as this. But, quite apart
from the desirability or undesirability of the application
of the method of hypnotism in modern psychotherapy,
there continues to be an emphatic need for the adequate
understanding of hypnosis, its laws, and its relation to
kindred states of mind. No modern psychologist can
afford to be ignorant of the subject, and no modern
psychologist can evade the question of the normality
or abnormality of the state of hypnosis or the justification
of the use of hypnotism in special cases.
As an exposition of almost all sides of the subject this
book is excellent. Where it falls short is in an inadequate
appreciation of the practical and medical (not the
merely theoretical) differences of mild states of hypnosis
or increased suggestibility from deeper singes, such as
that of " artificial somnambulism and the unaesir-
ability?indeed the danger to the subject?of repeated
hypnotizations at the deeper levels. Perhaps this is not
unconnected with the fact that neither of the authors
of the book possesses a medical qualification and may,
therefore, be not fully alive to the similarity of certain
symptoms of schizophrenia and of the more severe
types of hysteria to some of the more striking mani-
festations of deep hypnosis. It is still questionable
whether any subject who falls into a state of really deep
hypnosis is thoroughly normal. It is at least possible
that repeated deep hypnotization may make even a
relatively normal subject somewhat abnormal. But
milder methods of suggestion and autosuggestion,
especially when directed to produce adequate neuro-
muscular relaxation in the patient, are of the greatest
value.
W.B.
