Basic Mental Concepts
======================

:Author: Edward Glover, M.D.
Imago Publishing Uo., Ltd. London, is. bo.

It is not clear precisely to what audience this book is
addressed. Its purpose, to quote from the preface, is to
revive interest in the fundamental disciplines of psycho-
analytical theory as a counterweight to " the post-war
inauguration of a ' silly season ' in medical psychology
during which older forms of non-analytical therapy
have been resucitated, tricked out in the thinnest of
theoretical dress and presented to a never too discriminat-
ing psychological faculty as new and significant crea-
tions The method of the book is to endeavour to
establish, on strictly Freudian lines, a concept of primary
dynamic function to regulate the theories of mental
economy from birth to the end of this primary dynamic
phase, a stage which Dr. Glover associates with the
development of speech. As such the author is intent
to distinguish between the embryonic phase of mental
organization of this primary period and the more
organized stage of mental function which can be directly
observed by the technique of analysis, and to avoid
transferring automatically the organizations of this
second stage of mental development to the basic concepts
of the first.

Within these limits, this book is a deep and scholarly
examination of the nature of these basic concepts, but
it contains little that will be new, and nothing that will
be unacceptable, to the confirmed disciple of Freudian
psycho-analytical technique. Equally, its highly theore-
tical approach and its basic acceptance without question
of some fundamental points will do nothing to convert
those whom Dr. Glover would doubtless regard as
heretics from the faith. Many followers of other
schools of psychotherapeutic and psychopathological
thought will admit to more than the acceptance of " a
glib currency of terms originally psycho-analytical in
annotation " and to much of the basic concepts which
Dr. Glover here describes, without in any way weakening
their views on adult or child therapeutic methods.
The danger of this book lies in the ammunition it may
provide to antagonists of psychological medicine, who
are so prone, not without some justification, to point
the finger of scorn at the schismatic battle which splits
the various psychiatric groups.

Nor is this a book for the student, since its assimila-
tion, apart altogether from its acceptance, requires a
very considerable knowledge of fundamental psycho-
analytical theory.

Whilst, therefore, the appeal of this work must be
limited, it is, nevertheless, a masterly exposition and
discussion of a theoretical problem of great importance.
T.A.R.
