Mind Own Executioner
=====================

Correspondence
(We are glad to publish the following communication which has been forwarded to us by a psychiatric patient after
seeing this film.?Editor.)
" MINE OWN EXECUTIONER "

" First and foremost I don't think it should have
been publicly shown at all. It gave quite a wrong
impression to the public who seem, from what I have
heard, somewhat bewildered and nauseated by this
subject?bewildered because I don't believe the producers
know anything about it. It is a very delicate and
obtruse matter to deal with and I feel if it was really
necessary for such a film to be shown at all, it should
have been prepared by a team of expert doctors, though
the trimmings and love scenes could perhaps have been
left to the producers ! I went to the film with a reason-
ably normal person and she came away completely
condemning and horrified by it. From my point of view,
I was glad I saw it, for it proved to me that I was able to
face such a film ; previously I would have left the
cinema almost immediately, but I was determined to
stay to see what effect it would have on me.

" My own analysis of the film in its detail is a bit diffi-
cult, but I will do my best. First, it presented the very
worst aspect of the subject to the public so that youths
and young girls behind us laughed and giggled at parts
that required the deepest sympathy, thereby missing
one of the most important points of the whole film and
showing that they failed to appreciate in any way the
appalling suffering involved. No sympathy for the
patient was aroused nor was one good quality in him
brought out. He might have been a criminal for all
the public cared !

" Nothing was shown of the part played by the doctor
in leading the patient back to normality which would
have given hope to parents, sweethearts and friends of
mental patients in the audience. Instead one came
away with the idea that all mental patients were danger-
ous and very much to be avoided and no suggestion was
given that there were many types and degrees of mental
illness. To a patient the film would convey the idea that
he was a hunted social outcast and that no one had any
pity, sympathy, understanding or tolerance towards
him.

" If most films end happily why not this one, especi-
ally as it is on such an important subject ? I felt it was
bad psychology to show the patient committing suicide.
What a wonderful chance to show instead, the respect
and confidence of the patient in the doctor, and from
then onwards, to bring the picture to a happy end with an
ultimate cure.

" Again in the scene where he murdered his wife?
why not show how the power of love could dominate
his mind, and bring that aspect to the surface ? The
ladder scene too, gave a great opportunity of showing
the power of good over evil, in that the patient must
have realized here was his own prop which could help.
The instinct of self-preservation would surely have
prevented suicide so that he would have surrendered
until he could have been helped to stand on his own
feet. The scene showing the banalities and trivialities
of the psychologist with his girl friend was also bad
because of its flippancy. We know doctors require
relaxation, but was it necessary to show this ? After all,
the public build up unconsciously a certain ideal of the
medical profession and their standard ought not to be
lowered. If humour is required, surely it should be
shown through a patient ?

" Well, these are only random thoughts, and perhaps
I am all wrong ; but as I was invited to write, I have
done so, although with some fear and trepidation for
after all, I am not an expert. I only wish I were, for
nothing would give me greater joy than to help my
fellow sufferers. May I have the chance to do so."
X.
