Juvenile Delinquency in an English Middletown
===============================================

:Author: Hermann Mannheim. Routledge & Kegan
Paul, Ltd. 1948. 12s. 6d.

This recent addition to the International Library
of Sociology and Social Reconstruction presents
a study of juvenile delinquency in Cambridge over
a period that includes seven pre-war years and the
first four years of war, i.e. up to and including 1942.
It is an admirable demonstration of the value of
an approach that is neither purely a mass of
statistics nOr such a specialized view of the subject
that one facet only is given intensive consideration.
In this ecological study of a region, in which the
problem is viewed from as many aspects as available
data makes possible, the material is drawn largely
from probation and supervision cases appearing
before the local Juvenile Court; the 109 pre-war
cases included 1 Care and Protection case and
11 Beyond Control, while the 123 wartime cases
included 3 Care and Protection and 13 Beyond
Control. The inclusion, among the wartime cases,
of 20 evacuees living variously with parents or
relations, billeted with foster parents and living
at a Hostel for difficult children, provides an
interesting group for certain comparisons, and
furthers the author's purpose to indicate the interaction of social conditions within a geographically
limited area.

Reference is frequently made to reports from
the relatively few places in which similar approaches
to the study of the problem have been attempted,
but it is to be regretted that lack of uniformity of
data analysis has made necessary all too frequently
the comment that, for purposes of comparison, the
value of the data available from many of the
previous reports is questionable because of its
scantiness, or because the methods of classification
used have been so different that all but the broadest
comparisons have been impossible.

As a consequence of this difficulty we have, however, what is certainly not the least valuable contribution made by the author to recent literature
on juvenile delinquency. We are both directly and
implicitly reminded continually of the need for
further concerted studies in which many separate
lines of approach may be simultaneously followed,
so as to provide as complete as possible an investigation of the multitudinous facets of a common
problem.

Besides the importance of simultaneity in an
integrated study, we are reminded also of the no less
important need for successive studies at regular
intervals, the comparison of which may reveal
significant trends and alterations within even
relatively small communities over surprisingly
limited periods of time. From several comparisons
with evidence from a previous study in which Dr.
Mannheim collaborated (Young Offenders, published
1942), the effects of social changes within so short
a time as 6 years are already obvious. Incidentally,
the lack of adequate up-to-date information concerning matters of practical significance, both in
Cambridge and in other areas, does not, as the
author points out, merely limit investigators in
their assessments of factors of diagnostic significance,
but the use of out-of-date or too meagre references,
for want of more recent material, may lead to
invalid conclusions or to assumptions that are
misleading.

The author has been particularly careful to
indicate where he has been limited by inadequate
reference material and where his own findings must
be interpreted with reserve.

The fact, however, that he advises caution regarding some of his own findings, in addition to the fact
that he has considered the factors contributing
to juvenile delinquency from so many aspects,
suggests many further fruitful lines of inquiry.
Two of Dr Mannheim's findings concerning
home conditions are of particular interest to those
concerned with the effect of material conditions on
mental health, but at the same time warn us of the
tendency of averages to mask individual variation.
In dealing with the influence of housing conditions,
the author draws attention to the fact that, although
the number of rooms per family found among the
delinquent population families were no fewer
than those occupied by families in the general
population, the mean number of persons per room
was in fact nearly double. To assume from this
however, that overcrowding alone was responsible
for delinquency would be rash in view of the fact
that, in the course of this study, it was found that
the highest delinquency rates were not found in
the most crowded central wards, but in new housing
areas in outer districts.

Dr Mannheim contrasts these findings with those
from some other* studies, but there are probably
many places in which what were originally projected
as model estates have acquired notoriety as hotbeds of anti-social behaviour, and the author
quite rightly stresses the fact that re-housing in
itself is no panacea without adequate social
services.

Dr Mannheim has some interesting observation
on the subject of " beyond control " cases, in which
his findings again are not in line with what has often
been assumed. The Cambridge evidence suggests
that the occurrence of simultaneous delinquency
in children brought before the court as " beyond
control " is the exception rather than the rule.
The high incidence of abnormal and unsatisfactory
home conditions among this group, however, is
significant. Further, the fact that in a remarkably
high percentage of cases the unsatisfactoriness
lay in psychological rather than purely material
conditions adds point to the author's plea for
extended use of psychological services, not merely
for diagnostic purposes after offences have been
committed, but among preventive measures.
The succinct manner in which a remarkable
amount of material is presented in this book in
the short space of 131 pages; the admirable summary the value of which is increased by useful
paragraph references; a bibliography of 57 comparatively recent books (of which at least 50 per cent,
are British) and some 16 pamphlets; and indices
of both authors and subjects referred to in the text,
make this volume not only an excellent reference
book, but a fertile source of suggestions for further
work.
M.I.D.
