Fallen Idol. (Featuring Michele Morgan, Ralph Richardson and Bobby Henrey)
===========================================================================

MENTAL HEALTH 57
Film Reviews

The background subject of the film deals with the
usual triangle involving a kindly and well-meaning,
but rather weak man (Ralph Richardson),
a shrewish wife (Sonia Dresdel), and a charming
and attractive typist (Michele Morgan). The
husband and wife are butler and housekeeper at a
foreign Embassy in London. The wife, by a trick,
manages to surprise her husband and the typist in a
love scene at the Embassy, and while trying to spy
upon them falls from the landing to the hall and is
killed. The question arises as to the cause of her
death. The police are called in, but are finally
satisfied that it was an accident.
So far, so ordinary. If this were all it is doubtful
if the film would have run for a week. But this is
far from all, for the entire film is stolen by the
brilliant and subtle direction and the quite out-
standing acting of the Ambassador's little son,
(Bobby Henrey). The film resolves itself into a
psychological study of the reaction of an eight-
year-old child to the incomprehensible and
unpredictable " goings-on " of the adults around
him. We are given a most skilful and under-
standing picture of the only child who is always
being told by pre-occupied adults to run off" and play,
and who has very little emotional or mental contact
with anyone in his environment. In these cir-
cumstances, he gives his unreserved affection to
two objects?one human, the butler Baines, the
other, reptile, a grass-snake, MacGregor. On
the other hand, he feels equally unreserved hate and
fear for the hard and sadistic Mrs. Baines, who
bullies the child, nags her husband, and consigns
MacGregor to the coke-boiler.
The child inevitably gets mixed up in the love
affair of Baines and the typist, and, through his
intense loyalty and hero worship, finds himself
involved in a tissue of lies and self contradictions.
Having succeeded unwittingly by his lies in making
the police suspect Baines of murdering his wife, he
equally unwittingly does his best to upset their
conclusion that the death was accidental by trying
frantically to tell the truth. Happily, the police by
this time regard him as a completely unreliable
witness, and the film ends with them refusing to
listen to his desperate attempts to " come
clean ".
The way in which the child's emotional conflicts
are presented, his complete bewilderment and
consequent distortion of values, constitutes one of
the most remarkable psychological studies that the
film has yet afforded us. It greatly adds to the
realism that the child is neither particularly attractive
nor intelligent; he is just a very average, rather
sensitive, anxious little boy, and one feels that his
behaviour and his reactions as portrayed in the film
bear the hallmark of truth.
It will be interesting to see if the film is good
" box office D.M.O.
The Night has a Thousand Eyes. (Featuring
Edward G. Robinson, Gail Russell and John
Lund.)
To see what position in society any group of
people has, one should look, perhaps, not at a
film about that group in particular, but at one in
which a person of such a group appears incident-
ally. " Fathers " then will not be judged according
to Life with Father, nor " Mothers " by / Remember
Mama, but by any film you like in which a family
appears by the way. By this criterion " Fathers "
and " Mothers " and " Doctors " too (of physical
illnesses, mind) show rather well ; a little senti-
mental perhaps, but kindly and on the whole
sensible; clergymen and teachers are probably less
acceptable, but even they reach great heights of
popularity when compared with the "incidental "
psychiatrist?if one may so term him without
disrespect (though if he has seen The Night has a
Thousand Eyes he will be used to disrespect).
This film caused these reflections, for it is not a
story about psychiatry, and the incident in which
the psychiatrists appear could be cut without
affecting the plot. It seems, therefore, fair to
contend that such characters can be assumed to be
the man-in-the-street's idea of a typical psychiatrist,
rather than individuals like Mr. Milne in Mine Own
Executioner. When we examine this typical psy-
chiatrist, we find that he has three main character-
istics; he is wrong in his judgment, he is ridiculous,
he appears in connection with the supernatural.
The chief character of the film is a man who
forsees tragic events but is powerless to stop them.
This male Cassandra in a vision sees the death of a
young girl, with many attendant circumstances.
For many reasons this touches him very nearly and
he makes a desperate effort to influence and alter
the chain of events. (For non-psychiatrists one
may add that the suspense is intense, as the events
that have been foretold follow one another with
relentless regularity, and for those who have no
lonely walk home or empty home to sleep in,
this is good entertainment of its kind.) Soon
the police appear on the scene and the prophet of
disaster is interrogated. This is where the psy-
chiatrists appear. The plot, of course, demands
that all the forces of reason and authority shall not
believe them and that nevertheless they shall be right,
but one could hardly class these psychiatrists among
the forces of reason. Supercilious references to
endless pages of statistics, a patronizing gaze and a
58 MENTAL HEALTH
pompous manner seem to complete their reper-
toire?except for their capacity for deflation at
the end of the interview.
It is always easy to overestimate the importance
of such minor incidents, but one can safely say that
public confidence in psychiatry has not been
furthered by The Night has a Thousand Eyes.
P.E.W.
Mr. Perrin and Mr. Traill. (Featuring Marius
Goring and David Farrer.)
There seems to be more respect now on the part
of the cinema for the books which are adapted for
the screen. Certainly if our present passion for
psychiatry had existed in the bad old days, the
story of Mr. Perrin and Mr. Traill would have
appeared in a new guise: Mr. Perrin's increasing
mental ill-health would have been noticed by Mr.
Traill, who would have taken him to a psychologist.
Mr. Perrin would then have made some ink-blots
and associated such words as Trail-Hunting-Death,
and then the story would have continued as Walpole
made it.
For the absence of such an incident we must be
thankful. How churlish then to go on to complain
of the absence of psychology. But the story is in
fact a psychological one. Here really is an oppor-
tunity of showing a psychological problem on
the screen; the growth of envy and resentment and
hatred in the mind of an aimiable, kindly but
unsuccessful man, leading relentlessly to murder.
The sinister quality of that unpleasant film, The
Upturned Glass, would have been right here. If
there was to be humour, its right place was among
the children, whose happiness would have con-
trasted with the warped minds of the adults. But
this film had humour in every part and so it became
just a light and amusing picture, enjoyable, certainly,
especially to those who like stories about schools,
but not Mr. Walpole's Mr. Perrin and Mr. Traill.
The Headmaster is so awful that the audience
gasped?not so much with real horror, I think,
as with a kind of pleasurable incredulity. The
common-room is so good a caricature of the worst
elements in any bad common-room that it produced
gurgles of delight at the absurdity of human nature
that values so highly its petty privileges and rights.
But there was no horror, no tension, no awareness
of impending doom, except once when the young
master's engagement was told to Mr. Perrin.
Even then the feeling was pity rather than alarm.
To take the filming of Walpole's story seriously
is to regret an opportunity lost; to take the film
at its own value is to spend a most enjoyable
evening.
P.E.W.
The Quiet One. (Produced by the Wiltwick School
for Maladjusted Children, New York.)
This film is an excellent study of maladjustment.
It deals with the case of a small negro boy, who was
unwanted and unloved at home, his background
before entering school, and treatment and psycho-
logical development after coming to the school.
The film is subtle, slow and extremely sympathetic.
The school has 80 boys who on account of race,
religion, colour or bad home circumstances, have
become maladjusted. The film describes slowly
the early background of the child, his tired and
worn-out grandmother, his mother, who does not
want him, the boy's backwardness at school as
a result of emotional difficulties, his loneliness in
the big city, his inability to make friends with
anyone, and his suppressed hatred and misery.
After coming to the school, the boy is for a long
time an outsider, but slowly, with the help of the
doctor, he forms a great attachment to one of the
masters, but has grave set-backs because he becomes
possessive and jealous of the other children with
regard to this master. There is one excellent scene:
a pottery class, where the boy is making a bowl
of clay, and suddenly tries to transform it into a
sea shell. This brings back memories of when he
was a little boy playing by the sea, digging in the
sand with his mother and father and grandmother.
This becomes the turning point in his development
and from then on he is more able to face life.
The film has few spoken words and most of what
it has to convey is presented pictorially. It can
be shown on special request to private selected
audiences, and application should be made to:
Mr. Sinclair Road, Film Centre, 34 Soho Square,
W.l.
E.H.R.
