The Likes of Us
=================

:Author: G. V. Holmes. Frederick
Muller, Ltd. 7s. 6d.

The fact that a second impression of this book
has followed hard on the heels of the first, is evidence
of the welcome that has been given to it, and to
that welcome we would add our own. No one
responsible for Children's Homes, or employed
in them, should be without the book for it contains
an answer to the question which the writer?an
ex-Barnardo child brought up in the Barkingside
Village Home?suggests should have been asked
of the people primarily concerned when the Curtis
Committee was drawing widespread attention to
the whole matter: "What do you really think?
What are your views ? "

In the book a vivid picture is presented of the
life at Barkingside?of its joys and sorrows, its
opportunities and limitations, its hopes arid fears,
its high lights and its daily routine. Perhaps the
outstanding fact disclosed is the degree to which
the particular foster-mother concerned succeeded
in making for her adopted family a real home
atmosphere, so that the term " Mother " was one
that meant something precious to the child using
it. At the same time, the ecstatic discovery that
the new Governors of the Village actually were
interested in older girls, reveals a wistful longing for
that membership of a natural family group from
the loving security of which a child brought up even
in the most ideal " Home " must inevitably be
deprived.

Two further examples may be given of ways in
which these children reacted towards particular
incidents.

At Christmas it used to be the custom for
" Mother " to distribute from a large sack parcels
addressed to individual recipients which had arrived
by post, and afterwards anyone not fortunate
enough to receive such a parcel was invited to have
the first choice from a second sack filled with toys
deposited at each cottage by Father Christmas.
The child without a personal parcel did not feel hurt
because she knew that to her would be given this
privilege of the first choice. Later, however, a
well-meaning staff " put in " a parcel for everyone
so left out, with an enclosed greeting card. The
author's comment on this is illuminating. " It
did nothing," she writes, " to dispel that faint chill
of loneliness

" If a parcel v^as not actually there, one could airily
say: ' Expect it will come laterknowing perfectly
well it couldn't?but the ' made-up ' parcel deprived
us of this fierce wall of pretence and left us quite
defenceless."

The second example will be of special interest to
readers concerned with the welfare of mental
defectives. As part of the general re-organization
of the village consequent on the arrival of new
Governors (Miss MacNaughten and Miss Picton
Turberville), children who were feeble-minded
(familiarly known as " potties ") were taken out
of the Cottage Homes and housed in a separate
building. Popular comment on this reform ran
as follows :

" At first we were indignant, surely they were better
with us, but "Mother" explained that they needed
special ' modern ' care. . . . We felt they had
been our ' special care ', and never did I think this
putting them together was a good idea. They
seemed to us to grow into ' naughty girls' . . .
Maudie summed up the situation well when she
said ' All them potties together, ours and all, oh
lor !' Mother's ' Hush, Maudie ' was only
mechanical."

These two examples will serve to show the type
of information the book contains and the author's
gift as a narrator. There is not a dull section in
its 192 pages, and all who love children, and
specially those whose business it is to promote their
mental health and happiness, will feel grateful for
its publication. A.L.H.
