The Value of Conferences
========================

EDITORIAL

Most readers were no doubt either present at,
or regretted their absence from, the Associa-
tion's Conference at Seymour Hall on January
15th and 16th. This meeting is now an
integral part of the work of the Association,
and this year the large number of delegates
provided evidence of the growth of interest in
an ever-widening circle : the audience included
many representatives of local authorities and
of industry from all over the country, as well,
of course, as of the medical and nursing
professions and the social services.

It is, therefore, perhaps pertinent to enquire
in this journal what are the greatest benefits of
such a conference. Its success in the past and
its present standing should be a challenge to
us all to ensure that it is now serving the most
useful function it can. The Association is
anxious to benefit from the views and construc-
tive suggestions of our readers on this very point.
Conferences as a class, we feel, should
provide certain opportunities?firstly, for in-
struction, by hearing the views of experts, and
also the experiences of others in like (but not
too like) situations;' secondly, for a social
gathering ; and thirdly, for objective thought,
by allowing the delegates to step outside their
own environment and see their own problems
in perspective.

There can be no doubt that the experts were
there, with great benefit to us ; and all our
congratulations should go to the organizers,
as well as to the eight speakers themselves, on
the quality of the papers provided. Again, the
opportunity of stepping out of a small circle
into a larger one was freely given and freely
taken, and we cannot be too grateful to the
Government and other authorities for their
encouragement and help in arranging for
many delegates to attend.

We cannot, however, be so confident that
individual delegates were able to voice or to
hear many views which were really representa-
tive. Indeed some of the speakers in discussion
(naturally only a fraction of a vast audience)
found it obviously difficult in their few minutes
to build constructively on the fundamental
topics, or do more than pose their personal
difficulties ; and there was no way of dis-
covering how much they had the sympathy of
the majority ; so that a comprehensive sum-
ming up could not be achieved. Naturally,
there are difficulties inherent in the size of this
gathering.

It seems, however, logical to consider the
desirability of arranging some time for the
conference to break up into sections, to allow
more members to discuss their own views on
perhaps narrower topics, to attempt to resolve
their own difficulties in the light of their
neighbours, and finally to determine con-
structive proposals for the future. This would
entail the splitting of the long sessions into
shorter periods?which would not necessarily
be a disadvantage ; and it might also take an
extra day. This would be well spent.

Note. We publish in this issue, as the third article of a series on special problems, a study of adolescent patients,
written by Dr. R. W. Pickford. The first and second articles appeared in our last two numbers.
We also are beginning another series dealing with services of interest to the Social Worker, the first being on the work
of a School Psychological Service by Miss Agatha H. Bowley, Ph.D., of the City of Leicester Education Department.
