Certified
===========

MENTAL HEALTH 111

Dear Sir,?The review of my book, Certified, given
in your March issue, seems to demand a statement from
its author : if otherwise, the author has wasted six years
and ?250 in a fruitless endeavour to improve our Mental
Health Services and the lot of the mentally ill.
Although this book has been brilliantly reviewed
throughout the world, and despite the fact that your
reviewer is the only one to accord it an " adverse "
review, I must at once agree with him that it certainly
does not offer anything in the way of constructive ideas.
Therefore, I shall be glad if you will publish this letter,
so that your readers may become aware of my purpose.
Today, there is a spate of books written by ex-patients :
The Snake Pit, The Kingdom of the Lost, Certified, and
(now due from Allen & Unwin) Inside the Asylum, by
John Vincent. These authors have lived in our mental
hospitals and thus gained first-hand experience of the
conditions prevailing. They have witnessed the defects
in our Mental Health Services ; and consequently,
none of them finds any reason to praise the system.
On the contrary, they are shocked, horrified and angered
that things so wrong should be possible in our mental
hospitals as they are constituted today.
Now, although I do not doubt the sincerity of your
reviewer (for it is evident that we have the same aim
that of promoting by any means the improvement of
the mental health of the community) I do feel it necessary
to say that there are no inaccuracies in my book, that
I have deliberately minimized matters, that it is a terrible
fact that there was no treatment for mental disorders in
" my " asylum, nor was there any treatment for physical
illness?other than a first aid room.
With regard to your reviewer's justifiable suggestion
that part of my book may have been inspired by my own
mental disability, I would assure him that I was a per-
fectly sane man, and that because we were at war when
I wrote the book, I was unable to tell the reader how it
was that a sane man came to be in an asylum. This
is now made clear in my book, That Which is Caesar's,
which appears in a few weeks' time.
Is it not passing strange that a writer of world-wide
reputation (Vera Brittain) should have written the
Introduction to John Vincent's book, Inside the Asylum ?
And is it not also strange that many of our largest book
shops are staging an exhibition of my next two books?
Synthetic Mania and That Which is Caesar's ? Whole
windows are being used, wherein fifty copies of each
of these books, together with a poster bearing my
photograph and the following advertisement will be
seen: "A most courageous and dynamic book."?
Vera Brittain.
With all respect to your reviewer, who may himself be
a medical man well versed in psychological medicine,
may I suggest that so resistant is the human mind to
things not yet experienced that one can hardly hope
for complete understanding without further explanation.
Yours trulv.
H. G. WOODLEY.
Doune House,
Edzell, Angus.
