Psychiatry in India and Pakistan
=================================

..::Admonition: About the Author 
By EA. BENNET, MC, MA, ScD, MD, DPM.Senior Physician in Psychotherapy, the Maudsley Hospital; Psychiatrist, West End Hospital for Nervous Diseases; previously Consulting Psychiatrist, India Command

:Reference type:  Journal Article
:Record-number: 18331
:Author: Bennet, E. A.
:Year: 1948
:Title: Psychiatry in India and Pakistan
:Journal: Ment Health (Lond)
:Volume: 8
:Issue: 1
:Pages: 2-5
:Epub-Date: 1948/08/01
:Date: Aug
:Short-title: Psychiatry in India and Pakistan
:ISSN: 0025-9632 (Print) 0025-9632
:PMCID: PMC5078316
:Accession-number: 18885356
:Keywords: Humans, India, Pakistan, Psychiatry, PSYCHIATRY/India and Pakistan
:Notes: Bennet, e a Journal Article Ment Health (Lond). 1948 Aug;8(1):2-5.
:URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5078316/:Language: eng




The partition of India has thrown upon the
Governments of the two Dominions responsi-
bilities of such urgency that time must elapse
before plans for the health of the population can
take shape. When these plans come to be formu-
lated the question of priorities is sure to arise.
Mental illness did not arouse much medical enthusi-
asm in India in days gone by; and there (as
elsewhere) other forms of sickness were (and still
are) thought to be of more importance. Tuber-
culosis and leprosy, for example, present special
problems. The provision of hospital accommoda-
tion for patients with these complaints is inadequate.
Expert calculation revealed that in 1941 there were
20,000,000 persons in India " so blind as to be
unable to perform any work for which eyesight
is essential The general hospitals are few and
even in the large towns there is a shortage of beds.
It would be rash, therefore, to expect any rapid
change in the conditions for the mentally afflicted.
There are, however, indications that in each
Dominion the needs of psychiatric patients have
not been overlooked. The proposal to build a
mental hospital near Calcutta will fill a long-felt
need. The Government of Pakistan has laid
considerable emphasis upon the teaching of
psychiatry in the reorganization of the medical
services. An ambitious suggestion to establish
Chairs in Psychiatry at the medical teaching centres
in Lahore, Karachi and Dacca (in Eastern Pakistan)
has been considered. Through the Sind Public
Service Commission a notice was issued inviting
applications for the Professorship of Psychiatry
in Karachi. An appointment to this post was
about to be made when financial considerations
caused a postponement. Psychiatric out-patient
clinics are being opened at some general hospitals
in which there will be psychiatric wards. This
policy is in accordance with modern trends and
reflects credit upon those directing the medical
arrangements in Pakistan.
The purpose of this brief article is to sketch the
position of psychiatry in India before the recent
war, to indicate the impetus given to psychiatry
under the pressure of war conditions and to point
out some present-day needs and possibilities.
I
Hospital accommodation in India and in Pakistan
for psychiatric patients requiring institutional care
and treatment has been considerably below require-
ments for many years. On a rough computation
there is one bed for every 30,000 people. Most
of the hospitals are old fashioned and were intended
merely for custodial purposes. In certain places
a portion of the jail has been adapted for the recep-
tion of patients and several other hospitals are
MENTAL HEALTH
distinctly jail-like. Mechanical restraint was
routine practice in some provincial civil mental
hospitals as recently as 1945 and even shackles,
chains and handcuffs, while unusual, were by no
means unknown. A few hospitals are well
appointed and fairly adequately staffed. The Punjab
Mental Hospital in Lahore (800 beds) contains some
well-designed modern wards. The two hospitals at
Ranchi and the Mysore State Hospital, near
Bangalore, stand out as examples of what may yet
be achieved elsewhere. The Ranchi European
Mental Hospital?now to be called the Inter-
Provincial Mental Hospital?provides accommoda-
tion and treatment facilities similar to those found
in many hospitals in Europe.
The standard of nursing care in the three hospitals
just mentioned is good. Elsewhere in the two
Dominions it is very far from satisfactory. For
the most part trained nurses are unobtainable so
that untrained male and female attendants must
be used and often there are not enough of them.
The nursing conditions in the usually overcrowded
wards are consequently poor. The work is arduous
and unsatisfying, so younger men and women are
not drawn to it.
Taking all these matters into consideration it is
understandable that young Indian doctors were not
attracted to the study of psychiatry. Then again
the fear of mental illness is more conscious amongst
Indians than amongst Europeans.
This is a somewhat grim picture. In pre-war
India, life moved slowly and the administrative
machinery, central and provincial, was anything
but dynamic?at any rate in medical matters. In
1912 the Indian Lunacy Act became law and it is
still the statute under which the mental hospitals
work. During the intervening 44 years, psychiatry
has advanced to a remarkable extent. The Mental
Deficiency Act of 1913 and the amending Act of
1927 are the chief statutes under which mental
defectives may be dealt with in Britain. There is
nothing corresponding to these Acts in India and
Pakistan. Consequently mental defectives may
only be detained in institutions under the provisions
of the now outmoded Act of 1912. Before the
partition of India psychiatrists in that country
were well aware of the need for an Act under which
mental defectives could be treated in special colonies.
At least two suggested Mental Deficiency Acts
were drafted by experienced psychiatrists, but sad
to relate, they did not receive official sanction or
commendation.
II
The outbreak of the Second World War led in
due course to an expansion of the Indian Army
and the Royal Indian Air Force, while the British
units already in India were supplemented by a
continuous flow of fresh units of the Army and
R.A.F. Everywhere hospital accommodation had
to be expanded by new construction. In many
places the old Indian Military Hospitals and British
Military Hospitals were almost submerged in the
new buildings which sprang up around them;
and dozens of entirely new hospital centres were
created. Some idea of the vastness of the medical
services in India during the war will be gained
when we recall that in one area alone (Poona)
there were more medical officers than in the pre-war
R.A.M.C.
The development of the medical services was at
first gradual and it was not till 1942 that it became
evident that the psychiatric needs of the Army
were not being met. At that time there were six
psychiatrists in the Army in India and some of
them were doing general duty as well as
psychiatry. By 1945 the number of whole-time
psychiatrists had risen to almost one hundred.
This rapid development was accompanied by the
provision of over three thousand beds for psychiatric
patients. The policy was to link the treatment of
these patients with that of the general hospitals.
A " standard psychiatric ward" of twenty-five
beds was designed and one or more of these units
was added to the smaller general hospitals according
to local needs. In addition large psychiatric
centres were formed in base areas with accommoda-
tion for several hundred patients. These proved
insufficient and in 1945 a psychiatric hospital of
1,200 beds was opened.
Towards the end of the war there were between
forty and fifty psychiatric centres in India, Burma
and Ceylon. The supply of psychiatrists was
always less than the demand. It was easier to
build wards than to obtain trained staff to run
them. Scattered throughout the Army were many
younger medical officers with varying civil experi-
ence in psychiatry. Some were appointed graded
specialists while others required further experience.
Training courses were arranged and systematic
teaching was given. No claim is made that the
training produced fully competent psychiatrists.
But it did provide a fairly adequate background for
carrying out specific tasks in the relatively homo-
geneous group of Service patients. The training
of these officers was the responsibility of experienced
psychiatrists who?with two or three exceptions
?came from the U.K. The trainees were Indian
and British and they worked together with the
greatest goodwill.
The geographical formation of the country on
the borders of India, Assam and Burma led to
Divisions operating alone, so it became necessary
to have Divisional Psychiatrists. This indeed was
the only theatre of war in which each Division had
its own psychiatrist. Several of these officers
were Indians who had " graduated " in the training
centres in India.
Before the war there were no Indian Mental
Nursing Orderlies. Five training centres were
established and a large number of nursing orderlies,
trained by Indian Psychiatrists, were eventually
graded as M.N.Os.
The method of selecting candidates for com-
missions in the Army in India was changed in 1943.
MENTAL HEALTH
Previously the responsibility of selection lay with
an Interviewing Board. In February 1943 the
first batch of aspirants to commissions, thirty-six
in number, arrived in Dehra Dun to be tested by
the method of selection which had come into use
in the British Isles. The new machinery for
selection was at first rather cumbersome, being the
joint effort of the previous Central Interviewing
Board and a new Selection Board framed on the
pattern of the War Office Selection Boards. A few
months later a highly trained team from England
took over this work and expanded it. Psychological
tests designed for Europeans were of little value
with Indians and some entirely new tests, appro-
priate to the concepts of Indian soldiers, were
introduced. Selection methods were also used in
the Women's Services with satisfactory results. The
advance made by the use of these methods was
striking and in due course a Directorate for the
Selection of Personnel was set up. Later the
I.C.S. adopted an analogous method for selecting
candidates for the civil service?a tribute to those
responsible for building up the intricate machinery
of Selection.
Ill
The facts just mentioned are of more than
historical interest. They have relevance to
psychiatry in India and Pakistan today. The
staffing of the psychiatric centres and of the Selection
Boards was shared by Indian and British psychia-
trists and psychologists. Some of these, officers of
the old I.M.S. and the I.A.M.C., are still in the
armies of India and Pakistan, while others have
returned to civilian practice. Throughout the two
Dominions, therefore, are many psychiatrists with
experience in the use of modern methods?a much
larger number than ever before*. The majority
are younger men well able to accept responsibility.
Not all are now practising as psychiatrists.
Although the need for psychiatrists was great, the
opportunities for clinical work were restricted and
a few have taken up general practice. The period
of political transition slowed up the plans for
development of the psychiatric services. But
let us hope this is temporary and that development
has not been halted. Indeed several ex-army
and present army psychiatrists have been sent at
the expense of their respective Governments to
pursue post-graduate studies in England.
The Indian Psychiatric Society was started in
January 1947 with a membership of forty-two
practising psychiatrists. The Council of the Society
met in October 1947?that is after the partition of
India?and resolved that the political division of
the country should not interfere with the integrity
of the Society and that psychiatrists from both
Dominions should be eligible for membership.
This decision is in keeping with the best traditions.
Hitherto psychiatrists in civil practice have worked
in relative isolation. Now it will be possible to share
the administrative and clinical experience of others;
and to lay down standards of training for psychia-
trists and mental nurses. The Council of the
Society has expressed its willingness to co-operate
in the drafting of new legislation with provision for
mental defectives and delinquents and to maintain
the status of psychiatry at a high level.
A lack of vision in the past has resulted in such
anomalies as the admission of criminal patients
to the wards of mental hospitals and the classifica-
tion of ordinary patients as " non-criminal
On this and other related matters the Council of
the Indian Psychiatric Society has already made
recommendations.
During the war the Government of India set up
a Commission to report upon the civil mental
hospitals and upon the psychiatric needs of the
community. The findings of this Commission
(The Bhore Report) is an important document
containing, as it does, comments upon present
conditions and recommendations for improvement.
Psychiatrists in India and Pakistan would do
well to study the Report of Post-War Educational
Development in India, issued in 1944 by the Bureau
of Education, India. In it will be found a mass of
carefully sifted facts which have a direct bearing
upon the future of mental health in the two
Dominions. The first paragraph in this Report
reads as follows :
" In every civilized country in the world, whether
occidental or oriental, which aspires to be regarded
as civilized, with the exception of India, the need
for a national system of education for both boys
and girls which will provide the minimum prepara-
tion for citizenship has now been accepted. In
India the need for similar provision has been under
discussion for many years, but that no substantial
progress has yet been made is obvious from the
fact that over 85 per cent, of her population is still
illiterate."
The preventive aspects of psychiatry must be
linked with a comprehensive educational policy.
In 1944 there were only two institutions in India
for the education of mentally handicapped children.
The establishment of many special schools for these
children is essential.
"Apart from the provision of special schools,
it will be necessary to take the assistance of specialist
medical officers including psychiatrists, educational
psychologists and social workers experienced in
mental welfare, in dealing with these cases. For
this purpose specialist doctors may be associated
with the school medical service at least for part-
time work. Social workers will be able to seek
and remedy environmental causes which contribute
to the condition of the child, both at home and
outside it."?Report on Post-War Education in
India, p. 56.
A Child Guidance Clinic was opened in Bombay
several years ago and might well be taken as a modeL
Possibly other Child Guidance units have been
established since. There is certainly a need for
them.
MENTAL HEALTH
No one will under-estimate the magnitude and
importance of the task presented in building up
a satisfactory mental health service in India and
Pakistan. Frustrations will be many and at
times the burden will seem almost too heavy.
A difficult but necessary step will be to educate
public and official opinion. The relationship
between mental disability and the religious, social,
economic and educational environment of children
and adolescents is at present unknown. Fortified
with information on such matters it would be
possible to discuss the principles of health with
conviction. To cure and to alleviate mental
ailment is commendable. To observe and to
change the conditions in which it multiplies is a
demanding and rewarding obligation which will
provide our colleagues in India and Pakistan with
an objective worthy of their zeal.
/
