National Health Service Act, 1946
===================================

Local Authorities' Schemes for a Mental Health Service
Under Section 20 (2) of the National Health
Service Act, Local Authorities are required to serve
copies of their Schemes for carrying out the duties
imposed on them, to every voluntary organization
providing in their areas services of the kind concerned. Copies of the Schemes dealing with the
Mental Health Service (Sections 28 and 51) were
therefore submitted to the National Association
for Mental Health, and have been closely examined
by the Association's officers and staff. Observations were then sent to the Minister, at his request.
The chief points on which comment was made are
here summarized.

1. Medical Personnel

The majority of the Schemes propose that the
Medical Officer of Health should be responsible
for the general direction of the Mental Health
Services with the part-time help of Assistant
Medical Officers who have taken a short course in
Mental Deficiency, and general practitioners
approved as Certifying Officers. In addition,
joint-user arrangements with the Regional Hospital
Boards' psychiatrists are proposed, when decisions
have to be made on doubtful and difficult cases.
The Association urges the use of psychiatrists in a
wider consultative capacity and particularly for
supervising social case work. Such a provision
is stressed as being of the*utmost importance in view
of the fact that Local Authorities must at present
be dependent for such case work largely on a
non-medical staff often with little or no specialized
mental health training or experience.

2. Non-Medical Personnel

The use of psychiatric social workers, general
social workers, mental welfare officers with mental
deficiency experience, Public Assistance Officers and
Health Visitors is indicated in the Schemes under
this heading, but it is evident that the majority
of Local Authorities have little understanding of
the functions properly belonging to each group.
Nor is there any adequate appreciation of the
distinction between administrative work and social
work concerned with individual cases.

The Association fully recognizes that under
present conditions, authorities cannot hope to
secure fully trained personnel to cover the whole
field, but it is suggested that an effort should at
least be made to employ as the head of the team,
an experienced Mental Health worker (if a psychiatric social worker cannot be obtained).

3. Mental Deficiency Work

For the supervision of mental defectives, on which
a variety of personnel is to be used, it is urged that
the Minister should take steps to ensure that Local
Authorities are aware of the need for some special
training in order that the requirements of this group
may be fully understood. Many authorities propose
to establish, or increase the number of Occupation
Centres, and attention is drawn by the Association
to the Year's Training Course for Occupation
Centre workers for which early application should
be made.

4. Community Care and After-Care of persons
suffering from mental illness, including neurotics,
socially maladjusted and epileptics (Section 28)
Only a few progressive authorities are proposing
to take any immediate steps under this Section, in
so far as it relates to the neurotic and socially
maladjusted group. In view, however, of the
shortage of the necessary trained personnel, and of
the proportions which this work rapidly assumes
once it is begun, the Association is of opinion that
no purpose would be served by pressing for its
development at the present time. It is nevertheless
important for authorities to realize that the need
exists and that it is waiting to be met.

5. Training of Personnel for the Mental Health Service
The attention of the Minister is called to the
Courses for Relieving Officers transferred to the
Mental Health Service, which are being organized
by the National Association (see page 101) and it is
suggested that Local Authorities should be encouraged to explore the possibilities of such courses
in their own areas.

6. Mental Health Education

Only a minority of Schemes mention Health
Education and of these a minority again refer to
education in mental health. The attention of the
Minister is drawn to the importance of this aspect
of the subject and to the facilities offered by the
National Association as well as by the Central
Council for Health Education.
