Good Time Girl
===============

MENTAL HEALTH 27
Film Reviews
 (Featuring Jean Kent, Flora Robson,
Dennis Price, Griffith Jones, Herbert lorn.)
It is interesting to compare this film with that famous
and infamous production, No Orchids for Miss Blandish.
It is so similar in its theme of violence, so different in
its treatment of that theme. The same unanimity in
dubbing No Orchids a bad film will probably be found,
this time in praise of Good Time Girl. For this is a
moving and convincing film where the characters live
as human creatures, a mixture of tragedy, glamour and
humour.
The same cockney vigour and the back answers of It
Always Rains on Sunday are here again; the side alleys,
the street musician, the slum bedroom, as also the night
clubs and mink coats, are things of reality and they com-
bine to tell a pitiful tale.
Now should this film be censored as well as No Orchids ?
If it is Art that determined the censor's actions, then let
Miss Blandish suffer alone, for she was an unreal creature
in whom no one could believe. But if it is public
morality that is his concern, one may question whether
the sight of motiveless brutality is as dangerous as the
violence in Good Time Girl which is the outcome of
tremendous feeling, powerfully conveyed to the audience.
But a more important question for readers of this
journal is: What impression does this film give of our
psychological and social services ? It is difficult to believe
that it is anything but alarming and the fact that in all
other respects the film presents such a true picture of
life makes this the more regrettable. The Juvenile
Court and the Approved School are seen from the
point of view of the unreformed girl, and I should think
that, after seeing this film, most of the audience would
greet with undisguised incredulity the statement, " Many
girls after leaving an Approved School do lead honest
lives." For here the girl's horror as she exclaims,
" Three years in an Approved School ! " received a
sympathetic gasp from the audience. We shared her
feeling that the building was a prison and we shared her
many humiliations on arrival, when, for instance, the
matron and doctor talked across her while her hair
was being examined, when she was forced to wear
institutional clothes and ordered to say, " Good morning,
Mrs. Bond " as the long line of girls filed past the house-
keeper in the morning. To us as to her, the staff seemed
cold, inhuman, thin-lipped, the policewoman seemed
rough and callous and the probation officer prudish
and shocked at the sight of an embrace. Then too the
staff appeared to be so easily taken in, and psychologists
will feel sad that their appearance coincided with the
beginning of the girl's real deterioration. " I have
arranged for you to see the psychologist in the morning,"
" Thank you, matron," says Gwen meekly, and as the
matron smiles with pleasure that the girl has at last put
aside her truculence and is becoming amenable, a very
ugly smile appears on Gwen's lips at the ease of her
deception.
On reflection, one recalls that the two " bad " girls
are the exceptions and that the rest, though breaking
into disorder on the slightest pretext, do not seem
unhappy at the School or on bad terms with the staff.
One remembers too, as an afterthought, that the matron
showed herself to be really concerned for her charges in
her conversations with the rest of the staff and in com-
mittee, that the chairman of the Juvenile Court, who
tells the story of the film as an awful example to another
girl, is a humane woman too. But these are after-
thoughts, and the conscious afterthoughtsof one deliber-
ately trying to see what can be said on the other side.
At the time of seeing the film, the miscarriage of justice
and our sympathy with the victim create a feeling of
hostility to the forces of authority, in particular the
Approved School with its attendant Probation Officers
and Psychologists.
P.E.W.
The Centre.
This short film, directed by Paul Rotha for the
Central Office of Information on behalf of the
Foreign Office, is an account of the Peckham Health
Centre, the first experiment to study health, as Dr. Scott
Williamson, the founder, claims. It shows the fine,
light buildings and the activities earned on inside, the
gym., swimming baths, billiard room, cafetaria, etc.,
mainly as they are seen through the eyes of one family
that joins the Centre. This family is divided in its
attitude towards the Centre and one sees how the
principles of the experiment work out in their lives:
no compulsion to follow the advice given by the doctor,
in fact no conditions of membership except the annual
medical examination and a small weekly subscription.
The conditions that are believed to be those of the happy,
healthy life are provided, and the scientists watch the
result.
Perhaps men tend to feel that their leisure activities
should be spontaneous and that such an organized
experiment smacks of interference, although the truth
is that the social activities which were a natural growth
in England have suffered a rude interruption and it
may be that only by some such deliberate action can a
healthy social life be brought to the suburbs of our towns.
The film does prompt such serious questioning, but,
perhaps inevitably, a picture of this kind has a self-
conscious air that is something of an embarrassment to
an English audience. It may have been inevitable
too that such a film should show the conversion of the
hostile onlooker into an enthusiastic member with such
immediately good results that the audience stirred
uneasily. But the film only lasts twenty minutes and
most of the actors are members of the Centre, not
professional actors, and within these limitations a
convincing picture is given of the atmosphere of friendli-
ness and the improvement in health that does take place
at the Centre.
One small piece of criticism may be added. It is
stated at the beginning of the film that Peckham was
chosen because within it were to be found families with
incomes ranging from the highest to the lowest, but
it did not seem clear from the film that in fact The Centre
was used by families of largely differing incomes.
P.E.W.
