Mental Health Conference, 1948
===============================

76 MENTAL HEALTH

The National Association's Conference on Mental
Health, held at Seymour Hall, W.l, on January 15th and
16th, attracted large attendances at all the sessions, and
particularly at that dealing with the problem of the
difficult child, which was presided over by Mr. C. P. Hill
(Children's Department, The Home Office), in the
unavoidable absence of Professor Sir Cyril Burt.
Approximately 1,150 persons attended, of whom some
550 were delegates of Local Authorities and voluntary
organizations in all parts of the country.
The Conference was opened by the Rt. Hon. R. A.
Butler, P.C., M.P., President of the Association, who
made an earnest plea for a wider support of its valuable
work and the enlistment of new members. The Con-
ference was honoured by the presence of Mr. L. John
Edwards, O.B.E., M.P., Parliamentary Secretary to
the Ministry of Health, who expressed warm apprecia-
tion of the activities carried out by the Association.
He urged that particular attention should be paid
by local authorities to their after-care organization,
upon which might depend, to a very large extent, the
restoration to normal life of patients discharged from
hospital.
Papers on re-adaptation to life and work of the
neurotic patient in industry, were given by Dr. G. R.
Hargreaves, O.B.E. (Principal Medical Officer, Lever
Bros. & Unilever, Ltd.) and Dr. Donald Stewart
(Medical Adviser, Austin Motor Company, Babcock
& Wilcox, Ltd. and James Booth & Co.) who stated that
neurosis accounted for well over 90 per cent, of psychia-
tric cases, and was probably a factor in 20 to 30 per
cent, of all sickness.
Dr. Kenneth Soddy (Medical Director of the National
Association) gave an account of the Association's after-
care scheme for psychiatric service casualties which,
since 1946 had been extended to civilians and had dealt
with between 13,000 to 14,000 men and women. He
expressed the hope that local authorities might be able
to carry on and develop or co-operate in this pioneer
work which had proved of the greatest value. Dr.
Doris Odium (a Vice-President of the National Associa-
tion) gave a detailed survey of the opportunities presented
to local authorities for the development of a Mental
Health service under the National Health Service Act
of 1946, both in regard to prevention and treatment.
In response to many requests, these two latter papers
are being printed separately for immediate circulation
to local authorities for information and use in con-
nection with the mental health schemes which they are
at present formulating. These papers will also form
part of the full report on the Conference proceedings
which is to be published shortly and will be available
at 5s. 3d., post free. The report will be sent auto-
matically to all those who attended the Conference and
paid an inclusive fee. The attention of our readers is
also directed to proposals drawn up by the National
Association for a suggested scheme for a Mental Health
Service under a local authority. Copies of this leaflet,
price 3d., post free, are now obtainable from the
Association.
Miss E. M. Bartlett, psychologist to the Essex Educa-
tion Committee, who spoke on methods of handling
difficult children in primary and post-primary schools
as required under the Education Act, 1944, commented
on the wise shift of emphasis from medical to educational
News and Notes
treatment. The problem of handling children of this
type was linked with their whole educational environ- i
ment, and she urged the need for training teachers to I
recognize the principles upon which the attainment of
mental health is based. Miss Clare Britton, Tutor,
Child Care Course, London School of Economics,
speaking on the selection and training of staffs for
boarding homes for difficult children, referred to the need
for having a complete family unit at the centre of each
hostel or children's home, and the therapeutic value to
the children of having married couples in charge of these.
The final session, which was presided over by the Earl
of Feversham (Chairman of the National Association)
was devoted to the subject of education for mental
health as a national and international responsibility,
the speakers being, Brigadier A. Torrie (Director of
Army Psychiatry), and Miss S. Clement Brown, M.A.,
Programme Secretary, International Congress on Mental
Health, who deputized for Dr. J. R. Rees, C.B.E., owing
to his unavoidable absence abroad in connection with
the Congress arrangements. Brigadier Torrie, in the
course of his address, stated that the need for informa-
tion concerning the prevention and early treatment of
mental ill-health, was as great as the need for informa-
tion concerning tuberculosis and cancer. The greatest
hope for the nation was to be found in the adequate
handling of its children, and he advocated the institution
of parent guidance clinics throughout the country.
Editorial comment on the Conference is provided on
page 58 of this issue.
Lunacy and Mental Deficiency in 1946
Mental Disorders
A striking fact brought out in the 33rd Annual Report
of the Board of Control, Part I (H.M. Stationery Office.
9d.) is the steady rise in the number of voluntary patients
admitted to mental hospitals and consequently in the
total number of admissions. Whereas in 1938, out
of a total of 27,437 patients admitted, only 9,651 were
uncertified, in 1946, the relative figures were 35,585,
and 18,059. More than half the direct admissions were,
therefore, those of voluntary patients, and the rise in
the total admissions may be taken as indicative of a
greater readiness to apply for treatment rather than of an
actual increase in the prevalence of mental disorder.
In the Board's opinion this upward tendency is likely
to continue so that during the next decade it is possible
that an additional 1,500 beds may be needed.
The total number of patients under care on December
31st, 1946 was 146,444 (males, 42-8 per cent.; females,
57-2 per cent.) of whom 128,579 were in public mental
hospitals. Of this number, 11-8 per cent, were voluntary
patients, and 0-3 per cent, temporary: the remaining
87-9 per cent, were certified. Overcrowding inevitably
continues and has now reached 13-1 per cent., estimated
on a basis of recognized bed-space. Apart from the
cessation of building, this state of things is largely due
to the fact that 15,170 formerly available beds are
unusable for the following reasons: 10,417 are still
diverted to war-time services, 3,080 cannot be used
because of shortage of staff, and 1,673 are awaiting
restoration or re-equipment. The seriousness of this
position, particularly in relation to the rising number of
patients seeking admission, can hardly be over-estimated.
Discharges?chiefly as a result of the large proportion
of voluntary patients?show an increase of 4,519 over
MENTAL HEALTH 77
the figure for 1945 (viz. 25,326 compared with 20,807)
and reached the highest level yet recorded, being now
71-2 percent, of direct admissions as compared with 67-1
per cent, the previous year. The recovery rate was
32-6 per cent., and the rate for " recovered or relieved "
62-9 per cent. The fact that " many voluntary patients
are quickly restored to health and leave hospital after
a relatively short period of treatment " is recorded by
the Board with satisfaction.
Attention is drawn to the need for a greater awareness
of the value of Occupation Therapy for chronic patients
as well as for patients in the early stages of mental
illness, and it is pointed out that by this means, deteriora-
tion of personality may be prevented. With regard
to physical treatment, it is recorded that some form of
this is now used in every mental hospital and that there
is reason to hope that pre-frontal leucotomy?of
which a special report was issued in February, 1947,
by Dr. Isabel Wilson?offers, in certain cases, " a
probability of relief and the possibility of recovery ".
Mental Deficiency
The position in regard to accommodation for mental
defectives continues to be a desperate one, summed up
by the Board in the statement that:
" We do not at present see any remedy for the
partial breakdown in institutional provision which
is already causing difficulties.''''
With 49,230 institution beds available on January 1st,
1947 (representing an increase of only 168) there was
overcrowding to the extent of 4,131 beds, and a waiting
list of 3,898 defectives urgently in need of removal.
The total number of cases under all forms of care at
the end of 1946 was 101,805, classified as follows:
Increase on 1945
In Institutions .. .. 53,361 773
Under Guardianship
or Notified .. .. 5,172 156
Under Statutory
Supervision .. .. 43,272 1,468
Of the patients in institutions 5,571 were on licence,
an increase of 285 on the previous year.
Occupation Centre provision is as deplorably inadequate
, as it was during the war years, the increase being only
eleven, and the total number only 98 (as compared with
178 in 1939). Moreover, Local Authorities are con-
fronted by acute difficulties due to the shortage of trained
personnel and of suitable premises, but that they are alive
to the need is evident from the frequent mention of
Occupation Centres in schemes under the National
Health Service Act.
This Act will bring far reaching changes in the
administration of the laws relating to Lunacy, Mental
Treatment and Mental Deficiency, the most outstanding
being the transfer of Mental Hospitals and Certified
Institutions from Local Authorities to the new Regional
Hospital Boards. In the transition period there must
inevitably be many difficulties and complications, but
the Board record their belief in the value of a Mental
Health Service closely integrated with general medicine,
and in the opportunities which it will bring for expanding
its scope and increasing its efficiency.
Exchange Visit
An enquiry has been received from the Bureau
Fran?ais d'Echange Internationaux, Paris, as to
whether hospitality during the period of the Inter-
national Congress on Mental Health (August 11th to 21st,
1948) could be offered to Dr. Fretet of the Premontre
Asylum (Aisne). Dr. Fretet would like to stay either
with an English doctor or medical student to whom he
would be glad to offer hospitality in France, at a date
which would suit his English host. Would any of our
readers who are willing to help in this matter kindly
communicate with the Congress Organizer, 19 Man-
chester Street, London, W.l.
Prisons in 1946
The Prison Commissioners' Report for 1946 (price
2s. 6d.) is packed with information of general and
special interest.
From it we learn of the complete re-organization of
the Commissioners' Office in order that it may effectively
meet the growing demands made upon it. In addition
to three Commissioners, the personnel includes the
Director of Medical Services, the Director of Education
and Welfare, two Directors of Industries and Works and
a Vocational Training Officer. During the year, there
was also set up a new class of Social Workers, including
Psychiatric social workers, employed, to begin with, at
the three Borstal Reception Centres (Wormwood
Scrubbs, Latchmere and Holloway).
An interesting development recorded is the opening of
Leyhill Prison (Falfield, Glos.) as a " minimum security
camp prison " to accommodate up to 300 long-sentence
convicts of the Star Class previously housed at Camp
Hill, Isle of Wight. A Training Centre?foreshadowed
in the " Five Year Plan " outlined in the 1945 Report?
has been opened at Askham Grange, near York, for
60 to 70 selected women serving sentences of six months
and over and a second Centre in the South will be opened
when premises can be acquired. The first " open "
Borstal institution for girls was inaugurated in October,
1946, at East Sutton Park. Here special stress is
laid on the importance of linking up the life of this
little community with that of the village, an enterprise
in which considerable success has already been achieved.
A further innovation, small in itself but of considerable
psychological value, is the giving of facilities to women
prisoners for the use of cosmetics which may be retained
on admission and replenished out of earnings during
sentence.
The chapter on " Health and Hygiene" devotes
considerable space to a report on the psychological
and psychiatric services provided for prisoners in need
of treatment. Dr. W. H. de B. Hubert who contributed
so substantially to the initiation and development of the
Psychiatric Unit at Wormwood Scrubbs, left the Service
during' 1946, and Dr. Jonathan Gould was appointed
in his place. A non-medical psychologist (Mr. R. L.
Morrison) was added to the Unit's staff. It was decided
to establish a second Unit at Wakefield Prison, where
the medical staff is being increased by one more whole-
time Medical Officer, a part-time psychotherapist and a
non-medical psychologist. Reference is made to the
men discharged from the Services during the war, with
the label " Psychopathic personalities ", some of whom
found their way into prison and there frequently claimed
privileges on the grounds of their particular disability.
For this type attention is drawn to the need for prolonged
observation with the fullest possible use of psychological
tests and other diagnostic methods, e.g. the electro-ence-
phalograph, if a correct opinion is to be reached, as some
of these men respond ultimately to ordinary methods of
rehabilitation despite their idea that they must be treated
as mental invalids. In connection with epileptics, the
difficulty of disposal on release is mentioned and the need
for a state colony and clinic for epileptics with criminal
records, suggested, even though the numbers are small.
78 MENTAL HEALTH
Considerable help has been obtained from the Psycho-
logical Unit at Holloway in the allocation of girls to the
appropriate Borstal Institutions, now made easier by
the opening of East Sutton Park, and the taking over of
parts of the women's prisons at Exeter and Durham.
In July, 1946, a psychiatric social worker was appointed
to assist in this work and to help the visiting
psychiatrist.
The section concludes with a discussion of the Com-
mission's views as to the type of medical man best
fitted to undertake psychiatric work in prisons, and refers
to the imperative need for all-round experience and
first-hand knowledge of the prison service if it is to
be satisfactorily carried out. The recognition of certain
prisons under the regulations governing the Diploma
in Psychological Medicine, as being equivalent to mental
hospitals and clinics, is placed on record.
There has been a disquieting actual increase in the
number of young offenders (aged 16 to 21) found guilty
of indictable offences which for the year 1945 was (for
males) 21,133 as compared with 20,438 the previous year.
In the case of girls, however, the figures show a decrease
from 3,273 in 1944 to 2,919 in 1945.
" The Health of the School Child "*
During the war the publication of Annual Reports by
the Chief Medical Officer of the Ministry of Education
were suspended, and the appearance of this volume,
covering the years 1939 to 1945, is therefore an event
of special interest.
It contains material of particular value to Mental
Health workers, notably in Chapter VI (Child Guidance
and Hostels) and in Chapter VIII (Effects of War on
Special Schools). The former chapter?contributed by
Dr. Gale?opens with a most useful summary of the
history of Child Guidance in this country prior to the
outbreak of war. It then proceeds to trace develop-
ments following on evacuation experiences, bringing
to light " the presence and problems of children who
were psychologically maladjusted ". The opening of
special emergency Hostels met a small part of the need'
but for the majority of children other methods had
to be used, and more and more Local Education Authori-
ties turned to the idea of instituting a Child Guidance
Service, so that by 1945, the number of Clinics had
risen from 68 in 1943 to 79, of which 57 were wholly
maintained and 6 partly maintained by Local Educa-
tion Authorities. A year later, the figures had risen
again to 66 provided by Local Education Authorities
and 49 by other authorities. Child Guidance had thus
become a generally accepted necessity and an established
service recognized by the Education Act of 1944.
Turning from the past to the future, Dr. Afford then
discusses the Report on Child Guidance Services issued
in 1946 by the Association of Education Committees,
and the widening concept of Child Guidance. This
includes not only psychiatric treatment for the few, but
a psychological service in the schools for much greater
numbers?a development intensified by the new duty
laid upon Local Education Authorities to ascertain
maladjusted children and to provide special educational
treatment.
A concluding section in this chapter sums up the
available evidence?substantially reassuring?as to
the psychological effects of air raids on children.
The chapter on the " Effects of the War on Special
Schools ", by Mr. J. Lumsden, H.M.I., describes the
ups and downs of evacuation and re-evacuation, and of
the intermittent periods when the cessation of bombing
caused a drift back to the towns with the consequent
necessity for some kind of makeshift educational
provision. Day' Special School children?except in the
case of the delicate and partially sighted?were evacuated
in groups with their teachers to large country houses
or camps, and therefore problems connected with
individual billeting did not arise in their case. But the
premature return to the towns had a disastrous effect
on special school education as a whole. Thus in the
summer of 1941, the number of mentally defective
London children attending schools?either in reception
areas or in their home area?had decreased by 50 per
cent, compared with 1938-39 figures. In Liverpool
the decrease was 38 per cent, and in Manchester, 33 per
cent. Attempts were made in evacuation areas to which
the children had returned, to provide some sort of educa-
tion in small groups, often in any room in any school
which happened to be able to offer accommodation,
sometimes even in private houses where a few children
could be assembled. The Day Special Schools in parti-
cular, have not yet recovered from the upheaval*
"//; many places they, in common with the
ordinary schools, are in very makeshift premises:
often, as in London, they have lost all thread of
continuity in pupilsand staff and premises from the
pre-war days and are really new entities striving
to establish themselves in conditions of great diffi-
culty. The tradition of regular attendance at
school, built up over years, was rudely broken
by air raids, fathers in the Forces, mothers at work,
damaged housing and longer distances from
school, and it takes time to re-establish tradition.
In some places buildings have been so scarce that
handicapped children, instead of being in large
groups suitable for organization, have had to
occupy two or three rooms here and there and be
educated in classes with a very wide age range.
These troubles will not speedily be remedied,
but the production by local education authorities
of their development plans will ensure that they
are not forgotten."
On the other hand, certain positive advantages are
noted. Not the least of these was the knowledge
acquired by teachers, as a result of the intimate day to day
contact with their pupils in evacuated school premises,
Children from residential schools, too, moved to emerg-
ency quarters, had perforce to do with less close super-
vision and be left more to their own devices, so that they
developed a greater degree of self-reliance and independ-
ence. And the war-time necessity for granting more
frequent leave during term-time (to correspond, e.g.
with the periodic return of fathers from the Forces) has
led to a less rigid attitude in this respect than formerly
prevailed, and to the forging of a closer link between
home and school.
South African Council for Mental Health
It is announced that the name of the South African
National Council for Mental Hygiene has been changed
to the " S.A. National Council for Mental Health ".
The report of the Council for the year ended March 31st,
1947, shows a record of continued progress and expand-
ing activities. Tn a foreword to the report, the President,
* Report of the Chief Medical Officer, Ministry of Education for the years 1939-45. H.M. Stationery Office.
2s. 9d. post free.
MENTAL HEALTH 79
Dr. Gordon D. Laing, states that the contribution made
by the Council towards the improvement of mental
health is receiving greater recognition from the Depart-
ment of Health, which has been reflected not only in
the moral support given to the organization, but also in
increased financial aid. It is noteworthy that the Council
is one of the voluntary bodies represented on the National
Health Council, for the establishment of which provision
has been made by recent amending legislation in con-
nection with the Public Health Act of 1919.
The Scottish Association for Mental Hygiene
The Scottish Association for Mental Hygiene, which
was formed twenty-five years ago, started as a National
Association of Care Committees dealing almost exclus-
ively with the needs of the ex-Special School pupil and
other " mentally defective " persons. The Association
has since then extended its interests and it now covers,
in some degree, almost all aspects of mental health work.
Its offices are situated in Edinburgh, and enquiries and
visits are welcomed from interested persons visiting
Edinburgh, or needing information about mental health
work in Scotland. International, national and local
contacts are made from the office, but case work is as a
rule immediately referred to a more appropriate agency.
? The Association has always worked as far as possible
through local associations for mental welfare and local
care committees. There are 21 local groups at present,
and more are being instituted or re-formed each month.
While working chiefly among the mentally handicapped
in their areas, local associations have usually provided
their own voluntary visitors in the past, but Edinburgh
has had trained help in addition for some time. The
aim for the immediate future is an extension of the
voluntary work under experienced and/or trained social
workers, and gradual extension of trained help as staff
become available. The great work done on a voluntary
basis in the Paisley area over many years is at present
under scientific survey by Glasgow University Depart-
ment of Social Medicine, and the Report of Professor
T. Ferguson is eagerly awaited.
During the past year several local associations have
been negotiating with their local education authorities
for the taking over of the occupational centres as
recognized special schools under the Education (Scotland)
Act.
At a conference in January last of delegates from
local associations, the implications and opportunities
under the recent Scottish Education and Health Acts
were discussed. Local health authorities have been
offered the help of the Association, either directly or
through its local bodies, on relevant details of Schemes
for Mental Health Services. Particularly welcome have
been invitations from local authorities to the National
Office to form local associations for mental welfare.
The Association receives a steady demand for training
courses, and arrangements are being made to hold in
the spring a course lasting three weeks for staff in
Occupational Centres and Institution Classes, and for
Home Teachers of handicapped children. During the
summer a course will be held for workers of various
kinds in mental deficiency who have no training, and the
first of the revived courses for Medical Officers of
Health and School Medical Officers will also take place.
The Association has agreed to participate in the Mental
Deficiency training of prospective psychiatric social
workers at Edinburgh University.
The Association looks forward to greeting and meeting
in London and in Scotland many delegates to the 1948'
International Congress from other countries, and will
be glad to hear from " international " delegates able to
visit Scotland who would like to see some special aspect
of mental health work there.
All those interested in the work of the Association
and who would like to receive notices, are asked to
communicate with the Secretary and Organizer, Miss
Isabel M. Laird, M.A., B.Ed., Scottish Association
for Mental Hygiene, York Buildings, Queen Street.
Edinburgh 2 (Tel. 21104 Ext. 17).
West Indian News
News has been received of good progress in the Mental
Health movement in British Guiana?largely owing to
the enthusiasm and initiative of two pioneers?Dr.
Arthur Smith (Medical Superintendent of the Fort
Canje Mental Hospital) and Mrs. K. Palmer?who
between them started some 10 years ago, a Mental
Welfare Association for. the Colony. The initial ,
difficulties confronting the Association were on a scale
and of a kind unknown in this country but thanks to the
sustained effort and faith of its promoters, it has now
taken firm root and has received the encouragement of
the Economic Adviser to Colonial Development and
Welfare. The possibility of applying for a grant for
the purpose of conducting a survey of handicapped
children and adults with a view to the provision of care
and treatment is at present under discussion, and a
beginning has been made with the organization of a
class for Backward Children in the Broad Street Govern-
ment School, Georgetown, largely due to the enthusiasm
and initiative of Dr. C. C. Nicholson, School Medical
Officer.
Following on the appointment of the Colony's first
Probation Officer (Mr. F. M. Briggs)?a Juvenile Court
has been inaugurated?as well as a Home for Delinquent
Girls. Finally, in August last year, as part of a reform
project for which the Medical Superintendent, Dr.
Smith has been working since his arrival in the Colony
ten years ago, a self-contained ward was opened in the
Mental Hospital and named after the founder of the
Mental Welfare Association?the "Palmer Ward".
Various other innovations are being made in an effort
to bring the Hospital up to date, but the new legislation
for mental patients, drafted four years ago, has yet to
come before the Legislative Council, and much remains
to be done in the direction of stirring up public opinion.
Events are beginning to move also in Trinidad which
has decided that its wedding gift to Princess Flizabeth
shall take the form of a Home for Defective Children.
Research in Industry
The decision of the Home Secretary to set up a new
Committee on Industrial Productivity which will include
a panel, under the chairmanship of Sir George Schuster,
to investigate and report on the human factors affecting
industry, will be widely welcomed. The startling facts
concerning the incidence of neurosis in industry referred
to at the National Association's recent Conference and
the research already undertaken, notably that dealt
with in Dr. Russell Fraser's recent report published by
the Medical Research Council (Industrial Health
Research Board), can leave no room for doubt that
serious consideration requires to be given by all con-
cerned to the subject of psychological factors in attaining
industrial efficiency.
The report and findings of the Committee will be
awaited with keen interest.
