Oxford Essays on Psychology
============================

MENTAL HEALTH 109

:Author: William Brown,
F.R.C.P. Heinemann Medical Books. 10s. 6d.

This book is composed of seven lectures given to
students at Oxford in recent years. It does not claim
to treat exhaustively any of the aspects of psychology
with which it deals, but it is very far from elementary.
It will be of interest to the intelligent general reader,
especially if he has already some acquaintance with
psychological theories.

The first chapter deals with the general principles of
psychology and the instinctive basis of mental activity.
The classical orthodox view of instinct is taken in this,
and succeeding sections and although the author acknow-
ledges a debt to Freudian psychology and accepts much
of the teaching of the Freudian school the impression
is given that this must fit into the classical structure
rather than that the latter should be altered to accom-
modate the dynamic new psychology.

In the next chapter under the heading of " The
Gregarious Instinct " the author discusses the nature
of " transference and goes on to demonstrate the
effect of the transference situation in the relationship
of group and leader, with particular reference to the mass
psychology of Nazi Germany. Here also we have the
consideration of the formation of the super-ego, of
compulsive elements within it and of the projection of
undesirable qualities upon the enemies of Nazi Germany.
The following chapter deals with the inferiority
complex and reactions against it and with the paranoid
tendency and its frequency. These factors are also
applied to the German situation, and their influence
on the German national character is shown.

It is felt that this examination of the German mass
mind, which will probably be found the most interesting
part of the book does not sufficiently emphasize the
enormous capacity of the German for subservience to
leaders. This, based on early repression of the more
tender emotions associated with the mother-child
relationship, and acceptance of a harsh father identi-
fication, would seem to be a very potent factor in male
German psychology.

There follow two chapters on the socio-political
aspects of psychology, and finally we have a brief
survey of medical psychology and the type of disorder
that is the province of the psychiatrist. Methods of
treatment are briefly mentioned with emphasis on the
value of relaxation. Not every one will agree with the
wholesale condemnation of alcohol and tobacco that
the author makes in this section.

The use of these substances in moderation is of value
socially, and frequently of greater, more personal
psychological value. It is surely better in the constant
struggle to adapt to the demands of living that one should
use alcohol and tobacco in moderation, than that one
should be obliged to adopt some of the more crippling
devices used as a defence or protest against life's
demands.
R.F.R.
