Just Murder
============

By Edward Robinson. Lmcolns-
Prager, London. 1^4/. rp. z/i. race izs. oa.
This book has an excellent introduction by Professor
Harold Laski, in which he explains that the author's
aim is to advocate the reform of the law respecting
those accused of murder whose plea is insanity at the
time of the alleged offence. The duty of the judge in
his instruction of the jury in such cases is based upon
the McNaghten Rules of 1843. McNaghten shot and
killed Mr. Drummond, Sir Robert Peel's secretary, in
the belief that he had killed Sir Robert himself, and under
the delusion that he was being persecuted by the Tories!
He was found " not guilty " on the ground of insanity.
Much controversy was raised by this case, and, after
a debate in the House of Lords, five questions were put
to the Judges, and these resulted in the formulation of
the McNaghten Rules, which may be stated thus :
To establish a defence on the ground of insanity it must
be clearly proved that at the time of the act the party
108 MENTAL HEALTH
accused was labouring under such a defect of reason
from disease of the mind as not to know the nature or
quality of the act he was doing, or, that he did know
it but did not know that it was wrong.
If the accused is undoubtedly insane and unfit to
plead, and the jury agree, the judge may order his
detention in Broadmoor. If it is decided that he is fit
to plead, and the defence of insanity is persisted in and
accepted by the jury, the verdict will be " guilty but
insane and that also means Broadmoor. When the
accused is found to be insane on arraignment, he is not
found guilty of an offence and his mental condition at
the time of the alleged offence is not inquired into. If
found " guilty but insane " he is found guilty of the
charge and his mental condition at the time is inquired
into. Thus he may be of sound mind at the time of
the trial and yet be sentenced to detention as a criminal
lunatic.
These complicated possibilities make a very serious
set of problems for judge and jury.
It is easy for Mr. Robinson to show by means of
examples of trials which occurred between 1919 and
1939, that the result of all these complications is most
unsatisfactory from a psychological viewpoint. The
cases are excellently chosen, but it is a great pity that
the author has not classified them so that the reader
should be able to grasp clearly the kind of confusion
or injustice represented by each case, and the different
forms of injustice which seem to him to run through
them all. It is not sufficient that the cases should be
left to convince the reader by themselves, and a careful
summing-up by the author would have been a great
help. Dr. Charles Berg's interesting " last word " is
very valuable and could not be dispensed with.
This book, though the author does not consciously
intend it as such, is perhaps one of the best kinds of
argument that could be brought forward for the abolition
of the death penalty altogether. The very fact that a
man has committed murder is the strongest piece of
evidence of his gross mental derangement at the time.
If there were any evidence that punishment helped
people who had committed murder, so that they were less
inclined to do it again, then there would be a possible
case favouring punishment, but the murderer's death
does not help anybody, least of all the murdered man,
and all attempts to show that the death penalty has a
deterrent effect on others are unavailing. Murder has
never become more common where the death penalty has
been abolished. The McNaghten Rules are a relic of
psychological ideas probably out of date already in
1843, and the death penalty is a relic of the cruel forms
of retributive justice dating from the Middle Ages and
earlier times.
R.W.P.
