Certified
===========

80 MENTAL HEALTH
Reviews

By Hf G. Woodley. Victor Gollancz.
9s. 6d.
This book is "an autobiographical study"...
"the very human story of a man who found himself
certified insane and confined within one of our asylums.
... He at once set about turning evil to good by making
a point blank study of insanity. . . He experimented
upon himself and his companions, and gained much
insight into this complex subject ".
So says the publisher's " blurb one may, however,
find it easier to accept the first phrase than the rest of
this quotation: the good which results is not entirely
unmixed, the nature of the experiments is not always
clear, and the insight is sometimes scarcely apparent.
This is a pity, for Mr. Woodley's sincerity and energy
are obvious, and his style is vivid; so that his book
could do much to improve mental hospital conditions
by mobilizing public opinion towards their reform.
The need to improve much in these institutions is
accepted by all concerned in the matter; and it is easy
to see their practical difficulties in the shape of lack of
staff, lack of accommodation, lack of popular sympathy
and understanding. Unfortunately, the constructive
suggestions which Mr. Woodley makes are few, and not
likely to help either the medical profession or the general
public. He considers that the causes of lunacy, for
example, can be removed by educating the people about
sex, and about the far reaching effects of venereal
disease. Moreover, his condemnation of shock treat-
ment and his comment " not only is there no treatment
for mental disorders but there is absolutely none what-
ever for physical ailments " is likely to do untold harm.
It is, of course, the opposite of the facts and will dis-
courage many from seeking treatment at an early
enough stage, and so is diametrically opposed to the
work of those trying to educate public opinion in this
matter. It thus must contribute to the stigma and fear
of mental illness which Mr. Woodley elsewhere, so
rightly, decries.
There is also the danger that Mr. Woodley's style
and other inaccuracies may discredit his whole book,
and so let his readers think that the story is quite incred-
ible, or in fact the content of his own mental illness.
This would be a pity, for his account of conditions in
wards is probably applicable enough to some under-
staffed and under-financed hospitals whose authorities
would welcome any attempt to raise public opinion to
support them in their attempts at reform.
R.F.T.
