Training and Scope of Psychiatric Social Workers in Relation to Adults
======================================================================

38 MENTAL HEALTH

By J. B. S. LEWIS, M.D., D.P.M.
V IV VI
. ' Late Medical Superintendent, St. Bernard's Hospital, Southall
Brevity may be the soul of wit, but abbrevia-
tions, and especially medical abbreviations, are
an abomination. Nevertheless, I am so appalled
by the prospect of saying Psychiatric Social
Worker approximately thirty times in the course
of twenty minutes that I ask your permission to
say " P.S.W." instead. I would also like to
point out that if I refer throughout my remarks
to P.S.W. as " she ", and to a Psychiatrist as
" he ", this must not be taken to imply that I
personally disapprove of male P.S.W.s or female
Psychiatrists. That is in fact far from the
case.
In the short time allotted I fear I can do little
more than range over the field and attempt
to provide opportunities for discussion. I
propose to deal mainly with psychiatric social
work as it affects the Mental Hospital and shall
try so far as I can to provide food for thought
on the basis of the modern declension of the
irregular verb: I am stimulating, you are
provocative, he is offensive. For my own
part, I will endeavour not to lapse too frequently
into the third person.
We should remember how young a branch
of social science psychiatric social work is.
It was not until 1912 that it began as such in
the United States of America. The Mental
Health Course of the London School of Econo-
mics was not started until 1929, and it was not
until 1936 that that great body, the London
County Council, appointed full-time workers
in all their mental hospitals. Possibly even
now there are some mental hospitals in the
country with no P.S.W. at all, and I know for
certain that there are a number with only
untrained workers.
We can perhaps take stock by asking one or
two questions which, so far as I am concerned,
must, I confess, be regarded as entirely rhetori-
cal. Have P.S.W.s proved their usefulness ?
I have no doubt at all about this. Have they
a function, or functions of their own, as distinct
from other workers in the field ? Again I think
there is no possible doubt. Will a time come
when with saturation, if it ever happens, as
regards psychiatrists, psychotherapists, nurses
and the many other ancillary workers in the
field, who impinge on the patient and his
problems, the P.S.W. will become redundant ?
This question was in fact posed to me sometime
ago by an experienced P.S.W. who suggested
that the answer might possibly be in the affirma-
tive. For myself, I have no doubt that it must
be in the negative.
In adult work there has been considerable
variation of practice in different hospitals as
to the use made of P.S.W.s, and I think it
would be fair to state that neither the theory
nor the practice has been so carefully worked
o.ut, nor so tidily arranged as in work with
children. Team work has not been developed
in the same way, but this may have some com-
pensatory advantages.
Main Duties of P.S.W.s
1. To act as intermediary between hospital
and relatives and outside agencies.
2. To obtain social histories when required,
or to fill in gaps in such histories if these
have been obtained elsewhere.
3. To render reports on home environment
of patients about to leave hospital.
4. To make arrangements for accommoda-
tion where no home exists.
5. To supervise patients on trial whether at
home or elsewhere.
6. To help in after-care of patients who have
been discharged or of Voluntary Patients
who have departed.
7. To assist in follow-ups or special investiga-
tions.
8. To assist in dealing with property of
certified and discharged patients in those
cases where personal contact may be
essential.
In respect of these duties I feel the P.S.W.
should cast round in her mind to see if some
* Summary of paper given at Meeting o f the Royal Medico-Psychological Association, on July 7th, 1948. Published
by courtesy of the Editor of " The Journal of Mental Science
I
J
MENTAL HEALTH 39
other person or social agency should do a
particular job of work, or could do it better,
and if not should get on with it herself.
In relation to this problem one might perhaps
refer to a phrase which Dr. Golla used to be
fond of using, " the imponderabilia ", that is
to say, that in this type of work, so often it
may be a comparatively trival thing that is of
the most fundamental importance at any given
moment. As recent examples within my own
experience, I would quote the disposal of a
Labrador dog who arrived at the hospital
in the same ambulance with its demented
mistress, and another case in which a canary
in a cage and a couple of cats had to be dealt
with as a matter of urgency. Trivial and
though perhaps absurd from a purely objective
standpoint these matters may seem to be,
nevertheless they were, in my view, at that time,
of absolutely fundamental importance for this
reason: that they did present at that time
the most acute problem in the minds of the
particular patients who were the owners of
these animals, and it is this type of situation
that calls for rapid decision on the part of the
P.S.W. in the selection of her work.
Where there are a number of psychiatrists,
and a number of P.S.W.s in a hospital, with
varying experience, temperament and ability,
it is obviously desirable that the work shall be
co-ordinated and canalized into its proper
channels by some one person, whether a
Medical Superintendent, or as I should prefer it,
Clinical Director.
Relationship of P.S.W. and Medical Officer
In the relationship between Psychiatrist and
P.S.W. I think it is important that each should
try continually to keep in mind the differences
between their respective trainings and back-
ground, for by so doing they are more likely
to be able to co-operate with mutual sympathy
and understanding for the benefit of the patient.
We should all try to be aware of our own short-
comings, whether arising from our training
or our temperamental defects, for then we shall
be more willing to take advantage of what
our partners in the work can offer us. And
perhaps most important of all we should bear
in mind the differing angles from which we view
what is, or should be, our mutual interest,
the patient. It is, I think, true, though no
doubt regrettable, that there is still a proportion
of Mental Hospital Psychiatrists who have
undergone no personal analysis and who have
but a superficial and theoretical knowledge of
psychotherapy or even the dynamic approach,
and many also who have little knowledge of
social science or social conditions.
Too few of us have entered or are entering
psychiatry after a period of probation in general
practice. It is moreover true that many of us
tend to remain for too long limited in our
view of the patient. We are too easily en-
couraged or discouraged as to his future by
the outcome of the clinical interview. We do
not always take the trouble to enquire into all
aspects of the case, nor try to assess the patient
as a whole?his attitude to his wife and family,
to his job, to his foreman, to those under him,
in his play, his attitude to religion, to politics,
to the dogs, the pub and the club. It is in
regard to these important, if seemingly trivial
things, that we can learn, if we will, a great
deal from other members of the staff, and
especially from the P.S.W.
Psychiatrists should remember, and I fear
that many of them forget, or perhaps do not
realize that a P.S.W. may get a better rapport
with the patient than a psychiatrist, especially
in paranoid cases, for in these the doctor tends
to be regarded with suspicion because of his
custodial function, whereas the P.S.W. is
more readily welcomed as a link with the
outside world. I fear that some doctors,
instead of realizing this fact and making use
of it to exploit the situation to the advantage
of the patient, resent the fact and so tend to
indulge in injudicious resentment.
The P.S.W., for her part, must likewise
remember that there are psychiatrists and
psychiatrists : that all of us are not psycho-
therapeutically minded, and that biochemists,
pathologists, physical therapists, enthusiasts
in group therapy, social clubs, psychodrama,
cultural activities, electro-encephalography or
what will you, all have their place in the scheme
of things, even if they may have their blind
spots in relation to the particular problems
of the patient which are absorbing most of her
activities.
It is for these and other more obvious
reasons?the doctor of a particular patient
may be young and relatively inexperienced
(and it is, alas, the young and relatively inexperi-
enced who so often know all the answers),
or the P.S.W. handling the case may be newly
fledged and floundering and lost, sometimes
almost submerged, in one of our too large
hospitals?it is for these reasons, I would stress
that the importance of direction of the social
40 MENTAL HEALTH
work of a hospital by one person cannot be
overestimated.
All psychiatric social workers would agree
that the work should be guided by a psychiatrist,
but in the type of organization that we have today
and are likely to have for some time to come,
it may well be that if there is a clash of opinion
between an experienced P.S.W. and a less ex-
perienced psychiatrist, the former may be more
in the right of it : or perhaps it would be more
diplomatic to suggest that the greater social
knowledge and more mature judgment on social
issues of the P.S.W. may offer a more fruitful
future to the patient than the less balanced view
of a junior psychiatrist. Psychiatrists should
remember, and I fear that too often some of
them forget, that their focus, by virtue of
their training and the rather narrow bounds
of their clinical room, is on the patient as a
person to be cured or alleviated of his symptoms,
whereas the P.S.W. has a different and perhaps
in a number of ways a better and a wider focus,
namely, on a social situation in which the patient
is only a unit, albeit in some ways from the
point of view of the hospital's service, the most
important unit.
The doctor has been trained, as I think,
rather lamentably (and I hope this will before
long be altered), to look upon his patient as
a case, and the P.S.W. has been trained more
wisely to look upon him as a member of the
community, whilst not losing sight of him as a
person in his own right.
It is for these reasons, then, that I advocate
as strongly as I can that one senior psychiatrist?
whether he be the Medical Superintendent
or a Clinical Director?should be responsible
for the direction of the social services of the
hospital. He (or she) should know the patients,
the doctors, the P.S.W.s. He should allot
the work to psychiatric social workers on the
basis of the patient's needs?rather than on
grounds of seniority, sex, administrative or
geographical convenience (though all these may
have to be taken into consideration)?and he
should be available for consultation and
guidance and maybe for explicit directions if
that direful need should arise.
If it should be said that an Admirable
Crichton, a person with exceptional qualities,
is required, I agree, but then in my view,
psychiatry, if it is to be well done, is a branch of
medicine which calls for practitioners possessing
exceptional qualities.
I can now only refer very briefly to a number
of other aspects.
In an active hospital there is almost always
more work to be done than can physically
be achieved, and it is only after proper exposi-
tion and discussion that a decision can be made
on the priorities, and as to which aspect of a
case, or which case altogether, should be dropped
when all the work on hand cannot be given
full attention.
The management at home of acute and chronic
cases on trial, discharged, or departed, is always
a ticklish job, and often calls for snap decisions.
One has to consider the family as well as the
patient, and in our experience at St. Bernard's
a temporary return of the patient to the hospital,
even though he may not technically have
relapsed to any real extent, has often eased the
situation considerably, and also, in my judg-
ment, though this can only be conjecture,
prevented a severe relapse in a patient or a
breakdown in a relative.
Another problem that one often meets,
when patients are on trial while still showing
residual symptoms, (and this applies especially
to paranoid cases), is as to the right moment to
break the link with the hospital by recommend-
ing the patient's discharge. We have found,
by experience, that it is often better to cut one's
losses by agreeing to this and to give the patient
his chance to sink or swim on his own, rather
than to insist on too high a standard of clinical
recovery, when the patient is straining at the
leash. In quite an appreciable number of
cases we have noted a subsequent improve-
ment, due doubtless to the patient's relief at
the removal of certification. Conversely, with
depressives and with patients lacking self
confidence, and perhaps especially with certain
epileptics, I feel very strongly that the link with
the hospital should be maintained, sometimes
perhaps even in the face of pressure from
official bodies.
It is with regard to such problems as these?
where the P.S.W. under psychiatric guidance,
does the spade work?that I think it so necessary
to have a senior clinician of the right quality
in charge of the department, to direct, advise
and to make the final decision when the need
arises.
So far as the relationship of P.S.W.s. to modern
trends is concerned, especially group therapy,
social therapy and cultural activities, these
offer a field for discussion, but I can do no
more than refer to recent advertisements of
posts in which it has been suggested that a
P.S.W., as such, should be responsible for the
organization of the social activities of the
MENTAL HEALTH 41
hospital. I would enter a protest against this
attitude. It may be that a P.S.W. with the right
personality is exactly the right person for this
type of work, but there are others who are not
so suited, and quite definitely I would not
regard it as a proper function in relation to
the actual job of the P.S.W.
As far as training is concerned, is it long
enough ? Is it comprehensive enough ? There
are a variety of views. All I can say at
present is that the time for learning, as with
doctors so with psychiatric social workers, is
really after graduation.
As regards mental health students in mental
hospitals: our experience at St. Bernard's over
a period of, I think, some two years, has been
entirely satisfactory. We have found them
stimulating, and helpful, and on enquiries from
various grades of staff I have had no adverse
comments whatever. They have been welcomed
and useful.
Finally, I would make a strong recommenda-
tion that in a large mental hospital it is essential
to have an experienced P.S.W., and that
certainly no newly-qualified student should
be pitchforked into a mental hospital for her
first job unless there is already another experi-
enced worker there to advise and guide her.
I would like to end by re-affirming my
conviction that the best service will be rendered
to the patients only by those hospitals, whose
psychiatrists and P.S.W.s alike, realize to the
full that each of them has an individual con-
tribution to make. I think, too, that fuller
understanding of their own individual psycho-
logies by all members of the staff will engender
a proper spirit of give and take. When that
happy day arrives they will be truly fortified
and able to work together in real co-operation,
not only for the benefit of the patients whom
they serve, but to their own fullest satisfac-
tion.
/
