Group Psycho-Therapy and the Psychiatric Social Worker
======================================================

:Author: Erika ChanceH, B.A.

Psychiatric Social Worker, Warlingham Park Hospital
Although group treatment as a means of resolving
personal difficulties has been practised for some
time, it has but recently received recognition in
the psychiatric field. Since Pratt treated T.B.
patients by these means in 1905, the advent of the
shock therapies and the pressures of the late war
have done much to focus attention on a technique
of psychotherapy which, it was hoped, would be
time saving.

Psychiatry has for some years taken a wider view
of its function in relation to the community than
that which would restrict it to the treatment of the
mentally sick. Research into methods of group
therapy and sociometrics shows that the Mental
Health Service has a vital contribution to make in
terms of guiding interpersonal relationships. Indeed,
it can have no less a goal than that of the Inter-
national Congress for Mental Health: " The task
of preparing the way for individuals to become
citizens of the world.'' The formation of the groups
described here and the specific way in which they
are linked are the product of a Mental Health
Service which sets itself this goal.

Group therapy may be defined as the re-orienta-
tion of the patient by means of specific relationships
between the individual and the group leader, the
individual and the group, and between individuals
in the group. Two main divisions in group
treatment techniques may be distinguished; dis-
cussion therapy and activity therapy. In this
article, the writer will describe her experiences
in the past year in conducting group therapy
jointly with a psychiatrist for the following groups;
(1) a discussion group for In-Patients, (2) a dis-
cussion group for Out-Patients and (3) a Social
Therapy Club for Out-Patients. The psychiatric
social workers function in these groups will be
described and the writer will endeavour to assess
the contribution she can make by participating
in treatment groups, both to group therapy and to
psychiatric social work.

THE FIELD

(1) The In-Patient Group
This group has met once a week since November,
1946 for an hour's discussion of psychiatric pro-
blems. A wide variety of techniques have been
used, ranging from free discussion of problems
raised by patients, to discussion illustrated by drama-
tic acting out of situations, to the didactic lecture
discussion method.

Of the three groups to be described, recruitment
for this unit is least selective. Most patients attend
on the invitation of their doctor, but some are
brought by friends.

The membership of the group is subject to constant
change as patients attending are mostly on the
road to recovery. There have, therefore, been large
variations in attendance, ranging from 7 to 16.
Male patients tend to be in the majority. The
place of this group is ancillary to the general treat-
ment plan. Patients are also, as a rule, under
Insulin, E.C.T. or analytic treatment.

This group has failed to develop any social
structure although there are a number of practical
tasks for which patients could usefully take responsi-
bility, such as preparation of the meeting room,
acting as secretary, etc. It differs in this respect
strikingly from the Social Therapy Club. It is
the only one of the groups described in which
movement is almost entirely absent and in which
certain stereotyped features have developed. Men
and women tend to sit at opposite sides of the
room and, irrespective of the technique used,
the members contributions are nearly always
directed to the leaders. Attendance is entirely
voluntary and, by the very nature of the group,
patients come to it largely because they hope to
derive from their attendance some information
which will enable them to leave the group
permanently.

(2) The Social Therapy Club for Out-Patients
This club was opened in January, 1947, under
the leadership of the writer and of the psychiatrist
in charge of the In-Patient group. Meetings are
held once a week and a committee of members
decide questions of programme and club manage-
ment.

The programme includes discussions on questions
of general interest as well as on psychiatric problems,
dramatic and musical evenings, dancing, games,
outings, etc. A social is held every six weeks to
which members invite friends and relatives. An
invitation to the In-Patient group has become one
of the traditional features of these social evenings.
A quarterly magazine, largely concerned with
articles on mental health is produced by the patients.
Members take it in turn to bake for the canteen.
Recruitment is selective. Patients attending for
out-patient treatment and some of those discharged
from the Mental Hospital are invited to join by
the leaders. Information about each member
prior to enrolment is obtained from a psychiatric
interview and a social and psychiatric history. In
the course of his attendance the patient's social
problems are noted. Intelligence is tested. The
number of active members has remained at about
30 throughout the year and the bulk of the
membership has remained constant. The average
attendance is 19. Men and women attend in
approximately equal numbers. About 40 per
cent, of the members are former in-patients.
It is the aim of this group to provide patients
with all the facilities which a good club may offer,
including an ever-increasing scope for self govern-
ment and responsibility. The treatment aim of
the club is openly accepted by each patient in
relation to the staff. Repeated sociometric tests
show that although patients do in fact carry full
responsibility for all the mechanics of group
management their personal dependence is centered
upon the leaders. It is felt that both these factors,
the self governing, highly structured aspect of the
club, and the extreme personal dependence on the
leaders combine to give this group the family
atmosphere of a living community; structured
enough to provide a realistic social background,
and yet sufficiently flexible to allow therapeutic
situations to arise naturally and to be easily con-
trolled and guided.

(3) The Out-Patient Discussion Group
This group has met once a week since January,
1947 at the Social Workers' Office. Prior to the
discussion, tea is available in informal surroundings
for patients coming from work. While meals are
in progress the psychiatrist and the writer interview
individual patients who have specific problems.
At intervals they return to the tea room and join
in the conversation around the table. At the end
of the meal patients assemble for the treatment
group.

Of the three groups described, recruitment here is
most selective. Only patients with average or good
intelligence and with a real need for verbalizing
their problems are asked to attend. Attendance
ranges from 7 to 10 patients and at times patients
are asked to bring their husbands, wives, or other
relatives to the group when it is felt that they might
usefully take part in the discussion.

With the exception of one case all patients
attending this group also attend the club. They
look upon the club as a field in which to practice
insight and understanding gained in the discussion.
About half of these patients are former members
of the discussion group for in-patients.
The techniques used in this group are similar
to the methods used in the In-Patient group, but
the members' contributions tend to be more group
centered. Patients state their personal problems
spontaneously and, because they participate more
actively, it is possible to bring into the group
discussion material which would be too disturbing
in the setting of the In-Patient group.

This group shows no specific social structure,
but members demonstrate their individual feeling
for the group by assisting in the preparation of
meals and of the meeting room and in helping to
tidy up after meetings. After an hour's discussion
patients walk over to the club in groups of twos
and threes, often continuing the discussion on the
way.

In concluding this description of the field, the
degree of interaction between the three therapeutic
groups should be stressed as an important factor
in treatment. To the in-patient who visits the Club
on a social evening it is an encouraging experience
to meet former in-patients who look well and happy.
Members of the Out-Patient discussion group are
more conscious of the treatment purpose of the
club and help to keep club aims in the minds
of other members. The three groups represent
stages of mental health and social adjustment.

THE PSYCHIATRIC SOCIAL WORKER'S
FUNCTION

The joint leadership of any group presents a
problem in that it taxes the leaders' capacity for
co-operation and team work. The psychiatric
social worker and the psychiatrist have comple-
mentary functions in the normal working of a
Mental Health Service. These are usually per-
formed separately in time and place. Joint work
in group therapy requires detailed preparation
of a treatment plan for each session and discussion
which clarifies the role of each worker in the treat-
ment plan as a whole. It requires careful assess-
ment of each patient's problem, of his relationship
to other members, and to the leaders, so that the
optimum use can be made of all therapeutic
resources. From the foregoing it will be seen
that it is doubtful whether the advantages of group
therapy lie in an economy of time.

(1) The Psychiatric Social Worker's Contribution
to Group Therapy

All psychotherapy aims at the individual and it
has been our experience in preparatory discussions
and in the assessment of treatment that the psychia-
trist tends to concentrate on the treatment of the
individual in the group. The social worker tends
to focus her attention on treatment through the
group and on inter-personal relationships. She is,
therefore, much concerned with group cohesion
and group structure. If she has previous experi-
ence in work with groups this is of assistance. Her
contribution in this sphere consists largely in the
creation of opportunities for the group's growth
in the desired direction.

For instance, it was noted that the In-Patient
group showed considerable resistance at the
beginning of each session and the results of a
sociometric test showed a marked absence of
inter-personal relationships. As a result of these
observations it was decided that each meeting of
this group should be preceded by a symbolic
communal meal ", a cup of tea and a bun, shared
by all participants. This feature was found to
shorten the warming up process.

In activity therapy as practised in the Out-
patient Club the creation of suitable roles for the
patient is important. These must be within the
capacity of the patient and they should enrich
the social structure of the group. Their fulfillment
should give the patient release, satisfaction and a
feeling of achievement. Yet any steps taken by the
leaders should leave the patient with the feeling
that it is he who has taken the initiative.
The case of patient F.l illustrates this point.
She is a psychoneurotic woman, aged 31, whose
conversion symptoms are due to intense conflict
between a desire to be accepted as a model mother
and complete rejection of her three children,
between a wish to dominate (as expressed in her
unhappy marriage to a man six years her junior)
and a need for dependence. The Club Com-
mittee asked this patient to undertake the manage-
ment of the canteen. This work gives her ample
opportunity for organizing others for baking,
serving, and washing up. She looks upon the
provision of food as a maternal role and this
aspect of her treatment has been re-inforced since
she has begun to escort patients from the club,
who were unable to travel alone. She has met
her need for dependence by forming an attachment
for the writer. In the three months of her atten-
dance she has progressed sufficiently to formulate
her conflict concerning her sexual relationships
and her children. She accepts her symptoms now
as a passing expression of this conflict.

The psychiatric social worker as an auxiliary to
the psychiatrist can be of assistance in breaking
down resistance in discussion therapy. The social
worker's contribution as a lay member of the group
encourages patients to voice their ideas. In psycho-
drama and sociodrama her function as an auxiliary
ego has been fully described by J. L. Moreno.
The therapeutic possibilities inherent in the
double leadership of groups have not yet been fully
explored. Patients certainly look upon the leaders
as father- and mother-figures and usually develop
a stronger transference to one of these. In some
cases it has been possible to maintain group
membership while allowing a negative transference
to one therapist to develop.

Lastly all psychotherapy aims at the re-orienta-
tion of the patient so that he may be better able to
adjust to his environment and enjoy improved
relationships at home, at work and in his leisure
time. In-patients are much concerned with prob-
lems of social adjustment and they frequently
bring to the discussion group such questions as:
" Should I do full-time work immediately after
my discharge ? " " Should I tell my employer
about my breakdown ? " " Should I keep in touch
with the hospital or should I try to forget all about
my illness ? " Consideration of this type of dis-
cussion brings us to the second aspect of group
treatment to be considered here.

(2) Participation in Group Therapy as an Aid to
Psychiatric Social Work

On admission of a patient it is the social workers'
task to interpret the hospital to the patient's family,
to soothe the feelings of fear and guilt which arise
from the relatives' reaction to the patient's illness
and from the dread of " the asylum ", and to
obtain the active co-operation of the family in
treatment. In the past year, 14 members of the
Out-Patient Club have been admitted or re-admitted
to hospital. In each case the patient came into
hospital freely and without undue distress. Their
relatives, having established easy and informal
relationships with the staff and gained a better
understanding of the nature of mental illness in
the Out-Patient Club, gave active and intelligent
co-operation.

For example, on one occasion a manic depressive
was advised to apply for re-admission to hospital
because of an impending relapse. During his last
period of treatment as an in-patient his wife had
shown considerable hostility to the hospital and
had made every effort to persuade him to dis-
continue treatment. On this patient's second
admission, his wife suffering from a reactive depres-
sion due in part to a deterioration of marital
relationships, herself applied for admission to the
hospital on the same day. The couple, who are
devoted parents, asked the social worker to make
suitable arrangements for their three small children
while they obtained treatment in the Mental
Hospital.

In the mid-treatment stage the social worker's
presence in discussion groups helps her to under-
stand the patient's specific problems. The patient,
knowing that she has listened to his contributions
on such topics as work and leisure time problems
as described above, derives a feeling of security
from the fact that he, his illness and his rehabilita-
tion are treated as a whole. He tends to apply
insight gained in the discussion group more readily
to the solution of his practical difficulties.

M.2 for instance, a boy, aged 18, suffering from
petit mal and psychoneurosis, discussed the stigma
of mental illness in the group. He described his
tendency to escape from difficulties into day dreams,
explaining that an over-protective mother had
always allowed him to evade reality and had, on
occasions, prevented him from striking out on his
own. After the meeting he requested an interview
with the psychiatric social worker. He asked her
to find him a job on a farm. He said: " Since the
discussion I realize that you can't run away from
your illness . . . but I'd like to get another job.
This one is too easy. I have plenty of time to
dream over it. I'd like to get away from home,
too . . . ."

Members of the In-Patient group tend to request
on their own initiative an interview with the social
worker to discuss problems they may have to face
on discharge. The same occurs in the Out-Patient
groups concerning social problems of all kinds.
But for the In-Patient, the fact that he considers
the question of social adjustment long before his
discharge, helps to make him look upon his stay
in the hospital as a period in which he may gather
strength to face the outside world. This attitude
is of great assistance in after care.

Nearly all patients discharged from hospital after
a period of treatment exceeding four months, find
the transition from the sheltered routine of hospital
life to the noise and bustle of the outside world,
difficult. Social therapy clubs have been recognized
as a useful means of cushioning the shock of this
transition. Klapman describes the need of the
ex-hospital patient to establish a positive transfer-
ence to some one who has detailed knowledge of
his in-patient experience.

F.3, a girl, aged 21, who made a good recovery
from a schizophrenic illness formulates her attitude
as follows: " I have always been afraid of talking
about my illness, but since I joined the club, I don't
seem to mind telling perfect strangers." It is
suggested that the creation of a positive attitude
towards this patient's breakdown is the direct result
of membership of a community in which such an
experience is taken as a matter of course.
Patients in need of supervision after discharge
can be divided into those who are aware of their
need for help, and those who lack insight. The
first category presents little difficulty, as a rule,
in after care. But for those who lack insight,
provision of satisfying recreational activities and of
opportunities for unconscious learning through
social situations, have proved a surprisingly efficient
means of keeping contact. Some of these cases
have made exceedingly good progress through
social therapy.

F.4, a schizophrenic girl, aged 18, with an I.Q.
of 52 came to the club in January, 1947. She was
ill-dressed and appeared at the club with long
unkempt hair. She was at that time unemployed.
She was unable to respond to the members' attempts
to draw her into their activities and sat for most
of her first attendance, hiding her face beneath a
flow of hair. Work was found for her in a perfume
factory and she kept this job for 9 months. She
has attended every meeting of the club during the
past year with the exception of one (when she went
to a dance). She dresses well and has begun to make
use of cosmetics. She takes part in all games and
social activities without further encouragement
and she does her share in the canteen. She has
brought several friends to the club and our present
difficulty lies not so much in ensuring her participa-
tion in activities, but rather in damping her
enthusiasm for the other sex !

There will, of course, be always those cases to
whom club life and groups make no appeal. But
a progress analysis six months after the opening
of the Social Therapy Club showed that of 42
cases in which referral had been effective only
8 were lost because patients no longer wished to
attend.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
------------------------

(1) This study is a survey of one year's experience
of group therapy. The writer has endeavoured to
evaluate the contribution which the psychiatric social
worker can make by her participation, both to group
therapy and to psychiatric social work.

(2) Three groups have been described; a discussion
group for In-Patients, a discussion group for Out-
Patients and a Social Therapy Club.

(?) Recruitment for the In-Patients' discussion
group is least selective and there are great changes
in the membership and attendance. This group
has developed stereotype features. It lacks spontan-
eous movement, social structure and cohesion.
(?) Recruitment for the Out-Patients' discussion
group is most selective. Here too, there is little
social structure, but great spontaneity of movement.
There are no stereotype feature in this group.
(c) The Out-Patient club is sufficiently structured
to leave responsibility for all the mechanics of group
management to the patients. By virtue of their
personal dependence on the leaders the group
remains sufficiently flexible to allow therapeutics
situations to arise spontaneously and to be easily
controlled.

(d) The three groups are closely linked. Their
interaction is considered an important factor in
treatment.

(3) The Psychiatric Social Worker's contribution to
group therapy has been described:

(a) She is particularly concerned with structure
and cohesion of the group as a whole.

(b) She is responsible jointly with the psychiatrist
for the creation of social roles for the patient which
offer release, satisfaction, and a feeling of achieve-
ment.

(c) As an auxiliary to the psychiatrist her task
consists in breaking down resistance as another lay
member of the group in discussion, psychodrama
and sociodrama.

(<d) She presents the possibility of an alternative
transference. It was possible to maintain group
membership by these means while a negative
transference to one therapist developed.

(e) She assists in creating a permissive family
atmosphere, the background essential for thera-
peutic groups.

(/) In the guiding of discussions on social adjust-
ment her special knowledge is used.

(4) Participation in group therapy is of great assist-
ance in psychiatric social work :

{a) The social worker's participation in group
therapy facilitates interpretation of the hospital
and of the patient's illness to his family on
admission.

(b) It helps to enrol the active co-operation of the
family in the mid treatment stage.

(c) The patient tends to take the initiative in
discussion of rehabilitation problems. He applies
insight gained during treatment more readily to the
solution of his practical difficulties.

(e) On discharge the Social Therapy Club
counteracts the stigma of mental illness. Member-
ship of the club provides the necessary positive
transference which allows the patient to look upon
his illness as an integral part of his life experience.

(/) Patients lacking in insight who normally
present a problem in the provision of after care
were found to respond well to the facilities provided
by the Social Therapy Club.

(g) While it is too early to say for what propor-
tion of patients Social Therapy provides a satis-
factory means of after care, it was found that of
42 cases referred in the first 6 months of the establish-
ment of the Club only 8 failed to continue their
attendance because of personal difficulties of
adjustment.

In looking back over one year's experience of work
in these three groups the writer feels that her participa-
tion in group treatment has enriched her concept of
psychiatric social work, it has helped her to a better
understanding of patients and improved her relation-
ship with them in each case.

She is indebted for the opportunity to take part in
this work to Dr. T. P. Rees, Director of the Croydon
Mental Health Service, and to Dr. R. A. Sandison, the
psychiatrist in charge of the groups described.

Bibliography
--------------

Abrahams, J. " Group Therapy at an Army Rehabilita-
tion Centre." Diseases of the Nervous System,
February, 1947.
Bion, W. R. " Leaderless Group Project." Bulletin
of the Meninger Clinic, Vol. 10, No. 3, May, 1946.
Foulkes. " Principles and Practice of Group Therapy "
Bulletin of the Meninger Clinic, Vol. 10, No. 3,
May, 1946.
Frankel, E. " Social Relationships of Nursery School
Children." Sociometry, May-August, 1946.
Jennings, H. " A Graduate Seminar in Psychodrama."
Sociometry, May-August, 1946.
Jones, Maxwell. " Group treatment with particular
reference to Group Projection Methods." American
Journal of Psychiatry, 1944-5, Vol. 101, p. 292.
Moreno, J. L. Psychodrama, Vol. 1. Beacon House,
New York.
"Who Shall Survive?" New York, 1934.
Northway, M. " A Method of Depicting Social
Relationships." Sociometry, Vol. 3, 1940.
" Sociometry and some Challenging Problems
of Social Relationships." Sociometry, May-
August, 1946.
Sandison, R. A. and Chance, E. "The Study of a
Test to Aid the Measurement of the Interpersonal
and Group Relationships of Members of Thera-
peutic Groups, using a Youth Club for Comparison."
Journal of Mental Science, October, 1948.
Schwartz. " Evaluation of Group Therapy." Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 1944-5, p. 498.
Simon, Holzberg et al. " Group Therapy from the
patients' point of view." Journal of Nervous and
Mental Diseases, February, 1947.
Slavson, S. R. Group Therapy, New York, 1947.
Toeman, Z. "Clinical Psychodrama; Auxiliary Ego,
Double and Mirror Techniques." Sociometry,
May-August, 1946.
