Mongolism and Cretinism.
==========================

:Author: Clemens E. Benda.
Fp. 310, with 103 illustrations ana taoies.
Heinemann. London. 1947. 25s.

The purpose of this book is stated to be " to rid
mongolism of the mystery clouding its proper medical
recognition and to publish data which were collected
in the Wallace Research Laboratory during ten years of
continuous research". It is based upon a study of over
300 cases, which included repeated physical measurements, radiological, biochemical, psychological and
aetiological investigations, as well as the post-mortem
examination of fifty cases. The book also deals, by
way of contrast, with certain aspects of cretinism;
but mongolism is its chief concern.

After an account of history, frequency and terminology,
and a description of the physical and mental characteristics, the author passes to the results of his histological,
biochemical, pathological and endocrine findings. This
is the largest and most important part of the book.
It is based upon a very thorough and painstaking
investigation, particularly of the endocrine glands,
and as a result of this Dr. Benda comes to the conclusion that the condition known as mongolism is
undoubtedly due to congenital inadequacy of the
pituitary gland. He finds a deficiency of the secretion
of other endocrine glands; but these are activated by the
pituitary, and he considers that defect of this is the
essential basis. The mongol " is born with a pituitary
deficiency which he is never able to overcome ". In
addition, the author finds a number of other pathological changes in the brain and spinal cord, the chief
of which are areas of necrosis and demyelination and
disease of the nerve cells. These, as he states, are
similar to the changes produced by chronic deficiency
of oxygen or sugar metabolism, and he draws the
conclusion that the whole disturbance is due to some ill
health or abnormality of the mother. After giving
details of sixty-seven cases of women of various ages
who had given birth to mongol children, he states that
no one who glances through these can escape the conclusion that the cause of mongolism is to be found in
the condition of the mother at the beginning of pregnancy. The final chapters deal with certain precautionary
measures which might be taken by medical men in the
hope of preventing or diminishing the incidence of
mongolism, and with its treatment. If Dr. Benda's
views are correct, the obvious treatment is by administration of pituitary gland; but, as he says, an adequate
extract of this is not at present available. It may also
be doubted whether, if it were, it would have much
effect in remedying developmental changes which have
been present during some months of intra-uterine life.
The book is too medical and technical to allow of more
than a summary of the salient points in this place.
It may be said, however, that it is obviously based upon
a large number of very careful investigations of all
kinds, and that it constitutes, in the reviewer's opinion,
the most up-to-date and detailed account of mongolism
which at present exists. Dr. Benda's findings await confirmation; but he has certainly made out a prima facie
case for his views as to the pathological basis and
causation of this interesting and important condition.
There are obviously many details to be filled in, particularly with regard to the physical condition of the
* This review is reprinted by the courtesy of the Editor
of the " Eugenics Review

mother of a mongol child and other aetiological aspects;
but if his views prove to be correct, Dr. Benda will have
made a most valuable contribution towards the elucidation of a subject which has been a medical enigma for
many years. A.F.T.
