The Unsuccessful Reader
=======================

34 MENTAL HEALTH
By H. C. GUNZBURG, B.A., Ph.D.
Monyhull Hall, Birmingham
"... I was the worst reader in our class
at that time. I had a book called All about
the Circus and it was a baby's book. Well,
" I started to read it. It was no good and
it was about animals and a girl and a boy.
It was proper daft and I would not read it.
I felt like throwing it across the room.
I just sat down and looked at it. After
a few minutes our teacher came round and
said: ' Do you like the book ? ' Yes, I
said. I didn't half like it. I did not
bother reading books and now I regret
it and I am 15 now and I wish I was only
12 so I could go on again with my reading.
I have got only one year here. I have
heard many boys wish they were at school
again."
This extract from a short autobiographical
note by one of the boys in my class is typical
of the opinions of many unsuccessful readers
in later years. Not having learnt to read when
still comparatively young, they realize when
15 or 16, the importance of reading. However,
being forced to go through the initial stages
where scarcely any other reading matter is
available but that written for much younger
children, they detest reading though attracted
at the same time to a skill which seems so
necessary to all other people. This regret and
disappointment may assist considerably in
strengthening asocial tendencies, and many
research workers have pointed out the close
interrelationship between non-reading and
behaviour troubles.
The unsuccessful reader may be defined as a
reader whose technical ability to read, or whose
understanding for what he reads, does not
conform to his mental capacity. Even children
with subnormal intelligence ought in most
cases to be able to learn to read, though their
maximal achievements will of necessity be on a
lower level than those of their contemporaries
with normal intelligence. However, we find un-
successful readers at all intelligence levels,
though with a greater emphasis on the lower
sections.
The problem of the unsuccessful reader has
been approached from many different sides.
The physical bases have been investigated and
organic (congenital word blindness) or neuro-
logical weaknesses, defects of vision and of
audition, left ocular and manual dominance,
have been named as possible causative factors.
From the psychological angle, many investiga-
tors occupied themselves with research into
the nature of perception, of the mental functions,
of intelligence, of maturation, etc., and their
bearing on shortcomings in the acquisition
of reading techniques. The educationists
attempted to trace the cause of shortcomings
to inadequate techniques of teaching and to
disregard of individual differences. Compara-
tively new is research into the relationship
between a child's emotional and social adjust-
ment and his attitude to the reading situation.
The following article will attempt to point out
the theoretical assumptions, and some of the
practical experiences gained in approaching
the problem of reading disability from this
particular side.
To teach reading to senior boys of 14 to 16
is very often a roundabout process needing
much preliminary spadework before the initial
steps in the proper learning process can be
undertaken. Though most of the boys have
by that time realized the importance of reading,
there exists still in many cases a vast amount
of unconscious resistance. Many of them
cpme from slum homes, from broken-up
families, or are orphans or illegitimate. They
have been delinquents, truants, absconders, have
been in frequent trouble with the police,
have been beyond home control and are in
need of care and protection. Being pushed
about from pillar to post, from one institution
to another, they have developed feelings of
resentment and hostility against the society of
adults, to which they had been unable to adapt.
Intellectual subnormality is of little impor-
tance in this connection if demands are corres-
pondingly lowered. Far more important is
the subnormality in emotional and charactero-
logical respects, which is directly responsible
for these children's inability to adjust them-
selves to the requirements of society, among
them the task of reading. They become
neurotic and delinquent, and reading represents
MENTAL HEALTH 35
a prime target for their resentment because it
symbolizes society in its worst coercive features.
There exists an interesting study of American
retarded readers whose psychological make-up
has been investigated.(l) It arrived at the con-
clusion that retarded readers are emotionally
less well adjusted and less stable than normal
readers, that they are insecure and fearful
in relation to emotionally challenging situations,
and that they are socially less adaptable to the
group. How far the fact of non- or poor reading
is causative for such an attitude, or merely
strengthening an already inherent tempera-
mental pattern, cannot yet be decided. But
it may be surmised that here in the lacking
personal adjustment is to be found at least a
good deal of the contributory factors responsible
for many children's reading disability, which
is often merely traced to weak or inferior
organic tools and inefficient teaching techniques.
The effects of inferior organic endowment,
and inferior methods of teaching, can after all
be overcome and have been overcome as long
as there exists motive power and drive.
A great amount of work has been devoted
to the study of the import and significance of
particular reading disability features. Reversals,
addition and omission of sounds, substitutions,
repetitions, additions and omission of words,
have been named among others in the etiology of
reading disability. These, however, are reading
errors which are committed by every. child
learning to read. After an analysis of the
reading errors, the fact emerges that they, by
themselves, are by no means characteristic of
a particular reading disability, like certain symp-
toms are characteristic of particular diseases,
but are merely characteristic of a certain stage
in the process of learning to read through
which a normal child passes without much
difficulty, whilst the reading disability cases
remain for one or the other reason fixed at that
stage.
Despite the existence of some sensory or
psycho-physical handicap, this in itself does
not provide the explanation for a fixation on
such an unsatisfactory stage in a child's develop-
ment which is sure to be exposed to nagging,
threats and punishment by the family and near
environment. This unreasoning, chilling recep-
tion of the child's apparent inability to learn
to read, will contribute substantially to his
unwilling and resentful disinclination to over-
come his initial failure. The child is most
probably insecure and anxious, possessing a
weak and immature personality, lacking drive,
and everything combines to reinforce the
unsuccessful reader's negative attitude. The
child, having realized that the time has come
when he is expected to do his level best and to
conform to the standards and expectations
of the adult world, may, though consciously
trying his best, put up, unconsciously, a barrier
of resistance, thereby preventing that decisive
plunge into adult reality which he is too im-
mature yet to face and the first sight of which
has frightened him.(2) If, moreover, the child
happens to be subnormal in intelligence this
will most probably only have been detected
after repeated attempts at teaching have been
unsuccessful, which should not cause surprise
as it is just his lowered mental age which is
responsible for his unreadiness to benefit by
instruction at an early age. However, we can
be sure that the shock of being forced to do
something which the child was constitutionally
unable to perform, will have conditioned the
child to continue his negative attitude whenever
the question of reading crops up, even long
after his mental equipment is ready for use.
In both cases, in that of the child with normal
intelligence as well as in that of the sub-normal
child, reading and unpleasant adult world will
have become closely associated in the mind
of the unsuccessful reader and will have pro-
duced a kind of conditioned reflex leading to
continued non- or poor reading, though later on
the child may consciously be very willing and
eager to take up the difficult task of reading.
From all this, the problem of the unsuccessful
reader emerges as being the problem of the
maladjusted child. Reading disability in one
or the other form is very often merely an
expression of lack of adjustment to the reality
of society, if the intelligence is adequate to
master the complex processes of reading. The
mere presence of adequate intelligence, as
indicated by the results of intelligence tests,
cannot however guarantee success in over-
coming obstacles, as long as that intelligence
has not been made to participate in the task
and has not been integrated with the personality
as a whole.
Broadly speaking, the boys of my class are
badly adjusted to society. They are unstable,
immature, anxious, lack drive and ambition
and are weak. They are full of conflicts and
a lack of security. Their acts of truancy,
delinquency and absconding appear to be
mostly acts of despair: a breakdown of the
feeble self-control which has been weakened by
constant feelings of insecurity and inadequacy.
36 MENTAL HEALTH
There, then, a beginning has first of all to
be made in stabilizing the unstable, in adjusting
the unadjusted. As long as that negative
attitude persists and no emotional rapport
can be established, the non- or poor reader
will remain the unsuccessful reader he is,
because reading means to him the straight-
jacket of a society which he rejects and perhaps
attacks. Once, however, we are able to make
the unstable and the insecure realize that there
exists something like security and safety, that
we are able to offer him shelter for his emotional
distress, once we are able to let these emotion-
ally disturbed children find some ground under
their feet, we will have created the favourable
atmosphere for endeavouring to teach detestable
school subjects like reading.
The resentful, insecure, critical and timid
attitude of many of these boys interferes con-
siderably with the task of teaching to read, even
though psychotherapeutic treatment may succeed
to some extent in modifying the consequences
of temperamental obstacles. Reading itself
must become part of the psychotherapeutic
treatment by inducing feelings of security and
confidence in a task which can be mastered,
and which makes the children shed these feelings
of inadequacy which had led in the past to a
flat rejection of reading. The method and
approach must therefore be re-adapted to
the needs of senior boys who are often nearly
16 years of age and have many of the interests
of boys of that age, though only the technical
skill of boys of 7 or 8 years of age. The
material they work with, the books they are
given, must be easy and must induce confidence
but must at the same time not be " babyish "
or "daft", as reading material written for so
much younger children must inevitably appear
to older boys. The process of teaching to
read must appear " grown-up not compar-
able to the "baby-stuff" of the youngsters
which carries unpleasant associations with it.(3)
The process of improved reading must be
speeded up; dazzling figures of achievements
and improving reading skills act as a spur to
throw into the race all the little energy available.
Once some of the emotional obstacles have been
removed by establishing a feeling of security,
the undreamt of and intoxicating first success
in reading creates the feeling of self-confidence
which has been so deeply undermined in the past.
Teaching to read, that is to " bark at print "
as it has been put so pointedly, is, however,
not the final aim. Whilst it is perhaps com-
paratively easy to teach the skill of fluent
reading, because it is a mechanical skill which
is trainable once the necessary social and
emotional adjustments have been made, the
aim of reading is of course the understanding
of what is being read. This is not as obvious
as it may at first appear. Many readers of
sub-normal intelligence obtain, for example,
a skill of mechanical reading exceeding by far
their intellectual capacity to grasp what they
have read. We may disregard these cases as
long as their comprehension of reading matter
is level with their mental capacity. The real
problem cases are those whose comprehension
of reading matter is below their established
mental capacity, although these readers are
in the possession of an adequate technical
reading skill. These readers, too, though
fluent and efficient in their mechanical reading,
have to be regarded as unsuccessful readers.
Most available tests of comprehension of
reading are unsatisfactory when applied to
particular cases like the present. However,
their results, and the day to day observations
in the classroom, can soon substantiate suspic-
ions concerning the comprehension of those
otherwise efficient readers. There are various
factors which may be responsible for short-
comings and which may be listed as follows:
1. Lack of adequate experience.
2. Lack of adequate vocabulary.
3. Lack of emotional adaptability.
As far as the first two factors are concerned,
their influence on the misunderstanding of
reading matter is quite obvious. Particularly
children growing up within the four walls of
an institution, a residential special school,
or an orphanage, etc., show quite a considerable
lack of adequate experience which makes them
unable to draw from a personal reservoir of
experiences and associations to make their read-
ing meaningful to them. The exceedingly
small vocabulary resulting from the limited
contact with the environment, leads of course
to an inability to understand anything written
in a slightly more mature language than the
first primaries.
But I should regard of even greater impor-
tance the third factor, because here again can
be found the roots of a deeply founded in-
ability and unwillingness to overcome these
obstacles. Here in the unsuccessful reader's
personality we shall find a store of resentment,
hostility and immature critical opposition,
which are responsible for a pronounced tendency
on the part of the reader to misconstrue the
meaning of sentences, to overlook relevant
MENTAL HEALTH 37
particulars, to read his own story into the story
actually read, in short to go his own way in
reading instead of following the author.
It is fairly easy to imagine how the under-
standing of reading matter can be seriously
hampered by the interference of unsolved
emotional problems. Understanding of reading
matter is, after all, as Cyril Burt has pointed
out, not merely an intellectual process as gener-
ally assumed. The printed symbols are meant
to evoke certain mental pictures, to associate
with certain experiences to be visualized and
imagined. If it happens that reading evokes a
different set of mental pictures than has been
intended by the author, a private set so to speak,
and that other associations than those generally
accepted are the result, then we must assume
that the final outcome will be a rendering of the
story not as the writer has put it down, but
as the reader has shaped it according to his own
needs and wishes. In certain psychological
procedures, such as the word association experi-
ments, the same idea is utilized for uncovering
the unconscious life of patients. We can well
imagine that neurotic and anxious readers
will often substitute their own thoughts for the
author's thoughts, put words of their own
invention in place of the actual printed words,
mutilate and alter, a process which in fact is
parallel to those lapses of speech and memory,
the slips of the pen, and the trippings of the
tongue, which in adults have been shown by
psychoanalysis to be so richly symptomatic
of the profounder secrets of the individual's
mental attitude. "(4)
These children, so constantly struggling with
their rebellious inner forces and devoting nearly
all the little energy of which they are capable
to the control of their mutinous inner life, are
specially subject to an unconscious misrepre-
sentation of their reading matter. Again and
again their beloved ego, which they are carefully
shielding, pushes into the foreground and takes
the limelight, making them frequently unable
to see someone else's point of view or even to
pay sufficient attention to any other person to
enable them to follow his words. In the
class-room this can be clearly seen in the constant
usage of the excuse : " I thought you said ..."
when it is pointed out to the child that he did
not even trouble to take in the wording of a
question. It can also be seen in composition
and story telling where it is exceptional if a
child is able to employ throughout his narrative
the third person without changing over into
the first person.
This dominance of the ego, so conspicuous
in its personal life, must show itself in the
way such a child absorbs his reading matter.
The lack of emotional adaptability with its
over emphasis of the ego, must thus contribute
towards an increased misrendering of reading
matter. The shaping and bending of reading
matter according to the reader's own emotional
life is greatly assisted by the inaccuracy of word
pronunciation, by the small vocabulary which
enforces more or less skilfull guessing, and by
the narrow sphere of experience which has to be
supplemented by the reader's own, and not
always very healthy, phantasy. ,
The conclusion from the above is, that many
of the difficulties of the unsuccessful reader must
be sought in his own unsatisfactory personal
make-up. Emotional maladjustment will in
many cases express itself in poor academic
progress, making use of existing weaknesses
in the sensory apparatus. Special coaching
and new teaching methods may not be successful
as they do not treat primarily the root of the
disability, but merely the symptoms. However,
change in methods or special coaching are often
due to and coincide with new teachers, new
environment and a new encouraging approach
ensuing in a perceptible change of the emotional
atmosphere round the child. He may gain
new hope and confidence in his own abilities,
may feel more secure and thus the establish-
ment of emotional rapport is facilitated.
Co-operation and drive may not be long in
forthcoming, and remedial work in reading
will find little difficulty in eliminating the faulty
reading habits which are now of a merely
technical and habitual nature, deprived of their
previous emotional roots.
references
(1) Gann, Edith. Reading Difficulty and Personality
Organization. New York. 1945.
(2) Vorhaus, Pauline G. " Non-Reading as an Expres-
sion of Resistance." Rorschach Research Exchange
Vol. X, No. 2. June, 1946.
(3) Gunzburg, H. C. "Experiments in the Methodology
of Improving Reading in a Group of Educationally
Subnormal Boys." Journal of Mental Science.
October, 1948.
Gunzburg, H. C. " The Private Silent Reading
of Educationally Subnormal Boys." New Era.
February, 1948.
(4) Burt, Cyril. Mental and Scholastic Tests, p. 278.
Staples Press. 1927.
