Mine own Executioner
======================

 (Featuring Burgess Meredith,
Dulcie Gray and Kieron Moore.)

I have little to say on the adaptation of this novel.
What interested me more were the comments of the
audience in my immediate vicinity, because these seemed
to suggest certain technical difficulties in the presentation
of psychiatry.

Firstly, the use of drugs. This was considered " the
way they do it", and viewed with pleasurable
apprehension.

Secondly, theroleof the unconscious. It will be remem-
bered that after the session in which the patient confessed,
he tried to terminate the treatment. The analyst
explained that inside him there was " something " that
felt uncomfortable because it was being uncovered,
and for that reason " it" was trying to terminate
treatment. This was considered mysterious: there
was doubt as to whether the " doctor " had not made
him worse.

Thirdly, arising from the action described above,
confusion about schizophrenia. This raises the crucial
question about the presentation of mental illness to a
lay audience. In this film it is done so sketchily as to
be fairly misleading. We get a glimpse of the first
page of the case book, with the general diagnosis
" schizophrenia ", then two sub-headings: (a) split
mind; (b) deep conflicts in early childhood. Not
much enlightenment here?but could it have been done
better ?

Fourthly, there seemed to be great difficulties in
separating the personality, behaviour and philosophy
of Mr. Milne from the theory and practice of psycho-
analysis. He touches nearly all his patients in a
half-caressing manner; his intentions towards Barbara
are no better than they ought to be; he is unhappy;
so is his wife; he is a stumbling block in some obscure
way at the Institute, etc., etc.

Lastly, there is a lot of talk about the analyst not being
medically qualified, but never a word about his real
qualifications, except his own remark that he has a
certain flair for his work.

But a good time was had by all.
N.G.
The October Man. (Featuring John Mills and Joan
Greenwood.)

This is not a film about psychiatry, but the hero is a
man who has been discharged from a mental hospital,
and the attitude of a film (with its huge audiences)
towards such illnesses must be important to those who
would have the public look with hope rather than fear
towards their treatment.

The chief point that dominates the film is that a return
to the hospital is to the man defeat, and he is shown
struggling with great courage and helped by the love of a
girl, who is equally determined to save him from that
dreadful failure?further medical advice and care.
The implication that recovery depends on the man's
will alone is, at its best, out of date and, at the worst,
dangerous.

There is, however, nothing alarming about the actual
short scene in the hospital where the doctor is saying
good-bye to his patient. But though he tells the man
that much depends on his keeping calm and living a
quiet life during the next few months, the doctor never
suggests that he should keep in touch with medical
help.
h
Film Reviews
Apart from this mistaken attitude which is implicit
in the film, the story is a good one and the scenes in
the second-rate boarding house are a delight.
P.W.
The Upturned Glass. (Featuring James Mason and
Rosamund John)
In this film once again psychology only appears in
conjunction with the abnormal and criminal. It is an
exciting film and much of the photography is exceed-
ingly clever, but it would be difficult to leave the cinema
without the feeling, conscious or not, that an under-
standing of man's mental processes is akin to the
knowledge of the occult and brings in its sinister train
wickedness, violence and murder.
A brain surgeon plots deliberately and brutally to
kill a woman in a horrible situation; this same man,
who is also a lecturer in criminal psychology, deludes
himself into believing that he is a dispenser of justice
on a divine scale; and the casting of James Mason as
the criminologist ensures that this character shall be
subtly played in all its unpleasantness.
Psychological vocabulary is used throughout the film
and much is made of the technical term " paranoid ".
The surgeon is called " paranoid " frequently, appar-
ently because of his conviction that he is called on to
dispense justice, and it is stated as a psychological fact
that a paranoid always feels compelled to tell someone
of his crime. " Obsessional " too is another favourite
term in the film, used more or less as a synonym of
" paranoid ".
Dilys Powell in The Sunday Times has called The
Upturned Glass "a neat, empty story of murder with
the modish psychological trimmings but they are very
large trimmings indeed and, for the most part, false and
frightening. P.W.
Possessed. (Featuring Joan Crawford, Van Heften and
Raymond Massey.)
This is an unpleasant story of that fashionable com-
plaint, Schizophrenia. It seems to be a story told for
the sake of the complaint, as if one made a film about
a man with a serious physical illness for the sole purpose
of showing horrific symptoms and excruciating pain.
Is it not time that the cinema had a rest from schizo-
phrenia ? One may indeed hope that its day will pass,
like that of the inferiority complex. Meantime, from
such a film as this, an audience must obtain an inadequate,
if not completely false, view of this illness. The psycho-
logical vocabulary could hardly be better known?but
whether such an illness can ever be shown on the screen
in such a way as to be better understood is open to doubt.
In Possessed the first symptoms are described in an
interview with the doctor, after the woman has spent a
night tormented by a mind that conjures up imaginary
sights and sounds (with the wind howling and the rain
beating against the window-pane outside, to heighten
an effect that needed no heightening). The doctor tells
her that she is highly suggestible, that the sounds she
hears are her own heart beats and that she is finding
difficulty in distinguishing reality and unreality.
"Doctor," she says, "you mean I am suffering from
schizophrenia ?" The doctor is amazed and says,
" If I had thought that you knew anything about these
psychological illnesses, I should not have spoken so
freely " Really, doctor ! Do you never go to the
cinema ? "
84 MENTAL HEALTH
Then comes the end. Having killed her lover, she
rushes around, her face becoming more and more
distraught, the tension growing, until with a final crash
she falls into a coma and is taken to hospital. There
follows the treatment which The Seventh Veil popularized,
the injection and recital of her past life, or rather the
part of it in which she endlessly and passionately pur-
sued a man who did not want her. The doctor asserts
that the seeds of this collapse were there before she
became " possessed ", but this is a random remark
that the picture does not bear out.
On the credit side of this discreditable film may be
entered a humane attitude to mental illnesses, the
assertion of a hope of recovery (though the end of the
film leaves this in considerable doubt) and the implica-
tion that in America, at any rate, psychological treat-
ment is normal in every hospital and accepted by every
doctor. There was also a hint of that great problem
of responsibility which juries have to face. "I do
assure you," says the doctor, " that in killing her
lover she was no more responsible for that, than for any
of her other actions, but whether a jury will accept that,
I do not know." But this makes the credit side seem
larger than it actually is. The whole film is a portrayal of
the pathological for its own sake and it is difficult to
believe that the effect it is having on the full cinemas
to which it plays is a good one.
" I went to see While I Live I heard a 17-year-old
girl saying. " I thought it was good. And I went to
Possessed. When Joan Crawford had the apoplectic fit
(sic) a child screamed and had to be carried out by its
mother. I thought Possessed was good." I expect she
thought Spellbound, Dishonoured Lady, The Upturned
Glass, etc., good too?or even very good. P.W.
