Libraries in Mental Hospitals
===============================

:Author: Marjorie E. Roberts M.B.E. */

Member, Guild of Hospital Librarians
Libraries in hospitals are now an accepted
principle in this country and some others, but
before they can reach perfection their establishment in mental hospitals calls for more study, for
very ready co-operation by all concerned, and also
for much imagination and sympathy.

One day when going into a ward of particularly
distressed and depressed women, I felt compelled
to speak to one who looked unbearably unhappy.
I merely asked her if she liked reading. Seldom
have I seen an adult's face light up as can a child's,
when she replied, " Oh, if you could only get me
some Balzac ". Her wish was passed on to the
right authority at that time. But there should not
be any need to pass on such requests if libraries
for mental hospitals could be adequately staffed?
as they doubtless will be in due course.

The Librarian
-------------
Strange though it may seem, the right head
librarian is of prior importance in these hospitals
to the large number of books that have sometimes
been found in them. Numbers of books count
for very little; nor does the regular changing of
books from the central library to the ward shelves
imply a successful library organization, unless the
librarian is a whole-time member of the staff,
working in with his or her medical and nursing
colleagues, and above all having ability to fit each
book to , the patient who wants it, and, as far as
possible, to obtain special requests, as well as to
ensure a big enough library to suit all general
tastes. Here, indeed, should be bibliotherapy
worthy of the name. It is not easy to achieve,
partly because its success is not dependent as much
as is sometimes thought on technical training in
librarianship, or great psychological experience.
The slogan that " hospital librarians are born and
not made " is intrinsically true in relation to librarianship in mental hospitals. There, the chief
essential qualities are deep sympathy and understanding, linked with a wide knowledge of books
of all kinds, including certain types of technical
books. Given those qualities, and the co-operation
of medical and nursing staffs, the library will go
forward?even if books cannot be as numerous as
formerly. Moreover, the true librarian will often
be able to help non-readers to learn, or return to,
the joys of books by patient selection, or even
reading aloud; and not only that, but it will be
found that the oft quoted destruction of books is
not a serious trouble when the patients get the books
that truly interest them.

Opinion tends to be divided regarding the strict
control of types of books to be read by various
kinds of patients, and the close watch on the
patients' reactions to certain of these. The line of
common-sense and sympathy would seem to be to
avoid creating any feeling of restriction in freedom
of choice of reading by patients, and any impression
that their reactions are being watched. The advice
given by certain authorities that libraries in mental
hospitals could include any books that their owner
would not be ashamed to put in his own library,
still appears sound?subject always to medical
approval.

The structure and appearance of the central library
The central library in a mental hospital?as
distinct from the open book cases in the wards?
have never been seen by the writer to better effect
than in Denmark, where the one in question might
well serve as a pattern for many others. The room
is large, airy and bright; the woodwork and paint
are light in colour, and cheerful; and the shelving
round the walls is low, so that would-be readers
can browse amongst the books in comfort. At
one end of the library, the librarian has designed
for his use a platform, complete with desk and card
indexes. Here he can sit and work, and also
quietly watch patients in search of books without
disturbing them. At the same time he is easy of
approach for those who may want advice. There
was an atmosphere of peace and good cheer in
this library?well stocked as it- was with books,
papers and journals.

The library as a "cultural" or " rehabilitation"
centre
As a counsel of perfection, there should, as soon
as possible, radiate from the library administration,
books, pictures for the wards (changed, and talked
about at intervals), and music for, wards and
hospital concerts. When this ideal is reached it
will be desirable to follow one of two courses?
either to appoint a librarian prepared to bear the
responsibility of organizing such a cultural centre
and finding the right helpers, or to regard books,
pictures and music as entirely separate entities*
under the control of three qualified persons each
making the library the respective headquarters
for co-operation and administration in cultural
activities. Such a vision may seem a long way off;
but surely it is worthy of thought if the comfort
and healing powers, and the happiness to be
derived from those forms of interest and beauty,
are to be attained in fuller measure. Such a centre
might also help to strengthen the growing belief
that literature and art generally should be a part
of the administration of every mental, as well as of
general, hospitals. It will mean a carefully chosen
staff, and perhaps more funds; but so long as there
is for a start, a full-time paid chief organizer of the
centre, suitable voluntary helpers with expenses
paid could, to some extent, be found.

The link with the outside world
Few people who have experience of mental
hospitals, and maybe not many without that
experience, can fail to realize the joy and relief
to the patients of a regular link with the outside
world; and as time goes on, the wish and pleasure
of those in the world outside would be to strengthen
the link. It is well known that there has at times
been fear and shrinking from such contact.
Journeying into, other lives, in fact or fancy, or
into technical or artistic interests through the right
books, opens up almost unlimited possibilities
and, at times, great results. More sympathetic
study of this matter is still needed?by medical,
nursing and librarian staffs. That being so, the
rather less developed study of colour and design,
rhythm and melody, whether in practice, or enjoyed
passively, holds much in store. Nevertheless, the
powers of music over some natures can be almost
too strong for well-being; and the making of
pictures, even more than looking at them, is full
of relief, but can also be a strain. Herein care and
understanding are needed by those in charge.
In conclusion, therefore, a plea is put forward
for a constant study and wise planning of this
cultural side of mental hospital life, and the vistas
for happiness and good inherent in it.
