World Federation for Mental Health
===================================

46 MENTAL HEALTH
News and Notes

A World Federation for Mental Health was
established in London last August during the
International Congress, in place of the International
Committee for Mental Hygiene (founded in Wash-
ington in 1930 and which lapsed during the war
years.) Dr. J. R. Rees, C.B.E., was elected President
for the year 1948-9, Dr. Andre Repond (Swiss
National Committee for Mental Hygiene), Vice-
President, Dr. Frank Fremont Smith (U.S.A.),
Hon. Treasurer, and Dr. Kenneth Soddy, Hon.
Secretary. A constitution was approved, and an
Executive Board, consisting of 12 delegates from
founder members national organizations, was
appointed with Dr. H. C. Riimke of Holland as
Chairman. Dr. Doris M. Odium was elected to
the Board as Representative of the United Kingdom.
The National Association for Mental Health is
a founder member of the Federation. The first
meeting of the Executive Board will take place in
Amsterdam, from January 5th-9th, 1949, and the
second Mental Health Assembly is being fixed for
the second-half of August, 1949, in Geneva.
The incorporation of the Federation as a company
without profit is now being completed in Switzer-
land, where it is hoped to set up a permanent
secretariat. In the meantime, the Federation has
a temporary office in London.
The chief objects of the Federation are to promote
among all peoples and nations the highest possible
level of mental health, and to assist in developing
an informed public opinion on matters relating to
mental health. Membership of the Federation
is open to any national or other organization whose
purpose in main or in part is the promotion of mental
health and human relations and/or the study of
problems in these fields, and whose membership
in the Federation shall have been approved by
the Mental Health Assembly in accordance with the
Articles. The minimum annual subscription .for
national organizations desiring to become members
of the Federation has been fixed at 400 Swiss francs.
The World Health Organization and unesco
have accepted the World Federation as a non-
governmental body with consultative status, which
means in general that the Federation will be kept
in touch with their activities and will be asked to
help in various ways.
Large funds will be required to enable the
Federation to do really effective work. All countries,
therefore, have been asked to assist in fund raising.
The Federation's work in promoting friendly inter-
national relations should commend itself to every-
one, especially at the present time, because of the
general state of anxiety and the very obvious need
for improved human relations and better mental
health. The Federation looks to this country for
substantial financial help, and it is clearly the duty
of the member organizations to raise large sums of
money, in addition to their subscriptions, if the
Federation is to become firmly established.
Mental Deficiency Group
There has recently been formed within the
National Association for Mental Health a Group
whose function it will be to consider problems
connected with mental deficiency administration,
particularly those arising out of recent legislation.
Mrs. Hester Adrian, J.P., a member of the East
Anglian Regional Hospital Board and President
of the Cambridgeshire Voluntary Association for
Mental Welfare, has consented to act as Chairman.
Other members of the Group include Medical
Superintendents of mental deficiency institutions,
Mental Health Officers of Local Health Authorities
and members of the National Association's Social
Services Committee who have a special interest
in mental deficiency, amongst whom should
especially be mentioned Dame Evelyn Fox.
The Group, which held its first meeting at the end
of October, is at present considering questions
concerning the provisions of the National Health
Service Act, the National Insurance Act and the
National Assistance Act in so far as they relate to
the welfare of defectives. Other matters will be
dealt with as and when the need arises.
Essay Competition for Mental Nurses
Arrangements are now in train for the 1948-9
Essay Competition for certificated mental nurses,
founded by the Society of the Crown of our Lord,
and administered by the National Association for
Mental Health. A Selection Committee has been
appointed to choose a subject and to- adjudicate
on the essays received. An announcement on the
terms of the Competition will shortly be available.
Social Workers in Mental Health
In view of the acute shortage of trained social
workers in the mental health field, and the increasing
demand for services of this kind which experience
and also recent legislation have served to enhance,
a special Committee has now been set up by the
Minister of Health to consider and make recom-
mendations on questions relating to the supply
and demand, training and qualifications of social
workers in the mental health service. An interim
report on psychiatric social workers is also to be
presented.
Professor J. M. Mackintosh, Dean of the London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London
University, is Chairman of the Committee which
includes among others Dr. J. B. S. Lewis, late
Medical Superintendent of St. Bernard's Mental
Hospital, Southall; Dr. R. M. Bates, Medical
Superintendent, Royal Eastern Counties Institution
MENTAL HEALTH 47
for Mental Defectives, Colchester; Dr. Kenneth
Soddy, late Medical Director of the National
Association for Mental Health; Miss S. Clement
Brown, member of the Association of Psychiatric
Social Workers, and Miss J. M. Mackenzie, Secre-
tary of the Training and Education Department
of the National Association for Mental Health.
The Association has been invited to give evidence
and has prepared a memorandum for submission
to the Committee.
Dr. Alfred Torrie
We have pleasure in announcing that Dr. Alfred
Torrie, formerly Director of Army Psychiatry, has
been appointed Medical Director of the National
Association for Mental Health in succession to Dr.
Kenneth Soddy, whose resignation was reported
in our last issue.
Dr. Torrie, who had a distinguished war record
and attained the Army rank of Brigadier, has been
closely associated with the Mental Health move-
ment for many years. For some time he was Hon.
Secretary of the Prevention and Early Treatment
Committee of the National Council for Mental
Hygiene. He is well known in the National
Association and has served on its Public Relations
Committee.
The W.H.O. and Mental Health
it is interesting to record that Dr. G. R.
Hargreaves, O.B.E., who was Chairman of the
Business Committee of the International Congress
on Mental Health, and is at present Principal
Medical Officer, Lever Brothers and Unilever, Ltd.
has been appointed Director of Mental Health to
the World Health Organization. He is expected
to take up his duties early in the New Year. It is
noteworthy that the Executive Secretary to the
World Health Organization, Dr. G. Brock Chisholm,
is also a psychiatrist.
New Publications
Agricultural Hostels.
The National Association for Mental Health has
issued an attractively illustrated leaflet describing
its work in setting up Agricultural Hostels for
mentally handicapped men, the majority of whom
are on licence from Institutions. The success of
this experiment, started during the war years, has
been remarkable, and efforts are being made to
establish similar hostels for other categories of
workers. Copies of the leaflet may be had on
application to the Association (2d. each).
Occupation Centres
Another new publication which has been urgently
needed for a long time is Occupation Centres for
Mentally Defective Children (price 9d., postage
extra). This is intended primarily for the use of
local authorities, but it should also be of general
interest to those who are concerned with the training
of defective children.
Hospital Administration
An interesting innovation is to be introduced
by the King Edward's Hospital Fund, who, it
was recently announced, has decided to establish
a division of hospital facilities which will comprise
an information bureau and advisory service, a
library of hospital books and other publications,
and an index to the hospital literature of this and
other countries.
The division, the Director of which will be Captain
J. E. Stone, is intended to assist hospital authorities
to obtain a comprehensive review of thought and
practice in hospital organization and management,
and should also be useful to holders of bursaries,
students of hospital administration, organizations
interested in hospital work and practice, hospital
committees and architects, and officials and other
visitors from overseas who desire knowledge of
hospital affairs in this country; in addition it should
be a valuable centre for administrative research.
This centralization of information should prove
not only of great value to all concerned, but also
time-saving. The King Edward's Hospital Fund
is to be congratulated on its enterprise in initiating
a service which should fulfil a most useful function
and promote a wide diffusion of ideas and
knowledge.
" The Needs that Remain "
The publication of Lord Beveridge's report on
"Voluntary Action" is an event of importance
for all concerned with voluntary organizations,
and we hope to publish a review worthy of it in
our next issue.
Meantime, we would invite attention to one point
of special interest to readers of this Journal?viz.,
the absence of any consideration (except a passing
reference to the certified mental defective) of the
needs of the mentally handicapped in the com-
munity. In the Preface it is stated that certain
forms of voluntary action have had to be omitted
from the Report, but even here this particular
example of omission is not cited.
This, we suggest, provides another indication
of the distance to be travelled before the community
as a whole becomes conscious of the significance
of mental health and the needs of those who suffer
from the lack of it. The field of mental health
education has, in fact, hardly begun to be tilled
and the task awaiting those workers who have
accepted responsibility for it, is almost unlimited
in scope.
International Conference on Speech Therapy
An International Conference on Speech Therapy
was held at the Royal Society of Medicine from
September 20th to 24th, and was attended by
delegates from 15 different countries, many of
whom presented papers. Although, for some,
this involved speaking a foreign language, those
present were impressed by the high level of
performance as well as by the universal appeal of
48 MENTAL HEALTH
the subjects selected for an audience composed
of specialists.
The close relationship between psychological
maladjustment and certain types of speech dis-
orders (e.g. stammering) has long been recognized,
but it is becoming increasingly realized that some
degree of nervous instability is bound up with
almost every defect of speech. This fact was demon-
strated by one speaker after another during the
course of the Conference?with the corollary that
the Speech Therapist cannot work successfully
in isolation but needs the closest possible contact
and co-operation with other specialists, among
whom must be included medical and educational
psychologists. The titles of the following papers
are of particular interest in this connection : " The
Emotional Background of Stammering"; "The
Treatment of Child Stammerers through the
Principles of Jungian Psychology " ; " The Role of
Emotional Problems in producing Disorders of
Speech " ; " The Psychological Approach to the
Pre-School Stutterer
These, however, were not the only instances in
which the psychological aspect of the problem
was stressed. Papers dealing with the effects of
head injuries upon speech drew attention to the
therapeutic value of early treatment as a means of
re-assuring the patient, and the constant endeavour
to provide encouragement and a sense of normality
in his relationships with other people. The
restoration of self-respect is held to be a most vital
link in the chain of complete rehabilitation in such
cases, and also where the faculty of speech has been
impaired through surgical operation (e.g. total
laryngectomy) or is imperfect through organic
malformation (e.g. cleft palate.)
It may be seen that the Speech Therapist realizes
how close is the relationship between mental
health and verbal expression, and how great is
the need to work with other specialists for the
rehabilitation of the patient. To attempt to treat
the speech difficulty as an isolated symptom is
an out-moded technique.
International Bodies
A sign of the times is the increasing number of
organizations which are establishing permanent
international connexions, this being especially
notable in the social, educational and medical
fields. This is a heartening recognition of the
fact that the field of human knowledge knows no
boundary, and that there is everything to be gained
by an interchange of ideas and experiences between
all peoples and nations.
In addition to the newly formed international
organizations referred to elsewhere in this issue,
mention should be made of the World Council for
Early Childhood Education established at the interna-
tional conference which took place in Prague last
August. According to the draft constitution, the
objects of this world council will be to promote
the education of young children of all countries,
especially nursery school education, as a contribu-
tion to happy childhood and home life and thus
promote peace among the nations. An interim
commission, of which Lady Allen of Hurtwood is
one of the Vice-Chairmen, has been appointed to
prepare for the first world assembly which it is
proposed to hold in Denmark.
Conference of Educational Associations
The 32nd Annual Conference of Educational
Associations will be held at King's College, Strand,
W.C.2, January 3rd to 9th, 1949. There will be a
number of open meetings for which various
organizations are providing speakers, and the
National Association for Mental Health has
arranged for Miss E. M. Bartlett, Ph.D., to speak
on " The Handicap of High Intelligence ". A
copy of the printed syllabus may be obtained on
application to the Secretary, Mrs. Vera Chedburn,
M.A., Conference Office, 169 Strand, W.C.2.
Obituary
Dr. Susan Isaacs. With the passing on October
11th, 1948, of Mrs. Susan Isaacs, C.B.E., M.A.,
D.Sc., this country has lost a distinguished pioneer
in the field of child psychology, and one whose
work in this connection was widely known in this
and other countries. All those engaged in the
field of mental health know what a great debt is
owed to her work and teaching, and how much she
did to promote a wider understanding of the subject
among all sections of the community. Her valuable
contribution to psychological literature will remain
as a lasting memorial to her life's work, and will
continue to inspire and help to guide students of
child psychology. Among her best known publica-
tions is The Nursery Years (1929).
Dr. Isaacs was a keen supporter of the nursery
school movement, for which she worked indefatig-
ably, and she also provided important evidence for
the Curtis Committee on the care of children.
She had been a member of the National Association
for Mental Health, and it shares with other bodies
with which she was associated a deep sense of loss.
The Bishop of Wakefield. The Right Rev. Henry
McGowan, D.D., whose death took place recently,
was a member for several years of the National
Association for Mental Health which has particular
cause to remember with gratitude his part in
launching the Birmingham and Midland Branch of
the Association of which he became the first
Chairman, when Archdeacon of Aston-. The
Bishop was well known for the keen interest he
showed in all aspects of community life, not least
of which was the subject of mental health, and
the encouragement which he gave to the Birmingham
Association undoubtedly helped to place it on a
firm foundation and influenced many supporters.
The Association has lost a valued friend, and deep
sympathy is extended to his widow and family in
their bereavement.
