Normal and Abnormal Psychology
===============================

:Author: J. Ernest
Nicole, O.B.E., D.P.M. George Allen &
Unwin, Ltd., London. 8s. 6d.

Although Dr Nicole, in his preface, makes it
clear that his book is intended largely for the use
of nurses and others who need to show some
knowledge of psychology in their work and training,
it is perhaps unfortunate that the title itself does
not indicate the very elementary nature of this
book. This very remarkable book endeavours
to cover, in 94 not very closely printed pages, the
whole of academic psychology, the views of the
principal schools of psychopathology, symptom
formation, psychosomatic medicine, the principles
of the central nervous system and applied psychology. Whilst the success with which this aim has
been achieved reflects great credit on the author,
it serves to emphasize that the book is meant only
for the very elementary student of the subject.

On the whole, the balance between what is put
in the book and what is left out is well maintained,
but the necessity for brevity and the nature of the
audience for whom the book is intended means
that certain statements must be closely scrutinized
if they are not to mislead. Although the more
advanced student reading this book would have no
difficulty in appreciating the author's meaning
and intention, there are passages which might
confuse the elementary student for whom they are
intended. In particular, the author's attempt to
give the view-points of so many different schools
without coming down very strongly in favour of
any one of them, must leave the elementary student
somewhat confused as to what line to follow.
This is more than ever noticeable since only the
most superficial comparison between the various
schools of thought is possible in such a brief book.
Some confusion, too, is likely to arise over the
frequent use of the word " mental " which, to the
mind of the reader, may imply only its more common
everyday usage. Indeed the emphasis in this
book seems to be unfortunately strong in the direction of the psychoses, and the impression would
remain to those not well acquainted with the subject
that the psychoneuroses were merely minor manifestations of the insanities.

Dr Nicole is at his best in the chapter describing
symptom formation and he is to be congratulated
on the very excellent illustrative cases he describes,
which sum up the picture very adequately, without
being in any way lengthy. This chapter alone
would make the book of very great value to those
beginning the study of the subject. On the other
hand, his approach to psychosomatic medicine
is rather too technical and complex for a book of
this type. Perhaps the main weakness of this
book is the chapter on the applications of psychology
in general life. Although difficulty here is obvious
in a book of this size, in view of the enormous
scope of the subject, there does seem some lack of
balance in what is mentioned and what is omitted
from this chapter. The brief synopsis of the
anatomy and physiology of the central nervous
system, given in the appendix, is very well done,
but perhaps might well have been omitted in a
work of this type and replaced with more value by
further details on the actual subject matter of the
book. There is a very useful glossary, the definitions
of which are models of brevity, accuracy and clarity
in the space available, although it seems hardly
necessary to occupy space by definitions of such
words as " oral" and " visual A number
of suggestions for further reading are incorporated
in this book and although there are certain obvious
omissions, the list is a remarkably complete one.
Despite the shortness of the book and the vast
fields which it covers, there is no suggestion of its
deteriorating into a mere tabulated synopsis.

On the contrary, it is clearly and pleasantly written,
easy to read and a book which is likely to stimulate
interest and further study. It has carefully avoided
the common pitfall, even of elementary books on
psychology, of using too many technical terms.
In general, it is a very valuable addition to the
field for which it is intended and should prove one
which will not only provide the elementary student
with the information which he needs, but which
will give him a very excellent insight into the
possibilities, as well as the problems, of psychology
and psychopathology. T.A.R.
