Work Among the Mentally Defective in Switzerland
==================================================

56 MENTAL WELFARE.
By Gertrud Lortscher.
Translated by W. E. Houghton.
Who is mentally defective?
The idea of mental deficiency is a wide one, involving- much discussion.
Psychologists vary in their conception of its boundaries. I am not going to
discuss this question, but rather the place in social life of him who is considered
mentally defective.
" He is abnormal, who, on account of a deviation in his intellectual or
moral qualities is so far beneath the average as to be shut off from the usual
educational and vocational advantages, and relegated to a special educational
system."
Let us consider what is and should be done for him.
General Education.
The first group of mental defectives to be taken in hand in Switzerland and
dealt with systematically, as regards School-education, were the feeble-minded ;
whilst, as far as the moral imbecile is concerned, we are still groping more or less
in the dark.
In 1840-41 Hans Jakob Guggenbuhl opened an Institution at Abenburg,
Canton Berne, which, it is true, was soon closed again. On the other hand
the Keller Institution for feeble-minded girls in Kusnacht, which is still in
existence, was founded as early as 1849. The first " Relief-class," opened in
1872 by a native of Zurich, had the same fate as the Guggenbuhl Institution.
The Swiss Conference for Mental Welfare, which first met in 1889, and has
met every two years since, took in hand the training and care of the mentally
defective.
To-day, according to the Report of the Conference of 1921, we have in
Switzerland 33 Institutions, with about 1,530 inmates (the return of 7 Institutions
is lacking), and 198 Special Classes with about 3,300 pupils. The town of
Zurich has not a single institution for moral imbeciles among children or young
people. This lack is much felt by mental specialists and teachers. The fact is
that, up to the present, these cases are for the most part sent to the ordinary
schools. That we have more Institutions for those over school age is explained
by the fact that the tendency to moral defect, which is often a passing one, is
mostly not recognised until years of adolescence.
Spocial Schools.
We will first consider the special schools. In Canton Zurich we have the
following method of admission. The teacher of backward pupils sends to the
School Committee of the area a proposal that certain children should be
removed to a Special School. The School doctor then examines the children
and fills out a detailed form. Two School Managers are present at the entrance
examination which follows.
Special Schools are usually divided into 3 grades?Lower, Middle and Upper
?which are attended by pupils according to ability and not according to age.
These Classes, which are in one building, have, as far as possible, the same
time-table, so that, for example, pupils of the Upper Class who are weak in
reading and writing can attend the Lower Class for these subjects, and vice
versa. Handwork classes occupy more time than in the normal schools.
Work Glasses.
In 1916, two so-called " Work-classes " were started experimentally. The
formation of these classes was based on the experience that there were always
MENTAL WELFARE. 57
a number of Special School pupils who were incapable of profiting by theoretical
teaching-, but who, for various reasons, could not be placed in an Institution.
Another reason, on which too much stress was not laid at the time, was, that
even the more capable pupils had great difficulty in finding situations, less on
account of their lack of intellect than of their awkward clumsiness. So it was
hoped not only that the Special Schools would be relieved of the incapable
element, but also that the new method would be of more general service to the
feeble-minded. The reason for not laying stress on this point was that the
Work-classes met with powerful opposition, not only from the Authoiities, who
feared a heavy financial burden, but also from Special School teachers, who
reproached the very go-ahead, practical Herr Wunderli, the initiator, with
personal interest in the matter. In spite of this opposition Area 3, Zurich,
ventured on this experiment.
Children, who, after attending the Special School for 4 years, are unable
to reach the level demanded, may be admitted to the Work-classes. In the
Work-classes theoretical work is based not on deduction, but on experience. A
Pupil, for example, is learning measurement. On paper he continually works it
out incorrectly; he cannot grasp the idea of 10 cm. In the Work-class measure-
ment is again explained to him. He is once more incorrect and the wood breaks.
The result is that he has lost something, and the next time manages to measure
correctly.
The two Work-classes that exist have to be used by all school areas.
1 he classes are not parallel, but are divided into upper and lower grades, so
that here, too, it is possible to exchange pupils. The time-table covers 32 hours
a week?? hours more than Normal or Special Schools. In summer the boys
and girls work almost exclusively in the garden, during their 18 hours of
practical work. The products are sold to the pupils for one-third market value.
There is always sufficient work, owing to the size of the garden. It not only
Pays for itself, but also brings in something extra which can be used for other
Purposes. In winter, the girls have 18 hours' cookery and domestic subjects.
The boys have carpentry, metal-work and basket-making. In all the handwork
classes, experience precedes theory. The teachers of the work classes try to
attain their end, but meet with considerable difficulties, owing to material being
delivered by the Supplies Department, cut according to the schemes issued for
normal classes. Theoretical work is confined to reading, writing and arithmetic.
Preparatory Ciasses.
The Preparatory Classes were started in 1918. Pupils who are not able
to keep up with the 1st Class on account of mental backwardness, and are
fairly certain to be admitted later to a Special School, may attend the Preparatory
Class. The teachers of the Preparatory Class are expected to determine the mental
level of their pupils, and to help them forward by giving them occupation and
training, so that when they join the lower class of the Special School they can
follow the tuition there.
The idea of the Preparatory Class came from Herr Wunderli, and was
started in School Area 3. Experience has shown that it is useless to exempt
mentally defective children from school, as they are not helped at home and,
in school, owing to their limitations, they are not able to reap any benefit
from the Kindergarten. It is true that the principle of no-exemption has not
yet prevailed, so that even to-day the greater number of Preparatory Class pupils
have been exempted once or twice and then have had to attend an Elementary
School, remaining year after year in one class, until at last they aie sent to the
Preparatory Class, with the result that they are much more difficult to help than
if they had been educated on these lines from the beginning. Therefore, in the
Preparatory Class we have children from 7-12.
58 MENTAL WELFARE.
Crammer Glasses.
A further new organisation which only exists as yet in School Area 3, is the
so-called " Crammer Class." It is meant for children whose mental backward-
ness results from outside conditions (neglect). Children who have to spend a
second year in any class, and yet are not suitable for a Special School, are
admitted. There is more handwork than in the Elementary School Class, and
less than in the Special Schools. The children remain here a year or two and
then return to the Elementary School.
Institutions.
Teaching methods in Institutions are like those in Special Schools. The
children, however, do not make such good progress, for, as a rule, only the
weakest are sent to Institutions.
Vocational Education.
Moral Imbeciles.
" Moral imbeciles " are divided according to their various characteristics, into
many groups. Dr. Scholtz, in his book " Abnormal children," specifies 12 such
groups. Specialists are unanimous in laying down the rule that a " Moral imbecile "
should never enter a trade or occupation in which the responsibility is so great
that, through a slight breach of duty, harm might be done to others. Among
such occupations is, for example, that of a railway official. Some are of opinion
that an occupation should be chosen which offers the chances of much variety;
others assert, on the contrary, that the tendency to instability should not be
encouraged. Other experts hold that the "Moral imbecile" must always see a
definite result ahead, which acts as a decoy, and yet, that he must not have too
intensive work, as, for example, that of a machine-builder, who, it is true, sees
his goal, but has to work with unending patience and perseverance, or that of a
farmer, who, in spite of laborious work, often has extremely small results. The
work of a shopkeeper generally affords opportunity for the necessary change,
stimulation and expectation of results.
Nowadays we are more inclined to respect the principle of meeting individual
peculiarities half-way, as it has been proved impossible to eradicate the defective
tendencies.
Ihere is, as yet, little or no accommodation for "Moral imbeciles" of school
age, and, as a result, they often get into trouble, on account of which they are
sent to an institution, where they often receive more punishment than help.
They seldom have a chance of being alone or developing individuality, and all
independent action is out of the question. And yet these defectives will often
be sent into the world again. It is questionable whether this strict external
discipline has a lasting effect.
Feebleminded.
Mental defectives must, if possible, like normal people, learn a skilled trade
with an instructor. They have this advantage over normal people, that they have
learnt more handwork at school, where, even if they do not master a trade
thoroughly, they at least have their manual dexterity developed. In Zurich
mental defectives who have signed an agreement of apprenticeship, may, if
thought advisable, have two terms in the Preparatory Class, where they learn
reading, writing, arithmetic and drawing, before entering the Technical School.
They need at least another year before they can pass their apprentice examina-
tions. Some of the apprentices remain the whole time in the Preparatory Class,
practical lessons in the Technical School being attended by all. The class
MENTAL WELFARE. 59
consists of about 16 pupils who have lessons once a week from 12 to 6 o'clock.
Two examples wiil show how the workshops are managed. In the course
of several years, three workshops were added to the Institute for Mentally
Defective children at Regensburg?one for basket-making, one for carpet-making
and one for carpentry. In 1914, an agricultural home, about 20 minutes from
the Institution, was added; this is run by the " home-parents." The workers
in the 3 workshops live together in a house about 5 minutes from the Institution ;
one of the masters of the workshops acts as " house-father. These homes are
connected financially with the Institution, and are under the same director.
In the carpentry-shop about 7 boys can be employed. As well as looking after
all the house repairs in connection with the Institution, they work to order, and
made last year 65 armchairs. In the carpet-making, there is room for about
7 apprentices. Door mats are made, a work possible even for the weakest.
In the basket-making shop, 8 boys can be employed and may learn, so fai as
their ability allows, all kinds of rush weaving. At first they make hampers for
bottles, covers for plants, and baskets for carrying wood. At Loohof, ^ the
Agricultural Home, 8 or 10 youths can be" taught farming, and, at the same time,
grow strong and healthy, working on the 28 acres of land. As the foundation of
these homes was very costly, the cost of board is still as high as in the Institu-
tion, although the boys earn part of their keep. The chief object of the homes
is seen in the following extract from the Rules of the Institution " Boys are sent
here for educational purposes?they are to be strengthened physically and also
gradually accustomed to working all day."
In 1910 a home was affiliated to the Institution for Deaf and Dumb children
in Turbental; this home is a building near the Institution, and is in management
and in personnel connected with it; 25 boarders can be taken in. In this home
there are workshops for making shoes out of cloth remnants, for basket-making,
for carpentry and for brush-making. The shoes are made out of long narrow
remnants, which are plaited on a last, and then lined and soled; about 800-1,000
Pairs are made a year. Two kinds of wicker-work are made: bread-baskets and
hats for small children. The rushes used for this are split, planed and dyed
t>y the pupils. They also make all kinds of brushes. Turbental used to have a
loom for Smyrna carpets which had to be given up, because during the war wool
could not be obtained.
The Basle weaving-mill is rather a different kind of workshop. The chief
reason for founding this Institution was the almost insuperable difficulty of finding
work for mental defectives immediately on their leaving school. It was seen
that, when unemployed for any length of time, they not only did not develop
further, but lost that ability which they had with difficulty acquired; every
possible effort was made to remedy this. An enquiry made to S. and Co.
"with regard to the hiring of a loom as an experiment, was responded to by that
firm sending six complete looms free of charge. This was the beginning. The
following history of the beginnings of the Basle weaving-mill is taken from the
Report of 1918: "On December 6th, 1916, a Committee was formed. In the
spring of 1917, we had two rooms prepared and placed at our disposal by the State,
free of charge. Bobbins, cotton, etc., were supplied cheap, and in the middle of
August work was started with 2 pupils. In March, 1918, in order to place the
undertaking on a sound financial basis, the Union of Basle Weavers was formed,
and this union drew up rules and regulations. At the end of the first year
17 boys and 8 girls were at work. In November, 1918, a room for girls alone
was started?this room also being granted by the State."
To-day there are 3 rooms, with 22 looms and 27 youths employed. The
niore proficient do the weaving, the weaker ones manage the warp-beam, and
the weakest of all do mechanical work under the supervision of a master-weaver.
60 MENTAL WELFARE.
Wool-weaving" is now being tried experimentally. The less experienced make
dusters, the cleverer ones fine cotton materials with artistic patterns. About 20
girls are employed in their own room in winding bobbins. They also make up
the material woven by the boys into tablecloths, cushions, aprons for work and
ornament, and children's frocks, and hem the dusters and towels. This Institu-
tion is not residential, but it has a branch in Zugerberg, " Bergli," where 8
male boarder-pupils are taken. Here there are 7 looms, and farming is also
carried on. This is for those who are physically weak, and need to recuperate
at the same time as earning a little. Both institutions only take temporary
pupils. They have succeeded in training some pupils to take up silk-weaving.
In the Neuhof Boys' Institute education is not entirely based on religion,
but the attempt is made to bring out what is latent in each boy, to develop
what is still capable of development. There are 3 tables in the dining-hall. At
the lowest the newcomers sit. All have the chance of rising to the highest table;
those who sit here have various privileges, the chief of which is to possess a
room to oneself. In the single rooms, which, like all the dormitories, are fitted
up according to individual taste, lights are allowed for an extra hour. Those
occupying single rooms are allowed to go out on Sundays and other holidays,
and receive pocket-money; they are also sent errands and get the so-called " best
jobs." Prefects are also chosen from among them and receive 3 francs a month.
It does not follow that a single room, once attained, is always kept. The pupil
may be sent back for bad behaviour and can only be promoted again after two
others have already been advanced to single rooms.
In this institution a trade can be thoroughly learnt and afterwards the State
Apprenticeship Examinations passed. Those who are undecided as to an
occupation or who wish to learn one not taught at the institution, are sent to the
so-called General Department. They must stay in this General Department at
least two years, and if they are learning a trade they can stay for three. If a
pupil behaves well, he may be discharged at the end of a year and is then put to
learn a trade, supervised by the Institution ; if he does not make good at this,
he is taken back. These measures have, in most cases, good results, and often
make it possible for the boys to return fairly soon to normal life.
The next institution I shall speak of has much less freedom; a fact seen at
once in its name?Restraint, or Control Institution. It has room for about 70
inmates, who all sleep in single cells, which are locked all day and night, and
are always watched. The stay here lasts at least one, at most, three years.
During this period a trade can be learnt, followed by the apprenticeship examina-
tion ; tailoring, basket-making, shoemaking and carpentry are the trades taught.
A third institution is of a different character. Here 20 boys, from 12 to 16,
are employed for 3 years. The only work besides school work is farming. There
is no fixed time table; it changes according to the demands of the work. Even
in School there is no definite scheme, as the classes are composed of such
varying grades. In the evening, pupils, " house-parents," and staff meet
together, and no one takes offence if the games are somewhat rough. The
" house-father " knows the unhealthy tendencies of many of his pupils, yet he
treats each as if something could be made out of him, and this helps to good
results.
Possibilities of Employment.
It is clear that for mental defectives intellectual employment is out of
the question. Many mental defectives, whose lack is purely in the intellectual
domain, are employed in handicrafts, on account of their practical ability, and
can make a livelihood without difficulty. It is much more difficult to find
employment in cases where the defect shows in physical clumsiness. Some
MENTAL WELFARE. 61
years ago those who had the care of mental defectives were unable to find
suitable places for their pupils, unless they had been through a thorough
apprenticeship. This is more or less the same to-day, but it is being
modified more and more, in that mental defectives get positions as " helpers "
only. The chief occupations to be considered are: plumber, saddler, tailor,
basket-maker and the trades of hair-dresser and book-binder; for the girls, such
employments as ironer, boys' tailor, dressmaker.
Nowadays, when farmers are highly trained, the mental defective can no
'onger rise to' being an independent farmer. Previously, farming was con-
sidered the most suitable work for the feeble-minded. But experience has
shown, that in this work they can do much harm to themselves and others,
'riiis view is only now coming into prominence and is held principally by those
who have had practical experience, whilst theorists still advise training for
farm work. There is in farming much work which requires independent
thought, especially as regards cultivation of the land and care of animals.
In farming the mental defective can accomplish only subordinate work, in
which he must be supervised. But even for such work they are only fitted
if they have normal physical strength, and that is seldom the case, as those
with experience know " only too well. It also often happens that mental
defectives who go in for farming lose the habits of cleanliness they have with
difficulty acquired, and the suppression of other bad habits ceases, because those
in authority over them have no eye for such things. The principals of two
institutions complained to me of the unruly condition in which their pupils
often returned to them after a period spent on a farm, and confessed that the
trouble they had taken with them had been in vain.
In gardening the same factors come into play as with farming. Mental
defectives are incapable of fine independent work ; but they are fitted for rough
work done under supervision.
Up to the present we know of but few industrial occupations suitable for
mental defectives, because nowadays in all branches, employees have to know
their work thoroughly. The only trades which have yet been experimented with
are wool-weaving, carpet-making, wicker-work, basket-making, and brush-making.
As far as work done at home is concerned, besides knitting, sewing,
crocheting and embroidery for girls, we have rope-making for boys. In
Zurich there is a Central Store at the Workshops for the Infirm, for selling
such articles. But it has been proved that mental defectives can seldom be
trusted with independent home work. Among the 70 people to whom home
work is given by the Store, there are only 2 mental defectives. They are
employed at rope-making. The Turbental Institute gives out raw material
and tools to its former pupils, and then receives the finished articles. This is
the only systematic work done at home.
During the present trade depression the problem of employment is very
difficult. In 1922 there were 51,128 unemployed in Switzerland and 21,900
partially employed. We cannot ascertain how many of these were mental
defectives, but certainly a great number would be, as the more highly qualified
workmen would be kept on longest; unless, of course, mental defectives
are kept on as working for less wages, in which case they act^ as wage
depressors. We know that there are certain trades in which practically only
mental defectives are employed. A Berne knitting firm employs mental
defective girls, who earn only 20-30 frs. a month by piece-work; this means
about 45-50 c'ts. an hour. But in industrial trades which have to reckon
with workmen under a trades union and, therefore, have to pay a minimum
wage, there is little chance for mental defectives, as the employers prefer to
have people fully worth the money. Also, workpeople do not care to have
62 MENTAL WELFARE.
mental defectives working with them, as they are not to be relied on for straight
dealing.
I have, unfortunately, been able to inspect two factories only, one for
chocolate-making, and one for textile fabrics. In the first named, mental
defectives, and even epileptics, could be employed without danger in any of
the rooms, and could do the work required just as well as normal workers.
The same holds good for the weaving-mill, except that here epileptics would be
in greater danger, in the event of falling. I made further enquiries about the
textile industry, tanning and metal-work, and found that most of these
industries employ mechanical and unskilled labour. Now, if mental defectives
are able to accomplish as much and as good work as normal workpeople, the
question of the minimum wage presents no difficulties, for workmen who produce
the same quantity and quality of work can logically claim equal wages. But
in placing mental defectives we must be careful to choose posts in which they
can accomplish as much as the normal workman. Our first task is, therefore,
to enquire into the possibilities of employing them in industry. This is a work
of magnitude and difficulty, for those appointed to find out the possibilities
must, on the one hand, be acquainted with the idiosyncrasies of mental
defectives and epileptics, and, on the other, must understand the workings of
a factory; so, we must ask ourselves who is to undertake such a task, and
whether it would not be better to divide the labour. Since May, 1922, when
the first meeting of " Employment Advisers " for those unable to earn full
wages, was held, 6 such Advisers have been at work in the Canton. I consider
that the first task of these Advisers is to go into the possibilities of employment
of mental defectives in their own district, then to meet and exchange their
experiences, and finally to write down their decisions and send them to suitable
bodies, such as the Association for Mental Welfare. In order to do this
thoroughly the other Cantons should also appoint such Advisers.
Now as to the employers' liability. There are many factories to-day,
in which this question is no longer of great importance, for the arrangements
for the protection of workpeople are so efficient, that even with bad workmen
accidents are almost impossible. All factories should be so provided and we
should see to it that they are, and get into touch with factory inspectors
to this end. The most difficult problem is how to do away with moral danger.
It is a well-known fact that mental defectives are easily led astray; statistics
prove that among criminals, drunkards, prostitutes, etc., a large percentage
are mental defectives. In industry, on account of the freedom they enjoy, they
are particularly liable to temptation. In the meeting of the Commission on
those of small earning capacity in 1922 this question was brought up,
and it was decided to have a full Report on the matter at the next Meeting.
Ideas for remedying this are already in hand. Think of the many " foster-
homes " which are run by the Y.M.C.A. in Zurich. Boys are boarded with
a suitable family and are provided by the Central Bureau with books, and, in
winter, with facilities for sport. If the same plan were carried out with
mental defectives there would have to be a strict, though inconspicuous,
supervision. Another idea is to start boarding-houses in connection with
factories. The opinion of factory-owners was asked, and they agreed that it
would be excellent to have such houses, but that they must be under the
control of people unconnected with the factory. (Seven such boarding-houses
exist in East Switzerland, with 330 inmates.)
A more important idea is that mental defectives should work in a room
by themselves, separated from the other workpeople. In this way the fear of
being laughed at would disappear, and it would be possible to have an overseer
for them alone, who understood their particular needs.
MENTAL WELFARE. 63
Up to now we have spoken only of those who can be fully employed; the
following statistics show us the proportion of those who are only partially
employable or even unemployable:?
Inmates of Institutions?
Fully employable ... ... 15%
Partially employable ... 35%
Unemployable ... ... 50%
Special School Pupils?
Fully employable ... ... 60%
Partially employable ... 30%
Unemployable ... ... 10%
Ihose who are only partially employable cannot work either at a trade or in
industry. Some are able to earn a livelihood with work done at home; but
here the difficulty arises that mental defectives are characterised by being able
to work only under constant supervision ; the majority work better under control
than when left to themselves. The same holds good for the unemployable.
I he majority of these can accomplish a certain amount of useful work if this
is carried on in suitable surroundings. How and where we can employ this
class of mental defectives requires much thought. So far as I can see there
are only two possibilities:?
1. Occupation in residential institutions.
2. Employment in industrial undertakings run by private associations,
district societies, or the State.
As to 1, there are several possibilities to be considered:?
(a) Workshops connected with each institution and used only for inmates
of that institution.
(b) One large set of workshops, attached to one institution, where pupils
from others could be taken in.
(c) A self-supporting residential home on a large scale.
This last seems to me the best, and most specialists agree with me. Berne
is already on the way to realise this solution. After much hard work a
Committee has succeeded in forming an Association which has hopes
?f raising a capital of 150,000 frs., as well as of receiving yearly contributions
,?f 10,000 frs. In Spring, 1924, a Work and Welfare Home is to
be opened in Konitz Castle, which has been obtained cheaply from the Govern-
ment ; this is only at present for girls. The advantage of one independent home
lies in the fact that a larger institution of this kind can be carried on on more
rational and many-sided lines. One such Work and Welfare Home should
serve at least a whole Canton. The question will be raised again: Should such
an institution be run by the State or as a private undertaking? This is easily
answered, for at present, the State, far from being willing to start new
institutions, is saving on those already established. So, private Welfare
Associations must take up the work for the present, but care must be taken
to interest the State more and more in the matter. Individual districts, in which
financial conditions are relatively favourable, should, join together to found
such an institution.
What branches of work are to be carried on in such a home? Berne
intends to have farming, knitting, basket-making, washing, ironing, sewing and
mending. In the Institution for boys only, weaving (of carpets, linen, cotton,
and wool), basket-making, shoemaking, carpentry and brush-making. Some
Pupils could also be employed with rope-making, etc. The bigger the scale of
such a home, the better and cheaper it could be run, both as regards buying
?f raw material and sale of products; also as regards employing the inmates in
the home itself. It would be still more reasonable for two homes, one for
64 MENTAL welfare.
men and one for women, to be run in connection with one another. It would
then be possible for the women to do the washing, etc., for both Institutions,
whilst the men looked after farm and garden. Shoe-making, tailoring and
carpentry could be done for their own needs. Those who are incapable of
full work could be employed as helpers in making wholesale goods.
It might be possible to employ part-workers and the unemployable in
industrial undertakings and trade workshops run by private Associations,
possibly subsidized by the State, or by District Associations, with or without
State aid. Here, again, several Cantons could join. A weaving-mill, such as
that in Berne, would, perhaps, be the best thing to start with, as experience
in that direction has already been gained. Such an undertaking cannot, of
course, pay its own way entirely; the workpeople would be paid 50 per cent
more than they would be in industry, so that in spite of their lack of working
capacity, they might earn a certain amount. The Basle mill made 13,989 frs.
profit in 1921, but, of course, they had their capital of 29,8-12 frs. (raised by
donations, subsidies and subscriptions) and also a loan of 27,800 frs. Also
they have buildings free or very cheap. The beautiful and original patterns
of the Basle materials make it possible for them to compete with outside
industry, in spite of their higher prices. They have the great advantage
of Herr Kestenholz's art; he designs all the patterns himself, and is the real
founder of the mill, and its honorary manager. What makes the product still
dearer is the fact that only hand-looms arc used, which looms do only 15-20
per cent of the work of machine-looms. At least one machine-loom should be
installed, worked by a more highly skilled workman, so that orders wanted at
once need not be refused. There are other branches possible. At Konitz a
knitting machine is to be installed.
Articles of saleable value should be produced. We must now ask ourselves
how these goods are to be disposed of. The first point is that the individual
institutions must not compete with each other. The Basle weaving-mill has
already found that it is not easy to prevent this. When a new institution is
being opened and trades are to be started there which are already carried on
by some other institution, enquiries must be made into the chances of a ready
sale for the products; in this way competition might be avoided. To this end
before starting brush-making, the Turbental Institution got into communication
with the Central Association for the Blind. It should be possible to arrange
different districts for sale of the products. It is also desirable that the
individual institutions should be in close connection with one another; for
instance, raw material could be bought in larger quantities, and joint stores for
selling the products could be started. At the Conference of the Association for
the Welfare of the Partially Employable, a Society for community of work
and saie or products was formed. Lcrchenbuhl Institution, for instance, buys
all its brushes from the Blind Institution, and, in exchange, the travellers for
the Blind take Lerchenbuhl carpets with them. Whether goods should be sold
direct to the consumer or through a shop depends on circumstances, but, up to
the present, experience has shown that the direct sale is best. Turbental
Institution, which sends all its brushes to shops, makes little profit, whereas
Aarburg, which sells direct to the consumer, makes more, relatively, than any
other institution.
Future Development.
There is no resting to-day for those who fought for improved conditions;
they must still fight, not only to increase their work but also for its very
existence. Education authorities are bent on reducing expenditure, and intend
to put an end to all the more expensive institutions. It does not matter to them
MENTAL WELFARE. 65
that the little they save will, in the end, have to be paid by the Poor Law
Guardians, because, unfortunately, these separate Departments are entirely
independent in their activities. Whilst the exact cost of the Work-classes can
be reckoned, the good they do cannot be measured in the same way. Nearly
all specialists agree that this is by far the best type of education for mental
defectives, who easily forget what they learn only theoretically, but are more
likely to retain what is learnt practically. The chief difficulty in getting posts
for mental defectives is their clumsiness and awkwardness, which faults can
be at least partially eliminated in the Work-classes.. I have, unfortunately, not
been able to obtain any comparative statistics regarding the placing of pupils
from Special Schools and Work-classes. But the following figures are interest-
ing- In 1917 the After Care Committee for pupils of Special Schools apprenticed
28 pupils, 24 were from Special Schools, and 4 from the Work-classes. After
4 weeks only 4 were still at work; one was from a Special School, the other 3
from the Work-classes.
In the Report of the Swiss Union for the Education and Care of the
Mentally Defective, even an opponent of Work-classes stated that there were
certain cases in which theoretical tuition was useless, and that an introductory
course in practical work would be of more value. We should see to it that more
Work-classes are started, and more hand work done in Special Schools and
Institutions. There should also be Hostels attached to Work-classes and Special
Schools. Such Hostels would answer the same purpose as Institutions, and
should be managed by specially trained people. Need I add that more Institu-
tions and Special Schools are wanted? Principals of Institutions are convinced
that there are numbers of mental defectives in the country, exempted from
school and running wild. The Principal of an Institution for Incurables assured
me that if children were taken early enough to an Institution or Special School
they might, in some cases, prove to be educable. Another told me that he
"was constantly having children brought to him to be tested, who have been
exempted from school for years and yet have proved not to be ineducable.
Education Authorities in the country are often worse than useless, as they
refuse to make use of the weapon put in their hands by the law. If the
parents object to the children being sent to a Special School or Institution,
the Authorities take no further steps, not daring to refer the matter to a
Court of Law. It would be easy to gather statistics and prove this, but the
State is not anxious to do so, as it would mean founding more institutions.
&ut we must insist that such statistics be taken, so that we may demand further
accommodation.
At the first Conference of Mental Welfare Associations the question of
founding Work Colonies was mooted; this question has been brought up at
every Conference since, but, as yet, with very small results, quite inadequate
to the requirements. Specialists are not agreed as to how such Work Colonies
should be developed.
Others go still further and ask for independent Cantonal Work Colonies
to be started; some even think that one Swiss Institution would best fulfil all
the demands. It is true that in a big Institution of this kind it would be
possible to run many kinds of trades, and to have well-appointed workshops.
Those who are opposed to this idea hold that difficulties would arise owing to
the differences of the various Cantons and their religious beliefs; also they
think that in so large an undertaking, individuality would be swamped. Those
who are in favour of the motion believe that local peculiarities would not have
niucb influence on vocational training. They quote experiences in the large
Work Colonies and huge Institutions of Germany, with 1,000, or more, inmates,
where, through special organisation, the idea of family life is satisfactorily
66 MENTAL WELFARE.
carried out. One Principal argued that in a small Institution for only 20-30
children family life was impossible, but that in an Institution on a larger scale
such as the German one, it was possible to group the children into small
" families."
The majority are opposed to State management, fearing loss of independ-
ence, and increased cost owing to the larger wages which would have to be
paid. As a result of a Report sent up by the Association for Mental Welfare,
a contribution of 15,000 frs. was granted by the Council to the Central and
Branch Associations. Besides this, 6,500 frs. were sent to the Central
Association for Care of the Blind, and to the Society for educating and suc-
couring the Mental Defectives. In the Federal Council the following motion was.
brought forward by Herr Matt in 1919 : " The Federal Council is asked to con-
sider the following question, and to report on it : How institutions for the
abnormal are to be supported in view of the increased cost of living, and their
further existence rendered possible? " This set the ball rolling. The motion was
accepted by the Federal Council and approved by the Councillors. An expert
enquiry Commission, which was then formed, submitted the draft of a Bill, drawn
up by Herr Matt; this, however, was not gone into, and there is no hope of the
Federal Council considering it at present. The Bill deals chiefly with the subsidis-
ing of institutions by the Federal and Cantonal Councils, but also lays stress on
the importance of developing vocational training.
Article 1 says: Yearly contributions shall be made by the Federation and
individual Cantons to such institutions as undertake the care, physical and
mental, and also possible vocational training of mental defectives.
Article 10 says: The Council shall contribute 50 per cent, to the training of
teachers, who are to give special instruction to Mental Defectives, and to manual
instructors, who are prepared to train Mental Defectives for a trade.
It is the wish of many Welfare Workers to place Mental Defectives in
the country, under instructors who have a small-holding, as well as facilities
"for teaching a trade. As suitable instructors are difficult to find, it is
suggested that some should be trained who would then be willing to take in
five or six pupils, whose board would be paid for. Some workers go still
further, and think that teachers who are fitted for the work by temperament
and training, should start workshops in the country, where their pupils could
be employed in farming or gardening, as well as with handwork.
Another point in the programme is the starting of workshops in towns
where the pupils would not be boarders. In Zurich, in 1922, Herr Stauber,
the " Town employment Adviser," opened so-called " free " workshops for
the unemployed just over school age. He would like, when conditions improve,
and there is no longer need for such institutions, to develop them into places
for training Mental Defectives in a trade. This would be possible at com-
paratively small expense. About 8,519 frs. were collected from private sources
to start these two workshops for wood-work and metal-work; only 3,234 frs.
were spent on fitting them up, so that a sum of 5,315 frs. remained over,
which could be devoted to their extension. The town pays to the Principals
400-800 frs. a month, to the attendants 25-50 frs., for material 150-200,
frs., total 1,150-1,250; there are about 22 apprentices in each workshop.
The idea of using such existing workshops for mental defectives was welcomed
by all specialists. All these proposals have been considered with a view to
giving mental defectives a thorough training, and though lately there has
been a strong tendency not to give them such a thorough training, but to find
them situations in industrial works where mechanical or unskilled labour is
wanted, we must continue to press for training for all who are sufficiently
capable. The public and the State must be prepared to spend largely.
