News and Notes
===============

Courses Arranged by the C.A.M.W.

As we go to press the C.A.M.W.'s educational activities are in full swing.
The following Courses are being arranged during the next few months :?
Short Courses for Teachers (organised for the Board of Education).?The
Sheffield Course is beginning on April 18th and will be attended by 33 teachers.
Schools in Sheffield, Leeds and Nottingham will be visited, but the students will
be housed 15 miles from Sheffield in the Co-operative Holidays Association's Guest
House at Hope, on the Derbyshire Moors. Here all the lectures and classes will
be held.

For the London Course, from July 2nd to July 23rd, hostel accommodation
has been secured at King's College Hostel, Vincent Square, where the Course
last year was also held. This second Course is intended primarily for more
experienced teachers, especially for those who have already taken Part II.
The demand for these Courses continues as keen as ever and the number of
applicants is always greatly in excess of the available accommodation.

Three Months' Course for Teachers (May 7th to July 25th).? 1 his Course for
teachers of Mentally Defective and Dull and Backward Children is being organised
by the C.A.M.W.?as announced in our last issue?to meet the need of teachers
newly taking up work in Special Schools or Backward Classes for whom the ordi-
nary Short Courses do not piovide a long" enough period of training. Ihe Course
has been well supported by Local Education Authorities and 34 teachers from
different parts of the country have been enrolled. About half this number are
being sent by their Authorities in order that they may be qualified on their return
to take charge of classes for Dull and Backward Children : the other half, with
only one or two exceptions, are teachers from areas in which new Special Schools,
for which a trained staff will be needed, are shortly to be opened.

As this Course is largely of a pioneer nature we feel that more than usual
interest and importance is attached to it, and we hope in a forthcoming number
to report upon it fully, discussing how far it may be considered to have achieved
its object, and especially how far it has made a definite contribution towards the
problem of the training of teachers for Dull and Backward Classes. For this
has yet to be solved, and no experimental work in connection with it can justifiably
be passed over unrecorded.

Course for Medical Practitioners (May 18th to May 23rd).?Ihe sixth Course
on Mental Deficiency for Medical Practitioners, to be arranged by the University
of London Extension Board in co-operation with the C.A.M.W., will shortly be
held. The Course will follow the lines of those preceding it and will consist of
lectures and clinical work.

Course for Nurses and Attendants in Institutions for the Mentally Defective
and in Mental Hospitals (October bill to 24?/i, 1925).? Ibis is the fiist Course of
the kind to be undertaken by the C.A.M.W. and is being held largely on ?3ccount
of the experience gained by the Association through the work of its Occupational
Organisers. This has revealed the fact that in the smaller Institutions and in
Mental Hospitals, where there are a small number of mentally defective children,
there is, on the part of those attendants and nurses whose duties include educa-
tional and occupational training as well as physical care, both a need foi and a
desire for the special knowledge which will make them more efficient and moie
helpful. It is this need and this desire that the Course hopes to meet.

The curriculum will include classes in handwork, rhythmic training, country
dancing and speech training, with lectures on the principles of training, recreation
and general development of defectives, on Child Study and on the medical aspects
of Mental Deficiency. Visits to Schools and Institutions will also be arranged,
and opportunities will be given for informal discussions with the Organiser in
charge of the Course. Hostel accommodation will be provided so that students
may have the advantages of close contact with each other.

The Course has received the full approval of the Board of Control who are
prepared, under certain circumstances, to recognise for purposes of grant, ex-
penditure incurred by Local Authorities in sending nurses or attendants.
Further particulars of any of the Courses announced above may he obtained
from the offices of the C.A.M.W24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.
Mental Deficiency (Amendment) Bill, 1925.

The object of this Bill, which was introduced recently by Sir Leslie Scott
and which has just passed its Second Reading, cannot be better summarised than
is done in the Memorandum prefacing it, viz. :?

" Under the provisions of section seven of the Mental Deficiency Act,
1913, a defective who has been by order placed under guardianship may,
with the consent of a judicial authority, be sent to an institution."
" Some defectives, after prolonged residence in institutions, improve
sufficiently to permit of their being sent out of the institution if some arrange-
ments are available for providing care and supervision for them outside. The
existing law does not allow of transfer from an institution to guardianship,
but only from guardianship to an institution."

" If it is desired to transfer a case from an institution to guardianship,
it is at present necessary to discharge the patient and to take all the proceed-
ings necessary to obtain a new order. These proceedings are cumbrous and
expensive. This Bill provides that the same machinery which is available for
transferring cases from guardianship to institutions shall be available for the
transfer of cases from institutions to guardianship."

The need for this reform of the existing law has been frequently urged by the
Commissioners of the Board of Control in their Annual Reports, and if it is
effected one obstruction which prevents the more widespread use of Guardianship
will then have been removed.

The Bill is a private one but as it deals only with a detailed point of procedure
and is clearly for the benefit of defectives it is unlikely to arouse any opposition
and its promoters hope that it may quickly pass into law.

A Mental Deficiency Exhibit at Wembley.
---------------------------------------

It may be remembered that last year the C.A.M.W. showed at the British
Empire Exhibition for one month an exhibit of photographs, work done by and
apparatus used for the training of mental defectives in schools and institutions.
This year we are glad to be able to announce that the responsibility for a
similar exhibit has been taken over by the Board of Control and that it will be
shown as illustrating one of the activities in which the nation as a whole is
engaged, and for which the nation as a whole considers itself responsible.

Mental Welfare workers visiting- Wembley are urged to make a point of
seeing- the exhibit which will be found in the Government Pavilion, Ministry of
Health section.

A New Borderline Home.
-----------------------

We are glad to give publicity to the following announcement which has been
issued by the West Lancashire Association for Mental Welfare, and we feel that
the Association is to be cordially congrahdated on having instigated a piece of
work which is crying out to be attempted :?

" For some time the Association has had considerable difficulty in suitably
assisting- certain cases that are referred to them, namely, those who cause anxiety
by difficult and delinquent conduct, and who in addition appear to those who have
had dealings with them to be mentally unstable or abnormal, though not certifiable
at the time under either the Mental Deficiency Act or the Lunacy Act.

" Such cases are already being received in Homes and Institutions in our
area. They tend either to be sent away as too difficult to manage, or because
they do not improve sufficiently to recommend for any employment.
" We find girls of this kind tend to wander from one home to another, to the
great expense of voluntary bodies, and without the possibility of bringing them
under the observation of a Mental Specialist, with a view to procuring constructive
treatment.

" The Association in January of this year entered into an agreement with
the Committee of St. Agnes' Home, Thatto Heath, whereby our Association
maintains 4 beds, for a trial period of a year in St. Agnes, for the observation
of cases such as have been described, who are suitable to mix with the other
inmates of the Home?who are also mainly young preventive cases.

" The house is a pleasant one, with a large garden, and the numbers will
never be too large for individual attention. It is possible to provide a good deal
of outdoor work?gardening and poultry?and in addition arrangements are being-
made for the teaching of handwork indoors. It is adjacent to the Mental Hos-
pital, Rainhill, and by kind permission of the Lancashire Asylums Board, we have
the expert opinion of Dr. Reeve, the Medical Superintendent, on any cases
referred to him.

" Dr. Reeve very kindly has arranged to interview the girls in their usual
surroundings at St. Agnes, and it will be of the greatest value to have his advice
as to the right course to pursue for their benefit.
" The girls are not kept for long periods, but sufficiently long for thorough
observation.

" It is thought that Magistrates and others who have to deai with the
problem of the unstable and difficult adolescent might be interested to hear of t is
experiment, and we venture to bring it to your notice, and ask you to make it
known to others who may be interested."
" N.B.?Cases of obvious mental defect are not eligible for admission.
Out-County Cases can be received at payments to be arranged. For Parti-
culars apply to Miss F. Andrew, W. Lancashire Association for Mental \\ elfare,
14, Castle Street, Liverpool.

Internationa! Prison Congress.
-------------------------------

At the 9th International Prison Congress to be held in London from August
3rd to August 10th this year, the C.A.M.W. will be officially represented and
Miss Evelyn Fox has been asked to submit a paper in answer to the following-
questions which form one of the subjects for discussion :?

" Is it desirable that services, e.g., laboratories or clinics, should be
installed in Prisons for the scientific study of criminals?
Would such a system help both to determine the causes of criminality
and to suggest the suitable treatment in the case of the individual offender?
Would it not be advisable to use the same system for the examination
before trial of persons suspected of some mental defect?"

The Congress?which meets in London for the first time?is a specially inter-
esting one as it is 15 years since it last met in Washington and during this period,
as the President, Sir E. Ruggles-Brise, points out, not only have the problems then
discussed retained their importance but new ones of even greater urgency have
come to the front. *

Amongst these new problems those to which the questions quoted above refer
may perhaps be placed first and the papers and discussions upon them should be
of the greatest value to Mental Welfare workers throughout the world.

International Congress on Child Welfare, Geneva, 1925.
-------------------------------------------------------

At this important Congress, which is to be held at Geneva under the patronage
of the Swiss Federal Government, from August 24th to August 28th, the problem
of the Mentally Defective child is to receive due attention, one of the subjects
scheduled for discussion being " The standardisation of the definition of mental
defect and of its different degrees."

The English speaking section of the Congress is arranging that a paper on
this subject shall be contributed from England although at the time of going to
press the name of the expert whose services are to be enlisted has not been officially
announced.

The Congress is to be open not only to official representatives but to all
individuals interested in Child Welfare provided that application is made on the
prescribed form and a fee of One Guinea is paid. Special facilities in connection
with the journey to and from Geneva and for accommodation whilst there will be
available for members.

Enquiries for further information should be addressed to the Secretary of
the English Speaking Section, Mr. L. B. Golden, 26, Gordon Street, W.C.l.
* In connection with the Congress, Sir Evelyn Ruggles-Brise has written a new book entitled
" Prison Reform?At Home and Abroad." Macmillan & Co., Ltd., Price 5s.
