Some Thoughts on Juvenile Delinquency
=======================================

By E. A. Hamilton-Pearson, M.B., Ch.B. (Aber.)
Physician to Children's Department, Tavistock Clinic for Functional Nerve
Diseases. Clinical Psychologist to West End Hospital for Nerve Diseases, &c.
The problem of the delinquent child is a growing one; the past few years
have seen not only a steady increase in the number of juvenile offenders but
a definite increase in the seriousness of the offences committed. The conduct
of the youth of a nation must be, to a large extent, an index of the social
stability and commercial prosperity of a given nation. Where a country has
had years of civil peace and development, allowing of possibilities of personal
advancement and the quick absorption into remunerative occupation of the school-
leaving youth of the country, juvenile crime is at a low ebb. When a nation,
following the emotional stress of a great upheaval, has had a prolonged period
of trade depression, where remunerative occupation is scarce even for skilled
tradesmen, the untrained youth of the country sees no future. The energy of
youthful minds, which normally should be used in the service of the country,
must find an outlet, and consequently the records of juvenile crime increase.
Of the subsidiary sociological factors tending to the increase, one might
take first the decline in the apprenticeship system. It was an excellent system.
A boy changed the discipline of school life for the more excellent discipline
imposed by the learning of a craft. The unstable transition period between
boyhood and manhood was bridged in the finest way possible. There is no
better teacher of self-control, self-reliance and self-confidence than the practical
learning of a trade. At present there is no provision for this dangerous transi-
tion period, except a year or so longer at a school learning unpractical things
in which in the majority of cases interest, if it ever existed, has been lost.
It would be infinitely better for the individual, and, through him, the future
prosperity of the country, if every boy leaving school, with no definite occupa-
tion to go to, were in some form conscripted for a period, and not only trained
in drill but given occupational training as well.
The laxity of home discipline is another factor which is frequently laboured,
54 MENTAL WELFARE.
and the parents are held to be at fault. The home discipline of to-day is
certainly feebler in quality than it was, say, twenty years ago, but in a great
many cases is the blame altogether attachable to the parents? The point of view
advanced below may throw new light on this part of the problem.
Generally speaking a child educated to a certain degree beyond the standard
of parental education definitely tends to get beyond parental control. This
follows logically on the basis of the child's own personal experience. It is
superior to either parent in certain branches of acquired knowledge, which in
the school environment?the child's immediate means of gaining experience?
are of the first importance. Such superiority must, consciously or unconsciously,
lead, at the least, to a suspicion, if not to definite contempt for parental advice
in other spheres. Consciousness of greater knowledge in one direction, to a
mind unchastened by the hard facts of experience, breeds the belief in greater
capacity in all directions. It is impossible to say that this form of intellectual
snobbery is the cause of all cases of uncontrollable children. But to anyone who
has studied delinquents it will be apparent that it is the root cause in very many
cases.
The chief difficulty lies not in the recognition of the condition, but the dealing
with it. PrevenFion would be most salutary but would call for a definite
reorganisation of our educational system and its ideals, at present beyond the
scope of practical politics. Punishment is worse than useless, as it tends to
breed ideas of unfairness, and in that way increase the feeling of the individual's
superiority. There is nothing like a spell of hard physical work to reduce the
swollen idea of personal importance. It is best if such work is undertaken in
the service of others, and as part of the common work of a group, for example,
in camps, where each individual has to do a turn of menial duty as well as work
which calls for intellectual ability. Organised bodies, such as the Scouts, could
do good work in this way if part of their organisation were set apart to work with
delinquent cases.
The increasing state of congestion of our large cities is provocative of a
definite amount of juvenile delinquency. Children, boys especially, at one stage
of their development, tend to band themselves in organisations to seek adven-
ture, either real or imaginary. This is a necessary phase, because it teaches
many things?adaptability, the power to observe and plan, how to command
others, etc. Where there is comparatively unlimited open space such bands fulfil
their function and disappear without any marked effect on the ordered life of
the community. In areas as congested as London there is practically no outlet
for the activities of these gangs, except in ways which are illegal. There is no
doubt that in the first instance the band desires the fun of planning a raid, and
the excitement of carrying it out. Whatever is stolen has secondary value in
relation to the desire for adventure. It is later that the object becomes primary
and the planning and adventure a necessary means of achieving the object.
To give this necessary developmental phase scope to fulfil its function should
be the aim of any attempt to deal with it. The general lines of any scheme
should be based on the adequate provision of open spaces, the extension of
existing organisations which appeal to the adventure side of boyhood and give
it legitimate outlet, and the encouragement of organised games of every descrip-
tion. This sounds too extensive a programme ever to be practical. In my
opinion, however, it is one of the objects to be worked for and achieved if the
moral health of the nation is to be safeguarded.
In dealing with the individual delinquent it is essential, in the first place,
that one's own attitude should be right, that is, to realise that one's function
is not magisterial to condemn or condone on the basis of the evidence of a given
MENTAL WELFARE. 55
delinquency, but to try to understand what is the underlying mechanism of the
delinquency. It is only on the basis of such an understanding that it is possible
to aid a child towards its own salvation. Every delinquency must be investigated
on its own merits. Each factor in every given case must be investigated and
weighed with regard to its possible effect. By each factor is meant environmental
as well as physical conditions, and their individual 01 combined effect on the
child's psychological development. Whoever undertakes this form of work will
early realise that all hope of success must be based on the gaining of the child s
confidence most frequently difficult to gain and requiring endless patience in
the gaining, very easy to lose, and once lost practically impossible to re-establish.
From a practical point of view the best method of investigating any case is,
first, to interview each parent separately, and bring out all that is possible about
the child's physical history, habits and so on. It is frequently useful to get
several accounts of the parents' characters and habits. They cannot give a
just account of themselves. Then, and then only, interview the child by itself.
It is a good rule to make, never to see either parent after the first interview,
except where it is absolutely necessary, and then always with the consent of the
child. Nothing breaks a child's confidence so easily as the thought that what
it says may be repeated to the parents. Conversation with the child should be
on the child's level of intelligence and should be so directed as to allow of the child
speaking freely about itself, its desires, and so on, with an absolute minimum
of direct questioning. When the mechanism of the delinquency is clear it is
possible to begin to produce such changes in the environment as will permit of the
eradication of the delinquent tendency.
Early in the history of every case a thorough medical examination should
be undertaken. Many cases of delinquency are based on physical ailments, and
can be dealt with satisfactorily only in so far as the physical illness can be
ameliorated. Often the physical cause is obscure and can be elicited only after
very careful examination. A case I saw some time ago will illustrate this. A
boy of 17 brought to me because of outbursts of intense anger and intractability.
Investigation revealed the fact that coinciding with the temper outbursts the
lad had intense headaches of a bursting character localised to the vertex.
Between attacks he was perfectly normal. X-ray examination showed that the
pituitary gland was completely enclosed by a bony capsule which prevented the
normal fluctuation in gland size and gave rise to the headaches. The two condi-
tions, until then unconnected, were "undoubtedly interdependent. Mitigation of
the temper outbursts could only be expected with alleviation of the headache, if
that were possible, under the abnormal circumstances.
At as early a moment as is feasible with an accurate result?I usually find it
possible at the second interview?each child's mental age should be ascertained.
This is information of the first importance in the handling of any case.^ It
enables one to gauge the amount of understanding to be expected, and judge
""?ore accurately the delinquent's responsibility for his actions. The deeds of a
fourteen-year-old boy with a mental age of eleven, that is, intelligence equal to
that of an average eleven-year-old, could be correctly judged only on the eleven-
year-old level. In thought processes, desires, understanding and responsibility
for action such a boy is really eleven years old. Many mistakes will be avoided
and many disappointments saved if the finding of the mental age is made a
routine practice in every case.
In a paper of this length it is impossible to do more than touch one or two
fringes of a colossal subject. That is all I have attempted to do, in the hope
that it may stimulate thought a little, and, in some degree, indicate the necessity
I?r, and the importance and hope of, the early and adequate treatment of the
juvenile offender,
