The Crime and Trial of Leopold and Loeb
=========================================


74 MENTAL WELFARE
Book Reviews *3? Abstracts.
. By M. McKernan. G. Allen and
Unwin, Ltd. Pp. 380. Price, 8s. 6d.
In May, 1924, Nathan Leopold and Richard
Loeb, youths of 19 and 18 years respectively,
and the sons of Chicago millionaires, kid-
napped and murdered a 14 year old acquaint-
ance, named Bobby Franks. The murder was
planned with considerable cunning- and carried
out with the utmost callousness. The mur-
derers had no animosity against their unfor-
tunate victim, probably any other little boy
with rich parents would have suited them
equally well, since their objects were merely
to attempt to bleed the parents of the sum of
ten thousand dollars and to experience the
thrill of committing- a murder. For a short
time the perpetrators of this hideous deed
remained undiscovered, then a clue was found
which directed suspicion towards them, they
were arrested, brought to trial in July, 1924,
and pleaded guilty. They escaped the death
penalty on account of their age and " the
dictates of enlightened humanity," and were
sentenced to be confined in a penitentiary for
the term of their natural lives.
Such are the brief facts of this morbid case.
If these youths had not had wealthy parents
it is safe to say that very much less would
have been heard about it; but if the posses-
sion of great wealth could not supply them
with decent moral feeling or prevent atrocious
conduct, it could at least do one thing. It
could provide these young criminals with a
plethora of legal and medical assistance and
so give an amount of publicity to their crime
and trial which would hardly have been forth-
coming otherwise. This it succeeded in doing,
and in addition to the very full newspaper
accounts which were purveyed to the public
at the time, we now have this book. We must
confess that we have some considerable dif-
ficulty in classifying it or even in deciding as
to the purpose of its publication. Although
the writers of the preface repeatedly allude to
the startling effect which was produced upon
the " entire civilised world " by this case, the
subject is now a little stale as a mere item
of news. Certain portions of the book, namely,
those dealing with the life history of the
criminals and the reports of the medical
experts who examined them are of considerable
interest to the medical criminologist, but the
book is by no means a scientific one, indeed
it is obviously intended to appeal to the general
public. But those members of the lay public
who are possessed of any literary taste must
be continually irritated by the sensational
American journalistic style in which the book
is written, while the verbatim account of the
trial brings into lurid contrast the procedure
in an American criminal Court with the calm
and dignity which obtain in a similar Court
in this country.
On the whole, we cannot see that the book
serves any useful purpose. Indeed, it seems
to us that its effect may be distinctly harmful
and that its general tone, its prolixity of per-
sonal detail regarding these two morbid youths,
and its wealth of photographs of every item
connected with the crime and trial, may readily
stimulate an unstable youth to emulation
rather than act as a deterrent.
A. F. T.
The Psychology of the Unadjusted
School Child. By John J. B. Morgan,
Ph.d. Macmillan. 9s.
In this book the director of the Psycho-
logical Clinic at the State University of Iowa
attempts with considerable success to express
in a comparatively simple form some of the
truths of abnormal psychology in such a way
as to help the teacher to get at the real nature
of an individual case of " difference " from the
normal, and to indicate the best means of
bringing such a different individual back to the
normal lines of character development. At the
outset the author defines his attitude in the
statement that " the real test of a normal
person is whether or not he can make social
adjustments." He further maintains that ;i
teacher should " cultivate the ability to re-
cognise clearly all defects and peculiarities in
conduct and character without any feeling of
blame, resentment or horror, at the discovery."
He lays particular stress on the fact that the
teacher must first be clearly aware of her own
abnormalities and face them frankly before
she can hope to be successful in dealing with
the differences in her children.
After an outline of the place of mental con-
flict in the development of traits, the author
goes on to analyse and describe the various
ways in which a compromise with reality can
lead to abnormality whether by upholding or
surrendering the ego. Then in two sections
he deals with the peculiar problems of the men-
tally defective including the borderline case,
and also the normally intelligent child, lacking
in social judgment, sometimes called the moral
imbecile. Finally, he outlines a programme
MENTAL WELFARE. 75
of mental hygiene which should aid the teacher
m positive work of prevention. On this side
he emphasises throughout the need for making
the child face reality and cultivating the habit
of success without at the same time allowing
to? much content with present achievements.
From the educational point of view, all the
arguments seem to be on the side of those
methods which make allowance for the indi-
viduality of the child, and also for the arrange-
ment of his work in such a way as to compel
"im to meet his own difficulties.
In addition to the very clear and simple
language in which the main body of the text
ls Written, further aid in grasping the funda-
mental facts, both with regard to detection and
treatment is given to the reader by a series
?f practical "hints to teachers and a list of
questions for review at the end of each chap-
ter.
In discussing the connexion between intelli-
gence and mental conflicts, the author main-
tains that the lower the degree of intelligence
the less likely are mental conflicts, because
they presuppose an appreciation of the nature
?f a social situation and the ability to pursue
a more or less abstract train of thought in
connexion with it. The most difficult cases
of all occur in the moron and borderline classes
?f intelligence. In this connexion he illustrates
the various defence mechanism which the
tttoron sets up, and advocates for his teach-
:?Do not try to make the moron bright,
hut try to fit him for his definite place in
society by training him to do those things
which he can at least do reasonably well. _
The treatment throughout is so straight-
forward and clear that none with any experi-
ence with children need be afraid to read and
follow the positive methods of prevention of
abnormality suggested by the author.
The Problem Child in School. Publication
No. 4, Joint Committee on Methods of
Preventing Delinquency. 50 East 42nd
Street, New York, U.S.A. $1.00.
stated in the sub-title, this volume gives
!is "Narratives from Case Records of Visiting
Teachers with a Description of the Purpose and
;(c?pe of Visiting Teacher Work." The
cases '' are children who have brought them-
selves under notice as behaviour problems,
children whose school progress is erratic and
Puzzling, whose behaviour is perplexing or
whose personalities manifest traits that give
Cause for concern." The visiting teacher, a
new type of specialist, has been instituted in
connection with the American school system
" to give early attention to the difficulties with
which such children are struggling- and to pre-
vent serious problems of scholarship and con-
duct from developing." It can thus be well
understood how the Joint Committee on
Methods of Preventing Delinquency has in-
cluded among its activities the promoting of
this type of work, recognising in many of these
problem children the potential delinquent. The
Committee has co-operated with educational
authorities throughout the States in providing
such trained specialist visiting teachers in order
to demonstrate their usefulness. The records
given here have been selected as typical of the
cases dealt with, the methods employed, and
the results achieved, in order that some under-
standing may be gained of the "painstaking
development of a conscious and transmittable
technique which utilises the processes uncon-
sciously employed in some degree by every
successful teacher and parent."
The visiting teacher does not pretend to be
either a psychologist or a psychiatrist. She
must be temperamentally fitted as well as
trained to study dispassionately the innumer-
able small details that go to make up the life
of a child at home, at school, at play, to track
the apparently trivial causes that are at the root
of his difficulties, and then to use common sense
in bringing into action the appropriate remedial
measures. "She must be a skilled craftswoman
who can analyse thoroughly the problems which
confront her, and can marshal social and edu-
cative forces inside and outside the school for
clear and specific purposes." She is usually
attached to one school, or to a small group of
schools. She must know the teachers and
school activities well, and also the resources
and temptations of the neighbourhood, so that
she may become not only a tremendous help in
dealing with individual cases that have been
referred to her, but a quiet and steady influ-
ence in community education.
Work of this type cannot be hurried, and a
number of the children cited were under obser-
vation and care for as long as two and three
years. A flexible school curriculum is a neces-
sity in the majority of cases, so that we find a
dull boy permitted to drop the study of arith-
metic altogether, and even woodwork is
omitted when he felt he had had an overdose
of it in the Special Class.
Classification of cases is not unduly stressed,
but examples are given of problems arising
from parental attitudes to their children, feel-
ings of inferiority, questions of honesty and
sex, while the behaviour problems of the dull
76 MENTAL WELFARE.
normal child are extensively dealt with. The
book is written in non-technical language and
with a clear conception of the possibilities and
limits of visiting teacher work. It should be
interesting and useful to all who deal with chil-
dren, especially to teachers and care workers.
The quotations given at the heads of chapters
are peculiarly apt and suggestive, and point the
way to further reading on the various topics.
E. L. S. R.
Health & Pyschology of the Child. Edited
by Elizabeth Sloan Chesser, M.D. Heine-
mann, London. 7s. Gd. net.
The sweeping claim on the wrapper of this
book that "parents and teachers and all con-
cerned with child training must have definite
knowledge of psychology " is calculated to
rouse a feeling of irritation in the breasts of
ordinary parents, who may well point out that
plenty of healthy, happy families were reared
in aeons that passed before " psychology "
was invented. Many of the distinguished team
of experts whom Dr. Sloan Chesser has assem-
bled could justifiably retort, however, that a
substantial portion of their income is derived
from the treatment of naturally healthy chil-
dren who have been marred by incompetent
parents.
The contributions in this composite volume
are of very unequal merit. Among familiar
names one notes that of Dr. Pritchard, on the
Psychology of the Infant, Dr. Helen Boyle, on
the Unstable Child, Dr. Cameron on Refusal
of Food in Childhood, Lady Barrett, on the
Nursery Child, Dr. Tredgold, on Delinquents,
and Dr. Leonard Williams on the " Endocrine
Glands," who all present with their accustomed
skill, valuable material which should be of real
assistance even to experienced parents and
teachers. The outstanding paper is one by Dr.
Hadfield on the "Development of Self-Con-
sciousness in the Child." This writer is not
only a psychologist of eminence, but a shrewd
. and humorous observer of the human child.
He attaches definite meanings to terms too
often used as mere jargon (" suggestion " is
an example), his points are fresh and never
trivial.
Of special interest to teachers of defectives is
Dr. Agnes Savill's paper on Music and Educa-
tion. They would probably endorse her claim
for the educative value of musical training, but
few will care to follow her in the suggestion
that aesthetic appreciation is an adequate sub-
stitute for the religious training of past genera-
tions. Scarcely more helpful and equally at
variance with our experience is the essay of
Mr. Cyril Flower, of Manchester College, Ox-
ford, who occupies thirty dreary pages in ad-
vising that the groping mind of the child should
be left to create its own god out of " environ-
ment " and " suggestion." It is true, indeed,
that adults with no consciousness of security
in their own faith will have little to give chil-
dren. So much the worse for the child. Many of
us know, however, what joy and strength the
presentation of definite and concrete religious
truths may bring to children, even if defective,
and it is to be regretted that this point of view
has been entirely omitted from a volume pur-
porting to deal exhaustively with child
psychology.
L. D. F.
Report of Departmental Committee
APPOINTED TO INQUIRE INTO NURSING SER-
VICE in County and Borough Mental
Hospitals. H.M. Stationery Office.
The Report of the Departmental Committee
of the Board of Control on the nursing service
in county and borough mental hospitals should
be widely read by all those who are interested
in the welfare of patients and nurses. It is
commendably short, and can be obtained for
Is. 3d.
It formed the subject of an important confer-
ence convened by the Chairman of the Board
on April 21st and 22nd.
The Report emphasises the desirability of
bringing the service of mental nursing into line
with general hospital nursing. It recommends
that mental hospitals should be graded as to
suitability for training schools and that Govern-
ment grants-in-aid should be given; that the
general status of nurses, sisters and matrons
should be raised, and that no person in future
should be appointed to the charge of a ward
without a certificate in mental nursing; that
the rates of pay should be such as to encourage
study, and that general hospital training should
be recognised by the payment of an additional
yearly sum.
The Report urges that night duty, in the
interest of both staff and patients, should be
undertaken in rotation by all nurses except
first-year probationers, and that the staff on
night duty should be increased.
The Committee, in discussing hours of work,
emphasise the difficulty of standardisation and
the necessity for a careful consideration of the
whole position. They go on to say : " Nursing
is a vocation . . . which cannot be judged
by general occupational standards." The diffi-
culty of the position is of course to ensure
fairer treatment as to hours without loss to the
MENTAL WELFARE. 77
Patients, but there is no doubt that undue de-
mands are frequently made on the nurses.
t is interesting- to note that the Departmen-
a Committee express approval of the nursing
0 ^ell-behaved male patients by women
nurses, and this opinion coincides with that
^pressed by various members of the confer-
(Err' amon? others Prof. G. M. Robertson
eff ln^>Ur?'1)> who gave evidence to the same
ect before the Roval Commission on Lunacy
Mental Disorder.
