Corrective Teaching for Defects of Speech in Backward and Mentally Defective Children
=======================================================================================


36 MENTAL WELFARE.
By Irene R. Ewing,
Ellis LJwyd Jones, Lecturer in ihe Training of the Deaf, Manchester University.
During- the last five or six years many teachers whom I have met have dis-
cussed with me the defects which are so common in the speech of backward and
defective children, and the difficulties which lie before the teacher who tries to
correct such defects.
Lately much more attention is being- paid to the question of speech correction.
The Board of Education and Authorities of Training Colleges are recognising its
importance and are providing speech-training as part of a teacher's course of
study. Most of such training bears upon the teacher's own speech, and as yet
little instruction is given in the correction of children's speech.
In my opinion the greatest influence towards securing more perfect speech
in our schools is the more perfect speech of teachers. It is well, therefore, for
everyone who is interested in this subject to examine his or her own speech?
to detect and correct any imperfections that may be present. We are all apt
to form careless, slipshod habits when we talk, to catch local inflexion of voice
or the local stressing of a word. Our speech is so largely a matter of imitation
that it is not easy to avoid imitating the provincialisms of the district in which
we live or work. I would suggest, therefore, that if we are to improve the quality
of the speech in a school as a whole and also to correct individual peculiarities
and defects we must first of all ensure that the speech the children hear in school
shall be as perfect as possible. This presupposes that teachers realising the danger
of their own tendency in common with all mankind " to catch " provincialisms
will quite simply and definitely give ear to their own speech. The swiftest and
surest way to develop " an ear " for speech is, in my opinion, through the study
of phonetics. In such a course of study not only does one gain a systematic and
scientific knowledge of the formation of the sounds (i.e., vowels, diphthongs, con-
sonants and all their combinations) of which our language is composed, an under-
standing of the relative positions of the organs of speech for each sound, but one
also acquires facility in diagnosing faults, in controlling lips, tongue, etc.?a
facility greatly needed when we wish to imitate a fault for the purpose of diagnosis
and correction.
But there are many teachers of backward and defective children who, though
having neither enough time nor opportunity for the study of phonetics, are keenly
interested in speech correction, and would gladly devote some time and
thought to it, if they knew how to set about it. To them the following sugges-
tions are offered in the hope that they may be of practical help as a basis upon
which to work.
If suggestions are to be of real practical help, when making them, one must
bear in mind the conditions under which the average teacher works. For instance,
usually she has a class of twenty or more children, whose speech is slovenly and
inaccurate at best, and among whom there are one or two whose speech is definitely
faulty and unintelligible. When there is a specific speech fault such as stammering,
lisping, bad habits resulting from cleft palate, " t " given for c or k (e.g., toat
for coat), " d " for g (e.g., do for go), corrective teaching must of necessity be
individual?and we know it is not easy for a teacher responsible for a class to
MENTAL WELFARE. 37
devote time to individual needs. I think that satisfactory and lasting' results, when
dealing with specific speech defects, can only be obtained through much teaching
and practice?direct personal teaching regularly and systematically given by a
person whose whole attention can be devoted to the child during the speech
lesson. It is not possible for a teacher to supervise a class doing other work and
at the same time to give adequate corrective teaching for the lisp of one child.
I am persuaded that if a permanent improvement in speech is lO be obtained, time
for individual teaching must be made, either by an arrangement so that one teachei
or superintendent shall be responsible for this work, or by allowing each class
teacher a short time daily in which to deal with the worst types of defects among
the children in her class. Even in schools where one teacher or superintendent is
responsible for all speech training, the best results cannot be obtained unless each
member of the staff works in co-operation with her. Twenty minutes' teaching
and practice daily in sounding " s " instead of " th " {e.g., child who lisps and
says " thoap " for soap, etc.), will not alone establish the new speech habit in a
backward child. He is slow to form new habits and unless he is reminded every
time he uses a word in which the faulty sound occurs, he will not of himself
apply what he has learnt; the old habit will re-assert itself and he will continue
to lisp except when talking to the " speech teacher." She acts as a reminder and
lie sounds the " s " as a result. Sometimes we forget that it is not enough to
secure from the child the right sound ; we need to give enough practice in it and
its application to fix it in the child's speech in such a way that he produces it
eventually automatically and not with a conscious effort; and, again, let us
remember that we are dealing with backward children and therefore we must be
prepared to give extra practice, and yet even so to obtain a result more slowly.
I believe that it is well worth while to persevere with speech correction, no matter
how slow the progress made, and that very encouraging results are possible with
defective children in this branch of teaching, but only in so far as the speech is a
matter of interest to every member of the staff. One or two keen individuals can
bring about much improvement in the speech of a school, but the most lasting
results can only be obtained when every teacher in a school co-operates and makes
the utterance of every child her concern.
I hope that I may be pardoned for repeating what I have already written?
that it is well worth the trouble and time to study phonetics and to attend a
course of lectures in Speech-training, especially where several members of a staff
can attend together. I believe that it is very helpful?it is certainly more amusing
? if two or three or more work in co-operation when studying this subject,
analysing, criticising, comparing and imitating faulty sounds made by children
in the school.
To such teachers, anxious to develop " an ear " for speech, I would
suggest that it is helpful to think of speech from four different aspects :
1. The voice?pleasant and resonant?
2. Vowel sounds?pure or local?
3. Consonants?clearly uttered or thickly?
4. Accent?is stress laid on the right syllable?
Devote a short time daily for a month noting defects in the speech of diffeient
children ; later analyse each fault, and ask yourself quite simply :?
1. Is that defect due to the child's voice?
2. Is it due to a wrong vowel sound?
3. Is it due to a wrong consonant, or to a slovenly sound, or to lack of a
consonant?
38 MENTAL WELFARE.
4. Is it due to the wrong- stressing of a syllable (e.g., observe instead of
observe) ?
Whenever you hear a fault mentally analyse it and examine it to discover to
which group it belongs. By following this plan every day for a month you will
find that the vagueness as to the origin of defects will clear away and that you will
learn to locate that part of the mechanism which is responsible for them.
This is the first step towards correction. And the second step, I believe,
lies in the imitation of the fault. Train yourself to repioduce as exactly as you
can what the child says. Develop a sense of mimicry so that you can imitate faults
instantly. Unless a teacher knows what is wrong with the child's speech she
cannot show him how to correct it. The mere repetition by the teacher of the
word correctly spoken is practically useless. It is of no value for the teacher to
discourage a child by saying, " No ! that is wrong?this is right," again and
again as he tries to copy her pronunciation. She needs to show him how to
produce the right sound, so simply that he can follow her directions. Not only
must she understand how the correct vowel or consonant is produced but also she
must know what the child does that he should not do, or what he omits to do.
This knowledge will come naturally if she gain facility in imitating faults. Briefly
I suggest the following procedure will be helpful in diagnosis :?
1. Place the fault (i.e., Voice? Vowel? Consonant? or Accent?).
2. Imitate it.
3. Compare the right and the wrong sound as you repeat each in front of
a mirror.
4. Note the shape of the sound, if it is a vowel, and the position, if a
consonant.
What you can see of the production of sounds is even more helpful than
what you can hear, and it is more definite. You can show the child in the mirror
his own wrong shape or position.
In a short article such as this it is impossible to deal adequately with the
origin and correction of defects of voice, vowels, consonants and accent. I can
only recommend books that will be helpful to the teacher who wishes to know
more. For voice and its right development, for the production of vowels and
consonants I would recommend " Voice Training," by H. H. Hulbert (University
Tutorial Press, 1/Gd.). For valuable suggestions as to the correction of particular
defects I would recommend " Defects of Speech," by Ida C. Ward (Dent & Sons,
l/6d. ?). For a useful description of the formation of vowels, consonants and
their combinations, I would recommend " Speech and Speech Reading," by
A. J. Story (Harrison & Ainsworth, 3/10d.). This book is intended for teachers
of the deaf but there is much in it that can be very helpful to anyone interested in
the production of the sounds of which our language is composed.
If we consider the type of child in whose speech defects such as stammering,
strained speech, jerky speech, a hurried lisp occur, we find that almost always
he is nervous and highly strung. It is necessary, therefore, for us to remember
that successful correction for him will be brought about by building up his self-
confidence and a belief that he can speak properly. It is essential to arouse in
him a desire for correction and an interest in his speech, and this can best be
done, I believe, by noting and recommending- what is right in his speech from
the first?and only gradually introducing the idea that all sounds are not perfect
but can be made so.
In the foregoing plans we have considered the more pronounced speech defects
of particular children ; we have not dealt with the question from the point of view
MENTAL WELFARE. 39
of class teaching. I feel very strongly that there is valuable work to be clone
in this direction. Just as the' movements of hands, feet and limbs of backward
children are clumsy and often lacking in control, so are the movements of the
organs of speech?the lips, tongue, soft palate, etc. ; and just as free bodily action
is developed in drill, games and dancing by the regular exercise of all muscles
involved, so should we develop the muscles concerned in the formation of words.
This can be done by setting aside each day a short period to be devoted to speech-
training for the whole class. I would suggest that 15 minutes daily be allowed
for this and that the time would be well spent if divided into three parts
5 minutes on Voice training.
5 minutes on Pronunciation, i.e., Pure vowel sounds.
5 minutes on Consonants.
I his scheme is only intended to be suggestive. The wise teacher will note
the weakness in the speech of her class and she will plan her time and her
exercises especially for the correction of the most common faults.
Suggested exercises for Voice training :?
(a) Breathing exercises?upon which the strength and control of the voice
primarily depend. (See Hulbert?Voice I raining, p. 16.)
(b) Exercises based on " AR."
AR?prolonged and sung in a pleasant well resonated voice.
OO?Ditto.
AR?begun softly and swelling to greater loudness.
OO?Ditto.
AR?soft loud, soft loud in turns.
OO?Ditto.
It is necessary for the teacher to see that before such exercises a^e taken,
every child blows his nose effectively. Resonance is interfered with if there is
any blockage in the nasal organ.
It is important that a good chest voice should be produced and the sugges-
tion that each child should place his hand on his chest to feel the voice (i.e., the
vibration of voice) will help towards securing it.
It is also important that such exercises should be sung easily and lightly and
without any strain. Since speech itself is the best of all voice developers, always
provided the voice used is not harsh, heavy or nasal, it is good for children to
join together in the repetition of rhythmic verses such as " One Man went to
Mow " (not sung but spoken), " This is the House that Jack built."
Exercises to develop correct vowels :?We know that the purity of speech
depends for the most part upon the vowels and that provincialisms most often
can be traced to faults in them; therefore, it is well to give regular practice for
pure vowels, pointing out the correct shape of the mouth or the position of the
tongue; contrasting the wrong with the right shape. Let each child fot this
keep a small mirror and lead him to see and compare sounds, then to practice
them in words :?
e.g., Child says " die " for day.
Show in mirror :? i. Mouth is more open for die.
ii. Tongue is more spread for clay. _ _ _
Then, when the right sound day is given, let the class practise it in voids .
day, may, ha}', cake, say, stay. (When children cannot lead, the woids must
be repeated after the teacher.)
In five minutes it will be found that probably only one sound can be dealt
with, but each vowel should be practised in turn and once the puie sound is obtained
it must be insisted upon at all times.
40 MENTAL WELFARE.
Exercises to develop clear consonants :?When once we realise that the
intelligibility of speech very greatly depends upon the clear and precise articula-
tion of the consonants, we shall understand why the speech of backward children
is so often unintelligible and slovenly. Each consonant is the result of one or
more delicate movements, e.g. :?
" t " is a little explosion of breath which follows the release of the tip of
the tongue when it has been pressed against the upper gum.
" f " is a flowing out of breath when lower lip is raised to upper teeth and
they rest lightly upon it.
In my opinion, the consonants are best developed in babbling exercises,
e.g. :?
ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba
pa-pa-pa-pa-pa-pa
ta-ta-ta-ta-ta-ta
ca-ca-ca-ca-ca-ca
la-la-la-la-la-la
ga-ga-ga-ga-ga-ga
hee-hee-hee-hee-hee
pow-pow-pow-pow-pow, etc.
Each teacher will know best what sounds need most attention for her class.
The value of babbling exercises lies in the movement they provide for the muscles
concerned in the production of the sounds babbled. All such exercises must
perforce help the speech as a whole, but it is necessary also to give attention
to each faulty consonant as it occurs in words and therefore some word practice
should also be taken, e.g. :?
Child sounds " T " for " C " or " K."
ta-ta-ta
tor-tor-tor
tow-tow-tow
ka-ka-ka
cor-cor-cor
cow-cow-cow.
Practice, as given above, will help the child to produce both sounds more
accurately, but for him to use the right sound in a word, it will be necessary to
point out to him the difference in the position for each sound respectively and to
let him see the difference in the mirror noting that " T " is made by the tip of
the tongue and that " C " or " K " is made further back in the mouth and
the tip is down.
To give the " K " in a word, the child will need to make a conscious effort
it first, to place his tongue in the right position for " K " before he begins to
utter the word. Similarly, he must at first think about every faulty consonant
and practise the right formation again and again until, without any conscious
effort on his part, it occurs in his speech automatically.
What I have written only touches upon this subject very superficially and
inadequately. I feel I have not shown what an absorbing interest the correction
of speech defects can become, nor have I made plain the conviction I hold, that
if a teacher will begin to interest herself in children's speech, give thought to it
and experiment in her attempts to correct it; if she will be guided by common
sense and ask herself simply, " How can I bring home to that child the right
sound? " she will find that with thought, reading, the application of what she
reads, and experience, her grasp of this question will grow, confidence in her own
ability to cope with difficulties will become stronger and the results she will obtain
will more than repay her labours.
\
