Intelligence Testing: Its Methods and Results
================================================

MENTAL WELFARE. 47
Book Reviews & Abstracts.
 By Rudolf Pintner, Ph.D.
University of London Press, Ltd. 406 pp.
7s. 6d. nett.
We may perhaps be sceptical regarding the
flood of literature on this subject proceeding
from across the Atlantic, but the fact that the
author, now Professor of Education in the
Teachers' College, Columbia University,
U.S.A., was formerly a distinguished student
of one of our own Universities, may win for
this book a somewhat readier welcome. It
will certainly be deserved, for at the present
state in the development of the work of mental
testing we could not wish for a more suitable
volume to put into the hands of those of the
general public who wish to* be informed on tue
subject. Students in colleges, as well as
medical men and teachers who have no special
training in this direction, would do well to
begin their study by a careful reading of these
pages.
Professor Pintner deals in a comprehensive
way with the history and theory of mental
testing and the general methods employed,
concluding with a survey of the results of
testing with reference to such special groups
as superior and feeble-minded children, delin-
quents, the deaf and the blind, and others.
Of great value for reference are chapters v.
and VI., where various individual and group
scales are discussed and tables of age-noims
given for these scales. Full bibliographies
follow each chapter.
The publishers are to be congratulated on
the beautiful letter-press of the book and this,
combined with the author's easy style, method-
ical treatment of the subject and well-balanced
judgment, makes the volume very pleasant
reading as well as a thoroughly useful text-
book. E. L. S. R.
The Borderland: Some Problems of
Insanity. By Theo. B. Hyslop, M.D.,
F.R.S.E. London. Philip Allan and Co.
192-1. Pp. 304. 32s. 6d.
The Nervous Patient. By Millais Culpin,
M.D., F.R.C.S.(Eng.). ' London. H. K,
Lewis and Co, 1924. Pp. 305, 10s, 6d.
Aids to Psychiatry. Students' Aids
Series. By W. S. Dawson, M.A., M.D.
(Oxon.), M.R.C.P. (Lond.), D.P.M.
London. Balliere, Tindall and Cox.
1924. Pp. 309. 4s. 6d.
These three books all deal with the subject
of mental life but from different aspects. The
first, Dr. Hyslop's " Borderlandis a work
of far reaching scope as the title implies. The
author, a man of great attainments in many
spheres and of wide interests?to mention
Medicine, Art and Music among many?has
drawn upon his experience to give his con-
sidered views on many problems of our complex
social life. He deals with matters of Sociology,
of Education, and of Degeneracy with his
characteristic brisk and emphatic style, while
chapters are devoted to such questions of
public interest as " Civilisation," " Health
and Disease in Art," and so on. In all these
excursions his aim has been to deal with the
developments of the mind in the way of beliefs,
attitudes, and conduct, and to show how in
all departments of life expression may be found
for all those variations of personality which
can be considered neither healthy nor diseased
but belonging to the " borderland." With
the wealth of material he provides it would be
invidious to make any special references,
indeed it would be misleading ; the book must
be read as a whole for the aims of the author
to be appreciated. It is in no sense a text
book, he treats of no specific mental disease,
but it is rather a volume for the library shelf
to be read reflectively. Dr. Hyslop has
thought deeply and he wants his readers to
think also, and in his present work there is
much material for consideration for all, be
they medical, legal or educational by disposi-
tion or calling.
Dr. Culpin's book, " The Nervous Patient
is one of those psychological expositions of a
type to which we have become accustomed in
recent years. It is an attempt, quite indivi-
dualistic in conception, to put in a simple way,
the psycho-analytic explanation of those
troubles to which we are all liable in some
degree and which we ascribe to " nerves."
It is a sincere contribution based upon the
author's own experience of handling his cases
and he devotes a considerable part of the book
to a description of his own career in so far
48 MENTAL WELFARE.
as it explains how he was led to adopt the
principles which he advocates. He writes
very well and very plausibly but shows himself
a trifle carried away on the tide of his own
personal feelings, otherwise he would not in-
clude his defence of psycho-analysis and his
criticism of its antagonists which is caustic
and intolerant to a degree. In common with
its prototypes the book tells the story tho-
roughly, but it does not relate the whole of
the facts. Chapters on the major psychosis,
by Dr. Stanford Read, and on eye symptoms,
by Mr. W. S. Inman, written from the same
standpoint, add to the scope of the work. The
book is intended for the use of medical prac-
titioners, who, from their knowledge and
experience must judge for themselves as to the
actual value of the deductions put forward
and of the methods of treatment suggested.
" Aids to Psychiatry," by Dr. Dawson, is
a book of quite another type. Written to con-
form to the series of " aids " in other depart-
ments of medicine, it aims at presenting in a
small compass the whole subject of mental
disorder. Psychiatry is a branch of medicine
which lends itself but poorly to this form of
treatment and the author is to be congratulated
upon his success in dealing with the subject
matter. To the student who is not conversant
practically with the handling of cases of mental
disease, however, the book might be mislead-
ing from its very conciseness, and consequently
its use must be confined to those who for some
reason or another require a more or less
tabular form of presentation of the subject.
Such a statement as " like dreams and halluci-
nations, delusions are the distorted fulfilment
of an unconscious wish " require much elabora-
tion if it is to have any meaning whatever,
and we feel that the author would have been
wiser to confine himself to the pure descrip-
tion of the clinical and pathological phenomena
considering the limitations imposed by the
purpose of the book. It is very easy to criticise
and very difficult to satisfy, and on the whole
the presentation of the material is most credit-
able. The complete field of mental disorder
is laid out neatly and made easy of assimila-
tion for the student whose wider reading has
prepared his mind for the task of ingestion.
Modern developments of thought have been
followed and throughout it is obvious that the
author owes much of his inspiration to the
school of psychiatry to which he belongs, that
of the Maudsley Hospital and its directors.
Thomas Beaton.
Observations on Delinquent Mental Defec-
tives. By W. Rees Thomas, M.D.,
M. R.C.P.Lond., D.P.M., Medical Superin-
tendent, and Cecil H. G. Gostwyck, M.B.,
F.R.C.P.Edin., Assistant Medical Officer of
the Rampton State Institution, near Retford.
Journal of Mental Science, Jan., 1925.
In this very interesting- paper, the Medical
Officers of Rampton State Institution for
" dangerous and violent defectives," discuss
the problems presented by the patients in their
charge, divided into three groups :?
1. Simple mental defectives (21 males, 5
females).
2. Mental defectives with abnormal emo-
tional instability (26 males, 37 females).
3. Mental defectives with psychoses or
psychoneuroses (53 males, 58 females).
1. Simple mental defectives.?This group
includes cases in which there is no supervening
mental disorder or pronounced emotional in-
stability, but who have been led into anti-
social conduct as the result of lack of intel-
ligence and capacity and of impulses too strong
for them to control. In the orderly routine of
institution life they gradually become tractable
and often industrious, the only difficulty being
that by reason of their suggestibility it is neces-
sary to keep them away from the higher-grade
cases.
2. Mental Defectives with abnormal emo'
tional instability.?These patients are described
as restless, mischievous, defiant and noisy, and
often violent and destructive. They are liable
to extreme emotional outbreaks on the slightest
provocation, and create a disturbance which
spreads rapidly if prompt segregation is not
resorted to. Conduct during these outbreaks
is quite deliberate and directed, and may be
explained by the patient as having arisen be-
cause she " felt unsettled and could not help
herself." In between the attacks the patients
may make every effort to submit to control and
may earn privileges for good conduct and in-
dustry. In tests carried out under laboratory
conditions they may demonstrate a satisfac-
MENTAL WELFARE. 49
tory amount of reason, judgment and wisdom
and may show only a slight defect of intellig-
ence. In certain cases the writers record that
they have noted accompanying, though some-
times only transitory, symptoms, which seem
to indicate that the patient is in a transition
stage from instability to dementia prsecox.
3. Mental Defectives with Psychoses.?In
this group are included all those cases showing
a persistent or recurring psychosis or
psychoneurosis supervening on or causing a
legal mental deficiency."
All forms of mental disorder are found in
these patients, as concomitants of anti-social
conduct, though the most common is that
which is manifested by transient ideas and
delusions of persecution. Amongst the male
patients this type of disorder is markedly
found in those who have been committed for
some crime of a homosexual nature or who are
known to have homosexual desires, and it is
frequently found to be the outcome of the
morbid mental state which is produced by the
suppression of abnormal cravings of this
nature.
Discussing the question of certification in
the case of the patients in this group the
writers state that many are insane for short
periods but that the symptoms subside so
rapidly that certification under the Lunacy Act
is difficult and often impossible. To the ordi-
nary observer their psychosis is not always
apparent and when they come before the courts
charged with crimes possibly committed under
its influence, the acute and outstanding sym-
ptoms have disappeared, leaving apparent only
the mental defect. They are, therefore, certified
-?and rightly?under the Mental Deficiency
Act and their true condition only becomes re-
cognised after they have been kept under
observation for a long period.
It is interesting to read that to this third
group half the inmates of Rampton belong.
Canework. By Charles Crampton. Pp. 03,
Raffia Work. By Elsie Mochrie. Pp.61. 4/6.
Simple Embroidery. By Elsie Mochrie. Pp.
20. 1/6.
Tablet Weaving. By H. Pralle. Trans, by
M. & H. H. Peach. Pp. 19. 1/6.
All published by the Dryad Handicrafts, St.
Nicholas St., Leicester.
These four little handbooks are written
clearly and simply and contain numerous dia-
grams and illustrations which are easily under-
stood.
The skilled professional handicraft teacher
is not likely to find in them anything- very
new, but to workers in Institutions and to
Occupation Centre Supervisors seeking to add
to their knowledge of handwork, they should
be of considerable value.
The Dryad Works are to be congratulated
on their enterprise in making this attempt to
popularise the simpler handicrafts by publish-
ing this series of attractive booklets.
