Problems of Personality
===========================

MENTAL WELFARE. 105
Book Reviews *82 Abstracts.
 : Studies presented
to Dr. Morton Prince, pioneer in American
psychopathology. (I he International
Library of Psychology, Philosophy, and
Scientific Method). Pp. 4:34. Kegan
paul, Ltd., 1925. 18s.
The variety of thought displayed in this col-
lection of twenty-four essays is certainly in
keeping with the varied interests of the notable
Physsician and thinker it is written to honour.
,le bibliography given of Dr. Prince's wri-
ngs shows he has written just over one hun-
ted papers apart from five books. The con-
*nbutions include those on general medicine,
neurology) psychology, psychiatry and philo-
s?phy.
T? touch adequately upon the variety of
Authoritative opinion contained in this book
^?uld require a small volume, and it is only
Possible to give a bare indication of some
eatures of its contents.
^e book is classified into five parts (1)
general Essays, (2) Studies in Psychology,
Studies in Abnormal Psychology and
sychopathology, (i) Psychoanalysis (pro and
f?n)> (5) Miscellaneous, this includes Neuro-
??y? Social Psychology, &c.
T As pointed out in the introduction by Dr.
?back, the contributors include many schools
?f thought, and their views do not necessarily
pC<rord with each other or with those of Dr.
lncp. All, however, tend to bear upon per-
s?nality, to the study of which Dr. Prince
rna<^e such notable contributions.
. It is invidious to select names, but as an
1 ,lcation of the type and diversity of the
inters, one may mention Jung, Janet, McDou-
Sah> Myers, Elliot-Smith, White, Jelliffe, Dana
and Ernest Jones.
he last named puts forward a plea for the
greater utilisation of abnormal or clinical
\vlehology in studyin8" social psychol?gy-
. atever their views, few of those whose work
rings them in contact with abnormal cases
^ 1 deny the profound influence such work has
jP?n their views on psychology in general.
v5v Profess?r Elliot-Smith and Dr. Wm.
"lte, from different standpoints, attack
Catchwords and "bad thinking "?a warning
a^east as much needed in psychology as in
0 her spheres of thought.
Macfie Campbell traces the tendencies of
recent thought in psychiatry, particularly to-
wards studying from a biological point of view
the different types of personality with their
differing ways of reacting towards their en-
vironment. He reviews the work of Kahn,
Bleuler, Kretschmer and others. The cycloid
an'd schizoid types of the latter are not dis-
similar to the extroverted and introverted types
of Jung who contributes an article on " Psycho-
logical Types." Apart from discussing these
two main forms of reaction, Jung subdivides
each class according to their tendency to react
principally to sensation, intellectual thinking
processes, feeling and intuition, making eight
clearly distinguishable types.
A fine article by Dr. A. Roback contains in
its title?" Character and Inhibition "?the
author's conclusions. He defines character as
" an enduring psycho-physical disposition to
inhibit impulses in accordance with a regula-
tive principle," an idea which he admits is not
far from the conception of McDougall. He
discusses at length the various schools of
thought and the efforts made to classify types
of character.
Janet gives a short article on " Memories
which are too real," quoting an individual who
developed this condition from inability to recon-
cile himself to sudden removal from pleasing
circumstances. He gives a table of the differ-
ent relative values of reality which our past,
present and future activities and our other
thought processes should occupy.
Dana discusses handwriting in disease, and
suggests that Wm. Shakespeare, as deduced
from his signatures, may have suffered from a
cerebral vascular lesion.
Putnam gives a good account of the hysteri-
cal manifestations and their consequences as
exhibited in the witchcraft persecution of the
seventeenth century.
Professor McDougall contributes a paper on
" Prof. Freud's Group Psychology and his
Theory of Suggestion." This is a criticism of
Freud's " Group Psychology and the Analysis
of the Ego," and a defence of his own attitude
as described in " Group Mind " and elsewhere.
He carefully differentiates his own theory of
emotional contagion from suggestion which he
feels has been overlooked by Freud, and he
also discusses various other divergencies in
opinion. He sums up Freud's position as hav-
106 MENTAL WELFARE.
ing as its fundamental basis suggestion. This
latter resembles hypnosis which in turn re-
sembles the primitive attitude towards the
horde leader. The last is represented as a
sexually jealous brute, the repressed libido of
whose followers becomes fixated on himself.
McDougall's verdict after various criticisms is
" not proven and wildly improbable."
Apart from those noticed, there are other
excellent articles, and the book generally will
appeal to many varied tastes. Those with fixed
views may find opinions that irritate, which is
in itself a stimulating process.
A. A. W. P.
The Young Delinquent. By Cyril Burt, M.A.,
D.Sc. Pp. vii?637. University of
London Press. 1925. 7s. 6d.
The book is written in simple and non-
technical language, and is marked by "a
common sense " which should commend it
not only to magistrates, probation officers and
social workers interested in juvenile delin-
quency, but to all who are interested in the
education of the young.
It is based on a careful examination of a
large number of cases over a long period and
clearly shows how varied the causes of mis-
conduct are and how deep and thorough an
investigation must be before attributing mis-
conduct to any particular cause. It also shows
how juvenile delinquency can be largely eradi-
cated by the intensive study of the individual
offender, and that the application of any forms
of treatment without previous investigation
into the causes is like working in the dark.
Dr. Burt's plan of investigation is practical
and his discussion of the relative importance
of the different causes of misconduct is very
instructive. He lays stress on the importance
of defective family relationships and defective
discipline in the home?" of environmental con-
ditions those obtaining outside the home are
far less important than those obtaining wit'hin
it." It is to be hoped that as the result of his
clear conclusions, in future, before putting a
child on probation, careful enquiries will be
made into his home conditions, as some parents
are unwilling and others incapable of making
probation a success.
There are many experts who will not be as
convinced of the necessity and practicability of
psycho-analysis as Dr. Burt would appear to
be. A psychological examination, an examine
tion by a medical man possessing a soun
knowledge of psychology, has proved to be
sufficient in nearly all cases. Many prefer ob-
servational methods and the reports of reliable
social workers to the so-called " moral tests.
A revision of the Mental Deficiency Act with
a view to rendering it more applicable to de-
linquent defectives is suggested. Already there
is a tendency to a wider interpretation of the
definitions in the Act; more attention is paid to
conduct defects and less to the actual mental
age as tested by intelligence tests. The author
has rendered a service in pointing out how un-
fortunate is the term " moral imbecile " in the
Mental Deficiency Act. It is doubtful whether
it is wise to pay so much attention, as the
author appears to do, to hidden complexes as
causes of misconduct. True, they may be pre-
sent in many cases, but their association with
misconduct is not always clear.
In Appendix 2 a field of possibilities *s
opened by the suggestion of the establishment
of psychological clinics, the necessity and use-
fulness of which, in the treatment and preven-
tion of juvenile delinquency, will be agreed
upon by all workers.
This book should go far to counteract the
harm done by the extreme claims put forward
by some psychologists, as it is practical and
concerned mainly with methods of enquiry and
treatment. It is certainly the best book yet
written on the psychology of the young English
delinquent, and I strongly recommend this
interesting and instructing book to all teachers
and social workers.
J. J- L.
The Sensory Basis and Structure of Know-
ledge. By Henry J. Watt, D.Phil. Pp.X,
243. Methuen & Co., 1925. 8s. 6d.
This is without doubt a notable contribution
to psychological literature, and, like Professor
Spearman's book on The Nature of IntelH*
gence, marks a definite stage in the develop-
ment of the psychology of cognition. It is
written in a language and a manner that will
not shut out the layman from its enjoyment)
but it is nevertheless of primary interest and
importance for the professional student. As
Dr. Watt says, it is " rather a thesis than a
MENTAL WELFARE. 107
text-book," a thesis which sets out fully and
systematically the view which the author has
een developing' and testing throughout a series
?f papers and books on specific problems of
sensory integration during the last 15 years.
promulgates a comparative method of
analysis of sensory experience and a scheme
?f its progressive complication from the ele-
ments of sensation up to the primitive form of
^e concept," a method which (it is held) has
already shown its power to co-ordinate the
many and otherwise confused facts of ^sensory
experience, and which has been further justified
by recent detailed studies of sensation. The
Method is here shown at work in the detailed
statement of the elements of sensation and the
various types of integration, systemic_ and
temporal (proportion, time, stereoscopic vision,
Perception, and so on). In this volume we are
n?t carried beyond the primitive concept, but
as Dr. Watt remarks, " sense must run
smoothly and continuously into intellect. And
here must be a regular process of integration
eading from the elements and details of sensa-
^0n ? ? . to the processes of thought." Only
by starting in the right direction and with the
ri?ht method, however, shall we be able to
make the whole journey of a systematic psy-
chology
S. I.
Instinct, Intelligence, and Character : An
Educational Psychology. By Godfrey H.
Thomson, Ph.D. Pp. 277. Allen & Unwin,
Ltd. 10s. 6d.
In this book Prof. Thomson has published a
course of lectures delivered by him to students
^t Teachers' College, Columbia University, in
the session 1923-4. As the sub-title suggests,
t e course was designed for teachers; through-
put the book psychological theory is brought
into relation with educational problems. This
. ?es not prevent the book from being interest-
lng to the general reader, for none of the edu-
cational problems is confined to the class-room,
the whole book is alive with illustrations
at bring home to the reader the fact that
P yschology deals with the very warp and woof
his own web of experience.
Professor Thomson writes from the bio-
logical standpoint. In his last chapter he says,
The general idea which I have taken as my
beacon in writing- the previous chapters has
been the way in which man's mind has grown
out of the animal mind." He includes in his
treatment all the subjects usually found in a
text-book of psychology, and in several cases,
notably in the chapter on Repression and Sub-
limation, he gives an exceptionally clear and
helpful introduction to modern views. The
chapter on Individual Differences in Intellect is
a masterpiece for the simplicity and clearness
with which it presents some of the most funda-
mental principles of statistics?its only draw-
back is its brevity.
The book was designed for the beginner, and
for him it offers an attractive introduction to
the study of psychology and one that will make
most serious weakness of the book is that it
him want to pursue the subject further. The
gives the reader no signposts for further study.
There is no bibliography and few references to
other works are given in a form that would
enable the reader to pursue the matter further.
These omissions are the more regrettable be-
cause, although Professor Thomson notes in
many cases that there is conflict of opinion, the
very ease and lucidity of his presentation might
give the reader an impression of finality with
regard to subjects which further reading would
reveal to be involved in perfect quagmires of
discussion. For the reader who is specially in-
terested in the problems of Mental Welfare,
the book affords an admirable introduction to
psychology, and it has the merit of giving a
very readable non-technical account of some
recent results that are of special importance
from the point of view of Mental Welfare.
This applies particularly to the chapters on
Brain Localisation and the Nature of Satisfac-
tion and Dissatisfaction.
V. H.
" Incendiarism in Adult Males : with special
REFERENCE TO THE SUBNORMAL AND
MENTALLY DEFECTIVE PERSON." By
H. T. P. Young, Medical Officer, H.M.
Convict Prison, Parkhurst.
The interesting article which appeared in
the Lancet has been reprinted, and is another
example of the results of researches in mental
deficiency which are so often given to the
public in pamphlet rather than book form.
Dr. Young tells us that " among offenders
who undergo a routine mental examination
108 MENTAL WELFARE
before trial at remand prisons are those
charged with arson." He gives details of
some cases received at Brixton during 1921,
1922, and 1923. Thirty-six prisoners were
detained there on a charge of arson out of a
total of 23,959 persons accused of indictable
and non-indictable offences. " In the arson
cases mental disease in some degree was
frequently found to be present, 11 of the 36
Brixton cases being so affected, amounting to
about 30 per cent, of the whole, while 9 were
subnormal or certifiable as mentally deficient,
representing 25 per cent. In a supplementary
group of 8 cases which were not included in
the Brixton figures, 3 were regarded as insane
and 3 as subnormal or defective."
" Studies of Mental Defects and Handi-
caps." Miami University Bulletin. By
J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D.
In this collection of papers which have
appeared previously in various scientific and
educational publications, Dr. Wallin gives us
in handy form the " fruition of many years of
systematic, original investigation and reflec-
tion." The headings of the various chapters,
such as " An investigation of the sex,
relationship, marriage, delinquency and
truancy of children assigned to special public
school classes," or " Theories of Stuttering "
indicate the interesting nature of this publica-
tion.
"The Visiting Teacher Movement." By
Julius John Oppenheimer. 2nd Edition.
New York, 1925.
In our July issue we published a review of
" The Problem Child in School " (issued by
the Joint Committee on Methods of Prevent-
ing Delinquency), and in " The Visiting
Teacher Movement " the same Committee
gives additional matter for the further study
of the methods and results of this American
development for the care of the child who does
not adjust itself fully to school-life. The
appointment of trained visiting teachers to get
in touch with the child in its home surround-
ings, was first made in one or two cities in
1906-1907, and the work is being continued by
the Joint Committee in 30 communities, as
demonstrations of the value of this inter-
mediary between the home and the school.
Several cities have lately adopted the scheme
as part of their regular school organisation*
and it bids fair to become, in the future, par
of the general American school system. The
reasons for the appointment of visiting teacher5
are thus set out :?
" Because of the increase in the size ot
classes, the increase in the amount of work*
and the change in social conditions, the
teacher has not been able to maintain the
close personal relationships with the children
that she did in former years. . . . Educa-
tional methods are increasingly stressing ?
(1) the need of providing for individual dif-
ferences ; (2) the use of the child's ex-
periences as the basis of school education!
and (3) the importance of the moral and
social aspects of education."
The requirements usually demanded of a
visiting teacher are a college degree or its
equivalent, and teaching, or social experience)
or both, and the whole system appears to be
elaborated with all the attention to minuti#
of American organisation.
The Will Temperament and Its Testing-
By June E. Downey, Ph.D., Professor of
Psychology, University of Wyoming"-
George G. Harrap & Co., Price 7s. 6d.
This book and the Manual of Directions,
which must be read with it, describes a number
of tests, which require careful consideration!
more especially as it is coming to be realised
that temperamental instability is a factor in
producing anti-social actions at least as in1"
portant as mental deficiency.
It is impossible in the space available to do
more than draw attention to the tests, which
are thirteen in number, and from which con-
clusions can be drawn respecting three phases
of activity :?
(1) Speed and fluidity of reaction.
(2) Forcefulness and decisiveness of reaction,
and
(3) Carefulness and persistence of reaction.
For each of these phases four tests are given
for different aspects of the reactions thus :?
(1) (a) Speed of movement, (b) Freedom
from load, (c) Flexibility, (d) Speed of
decision.
(2) Motor impulsion, (b) Reaction to con-
tradiction. (c) Resistance to opposition,
(d) Finality of judgment.
MENTAL WELFARE. 109
(^) (a) Motor inhibition, (b) Interest and
detail, (c) Co-ordination of impulses, (d)
Volitional preservation.
k these tests have a time factor and all
*-lree cons's^ in writing- the name of the
aminee or a short sentence under various
?nthtions of speed, space allotted, voluntary
an<r?isin?:' e^c' ^ ^le ot^ier three (1) (d)
on ? ^ are tested marking" in a list of
PPosite qualities, which of each pair the can-
^te considers he possesses and revising the
jn?1Ce later on and (2) (b) the candidate, hav-
is ch?sen one of two similar envelopes,
a^ter an interval, asked which he chose,
th a^ter saying which it was, is told it was
CQe ?ther. His strength of reaction to this
tradiction is assessed according to a scale
,ven in the Manual.
jq All the twelve tests are rated from 1 to
^ and scored according to directions given.
Q ^ Plotting out the score under each head
cu Sclu.ared paper and joining up the dots, a
-e is produced which the author calls the
t 1 "temperament profile and from which the
. Peramental quality of the examinee can be
tig ?^Cet^' This profile almost always shows
loed peaks and depressions. Thus a rapidly
an !n? excitable person has a peak in (1)
tyitl ^er^aPs in (2) but a depression in (3) while,
1 the slow methodical person the profile is
the Pea^ in (3)- I" another
the t a ^ure> resembling for this purpose
ad r telligence Quotient, is arrived at by
t, ln8" together all the scores, when the Au-
of?tkSS states that a score of 90 or over out
so r Possible 120 indicates a forceful per-
0rna ty, a total below 50 one which is weak
te Psyph?pathic. It is unlikely that these
^ s will be accepted entirely in their present
ess^' ant^ 's Quite realised by the Author-
> who asks for criticism.
One point which may be urged is that tem-
a ment is n?t a fixed quality but varies with
the' ant* t^lat with most people during life
in tk w?uid be a continuous shift of the peak
ther f Pro^e from (1) towards (3) and that
, etore norms would have to be prepared
t0r various ages.
qu^.n?ther practical difficulty is the time re-
co ? '? *^us the test (3) (a) Motor Inhibition,
AnJSl?tin?" ?f writing " The United States of
Pin^riCa " as slowly as possible without stop-
s') must, according to the Manual, take at
least 18 minutes with two further trials if
this time limit is not attained in the first or
second. Though none of the other tests would
take quite as long- as this, yet when these
are to be added to intelligence tests, voca-
tional tests, and possibly ethical tests, it is
obvious that the number of persons to whom
the\ can be applied will be limited.
J. W. F.
