The Unstable Child
===================

22 MENTAL WELFARE.
Book Reviews.
' " : An Interpretation
of Psychopathy as a. Source of Unbal-
anced Behaviour in Abnormal and
Troublesome Children.
By Florence
IViateer, A.M., rh.D. D. Appleton and
Company. New York and London :
1924. 10s. 6d. net.
It is claimed in the publisher's notice that
" this is the first book to explain the source
of the unbalanced behaviour of the problem-
child." The explanation, we are told, is
"psychopathy." Ten years ago American
enthusiasts declared that the misconducted
child was, in a majority of cases, mentally
defective; to-day, with the same sweeping
enthusiasm, he is said to be psychopathic. To
interpret more precisely what is meant by this
new term, is the chief aim of Dr. Mateer's
able and instructive work.
The book itself is the outcome of careful
psychological studies at the Ohio Bureau for
Juvenile Research. A year or two ago, Dr.
Goddard, who at Vineland had previously
done so much to emphasize the importance of
mental deficiency, published, in his book on
Juvenile Delinquency, a short account of the
research department at Ohio. Dr. Mateer's
volume may be taken as the sequel.
It is divided into two parts, a theoretical
and a practical. The theoretical chapters
describe the origin, development, and outlook
of clinical psychology, and briefly survey its
methods and achievements. The second part,
termed somewhat ambiguously " the practice
of psychopathy," deals with the practical study
of delinquents; and contains chapters upon
psychopathic children grouped according to
their mental level.
What is psychopathy ? And who are psycho-
pathic? Dr. Mateer's definition rests upon
the distinction between mental level and
mental function. The study of mental level
decides whether the child is " bright, back-
ward, or mentally defective." The study of
mental functioning indicates whether his mind
is " reliable or unreliable," no matter what
his mental level may be. The former is
quantitative; the latter qualitative. The
former relies merely upon tests for mental age.
The latter applies ten empirical criteria, which
Dr. Mateer expounds in detail. Of these
criteria, the first and simplest are the quality
of the child's replies and the distribution of
his failures and successes in the ordinary
Binet-Simon tests; the unevenness of his
mental level as judged respectively by the
Binet tests, by performance tests of intellig-
ence, and by standardised tests of educational
ability, is almost equally significant; the in-
trinsic nature and the unusual character ot
his replies in the Kent-Rosanoff tests of asso-
ciative reactions are also to be considered;
most important of all are the young patient's
own story, his behaviour during the examina-
tion, and his general orientation as an indi-
vidual.
In England, the theoretical distinctions that
Dr. Mateer draws, the stress she lays upon
mental qualities other than those of mere in-
telligence, the importance of supplementary
criteria such as she here enumerates, are
already commonplaces among those engaged
in the practice and teaching of individual
psychology. The English psychologist,
therefore, is not a little surprised to find Dr.
Mateer's line of approach acclaimed as "a
new angle." But America, unlike Great
Britain, has suffered much from the narrow
work of the half-trained Binet-tester; and, no
doubt, the American public needs to be re-
minded that, in modern psychology, Binet-
testing is not the sole method or the last
word.
To note defects of intelligence alone is
avowedly inadequate. But to put all other
defects into one comprehensive category, and
dub them psychopathic, exhibits a dangerous
principle. It is a principle constantly revived
by students of the abnormal; and the only
difference in each revival is that a new key-
word is offered by each new advocate. De-
generacy, moral deficiency, constitutional in-
feriority, the presence of complexes, the
absence of a moral sense, these conceptions
have all been advanced as the sole or chief
explanations of disordered conduct.
British psychologists in general have
accepted McDougall's account of human con-
duct : the foundations of social behaviour are
the common human emotions. Hence, dis-
orders of conduct arise largely from emotions
that are excessive or defective. If this account
be orthodox, then Dr. Mateer's antithesis can
be easily re-stated. The contrast she means
to emphasize lies between the intellectual and
MENTAL WELFARE. 23
the emotional aspects of the mind, between
intelligence on the one hand and temperament
on the other, not between level and function-
ing. Ihere are levels of emotionality, just as
there are levels of intelligence; and intellig-
ence is a matter of function quite as much as
is conduct.
Dr. Mateer's own key-word " psycho-
pathy " is itself a word with a history. Its
primary and its proper use has been to cover
those borderline cases which cannot be desig-
nated as definitely insane, but yet show
tendencies towards one or the other of the
well-defined psychoses. This seems to be the
only legitimate meaning of the word. To
extend it to cover all forms of " mal-function-
mg " is to blur essential distinctions.
English psychologists believe, it is true, in
the existence of a general factor underlying
many disorders of conduct. But they ground
their belief upon no mere a priori argument
or dogmatic simplification. Like the general
factor which they term intelligence, the general
emotional factor is disclosed by the statistical
analysis of ascertained correlations. The
child who suffers from an excess of this
general emotionality has in England long been
known as the " unstable child." This
phrase, taken by Dr. Mateer for the title of
her book, seems far preferable to the mis-
leading word " psychopathy." Just as mental
deficiency in most instances is simply an
extreme deviation from the normal average
of 'intelligence, so instability as thus defined
orms simply an extreme degree of deviation
in all the common instincts and emotions. And
again, just as a few cases of mental defect are
pathological, so a small proportion of unstable
children show pathological tendencies. But
to imply that a pathological tendency is
c laracteristic of the whole group is scarcely
justifiable. We need to discriminate rather
t an to generalize; and the unbalanced child,
w lose improper mental functioning is due
mere y to an excess of emotionality, should be
c ear y distinguished from the child who shows
a atent tendency to a definite psychosis.
n^?i\ Tta^e ?ne example ? 27 per cent, oi
r" l^teer s cases were found to suffer fron
congenital ^ syphilis. Congenital syphilis
erefore, is said to " cause psychopathy.'
et it may equally well cause a definite psy
c iosis on the one hand, or mental defect or
the other; and there seems no advantage in
inventing a single wholesale category which
shall class together both those suffering from
post-syphilitic derangement and those who are
merely unstable in a relatively normal way.
These criticisms, however, refer mainly to
the use of terms. With the general attitude
which Dr. Mateer has adopted every English
psychologist will find himself in sympathy.
Her book, though it suffers a little from over-
repetition, is readable, stimulating, and sug-
gestive, and forms a valuable contribution
to the psychology of the unstable mind.
C. B.
