The Mental Deficiency Act, 1913
================================

 3rd Edi-
tion. As Amended by Subsequent Legis-
lation, together with the Orders,
Regulations, Rules and Circular Letters
Made and Issued Thereunder with Intro-
duction and Annotations, by R. A. Leach,
of Gray's Inn, Barrister-at-Law, Nor-
thern Circuit. Poor-Law Publications,
Ltd. 15/-.
For some years those whose duties have
included the guiding- of students through the
intricacies of the Mental Deficiency Act have
found themselves hampered by the fact that
" Leach " was out of print; for to read the
Act by itself is a process of little value,
tending, in our experience, rather to bewilder
than to enlighten the enquirer, and for an
intelligent grasp of it, not only notes and
explanations of obscure phrases are necessary,
but also the Circulars and Regulations which
clothe its dry bones. Many of these Circulars
it is impossible now to procure, and the text
book before us is the only one which contains
them. If only for that reason alone its re-
appearance in a new and thoroughly revised
edition would be a matter for congratulation.
The last edition was issued as long ago as
December, 1914, and, as the author points
out in his preface, four important legislative
changes have, therefore, had to be noted :?
viz., the withdrawal of the limitation on the
total amount of contributions payable by the
Treasury under Section 47 of the Act: the
repeal of Section 45 dealing with the Super-
annuation of officers of certified institutions
and its replacement by the Asylums and Cer-
tified Institutions (Officers' Pensions) Act of
1918; the incorporation of the Elementary
24 MENTAL WELFARE.
Education (Defective and Epileptic Children)
Acts in the Education Act, 1921 ; and the con-
version of the Local Government Board into
the Ministry of Health.
For other important developments in con-
nection with the Act it is necessary to turn
to the Circular Letters issued from time to
time to Local Authorities and Boards of
Guardians by the Board of Control and several
have been added to those which appeared in
the last edition, viz., the Circular of February,
1918, dealing- with the After-Care of defectives
leaving- Institutions; that of December, 1919,
containing suggestions for the Institutions
which it was then hoped would be rapidly
built; the Circular letter issued to.Boards of
Guardians in June, 1919, urging the greater
use of Section 30 (ii), and the " Review of
the Conditions of Defectives and Lunatics in
Poor-Law Institutions/' which followed it.
There is also given the Poor-Law Institutions
(Mental Defectives) Order of 1917, and the
Board's Model Forms of Agreement for the
Reception of Defectives into Poor-Law and
Certified Institutions. We regret, however,
that the two important Circulars to Local
Authorities issued in December, 1922, and
June, 1923, on the subject of Occupation Cen-
tres have been omitted. In his preface the
author refers to the impossibility of including
every Circular and to the inadvisability of
giving those which " are mere reminders of
what has already been said in previous
letters " and " those which, issued to deal
with an exigency of the moment are apt to
become out-of-date and misleading," a point
which we fully appreciate. But Circulars
announcing the decision of the Treasury to
empower grants to be given to Occupation
Centres and authorising Local Authorities to
regard them as part of the machinery of
" Supervision " cannot be said to come
within either of these categories and are surely
of considerable importance. We note, too,
in this connection, that the Repeal of Article
15 of the Home Secretary's Provisional Regu-
lations has been overlooked. We would also
point out that Schedule F. (for the report on
a child examined for mental deficiency) origin-
ally appended to the Board of Education's
Revised Model Arrangements issued in 1914
and reproduced in this volume on pp. 261 to
264, was in 1921 replaced by the much simpler
Form 306M.
In the notes given concurrently with the
Sections of the Act many valuable additions
have been made, particularly in connection
with Rulings of the Courts as to the inter*
pretation of certain clauses. Amongst these
we would especially commend the list of
Rulings with regard to Sections 43 and 44
(Determination of Residence) which present in
a concise and condensed form all the important
cases upon which judgment has been given-
Other useful Rulings recorded are those on
" neglect " and " without visible means of
support." Under Section 48 there is a note
as to the number of Voluntary Societies re-
ceiving financial assistance and the amount
paid to them during the financial year ending
31st March, 1920. We are glad that some
information of the sort has been included
though it is a pity that more up-to-date
figures could not have been procured for the
purpose.
But, despite our criticisms on points of
detail, we are of opinion that in its present
revised form this is a text book which no one
concerned, either theoretically or practically-
with the administrative side of work for de-
fectives can afford to be without. We only
regret that the publishers have found it neces*
sary to charge for the book nearly five times
the price at which it was originally issued.
