Performance Tests with Defectives
==================================

 :Author: D Lucy G. Fildes, B.A.,
Research Student, Psychological Laboratory, Cambridge.

There is no need, in writing for this journal, to emphasise the service which
the *Binet-Simon Scale for the Measurement of Intelligence and its many revisions
have rendered in the study of mental deficiency. The substitution of objective
measurement in diagnosis for mere personal opinion ; the possibility of estimating
degrees of defect and of stating them in standardised language; the realisation
that a condition of lowered intelligence does not as a rule improve with age;
all these but rarely outline its benefits. And yet, perhaps because of the very
vital importance of its services, we have at the present time great need to pause
and consider lest in our use of the Binet Scale we attribute to it powers which it
does not and cannot possess. For in dealing with the individual the apparent
ease with which it estimates intelligence may prove our undoing. Mental ages
and intelligence quotients may become magical formulae giving a spurious appear-
ance of knowledge and leading to inferences entirely unjustified in fact and
disastrous in application.

In reality, as a moment's thought will reveal, a mere acquaintance with the
mental age and intelligence quotient of a child tells us singularly little about him.
While serving its purpose in diagnosis, in classifying him broadly, that is, with
a certain group of his fellows for practical ends, it alone forms a quite inadequate
foundation for educational treatment. For to educate truly we must have an
intimate knowledge of each individual's peculiarities, and cannot be content with
the bare bones a mere statement of mental age supplies. Especially is this so
in working among the sub-normal, whose demands on the educator are far greater
than are those of their normal fellows. Indeed, even though the concepts of
mental age and of intelligence quotient be made more explicit and therefore of
greater value by an exact statement of the results of the different tests attempted
in each case, the limitations inherent in the nature of the Binet scale itself will
prevent their ever being, if taken alone, adequate for sound educational and
social prognosis. They are valuable, but something more is needed.

As a matter of fact, we have to admit that in certain types of cases their
very value is in doubt. A Binet mental age and intelligence quotient may, far
from being helpful, be positively misleading. For a fair application of the scale
demands that the individuals tested shall have had at least average educational
opportunities. Consequently, an abnormal external environment, on the one
hand, or a special and limited mental disability, on the other, may result in a
false suggestion of general deficiency. Cases such as those of canal boat children,
cut off so largely from the ordinary experiences of modern life; and of word-
blind children, who suffer mainly from failure in visual discrimination, are here
in point.

But apart from these special cases we are coming to realise more and more
the need for an exact knowledge of the defective greater than that which can be
given by the Binet scale. Obviously, the more such knowledge approaches in
type that given by the scale, in other words the less it depends on the mere opinion
of the individual investigator and the more rapidly it can be gained, the greater
is its value likely to be. Most urgently is it needed with the higher grade
defectives, in whose case defect or social competence is determined far less on a
* Throughout this Article the term "Binet Scale" should be read as including the many
revisions of the original scale.

basis of simple intelligence than on the possession of certain temperamental and
emotional characteristics ; for it is these which really decide the use that can be
made of the intelligence possessed. Any attempt to diagnose defect on a basis
of mental age or intelligence quotient alone is psychologically indefensible. It
assumes a division of mental power which does not take place since the operations
pf the intelligence are necessarily bound up with other mental activities. True,
individuals of slightly subnormal intelligence seem very frequently to suffer also
from peculiar emotional instabilities, which render them socially and industrially
incapable under the conditions of modern civilised life; and so far no entirely
adequate reason for this fact can be supplied. But there are also many, definitely
subnormal in intelligence, who, with reasonable help and education, can make
good in society in spite of their disabilities : provided only, that is to say, that
their intelligence is above a certain minimum.

In distinguishing between these two groups, i.e., between those high grade
defectives who are likely to be socially competent and those not so competent,
a mental age or intelligence quotient on the Binet scale is of little, if any, help.
A boy may, for instance, attain an intelligence quotient of 70 only, or even
less, and yet being slow, plodding, good-tempered and governed largely by
routine and able to stick to a job, be capable of supporting himself with com-
parative ease in a suitable occupation; while another, better in intelligence but
careless, flighty, irresponsible and readily distracted from work will never make
good in the world and will always need special care. It is because of this
inadequacy in the Binet scale that at present the decision as to the adult certifica-
tion of these high grade children is influenced so much by the opinion of those
responsible for their education, as indeed up to a point it should and must always
be; seeing that nothing can replace prolonged study by experienced observers.
But the value of standardised tests, if such are available, as supplementary dis-
criminative evidence is obvious enough; especially when ffie Binet mental age is
very high. Personal opinion would then receive a backing demonstrably free from
prejudice.

Such tests would demand that the child's intelligence be carried over into
some form of practical activity not yet learnt; that he be given a chance to show
whether he can and will carry on under difficulties and whether he can adapt
himself to new situations without undue loss of time. They would further permit
of the comparison of his results with those of others. These requirements are
fulfilled by the now rapidly increasing group of tests known as performance
tests. Performance tests satisfy in the first instance the essential requirements
of all mental tests. They are standardised in procedure and in marking. They
Permit comparison of individual results with the average results of large groups.
In other words, they constitute, when rightly used, objective measurements
resembling those of the Binet scale. They have, however, certain definite
Peculiarities. Although demanding as a result an actual doing of something,
they are planned to measure intelligence and not manual dexterity alone. The
mere act is never what matters, but rather the ability to discover what to do and
to do it : often to do it in spite of many failures. Planned as a rule to supple-
ment difficulties inherent in the Binet scale, performance tests demand a minimum
of language. The words of the investigator in giving the necessary diiections
are few and simple. The subject need not speak at all. Although affected, as
are all our actions, by past life, they are less influenced in their results than are
most of the tests of the Binet scale by the normality of past experience. Absence
from school, for example, will affect them comparatively little, while, on the
other hand, ordinary school teaching will not influence them much. One must
bear in mind, however, a fact often forgotten : that, from the results of one
90 Mental welfare.

performance test only, no conclusions whatever can be drawn as to the capabili-
ties of an individual. The nature of any one test, or the circumstances of its
administration, may always be specially favourable or unfavourable. A result
may be gained by chance?this is very hard to guard against in some tests?
or it may actually have been known beforehand. And, anyhow, the data are
inadequate for inference.

Consequently, for anything approaching a fair estimate of capacity many
tests must be used. At once arises the difficulty of the time taken for testing.
But, after all, time is necessary for good work. We cannot misjudge the children
simply because we are in a hurry; and it is only in difficult cases that performance
tests will be needed for actual testing purposes.

What has been said already suggests that performance tests will be most
useful with certain types of individuals, with those, that is, having abnormal
past experience or suffering from specific defects. It seems fairly obvious that
a boy eleven years of age, not deaf, yet unable to use or to comprehend language,
who attains a mental age of twelve and a half years when tried on ten performance
tests, is not mentally deficient in the ordinary sense of that term; nor can he
satisfactorily be educated with mentally deficient children. Yet, apart from
performance tests, it would be hard to find any satisfactory evidence of his
intelligence. We may know that he is intelligent, but without definite facts
showing how exactly he compares in a variety of ways with his normal fellows
we cannot prove this. So with the child who cannot learn to read. Technically,
he is defective. He cannot " profit by the instruction given in the elementary
school." But performance tests will help enormously in determining how best
to teach him. For a mere inability to read will not make him defective in adult
life, and his education must look forward to the future. Other specific disabilities,
influencing school work in particular and reflected in Binet results, especially with
older children and adults, may reveal themselves in the same way. It is very
possible that many children, judged subnormal in school and on Binet results,
are not subnormal at all in what one may call practical ability, and may be
saved from the despairs and disasters of constant failure if only this is realised
in time, and education fitted to individual needs.

In the same way, performance tests give a chance of trying out children of
unusual early life. The Binet tests are confessedly based on the assumption that
the individuals doing them have had certain common bases of experience and
opportunity and that native intelligence displays itself in ability or in failure to
learn from these experiences. But children brought up mainly in isolation with
uneducated parents, such as canal boat children, have not had opportunities other-
wise almost universal in civilised life. For them, therefore, a Binet examination
is not a fair test. Performance tests may not be altogether fair either, but they
do make lower demands on the use of knowledge which must be derived from
the external environment.

Let us then assert definitely that performance tests are of use in some cases
of difficulty when the diagnosis of defect is in question. If only, that is, enough
time can be spared for the work. But their value in the educational and social
prognosis of high grade cases is less certain and needs a closer investigation.
*Porteus, in discussing his Maze Tests?the most used probably of all perform-
ance tests?makes for them very definite claims in this direction ; maintaining
that they reveal certain important temperamental characteristics, especially the
habit of prudent preconsideration. He shows further that their results correlate
highly with his ratings of industrial capacity and of social adaptability. " Com-
bined with a Binet examination," he says, " they make diagnosis much more
* Guide to the Porteus Maze Tests, by S. D. Porteus, 1924.

certain." True, he discounts similar claims made by other performance tests
and scales; but even he would doubtless admit that a scale of performance tests
including" the Porteus mazes was of some diagnostic value as a supplement to,
rather than as a substitute for, the Binet scale; particularly when the social and
industrial adaptability of high grade defectives is in question.

Of interest here are the results of the examination of forty-eight high grade
boys on such a scale. The scale used was that described in ilhe British Journal
of Psychology, April, 1925. It consists of fourteen tests, chiefly American in
origin, but restandardised on English children, the Porteus mazes being included.
1 he boys examined varied in Binet intelligence quotient from 34 to 93, only five
of them having I.Qs. below 50, and fifteen having I.Qs. above 70, i.e., being
definite problem cases. On the performance scale the I.Qs. varied from 36 to
108, twelve being below 50 and twelve above 70. The performance I.Qs., that
is, as worked out on this scale, tend to be lower than the Binet. But, seeing
that we are dealing with two entirely dissimilar sets of tests whose results are
estimated in quite different ways, this fact can hardly be taken as significant.
What is significant, however, is the type of boy showing considerable differences
between Binet I.Q. and performance I.Q.

Taking all the children together, the results from the two scales show the
high correlation of .09. Obviously, most of the boys vary very little in their
rank order in the two groups of abilities tested. But in twelve cases the variation
between I.Q. in Performance and I.Q. in Binet is enough to be judged important
(a difference of at least 10 in each case). Considering these briefly in turn :
seven have a Binet I.Q. at least 10 higher than their Performance I.Q. What
are they like? Brief notes will show.

A. Appears fairly intelligent and is able to learn under close supervision,
but is extraordinarily inattentive and restless, unstable and irresponsible. There
is practically no hope of social competence in the future. The boy is almost
entirely self-centred. His Porteus Maze result?a mental age of five and a half
years at the actual age of thirteen?is suggestive.

(Binet I.Q. 71, Performance I.Q. 47.)
B. Very talkative, with good language and memory for events; interested
and keen on all happenings; but erratic and unstable, spoiling work by over-
impetuosity and lack of foresight.
(B. I.Q. 66, Perf. I.Q. 49.)
C. Can learn, but does not do so with ordinary teaching. Restless, talkative,
easily distracted. Shows little power of self-control.
(B. I.Q. 67, Perf. I.Q. 57.)
D. Amazingly slow in doing anything new. Stubborn; capable of sitting
still for hours before assimilating a new idea, and making no effort when work
is difficult, although it may actually be within his capacity.
(B. I.Q. 61, Perf. I.Q. 44.)
E. Nervous to the degree of inhibition of activity when presented with a
new task, except when given very much time and encouragement. Can do good
routine work, but thought processes seem paralysed by fear.
(B. I.Q. 64, Perf. I.Q. 43.)
F. Another nervous case. Sits before new work as if inhibited from effort.
(B. I.Q. 63, Perf. I.Q. 48.)
G. Hardworking and earnest; most anxious to do well; but limited in
power to routine and memory work. Very stupid in all practical affairs.
(B. I.Q. 56, Perf. I.Q. 44.)
t A Study of Performance Tests, by Frances Gaw.
92 MENTAL WELFARE.
Five boys have a Performance I.Q. at least 10 higher than their Binet I.Q.
Of these?
H. Is partially deaf, and has in consequence marked language trouble,
which prevents him from doing himself justice on a Binet examination.
(B. I.Q. 54, Perf. I.Q. 83.)
I. Has a marked physical disability which has probably much interfered
with past education. He is slow, but has none of the marked mental characteristic
suggestive of permanent defect.
(B. I.Q. 93, Perf. I.Q. 108.)
J. A borderline case. Difficult to manage, but capable of good work along
practical lines. Will probably be socially competent.
(B. I.Q. 77, Perf. I.Q. 93.)
K. A rather restless, talkative boy, particularly good at all forms of craft
work in which he is really interested.
(B. I.Q. 65, Perf. I.Q. 79.)
L. Another case in which difficulty with many forms of school work is
coupled with almost normal intelligence.
(B. I.Q. 88, Perf. I.Q. 99.)

Reviewing these cases we see that those showing marked superiority on the
Binet scale are of three types, viz. :?
(a) Slow, nervous, inhibited children who are afraid to tackle new problems ;
(b) Children almost the opposite of these, restless, readily distracted, un-
stable ; possessing far more intelligence than they can use; and
(c) Children of a slogging temperament, whose patience in acquiring know-
ledge gives them a false appearance of power.

With all of these social adaptability and industrial efficiency .are probably
far better indicated by their Performance than by their Binet intelligence quotients.
With regard to the other cases, the value of the performance tests where
special mental or physical disabilities exist is well illustrated. The chance of
selecting individuals on a basis of industrial efficiency rather than on aptitude
for school work is also shown.

A further examination of the correlations between the results of the Binet
tests and those of the Performance scale' supports these same suggestions.
Although the correlation given by the whole set of results is .69, that given if work
from three of the boys only is not included is .80. Of these three, one has a
marked defect of hearing, and the other two are peculiarly unstable though high
grade, and are therefore incapable of much in the way of achievement. Hence it
is clear that these characteristics in particular are discriminated by the perform-
ance tests.

We may therefore assume that performance tests can be of considerable
help in the diagnosis of defect, not only where specific disabilities exist, but also
in judging of the chances of industrial and social efficiency in borderline cases.
There is, too, reason to hope that increased work on the tests and scales them-
selves will add to their possible services in this respect. At present marking
the tests, notably estimating the value of the time factor, often constitutes a
serious difficulty, more especially when tests tried out with normal children are
applied directly to the abnormal. But further research will remedy this.

One other value, by no means the least t:o the educator, of performance tests
remains to be considered. So far we have dwelt on their possible uses in diagnosis
and in prognosis, and in so doing results have of necessity occupied the focus
of attention. To work out mental ages and intelligence quotients results are
all that matter : actual achievement alone is under review. But to the educator
what a child actually can do at any particular moment is of very minor importance.
The things which the teacher must know are what are the child's difficulties in
learning; how the child can and will approach new work with the best hope of
success; in other words what the child as an individual really is like and what
are the driving forces of his nature. And for successful teaching the sooner this
is known the better. Most vitally is it important with candidates for the special
school, for they have, as a rule, suffered only too long from the absence of that
sympathetic comprehension which alone will prevent in them the establishment
of habits of failure so disastrous in their consequences. There can be no doubt
that the first stage in the education of the defective is to help him towards some
real achievement, to put him in the way of conquering difficulty rather than in
the way of being contentedly or sullenly overcome. The more, then, and the
more rapidly, one learns about each individual's nature the better.

For this study few things offer such useful opportunities as the observation
of the child during the conduct of performance tests. The casual and undirected
observation of the classroom is here replaced by study under definite and fixed
conditions. The approach made by different children to the same task can be
watched and noted. From this point of view what is done matters not at all :
how it is done is everything. What motives govern the child's behaviour? Is
he interested at first with rapidly flagging attention or does his interest grow
with effort? How far is the teacher's presence a necessary impetus to work at
all? What is the effect of failure? How far are mistakes recognised and avoided,
and how far is the work a meaningless routine? These and many similar ques-
tions our study can aim at answering, for it is essential to the very nature of
the tests that in them the child must work without help and without interference.
So he reveals himself. It is, of course, understood that such study cannot be
undertaken in the classroom. The individual child must have during it the
observer's undivided and unflagging attention.

Of its ultimate value there can be no doubt. A few definite records of what
a child actually does, of what he achieves and how he behaves under fixed con-
ditions, is worth more than any number of vague impressions ; even if the vague
impressions be those of an experienced observer. For experience in dealing with
and judging children, necessary and irreplacable as it is, is apt to develop habits
and prejudices of mind which may seriously lead one astray. What is one to
think, for instance, of the character of a bov judged always on ordinary behaviour
as reckless, impulsive, unheeding and careless, who sits before every performance
test silent and thoughtful until he has arrived at a possible method of solution ?
Or of a boy of twelve years, good at school work and judged but slightly defective,
who reveals a total inability to control reckless impulse or to plan? In the first
case realisation of the possibility of success hinders impetuosity and develops
thought; in the second, intelligence is overwhelmed and swamped.

In conclusion, let us summarise briefly our main points. Performance tests
are of undoubted service in the study of mental deficiency for two chief ends.
Used with cautious discrimination as a scale rather than as individual tests, and
with a full realisation of their imperfections, they may act successfully in supple-
menting the Binet scale for diagnosis and prognosis. Used as a means of
individual study, they can, by providing a fixed method and so giving standards
for comparison, be of infinite use to the teacher who seeks to have an intimate
knowledge of his individual children so as to help them best.
