A Report on the Examination of one Hundred 6b Children in Philadelphia Schools
===============================================================================

Mabel R. Farson
Supervisor of Mental Examinations, Department of Special
Education, Philadelphia
Purpose of Investigation
In the autumn term of 1926, Dr. Philip A. Boyer, the director
of the bureau of Educational Research of the Philadelphia Public
School System asked Dr. Gladys G. Ide, Director of Special Edu-
cation, if one hundred 6B children might be given the Stanford
Revision of the Binet-Simon Tests in order to determine the cor-
relation of this test with the Philadelphia Group Test of Mental
Ability. Accordingly a supervisor of mental examinations was as-
signed to the task.
In Philadelphia schools in the 6B grade, i.e., the second half
of the sixth grade, the children are given the Philadelphia Group
Test of Mental Ability. In the following term, when these pupils
enter the junior high school, they are grouped according to abil-
ity on the basis of the scores achieved on this test. The instigation
of this investigation was, therefore, an attempt to determine the
correlation between these two tests.
In addition to this aim, the study served another purpose of
particular value to the Division of Special Education, in that it
afforded a sample of the performance of normal sixth grade chil-
dren. Every year there are referred to the psychological clinic of
this division, thousands of children who are doing unsatisfactory
work in the grades. It is of value to know how the performance of
these children compares with that of those who are not selected
from the normal group. The study of a relatively large number of
children of about the same age affords a standard to which in-
dividual children may be compared.
In the psychological clinic of the Division of Special Educa-
tion, high school students and apparently normal children from
twelve years of age and upwards, have been given a Morgan Mental
Test as part of their examination. The test has been used to gain
some idea of the child's ability to follow written direction and to
work without supervision. This study afforded an opportunity to
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 129
determine the correlation between the Stanford-Binet Tests and
the Morgan Mental Test.
Group Chosen
It was decided that for this investigation "average schools"
should be chosen and that the entire 6B group should be given the
tests. Accordingly schools were selected in a district where there
was no undue preponderance of foreign parentage, where the school
population had not been affected to any extent by the influx of
negroes from the South, and where the children on the whole came
from homes in which their physical welfare was considered but
which offered nothing unusual in the way of intellectual oppor-
tunities. Two schools in North Philadelphia were chosen for the
purpose. Eveiy child in the 6B grade in those two schools was
given the examination. These schools provided ninety-three chil-
dren and the remaining seven children were selected from a West
Philadelphia School. In order not to overweight the group at either
end of the scale, these seven children were chosen on the basis of
their performance on the Philadelphia Group Test of Mental Abil-
ity. The children with the two highest scores, the two lowest scores
and three from the medium group were selected.
The group included fifty-three males and forty-seven females.
There were five negroes and sixteen Jews, all of whom were Rus-
sian Jews except one boy who was an Austrian Jew. There were
eighteen other children whose parents were foreign born; five were
born in Germany, three in Italy, two in Hungary, one in Austria,
two in Poland, one in Scotland, one in Sweden, one in Ireland, one
in Canada, and one in England. This formed a fairly representa-
tive Philadelphia School group.
The occupations of the parents of the children give some idea
of the social level of the group. There was one doctor, one teacher,
one bookkeeper, one stenographer and seven salesmen. A number
of the parents maintained the neighborhood stores. The following
trades were represented,?machinist, printer, carpenter, painter,
plumber, tailor, barber, butcher, steam fitter. There were some
employees of a well known steel corporation, some hosiery mill
operators, electrical workers, shippers, two firemen, a shoe repairer,
a cement finisher and several laborers. Every class of Taussig's five
point classification scale of occupations was represented, but there
was a predominance of classes of four and three of this scale on
which five represents the highest group.
130 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Tests Used
The Philadelphia Group Test of Mental Ability was given to
the pupils under the direction of Dr. Philip A. Boyer as part of the
regular procedure in the 6B grade. As part of this special in-
vestigation the group of 100 children were given the starred tests
of the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Tests, because, as has
been said, the original purpose of the study was to determine the
correlation between these two tests. The use of the Binet-Simon
Series furthered the purpose of attaining standards of comparison
since this series of tests is a part of the battery of tests used in
the routine examinations of children referred to the division of
Special Education for examination. For the same reason, memory
spans were also taken. Time would not permit of the use of the
entire battery of tests usually given to the children referred to this
clinic, but an effort was made to select representative tests and
those which tested some specific abilities.
The Dearborn Formboard No. lc was selected as the perform-
ance test, which was because of its grade of difficulty, the best
intelligence test for children of this age. The use of this test af-
forded a sample of tEe child's performance on tests of this type.
Additional performance tests were not used because of the time
element involved.
The Morgan Mental Test, which employs the medium of writ-
ten directions was also used so that its correlation with the Binet-
Simon Test could be determined. The impression which had been
gained after using the Morgan Mental Test as an additional
diagnostic measure in individual cases for several years, was that
the "mental age" achieved on this test, on the whole correlated
closely with the "mental age" as determined by the Binet Scale.
In individual cases however, a great discrepancy had been noted.
This seemed to be due to the fact that some subjects worked bet-
ter under the stimulation of the individual attention of the ex-
aminer as when the Binet tests were being administered, while
others gave a better performance when permitted to work by them-
selves and when they were not conscious of the attention of the ex-
aminer being directed upon them. The use of this test on a relatively
large group and the subsequent correlation with the Binet Test
was an attempt to verify or disprove statistically the impressions,
relative to this test which had been gained. With this series as
with other tests, it was desired to have records of the scores actually
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 131
made by 6th grade children in Philadelphia Schools in order to
have some evidence of the range of the scores, to determine whether
Morgan's norms fitted our children, and to give again some stand-
ards of comparison.
Reading and spelling were the only school proficiency tests
given and these were given for the purpose of checking the 6th
grade proficiency tests in these subjects which are used by this
department.
Method of Procedure
The class room teachers administered the Philadelphia Group
Test of Mental Ability, scored the test?forwarded the results to-
gether with the child's age and present school monthly report to
Dr. Boyer's office.
All other tests were given by the one examiner. The children
came to the examination room one at a time. The child's date of
birth, parents' names, birthplace of child and parents and school
history were obtained from his registration card. The school his-
tory consisted of the date of admission to public schools, the number
of terms in each grade, and the rating received for each term's
work in the last two years. Information concerning the grades he
had received on his report for the present term was obtained from
the child himself.
A brief social history was also obtained from the child. By
questioning it was determined of what members the household con-
sisted, which incidentally brought out the facts as to whether the
child lived with one or both parents, and the size of the family.
The father's employment, the mother's employment outside the
home, if any, and the employment of any children of the family
were other facts noted. Thus some idea of the social status of the
family was gained.
After this preliminary information was recorded, the Dear-
born Formboard lc was given. Errors in analytic discrimination
were noted so that it might be determined what errors, if any, were
made by the median modal group. Notes were made concerning the
method of working or of any difficulties encountered which tended
to produce failure or lengthen the time required.
The method of procedure used for the Dearborn Test was that
which is followed in the Psychological Clinic of the University of
Pennsylvania. The four long blocks were removed and the pieces
remaining in the board were arranged so as to leave four short
332 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
spaces. On the second trial, the board was turned so that the
former top row of recesses was now the bottom row.
Following this test the memory spans,?auditory, visual and
reverse were given. Then the Binet-Simon Test was administered.
A record was kept of the child's interpretations of fables and of
his responses on the similarities test at the twelve year level. Any
response which seemed of especial note was recorded.
An estimate of the child's physiological development was made
by the use of the terms adolescent, pubescent, child. '' Adolescent''
was used to designate children whose physical appearance, voice
and general response obviously indicated that they were definitely
post-pubescent. "Pubescent" was the term applied to those in
whom the changes characteristic of adolescence were just beginning
to occur. Neither the terms adolescent or child applied satis-
factorily to this group who were in a state of transition from one
stage to the other. "Child" was used to designate a group whose
physical appearance and whose attitude was still that of a child.
During the examination, the subject's personality traits were
also checked as they were noted. Under this general heading,
the following items were listed: alert, placid, apathetic; ambitious,
contented, flaccid; animated, stolid; bold, poised, shy, repressed;
charming, pleasant, colorless; conformed, sociable, mischievous
asocial; co-operative, bidable, suspicious, un-co-operative; courteous,
civil, rude; fast, deliberate, slow; frank, evasive; friendly, sus-
picious, unfriendly; gregarious, lonely; industrious, indolent; in-
quiring, interested, indifferent, loquacious, silent; vivacious, spirit-
less; well trained, untrained, winning, dull. Only such character-
istics as seemed particularly applicable to each child were checked
and the number of characteristics checked varied with the per-
sonality of the child.
If a foreign language was spoken in the home, this was noted
on the record. Any significant bit of a child's behavior or any
reaction which would tend to throw an additional light on his
performance was also recorded.
After the Binet Test was completed, the child was asked to
copy a diamond, to read a selection, reproduce the thought of it
and then to write some sentences from dictation. The individual
examination of each child required from one hour to one hour and
twenty minutes.
After the individual examinations were completed the Morgan
Mental Test was given as a group test, administered by the same
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 133
examiner. The tests were scored and their correlation with the
Stanford Binet determined.
Discussion of Results
The attitude of the children toward the examinations was
interesting. They were very eager to come in for the examination.
The children were told at the beginning that it would be unfair
if anyone who had had the examination discussed it with another
child who had not yet had the tests. They entered into the situa-
tion with a sportsmanlike attitude. At recess time the girls who
had been given the examination talked with one another having
considerable fun evading the other children and having a secret
from them. The boys told some imaginative tales to their fellows
concerning the nature of the tests. Their behavior served to in-
crease the curiosity of those who had not had the examination.
Neither the teachers nor the examiner discovered any evidence
that the actual test questions had been discussed.
Dearborn Formboard
With the Dearborn Formboard lc a ten minute time limit
was used, though we have been accustomed in the Division of
Special Education to using a five minute time limit. Four years
ago it was decided in this division to use a five minute time limit
for this test, which we then considered to be a test at about the
fifteen year level. Judging from our records the ten minute in-
terval was too long and made the test too easy so that it was
not really an intelligence test at this age level. We then reduced
the time limit and began to use the test at lower age levels.
In testing these 6B children, a ten minute time limit was used
to determine, with a group of presumably normal children, whether
there was any advantage in permitting the additional five minutes'
work on the test. Seventy-four per cent of this group, which rep-
resented approximately the twelve year level, succeeded in com-
pleting the Dearborn Formboard in five minutes. All but 5 per
cent completed the test in ten minutes. If we accept Dr. Wit-
mer's premise that an intelligence test is standardized at that age
level at which 50 per cent of children are able to do it, then ob-
viously a ten minute time limit is too great at the twelve year
level for this test.
A survey of the results obtained in this group indicated that
Table 1. Results
C. A. M. A. Percentile I. Q.
Percentile Distribution
M.S.
Aud.
M. S.
Vis.
M. S.
Rev.
Dear-
born
F. B. I
Dear-
born
F. B. II
Morg. Morg.
M. T. M.T.
M. A. Score
10-6 9-0 100% 137.9
10-8 10-0 99% 132.0
11-4 10-5 90% 122.1
11-6 11-3 80% 115.7
11-9 11-5 70% 111.2
12-0 12-0 60% 104.9
12-5 12-3 50% 99.2
12-9 12-8 40% 93.7
13-2 13-2 30% 89.6
13-10 13-7 20% 84.0
14-5 14-3 10% 75.7
15-11 16-9 1% 65.7
16-3 17-4 0% 65.6
10
10
9
8
8
8
8
7
7
7
7
5
43
62
88
138
156
178
203
230
278
344
500
F. in
600
F. in
600
31
35
58
71
80
92
113
133
156
202
312
not
given
Second
trial
16-8 105
15-7 104
15-7 98
14-6 87
14-0 81
12-9 70
12-4 65
11-3 57
11-3 55
10-7 52
9-8 44
9-2 32
8-5 23
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 135
the additional five minutes was of little value. In every case in
which more than six minutes was required, the records show that
the method used was trial and error. Typical comments on these
records are '' A purely trial and error method "; '' Did not grasp the
problem at all"; "Trial and error without any regard to form";
"Failed to comprehend the problem." In each of these cases
a great many errors in analytic discrimination were noted. In
some cases there was no attempt to discriminate between the
forms and to associate the shape of the insert with the proper
recess. The child was confronted by a problem which he could
not grasp, so he merely tried to place any block in any recess
which happened to fall within the range of his attention at that
particular moment.
In all of this group of cases, i.e., those requiring between six
minutes and ten minutes, nothing which would be of additional
value in making an analytic diagnosis was discernible in the last
five minutes. The child's ability to grasp the problem which the
test presented, his ability to make analytic discriminations, his
ability to make deductions, his concentration and his distribution
of attention were adequately displayed in the first five minutes.
By the end of this time he had ceased to make any effort to solve
the problem intelligently but simply carried on in an aimless trial
and error fashion. The additional five minutes served only as a
further test of his persistence.
There were seven cases which required between five minutes
and six minutes to do the test. One boy at first simply failed to
comprehend the problem so that at the end of four minutes he had
not succeeded in placing a single one of the four long pieces re-
moved when the test was given him. Then he seemed to see the
method of solution and in 638 seconds succeeded in solving the
test. In the other six cases the length of time required was due
to the confusion of the diamond and the hexagon and to difficulty
in placing the two smaller triangles and the two smaller halves of
the hexagonal shaped piece.
Eighty-four per cent of the 100 children examined confused
the diamond with the hexagon. Obviously then it is normal for
children of this age to make this error. This is a significant fact
to be taken into account when rating the child for analytic dis-
crimination.
As has been said, the ability to distinguish between the dia-
mond and the hexagon constituted by far the most difficult prob-
136 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
lem presented by the test. The next greatest point of difficulty
was found to be the placing of the two smallest triangular pieces.
Frequently they were placed with the second long triangular piece.
Very often when an attempt was made to place them in the
same recess with a short triangular piece, one of the small pieces
would be fitted in and then the other could not be placed be-
cause the child was attempting to place the hypotenuse of the sec-
ond small piece in juxtaposition with the vertical of the small piece
already placed. It was necessary only to turn over the small
block in order to fit it into the remaining space but very few
saw that this was the necessary step until they had worked at
this problem some time. Usually after the subject found difficulty
in placing the two smallest triangles in this position, he would
believe he was attempting a wrong placement and would again
place the two small triangles with one of the long triangular
pieces, only to find that the problem could not be solved in this
manner so that he was again brought to face with the original
problem.
When blocks were tried in recesses of an entirely different
shape, as, for example, the rectangle and the ellipse, the error
was apparently not due to an inability to distinguish between these
forms as was the case with the diamond and hexagon but was due
rather to a lack of adequate comprehension of the problem. A
lack of comprehension was evident in the cases where a purely
trial and error method was used?where blocks were simply tried
in every recess. There were, however, other children who had
some comprehension of the problem but who did not make deduc-
tions well. They at first attempted to fit two long pieces and two
short pieces together and would, for example, try to place a long
rectangular and a long elliptical piece in a rectangular recess or
make a similar error with the short pieces. Frequently a child
made an error with the other long pieces after he had succeeded in
placing the triangles or ellipses since the problem is solved in these
cases by placing the two long pieces together.
Some children had difficulty on the second trial because the
turning of the board confused them.
The record of the time required on the second trials on this
test shows considerable reduction from the time required on the
first trial. The records thus give an indication of the degree of
trainability which normal sixth grade children display in working
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 137
with concrete material and therefore furnish standards of com-
parison.
It has been frequently stated that Jewish children on the
whole do inferior work on performance tests. This assertion held
true in so far as the performance of this particular group of 100
children was concerned. Sixteen per cent of the group were
Jewish children, but 30.7 per cent of the failures on the Dearborn
Formboard (those not completing the test in five minutes) were
made by Jewish children. Fifty per cent of the Jewish children
represented in the group failed on Dearborn Formboard as con-
trasted to 26 per cent of failures for the entire group. The Jew-
ish children were a representative group ranging in school work
from failures to the best children in the class. In one school where
the children were grouped according to ability, five of the Jewish
children were in Group I or the best ability group.
That the Dearborn Formboard tested different abilities than
did the Binet Tests was evidenced by the lack of correlation between
the tests. The I.Q.'s of the children failing on the Dearborn Form-
board ranged from 65.7 to 132. Ten of the twenty-six failures had
I.Q.'s above 100.
It was not possible to estimate from a child's performance on
the Dearborn Formboard his ability to do school work. Sixteen
of the twenty-six children who failed on this test were making
passing grades in school while some children who were successful
on the Dearborn Formboard were failing in school. Five of the
failures on the Dearborn Test had a grade of 8 on their monthly
report cards and it was interesting to note that four of these
children were Jewish; three of whom had I.Q.'s above 100.
The child's performance on the Dearborn Formboard revealed
personality traits as well as specific abilities and disabilities. On
this test a child displayed his intelligence, his originality or his lack
of this ability, depending on whether he was able to grasp the prob-
lem, make the necessary deductions, and solve it quickly or whether
he had to resort to a trial and error method. His analytic dis-
criminability was shown by his ability to distinguish between the
inserts and to place them in the correct recesses. He also displayed
his trainability and an ability to grasp the principle of the test
and apply it to a slightly changed situation on the second trial of
the test. The child's concentration of attention was evinced as he
worked on this test. Some personality traits were displayed while
the child did this test. Some children were very persistent, if their
138 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
attempted solution failed they thought out another plan, showing at
no time any slackening of effort but displaying a determination to
succeed. Others displayed a pseudo-persistence, i.e., they continued
to work on the test though they ceased making intelligent efforts to
solve it and simply continued with a half-hearted, trial and error
method. Others, when they saw that the problem was apparently
too difficult, simply put down all the blocks and said "I can't do
it," and could only with urging be prevailed upon to continue
their efforts.
Memory Span
With a number of children who were referred to the Division
of Special Education for mental examination, a limited memory
span was found to be one of the factors contributing to their re-
tardation. A child who, in a single coherence, can grasp only a
very small number of discrete elements, is handicapped. He can-
not learn at the same rate as a child who is able to grasp a
greater number of elements at a time, and, therefore, in regular
grade, he falls behind because the teacher is presenting too many
new elements in any one lesson for him since she is adapting her
teaching to the attention spans of the majority of the members
of the class.
In this group of 6B children, the modal and the median audito-
vocal-digit memory span was six. The Humsptone series of digits
was used with the group. There were two children with auditory
memory spans of four and two with spans of nine.
It has been frequently pointed out that while a short memory
span is so decided a handicap as to prove a diagnostic measure, a
long memory span is not significant. The experience gained in
testing hundreds of Philadelphia school children would lead any
member of our staff to suspect that a child with an auditory mem-
ory span of four would not do successful sixth grade work. The
school history showed that such was the case with the two girls
whose auditory memory spans were four.
Katie, one of these girls, had repeated the 2A and the 2B
grade, had spent three terms in the 3A grade and then had made
passing averages till she reached the 5B grade. She was given
a "red ink promotion" to 6A. (When a child has really failed in
the work of a grade but is promoted on trial because of age
or because of some necessary adaptation to the school organization,
this promotion is registered in red ink.) In the 6A grade she had a
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 139
term average of 5, but, because of an overcrowded 6A grade, she
was placed in a 6B class where her general averages for both Sep-
tember and October were 5. Katie was not recommended for an
Orthogenic Backward Class as a result of the examination because
she was going to be sixteen years old before the next term and
she did not intend to return to school. She failed on the Dearborn
Formboard. She had an I.Q. of 65.7. She displayed very poor lan-
guage ability. To be sure she was handicapped by the fact that
Italian was spoken in her home. However, the fact that her
younger sister, who was in the same class, showed greater pro-
ficiency in the language field, indicated that Katie's lack of acquire-
ment of language was at least partially due to a lack of innate
ability. Katie passed the Binet vocabulary test at the eight year
level. In reading she had 3A proficiency, which also represents
the eight year level. In spelling she had 3B proficiency. Her
spelling was so peculiar as to make one wonder what determined
the choice of the particular letters she used to represent a word.
On the Morgan Mental Test, Katie achieved a score which was the
average for age 9.2. She was a very well conformed child, who
always had a rating of E or G for conduct and effort. Her great
conformity explains the fact that she was not recommended for an
O.B. class long before this time because her teachers agreed that
she was very dull.
Constance, who also had an auditory memory span of four, was
a big adolescent girl of Scotch descent. She had spent three in-
stead of the customary two terms in every grade since she entered
school. She was doing unsatisfactory work in her present grade.
She, too, did not intend to return to school the next term. Con-
stance did the Dearborn Formboard in 186 seconds on the first trial
and 53 seconds on the second trial. She had an I.Q. of 72.9 and
a reverse memory span of three.
There were two children with memory spans of nine, who were
in different schools. Both of these pupils were rated "child" on
the physiological development scale. They both did superior school
work, having had ratings of 8 or 9 throughout their school career.
The boy did the Dearborn Formboard without a single error in
analytic discrimination and only one false move, made with the
small triangle, but he immediately saw that it was necessary to
turn over the piece. He required 75 seconds on the first trial, and
92 seconds on the second trial. His I.Q. was 137.9. He had a
reverse memory span of seven.
140 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Dorothy, who also had an auditory memory span of nine, had
a visual span of ten and a reverse span of six. She had an I.Q.
of 132.0. She required 311 seconds for the first trial on the Dear-
born Formboard and 179 seconds for the second trial.
Dr. Grave, in her study of the proficiency of six year old chil-
dren, and Dr. Learning, in her study of the performance of children
at the fifteen year level, pointed out that a long memory span has
no value as a diagnostic measure. The results obtained with this
one hundred 6B children indicated that the probability of success
in school work was not influenced by the increasing length of mem-
ory span above the mode. Whether the memory span was equal to
the mode or below was the significant factor in determining the
influence of the memory span on the ability to do school work.
In determining the relation between memory span and school suc-
cess, the rating given on the last monthly report of the child was
used as the measure of success. With the group having an auditory
memory span of nine, there were no failures; in the group having
an auditory memory span of eight there were 20 per cent of fail-
ures; in the group having an auditory memory span of seven, 25
per cent failed; in the group having an auditory memory span of
six, which was the modal group, there were 16% per cent failures;
but in the group having an auditory memory span of five, which
was below the mode, there were 42% per cent of failures and in
the small group with an auditory memory span of four, there were
100 per cent of failures. Apparently a memory span below the
median mode for a particular age-grade level decreases the prob-
ability of school success, while a memory span which is equivalent
to or better than the mode increases the probability of success.
Any increase of length in the memory span above the mode is not
significant. The mode and the median of the visual memory spans
were both eight, two higher than the mode and the median of the
auditory memory spans.
According to Terman, a reverse memory span of five is the
average at the twelve year level. With this group, which repre-
sented approximately the twelve year level, the mode and the
median for the reverse memory span was five.
A number of the children who were referred to the psycho-
logical clinic of the Division of Special Education because of
failures in high school and junior high school have been found to
have had reverse memory spans below the average even though
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 141
they possessed an average forward span at their age level according
to the Stanford Binet standards. Then, too, many of the children,
who, after an examination, were recommended for placement in
orthogenic backward classes, had decidedly inferior reverse memory
spans. These facts led to the assumption that the reverse memory
span was a significant diagnostic measure.
In this group of 100 children, nine had a reverse memory span
of three. Four of these children, i.e., less than 50 per cent, were
failing in school work at the time of the examination. None of
the children, however, had a rating of higher than 7, so that not
any of them fell in the group who were doing good school work;
six of these nine children had a history of repetition in the grades,
but three of them had never repeated a grade and were doing satis-
factory work in the present grade. The I.Q.'s of the group having
a reverse memory span of three ranged from 65.7 to 102.8.
Thirty-seven per cent of the twenty-six children having reverse
memory spans of four, had failed on their last monthly report. In
this group also there were no ratings of 8. Twenty-four per cent
of the fifty-four children who had a reverse memory span of five
failed on their last monthly report. One of the nine children, or
11.1 per cent of the children with a reverse memory span of six,
failed. In the small group with reverse memory span of seven,
the children had 8 and 9 on their reports.
It appeared, therefore, from these results, that the probability
of doing successful school work decreased with a decrease in the
reverse memory span, but that a poor performance in this field was
not so great a handicap that other compensating abilities would not
enable a child to achieve success in school.
The reverse memory span differed from the forward memory
span in that the probability of doing successful school work con-
tinued to increase with the increase of the reverse span while with
the forward memory span the only significant difference was noted
in the success of those having a span equal to or superior to the
median mode as contrasted to the success of those who fell below
the median mode.
Binet Tests
The Terman Revision of the Binet-Simon Scale was given each
child. As has been said, the initiating purpose of the investigation
142 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
was to determine the correlation between this scale and the Phila-
delphia Group Test of Mental Ability. The Binet Tests have been
frequently criticized, but whatever adverse criticism may be made,
the fact remains that the performance of this scale bears a close
relation to the child's ability to do school work. The criticism
is often made that these tests stress language ability unduly, but
language ability is a very necessary factor to school progress.
Instruction is given through the medium of language, school pro-
ficiency is tested through the medium of language, and, in fact, all
abstract thinking employs the same medium. The child's ability
to handle language becomes increasingly more important as a factor
in his ability to do successful school work as he advances in school.
Furthermore, many of the child's personality traits, characteristics
which may have considerable influence on his ability to progress in
school are frequently revealed in these tests as well as on per-
formance tests. It is not uncommon to find a child interested in the
performance tests which make use of something novel in the way of
material, to find him alert, interested, and a willing worker on
these tests?only to find out that when the Binet Tests are pre-
sented he is uninterested, makes little effort, preferring to say "I
don't know'' to trying to answer a test which is somewhat difficult,
is slow in response, or has difficulty in expressing his replies clearly,
any one of which traits may explain to some extent his inability to
progress normally in school. While certainly the Binet Test could
never be recommended as a test to be used exclusively it does
have a relatively important part in a battery of tests, especially
when the object of the examination is to estimate the child's ability
to do school work. Then, too, it is so widely used that the re-
sults serve as a means of comparison with other investigations.
In this group it was found that on the whole the children with
high I.Q.'s were doing the best work in school. There were some
exceptions to this general rule which will be treated individually.
The I.Q.'s ranged from 65.6 to 137.9 with 98.9 as the median. The
children composing this group possessed varying degrees of intelli-
gence and of intellectual ability, but all were normal children in
that they had not been taken out of the group.
A comparison of the I.Q.'s with the chronological ages showed
that the higher I.Q.'s clustered about the lower end of the chrono-
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 143
logical age scale, as the following table indicates. The highest I.Q.
was made by a girl in the second decile of chronological age dis-
tribution.
Table 2.
Decile
Range of C. A.
Range of I.Q.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
10 yr. 6 mo. to 11 yr. 4 mo.
11 yr. 4 mo. to 11 yr. 6 mo.
11 yr. 6 mo. to 11 yr. 8 mo.
11 yr. 9 mo. to 12 yr.
12 yr. to 12 yr. 4 mo.
12 yr. 5 mo. to 12 yr. 9 mo.
12 yr. 9 mo. to 13 yr. 1 mo.
13 yr. 2 mo. to 13 yr. 9 mo.
13 yr. 10 mo. to 14 yr. 4 mo.
14 yr. 5 mo. to 16 yr. 3 mo.
110.9 to 123.6
102.9 to 137.9
4 I. Q.'s below 110
88.9 to 132
1 I. Q. below 100
90.7 to 120.4
3 I. Q's below 100
83.7 to 118.4
5 I. Q.'s below 100
84.7 to 115.7
5 I. Q.'s below 100
68.7 to 102.5
9 I. Q.'s below 100
81.1 to 123.4
8 I. Q.'s below 100
71.4 to 91.2
10 I. Q.'s below 100
65.2 to 109.1
9 I. Q.'s below 100
There was one child in the eighth and one child in the tenth
deciles who stood out as superior to their group in so far as the
I.Q. was concerned.
The "mental ages" achieved on the Binet Scale covered a
greater range than did the chronological ages of the group but
there was little difference in the medians. The median chronological
age was 12 years 4 months while the median "mental age" was 12
years 3 months. The "mental ages" ranged from 9 years to 17
years 4 months as contrasted to the range in chronological age from
10 years 6 months to 16 years 3 months. It was evident therefore
that the group was less homogeneous from the standpoint of in-
tellectual ability than from the standpoint of chronological age.
Certainly these findings corroborated the impressions gained while
working with the children.
Dr. Witmer in his seminar stresses the fact that a comparison
of the performance of one individual on a specific test to a mere
144 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
mathematical average of a number of performances on this test
is of little value. Accordingly, on the basis of a number of exam-
inations of children at particular and significant age levels, the
Witmer Diagnostic Standards have been developed whereby it is
possible to tell not only whether a child's performance falls in the
50 per cent group above the average or the 50 per cent group
below the average, but to make a finer comparison so that his per-
formance may be equaled to that of a group of 10 per cent superior
to or inferior to the remaining 90 per cent or superior to some and
inferior to others of the remaining 90 per cent. It is possible by
comparison with these tables of norms to tell whether a child's per-
formance is comparable to the 60 per cent median modal group
which comprises what is commonly meant by "average indi-
viduals. ''
In comparing the I.Q.'s of this group of children with the
Witmer Diagnostic Standards for the six year and the fifteen year
levels, it was noted there was a smaller range of I.Q.'s in this
group of 6B children than there were in the tables at either the six
or the fifteen year levels. The results of the examinations of these
6B children showed I.Q.'s neither as low as the minimum nor as
high as the maximum on the tables. This lesser range was to be
expected since, as it has been said, an '' average group'' was selected
for the purpose of this investigation. There was, however, little
difference in the range of the I.Q.'s for the median modal group
and in the median I.Q. For the 6B children the median modal
group ranged from an I.Q. of 84.0 to an I.Q. of 115.5 as compared
to the Witmer Diagnostic Standard for boys at the fifteen year
level where the median modal range in I.Q. is from 85 to 117.5 for
girls of the fifteen year level where the median modal range is
from 81 to 110 for boys of the fifteen year level, and to the tables for
the six year level for boys where the range is 90.4 to 117.5 and for
girls at the six year level where the median modal range is 90.3
to 117.7. There is correspondingly little difference in the medians
of the group of 6B and the groups used in preparing the statistical
tables, as a glance at the results will show.
According to Terman's standards, there were five children
of the entire group who were '' definitely feeble-minded,'' and seven
who were in the group of "border-line deficiency." If a diagnosis
were made on the basis of the possibility of intellectual achievement
such as Barr's classification, some of the children in this group
would be considered high grade imbeciles. However, in the Division
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 145
of Special Education, a social point of view is the basis of diagnosis
and from this viewpoint none of the children were feeble-minded.
They were children who were succeeding in holding a normal place
in the school society and who could ultimately earn a living for
themselves. They all had good enough social orientation to be able
to care for themselves.
Every child was given the starred tests at the twelve year level
on the Binet Scale. More than 50 per cent of the children passed
every one of these tests. The dissected sentences test proved to be
the most difficult of this group of tests as there were fifty-four suc-
cesses and forty-six failures. The interpretation of fables was the
easiest test of the group, showing eighty-three successes and seven-
teen failures. This was due to the fact that fables are taught as
part of the English course of study in Philadelphia schools. On the
vocabulary test there were sixty-six successes and thirty-four
failures; on the picture interpretation test, seventy-four successes
and twenty-six failures; on the similarities test there were seventy-
six successes and twenty-six failures.
The lowest I.Q. was that of a negro boy who was sixteen years,
three months old. The mental age he achieved, however, fell in
the second decile so that he did pass more tests than eleven other
children in his grade. Robert was a tall adolescent boy. He was
pleasant, friendly, clean, co-operative and well conformed. He
showed no physical stigmata other than that his teeth were widely
spaced and the lower teeth had slightly serrated edges. He had
come to Philadelphia from the South and after eight terms in
Philadelphia schools returned to Virginia for a time and then
came back to Philadelphia again. His registration card gave a his-
tory of two or three terms in every grade. During the present term,
his first in a 6B grade, he had succeeded in making a 7 on his re-
port each month. The boy was ambitious, in fact ambitious beyond
his power of achievement as he wished to go to junior high school.
He had decided that his future occupation would be that of a
photographer or an electrician. He was industrious, working (il-
legally) after school from 6 p.m. to 11 p.m. at a drug store and
studying between his tasks. This boy had four sisters and five
brothers living at home. The father and this boy were the only
ones in the family working. In most cases the mothers of the
negro children in our schools work also, but this mother evidently
had too large a family of young children to do so as Robert
was the oldest child.
146 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Robert did the Dearborn Formboard, on the first trial in sev-
enty-two seconds, confusing only momentarily the diamond and
hexagon and making no other false move. On the second trial he
required 136 seconds but reduced the time required to fifty-six
seconds on the third trial, a performance which indicated train-
ability. His memory spans were auditory five, visual five, reverse
three. On the Binet Scale, Robert had a basal age of eight years.
At the nine year level he failed to give four digits in reverse order;
at the ten year level he named only twenty-five words in one minute,
fifty-four in three minutes, thus failing on this test. At the twelve
year level he failed on the vocabulary test, the mixed sentences and
the reverse memory span. He did not succeed in passing any test
at the fourteen and sixteen year levels. There was nothing about
Robert to suggest that he was feeble-minded. He was already
demonstrating his ability to earn money. His school conformity
indicated his ability to adapt himself to his environment. He
showed ability to grasp practical situations and some ability to
understand general situations. He was industrious and had a
feeling of responsibility and a sense of family obligations.
The next lowest I.Q. was that of Katie, the case discussed in
connection with the memory span. She was the daughter of an
Italian cement finisher. She was a friendly, polite, clean and very
well conformed child who was attractive and likeable. She will be
able to support a normal existence in her own social environment.
Two of the six negro children were in the group of five whose
I.Q.'s fell below seventy. A third negro child came just above this
group and her I.Q. represented the sixth percentile, inferior to 94
per cent; the fourth negro child represented the thirteenth per-
centile inferior to 87 per cent; the fifth negro child represented
the fifteenth percentile inferior to 85 per cent of the group, while
the sixth negro child represented the seventy-third percentile in-
ferior to 27 per cent of the group. All but one of the six negro
children fell in the poorest 20 per cent group in so far as the I.Q.
was concerned. Only one of the negro children, therefore, fell
within the median modal group.
In one school there was a double class, i.e., since there were
too many 6B children for one grade, a 6A and a 6B had been com-
bined to form another class. To form this double class the "best"
of the 6A and 6B children were picked by their teachers. There
were eleven 6B children in this group, which included no adoles-
cents. The children composing the group were, on the whole, rather
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 147
pale, little, thin, eager, hyper-active, somewhat frail looking chil-
dren. The mere physical appearance of this 6B offered a decided
contrast to the other 6B grade in the school. Naturally, when
the teacher made her selection of the children she was consciously
or unconsciously influenced by their conformity. The best class was
a group of children, eager, alert, displaying initiative and interest.
At the first glance at the poorer class, one was impressed by the
fact that it was adolescent. Closer inspection showed that there
were many pre-pubescent children in the class, that some of them
had as good or better ability than some of the children in the
higher group, but the presence of the adolescents was the most
obvious distinction between the two classes.
There was a most marked difference in the attitudes of the
children and in their personalities. The children who did the best
work on the tests and in the classroom were pre-pubescent children.
They were smiling, alert, animated children eager to pit their wits
against the problems set by the tests in which they showed great
interest. Many were vivacious and loquacious. Practically all used
language well. They were noticeably quick in response. Many of
this group were inquisitive and displayed initiative. Some asked
what was the usual time required for the Dearborn Formboard,
whether their second performance was better than the first, etc.
The Jewish children inevitably asked seriously, "Did I pass?"
or "What mark did I make?" The selected superior group i?
one school waylaid the examiner whenever possible to ask when s I ?
was going to give them their marks so that they would know
where they stood in relation to the other children of the class.
The duller children just as eagerly peeped under the curtain
of the examination room as the line passed to go to recess, were
just as insistent on having their turn in order and seemed just as
eager to come in for the tests, but once they slarted on the tests
a most noticeable difference was evident. The,?,- children were less
vivacious, displayed less of that restless, nervous energy so char-
acteristic of the better group. Their response was characterized
by a slow rate and a lack of persistence in the face of difficulties.
They were not sure of themselves. don know" or "I can't do
that" were characteristic responses. Several said, after directions
had been given, "Will you say that again, please, I didn't get what
you said." One child asked in awed tones before starting, "Is it
hard?" On the whole this group displayed inferior concentration
?f attention to the other group. There were several boys who had
148 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
once been in orthogenic backward classes. They were among the
worst offenders as far as saying "I don't know" before they had
made any real effort, or "I can't finish that" when a task was
difficult. This lack of self-confidence may have been caused by the
many failures they had encountered in their school careers, or,
on the other hand, it may have been that their lack of persistence
and their lack of effort was one of the contributing factors to their
failures.
In the school where there was the double grade, one 6B group
contained children who had been picked by their teacher as dis-
playing superior ability. In this superior group, the I.Q.'s ranged
from 89.6 to 132.0 In the 6B group of lesser ability in the same
school, the I.Q.'s ranged from 65.6 to 123.4. In the better group
only one of the eleven children had an I.Q. below 100, while, in the
poorer group, only thirteen of the thirty-seven children had an
I.Q. above 100.
Harry, the boy in the high group with an I.Q. of 89.6 was
twelve years, ten months old. He was a victim of infantile paralysis
and had formerly been in an orthopedic class. He had lost and still
does lose time at school because of the necessity of going to a hos-
pital for treament. He had shown some artistic ability and there-
fore attended art school.
Harry did the Dearborn Pormboard in eighty-eight seconds
on the first trial without any error in analytic discrimination. On
the second trial he confused the diamond and hexagon but did
the test in fifty-three seconds, a performance which showed learning
ability for concrete material. His memory spans were auditory
six, visual eight, and reverse five, all of which were equivalent to the
mean for the group. On the Binet Scale he had a basal age of
ten years. At the twelve year level, he failed on the vocabulary,
the mixed sentences and the similarities; at the fourteen year level
he passed only the arithmetical reasoning test; at the sixteen year
level he failed on all the tests. Harry was classed as a "pubescent"
boy. The following personality traits were checked: alert, ani-
mated, clean, conformed, co-operative, courteous, frank, friendly,
good-natured, sociable. In spite of his failures on tests involving
primarily language ability, his v( , -ises were rather well ex-
pressed. After he had finished the ? he accompanied the next
child to the room and laughingly .marked, "Here's your next
victim," which was typical of tee altitude of those who had
the tests toward those who had n< In the 6B grade Harry had
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 149
received only 7 on his report though he had had a term average of
8 for the 6A and 5B grades. He attributed his present poorer
marks to the fact that his "tongue was wagging too much." The
boy was interested in school work and prepared his work. Because
of his physical defects many fields of normal boyish activity were
cut off from him.
The boy who had the highest I.Q. in the lower group of this
school did not appear nearly as alert as Harry. Donald showed
little animation, was not interested in school and expected to leave
and go to work as soon as he had finished the 6B grade. Donald's
school history showed erratic work. He skipped the 2B grade, but
spent two terms in the 4A and was in the 6B grade for the third
term. He had a term average of 8 in the fifth grade, 7 in 6A and 6
for the first and second terms in the 6B grade. He was making
an average of 7 the third term in the grade.
The boy's parents had separated and Donald lived with his
mother, who earned a living as a janitor's assistant, a sister and a
brother. The boy himself seemed to have no ambition except to
go to work as soon as possible. He was slow in comprehending
the problem presented by the Dearborn Formboard. He did not
succeed in placing a single long piece in four minutes then seemed
to understand the problem and solved the test in 338 seconds.
On the second trial he required only forty-eight seconds, which
showed good trainability. His memory spans were: auditory eight,
visual nine, reverse seven, all of which were two above the median.
His good memory spans seemed to be due not to ability to organize
but to excellent visual imagery, if his untrained power of intro-
spection could be depended upon. He said he saw the numbers
and simply read them off forward or backward. On the Binet
Scale, Donald had an I.Q. of 123.4. He failed on the language
tests, vocabulary and dissected sentences, but these failures were to
some extent due to an environmental handicap. At the fourteen
year level he passed the arithmetical reasoning test; at the sixteen
year level the interpretation of fables, the problem of the enclosed
boxes and the reverse memory span; at the eighteen year level he
passed the forward and reverse memory span tests. Thus his high
I-Q. was the result largely of his good memory spans. The im-
pression gained was that Donald could have done better work
had he been willing to make a greater effort. The greatest differ-
ence between these two boys, Harry and Donald, was a difference
111 motivation.
150 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
An interesting case was the boy who, in the last decile of
chronological age distribution had an I.Q. of 109.1. He had the
highest "mental age" of the group, seventeen years, four months.
He had a serious case of strabismus. His eyes had turned in and
rolled up. As the result of several operations, his eyes no longer
turned up but his left eye still turned very markedly inward. He
had continued to suffer severe headaches. He also frequently had
a sore throat so that his attendance at school had always been
irregular. Judging from his description of his difficulties, he
apparently formerly had double vision. He had stopped wearing
glasses, which had not brought about correction but which he
stated resulted in increased frequency of headaches. He had been
attended by some of the city's foremost eye specialists. When he
wrote, he threw his head back in a peculiar position and then
attempted, with apparent difficulty, to look over his lower eye-
lids. All writing was accompanied by movements of the chin.
Harry was an adolescent boy who, from the standpoint of his
interests, was too mature for a sixth grade. From the point of
view of his interests and his ability, he belonged in a high school
group. He had intellectual interests which he furthered by study
on his own initiative. On the vocabulary test, Harry gave quali-
tatively good definitions and his diversified interests were first
apparent on this test. He showed some knowledge of simple chem-
istry and when questioned as to the source of his information he
replied, "I was interested in chemistry so I read on it, in the li-
brary." A frequent response was, "I learned that from a book."
His interests covered a wide range. He went to Leary's where he
bought a simple German text with a German-English vocabulary,
with the aid of which he translated the text. He then sought out
a German family in the neighborhood and began to converse with
the children. He had a Latin grammar in his school desk and
whenever he finished any class work early, he studied from this.
He bought a "self instructor" and thus began his study of the
violin which he later continued with a teacher. He took a corre-
spondence course in drawing. Thus he provided himself with extra-
curricular activities.
He had a critical attitude toward his work and analyzed his
own performance. He was getting only a 7 on his school report be-
cause, as he said, he was never in school for the recitation of a
lesson which he had heard presented. His teacher attributed the
fact that Harry did not make better marks to his very frequent
EXAMINATION REPORT OF 6B CHILDREN 151
absence. Harry has repeated the 3A, 3B, 4B, 5B, and 6A grades.
For a time he was in an Orthogenic Backward and then in a Restor-
ation Class. He was placed in these classes because of his inability
to read and to spell. His failures in these fields were due largely
to his poor vision. The repetitions of grades were due to poor
reading and spelling and to irregular attendance. During the ex-
amination Harry read aloud very poorly. He was, however, able
to reproduce accurately the thought of a paragraph read. In spell-
ing he had 5A proficiency.
Harry did the Dearborn Formboard in forty-three seconds on
the first trial and sixty-two seconds on the second trial. His mem-
ory spans were: auditory eight, visual eight, and reverse six. On
the Binet Tests he had a basal age of fourteen years. At the
sixteen year level he failed on the vocabulary test; at the eighteen
year level he failed on the vocabulary test and the reverse memory
span.
Reading
As a reading test Haggerty Reading Examination?Sigma I,
page 7, was used. While this test is designed to be used as a
group test for grades 1 to 3, page 7 makes a satisfactory test at
higher grade levels. The child was asked to read the paragraph,
the text was removed and the child was asked to tell what he had
read. Sixty-seven 6B children read the paragraph satisfactorily,
nineteen were rated only fair, while fourteen failed entirely. This
paragraph has been found a satisfactory reading test for fifth grade
children and was fairly satisfactory for 6B children.
The spelling test consisted of sentences composed of words
taken from the course of study for particular grades. The child
who read well did not always spell well, and sometimes a good
speller was not a good reader. Seventy-seven children were doing
satisfactory work in spelling.
The correlation between the Stanford Binet-Simon Test and the
Philadelphia Group Test of Mental Ability was determined by the
Otis Correlation Chart. The coefficient of correlation was ? .70,
and the probable error of the coefficient was ? .035.
The correlation between the Morgan Mental Test and the Stan-
ford Binet Simon Test was determined by the Pierson Product
Moment Method. The result was a positive correlation of .677.
?ftugg, in "Statistical Methods Applied to Education," says, in
discussing the definition of "high" or "low" correlation, "With
152 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
the present limitation on educational testing few correlations in
testing will run above .70 and it is safe to regard this as a very
high coefficient." Therefore, there is a high positive correlation
between the Morgan Mental Test and the Stanford Binet-Simon.
Conclusions
1. There is a high correlation between the Philadelphia Group
Test of Mental Ability and the Stanford Revision of the Binet-
Simon Test. The Stanford Binet-Simon Test has in other investiga-
tions been shown to correlate closely with the ability to do successful
school work. Therefore, the Philadelphia Group Test of Mental
Ability is a relatively satisfactory measure for use in grouping
children according to ability. It is at least as satisfactory as the
Binet Test, and, since it is a group test, requires considerably less
time than the administration of individual examinations.
2. The Morgan Mental Test has a high correlation with the
Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Tests. Because, as a group
test, it requires a comparatively short time to give it, it could be
satisfactorily used for whole classes, and thus to single out chil-
dren who needed an individual examination.
3. In the 6B grade, the last grade of elementary school, the
group presents great diversity in so far as chronological age, ana-
tomical and physiological development, school proficiency and men-
tal ability concerned.
4. The older children in the grade on the whole do inferior
school work and give an inferior performance on the tests.
5. Motivation is a factor of prime importance in school suc-
cess.
6. A forward memory span which is equal to or superior to
the median-mode increases equally the probability of school success,
while there is less chance for school success with a forward span
inferior to the median mode.
7. A reverse memory span which is inferior to the median
mode to the extent of being poor (reverse span of three for 6B
children) has a limiting effect on school success, i.e., children with
a limited reverse span do no better than fair school work. "While
some of the least successful pupils are found in this group, a poor
reverse memory span does not necessarily mean failure.
