A Problem in Social Adjustment
==============================

A Statistical Study of the Mentality and Personality Types of
More than Thirteen Thousand Consecutive Cases, Examined
at the Neuro-Psychiatric Clinic of the Municipal
Court of Philadelphia
Anna Spiesman Starr, Ph.D.
Formerly Psychologist at the Municipal Court of Philadelphia
Apart from its judicial function and yet inextricably related
to it, the Muncipal Court of Philadelphia is one of the largest social
agencies of any city. Its purpose may be said to be the social ad-
justment of each individual whereby citizenship is the more fully
and truly achieved. Its emphasis is upon restitution as complete
as possible and upon awakened personal responsibility rather than
punishment. The law provides that this Court shall have ex-
clusive jurisdiction (1) in all Juvenile cases (children up to six-
teen years of age), (2) in cases of disorderly children from sixteen
to twenty-one, and (3) of all disorderly street-walkers. Its juris-
diction also extends to (4) cases of desertion and non-support of
wife and child as well as to other types of homes-in-the-breaking;
(5) to indigent and abandoned parents, and (6) in a limited de-
gree to criminal and civic cases. Hence it is primarily the great
tribunal dealing with the welfare of children and with home prob-
lems in the city of Philadelphia.
Statistics of the Neuro-psychiatric Division of the Court are
now available for the first five year period (1920-1925) of its pres-
ent organization. During this time, at its central clinic, upward
of thirteen thousand individuals have been examined, more than a
thousand of whom have had subsequent re-examinations. The rec-
ords of so extensive a Diagnostic Clinic may be assumed to indicate
rather definitely the types of people who appeal to such a Court
for help in the adjustment of their difficulties or who have so failed
in their social and civic obligations as to have been arrested as law-
breakers. To consider what have been the results of these exam-
inations and to interpret the conditions indicated thereby is the
Purpose of the present study. In passing, it may be worthy of
note that during this period there was no change in the Examining
Staff at the Clinic,* which fact adds considerably to the uniformity
* There are in fact three divisions of the Neuro-psychiatric Department.
One at the House of Detention where most of the arrested boys and girls
86 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of terminology and thereby to greater accuracy in the statistical
treatment of the data.
The work of the Neuro-psychiatric Division has been purely
diagnostic. With the limited staff and pressure of work, no treat-
ment has been possible except as suggestions at the time of the
examination and recommending special placement or treatment at
Hospital Clinics. Probation Officers have been free to consult the
Examiners about any case and they frequently avail themselves of
the opportunity to discuss the practical solution of their problems.
The value of such a Clinic lies primarily in presenting to the Court
a more accurate evaluation of a client's potential adjustability than
casual observation could possibly do. Psychological and Psy-
chiatric examinations determine the zone within the limits of
which an individual is capable of functioning. In a practical
way, the Clinic advises what the Probation Officer may expect
to accomplish with a particular case, thereby eliminating all effort
to attempt the impossible.
Cases of Children
Whether it be a question of dependency or delinquency, of
neglect or vicious mischief, every child coming within the jurisdic-
tion of the Court has a physical and a mental examination prior to
the hearing. The results of the examinations are before the Judge
at the time of his decision, along with the report of the home and
school investigation. This indicates how important the Court has
found the child's physical and mental health to be in determining
his responsibility. Experience has shown how intimately they in-
fluence the success of the Probation Officer's efforts toward estab-
lishing the individual's economic and social sufficiency. In the
Courts of several other cities, physical and mental examinations are
made in those cases designated by the Judge, but in the Phila-
delphia Muncipal Court all children are examined before the Court
hearing.
Table I records the diagnoses made of 7,664 children under
sixteen years of age. As individuals, they may have been referred
from any one of the divisions of the Court and involved in any
are examined while awaiting Court; a second at the Women's Misdemeanant's
Detention House and the third at the General Medical Building. The records
here considered are entirely from the last mentioned place to which cases of
all ages are referred from any of the Court divisions whatsoever.
PROBLEM IN SOCIAL ADJUSTMENT 87
type of case. As in all instances throughout this consideration,
the diagnosis tabulated has been the primary or outstanding one.
In many instances dual diagnoses have been made especially in
the Moron and Subnormal Groups where unstable and psycho-
neurotic personalities are so frequent. However, the diagnoses re-
corded here are unqualified and refer to that group which most
nearly covers the case.
Table I. Juvenile Cases?Infancy to 16 Yrs.
Diagnosis Number of Cases Percent
Normal  3150 ?
Retarded  1542 '
Subnormal (Moron)  1912 ?
Low Grade Defective (F.M.)  332 ?
Idiot and Imbecile  1^5 '
Epilepsy  50 '
Psychoneuroses  221
Psychoses  ^
Organic Nerve Disease and Chorea... 56
Post Encephalitis  21
Constitutional Psychopathic Inferior. 100
All Others  1015 1*3
TOTAL 7664 100.0
The most apparent and outstanding facts indicated by Table I
are, first, that the group is roughly divided into half as between
the Normal Children and those presenting some abnormal nervous
or mental condition; secondly, that children tend to express their
mental deficiency chiefly along intellectual lines. This is prob-
ably due to the fact that problems of childhood are those of Learn-
ing both in and out of school, and any mental deficiency is ex-
pressed in their failure to meet this problem adequately.
The 41 per cent diagnoses as Normal may be held by some
to be too large a proportion. It must be admitted that several hun-
dred of these children were very young at the time of examination
and that defect other than the grosser kind may not have been dis-
cernible so early in their development. Also, children functioning
within the limits of normality at pre-school age may be deficient
later on through injury, illness or a failure to develop. On the
other hand, many of the children in the Retarded Group are func-
88 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tioning below their best possibilities due to an environmental, a
nutritional or an organic handicap and it is therefore to be ex-
pected that under the Court's supervision these obstacles may be
removed and a fuller and more active mental development result.
Next to the Normal Group is the Deficient Group?those of
subnormal (moron) intelligence. The extent of this group (25
per cent) is not surprising when we realize that lack of judgment
and adequate appreciation of the causal relationships in every day
living are characteristic deficiencies of this class. This is largely
the group charged with the petty and even more serious delin-
quencies. In most cases life demands too much of these children.
Their deficiencies are either not generally recognized or they lie
along a particular ability and the resulting behavior and trans-
gressions are too often considered "devilish" when the offender
may be just as surprised as anyone at finding himself in difficulty.
"I did it because he asked me to. I didn't think I would get
caught. I just did it." This group can be helped by probation
only when their defects and possibilities are both recognized and
their environment and social demands so adjusted as to be more
nearly proportional to their possibilities.
Among the children, there were 6.4 per cent of low grade
mental defectives including the so-called feebleminded, imbeciles
and idiots. This large percentage is due to the fact that it is
through the Juvenile Court that all such children are committed
to institutions and most of these cases were referred for that
specific purpose.
The children of the Psychoneurotic Group (3 per cent) were
those of excessive fears and emotionally overactive. Their success
in life is imperiled by their emotional instability rather than by
their intellectual capacity, any degree of which they may possess.
They range all the way from the child afraid of the dark to those
unhappy ones who meet no situation with confidence and cripple
their self expression by vague fears of their own inferiority. The
diagnosis CPI (constitutional psychopathic inferior) denotes those
who so lack moral impressionability as to be incapable to a consider-
able extent of appreciating social or group responsibility of any
kind. They are impulsive, unchecked by inhibitions and have a
minimum of emotional development. Their delinquencies are char-
acterized by a bold audacity and a cheerful disregard of conse-
quence.
PROBLEM IN SOCIAL ADJUSTMENT 89
Adolescent Cases
In the cases of those above the juvenile age, i.e., the adolescent
and the adult group, mental examinations were made at the re-
quest of the Probation Officer in any case where probation had
failed or wherever there appeared any symptoms of "nervousness"
or complaint of mental or physical disorder. Other cases were
referred directly from the Court Room at the discretion of the
Judge or by direction of the physician attending Court. In this
study the records of the older groups are therefore not so inclusive
nor unselected as in the younger class. However, 5,721 cases above
sixteen years are here recorded, which number is sufficiently large
to be at least suggestive in the differentiation of types, but not to
be taken as establishing definite percentages.
Table II records about 1,000 cases between 16 and 21 years of
age. They consist largely of runaway and incorrigible boys, un-
Table II. Adolescent Group?16 to 21 Yrs.
Diagnosis Number of Cases Percent
Normal  119 12.3
Retarded  32 3.3
Moron  444 45.8
Low Grade Defective (F.M.)  90 9.2
Imbecile, Idiot  15 1.5
Epilepsy  23 2.3
Psychoneurosis  154 15.8
Psychosis  26 2.7
Organic Nerve Disease and Chorea... 5 0.5
C.P.I  53 5.6
All others  10 1-0
TOTAL 971 100.0
married mothers and young husbands and wives who have early
encountered marital difficulties. The drop in the percentage of
the normal group is not as significant as would at first appear,
because this older group is somewhat selected while the Juveniles
were entirely not so. The bulk of normal children came to be
within court jurisdiction because of economic dependency. Many
were merely asking for maintenance, while in the adolescent group
no such financial aid is awarded. Each case in Table II indicates
an individual in difficulty more or less of his own making. The
90 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
decided increase in the percentage of emotional instability is, how-
ever, significant. It indicates that the adolescent reacts to his
insufficiency with increasing emotion. To any intellectual defi-
ciency the adolescent delinquent is likely to add emotional insta-
bility, often to the extent of making this emotional instability his
chief handicap. The increase in the number of developed psychoses
is also to be expected, as a corresponding increase takes place in
the general population during the adolescent years.
The adult group was largely recruited from the Domestic Re-
lations Divisions and from those cases involving cruelty or neglect
of children. The results of their examinations are tabulated as
Table III and further demonstrate the tendency indicated in Table
Table III. Adult Group?above 21 yrs.
Diagnosis Number of Cases Percent
Normal  854 17.8
Moron  760 16.0
Low Grade Defective (F.M.)  76 1.6
Epilepsy  50 1.5
Psychoneuroses  1860 39.1
Alcoholism    131 2.7
Senility  147 3.1
Psychoses  456 9.5
Organic Nerve Disease, and Chorea. . 139 2.9
C.P.I  152 3.2
All others  125 2.6
TOTAL 4750 100.0
II, viz., that with increasing age, individuals fail to meet their
problems more and more because of emotional instability. In this
group (4,750 cases above 21 years) it appears to be the chief causa-
tive factor. If we add the cases of deficient (not F.M.) mentality
to those of psychoneurotic makeup, we have 55 per cent of the en-
tire adult group. This means that more than one half of the
adults examined were to a considerable extent mentally or emo-
tionally handicapped?yet still within the range of being some-
what adjustable. In comparison with the other deficient group,
their prognosis under treatment is favorable. This is an astound-
ing fact, the consequences of which are far reaching indeed and a
recognition of which must be made if any lasting social adjustment
PROBLEM IN SOCIAL ADJUSTMENT 91
is to be effected. One should realize that this is the group whose
economic status is so often barely adequate and hence is readily
upset by unfavorable labor conditions. In their lives emergencies
are met by expenditure of capital in health and ideals as readily
as material extravagances are indulged in during times of tempo-
rary opulence. Furthermore, theirs are frequently the homes of
incorrigible children, many of whom are mentally deficient, physi-
cally handicapped or both. When we appreciate these facts and
conditions we begin to sense the enormity of the problems con-
fronting such a Court and Clinic and realize how involved aie the
vicious circles which all but defy untangling.
Table IV is a summary of all the cases examined and in this
form admits of a closer comparison of the three groups. First, it
Table IV. Summary.
Diagnosis
Normal
Retarded
Subnormal (Moron). . .
Psychoneuroses
All others.
Total number of cases..
Juvenile
41.1
20.0
25.3
2.9
10.7
100.0
7664
Adoles-
cent
12.3
3.3
45.8
15.8
22.8
100.0
971
Adult
17.8
16.0
39.1
27.1
100.0
4750
Total
23.7
36.8
19.3
20.2
100.0
13,385
Social
Status
Adjusted
Border-
line or ad-
justable
Non-ad-
justable
indicates that about one fourth of the entire group were of normal
intelligence and were free from any mental, emotional or neuro-
logical disorders. Secondly, and undoubtedly this is the most strik-
ing and suggestive determination brought out by the whole study,
that 56 per cent of all individuals examined over a period of five
years belong to a "Borderline Group"?each member of which
presents in varying degrees some defect either in the field of in-
telligence, of emotion, or both. Yet these individuals function
within such limits as admit of considerable adjustment and for the
most part reflect very plainly in their behavior the forces of their
environment. This group may well be recognized as being in spe-
cial need of such therapeutic measures of Mental Hygiene as will
92 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
increase their stability. Unless they do receive such treatment, they
will succumb to the chance forces of their environment, which will
tend to make their condition the worse through their very lack
of critical discrimination. This group may be termed "Adjust-
ables" in contradistinction to those of grosser defect whose prog-
nosis is more unfavorable, the Non-Adjustables. Thirdly, we note
that the Non-Adjustables under the caption of All Others approxi-
mates the Normal Group in size; also, that the percentage of Non-
Adjustables increases with age?there being almost three times as
many of them in the adult as in the juvenile. Fourthly, this table
clearly emphasizes the shift in the type of defective reaction char-
acteristic of each group. Children's problems involve the learning
processes and their failure therein indicates their defect and defi-
ciency. By adolescence their problems involve more of judgment
and planfulness and when their defective mentality or their insta-
bility inhibits (prohibits) success, their reaction is complicated by
increased emotional disturbance. This condition is further intensi-
fied in maturity especially in marital and family problems when
they no longer accept parental supervision and so much depends
upon their personalities. Many who were well able to cope with
the school curriculum by their rote memory, fail in maturity be-
cause of the complexity and fluctuation of circumstances. Their
resulting behavior is like the youngster beating his head against a
stone wall and then crying because it hurts.
The relatively small proportion of normals in the older group
as compared with the children is partially due to the fact that in
this study the Juvenile Group is wholly unselected while the others
are not. Then, too, the normal child does not necessarily become
the normal adult. Some individuals attain their mental stature
at an early age, beyond which the increasing years bring nothing of
mental acumen, and increased skill, due only to practice and ex-
perience, is but increased efficiency on no higher plane. Yet, if
fairly well poised, they are capable of being "good citizens." The
increase of the normal cases in the adult group over the adolescent
is due in part at least to this, that in the Domestic Relations cases,
the diagnosis of mental abnormality in either husband or wife re-
sults in the request for the other one to come to the Clinic, for
whom there might otherwise have been no question of a mental
examination.
This statistical data presents a fairly definite picture of the
PROBLEM IN SOCIAL ADJUSTMENT 93
mental status of the group considered. Of the 13,385 individuals
examined, somewhat less than one-fourth (23 per cent) were diag-
nosed as normal, more than one-half (56 per cent) constitute a
"Borderline Group," as herein defined, while the remainder were
either those of uncertain diagnosis or so impaired mentally as to
he considered non-adjustable from a social point of view. The first
conclusion to be drawn from such findings, is that deficiency in
mental alertness or emotional stability or both characterizes the
majority of individuals whose social and civic problems Philadel-
phia's Municipal Court was called upon to adjust. It would there-
fore appear that some causal relation exists?viz., that mental defi-
ciency and emotional instability largely contribute to social in-
competency. This is universally recognized wherever there is gross
defect, but in this study we find that more than half of the entire
group were not grossly nor irreparably defective but that from a
functional viewpoint, they were sufficiently deficient in their par-
ticular environment as to be, for the time being, socially inadequate.
This fact raises the whole question of "partial responsibility" and
challenges some satisfactory solution.
The second conclusion is that, since the Adjustables, as such,
functioning below their possibilities are socially incompetent, it is
reasonable to expect that functioning at their best they would be-
come much more sufficient in their social relations, if not entirely so.
This necessarily involves the concept of making it possible for each
to attain his highest norm.
The Court knows that families and individuals enmeshed in the
most tragic and intricate problems of poverty and suffering can
be helped toward rehabilitation and expected to maintain their re-
gained position in direct proportion to their intelligence and the
stability of their personality. The individual must be such as can
be relied upon to cooperate in the guidance offered and must help
himself to face the issues squarely, not passively indulging in dis-
proportionate self-pity or indifference. Otherwise he hinders his
own progress by poor judgment or chronic depression. This is
particularly true in cases involving financial conditions when irri-
tation and family friction are so easily stimulated. Most family
problems as well as all cases of dependency involve this point.
Mere financial problems can be adjusted and with careful analysis
?f the situation it is possible to evolve some plan of rehabilitation
through cooperation and mutual effort. But, it is when illness or
94 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
defect complicate the situation that the problem is really serious.
However, all persons cannot be adjusted to live happily in a com-
munity and for their own good should be removed to custodial
care as soon as possible. It is poor social management to keep
some families together and it is a miscarriage of justice to try to
do so. Energy should not be wasted in attempting the impossible
but rather should greater effort be concentrated upon that which
can be done.
Social problems seem to arise directly from the type of per-
sonalities concerned rather than from purely environmental cir-
cumstances. A very frequent cause of maladjustment is the in-
stability of the hysteric or the moron's lack of judgment. Not
every one who bears financial or social burdens comes to Court
and the stories of some who finally do come are records of self-
sacrifice and cheerful heroic effort almost beyond belief. These
are, however, in the great minority and their problem is external
to themselves. By far the greater number of Court Clients are
involved in difficulties because of their inadequate meeting of a
situation fairly well within their possibilities. Comparatively few
function at their best unless definitely trained under supervision
more or less enforced.
Through experience the Court knows all of this and knows too
that unless there is some change within the individuals themselves,
the solution of this year's problems bears no guarantee that next
year they will not return with similar ones. The needed change
may be only one in the point of view or having some ambition
keenly stimulated. It needs to be that "something," the absence
of which results in the individual being a social deficit and by its
presence makes him more nearly an asset. Most individuals who
are at all socially competent have some aptitude, the expression of
which arouses justified pride and self-respect. This ability asset
is what the Probation Officer or Counselor fosters and encourages.
All unadjusted individuals need a more accurate appreciation of
their possibilities and some recognition of their limitations plus
an ambition to function at their best. Somehow they need to be
conscious of a philosophy?i.e., an explanation or justification of
life which to them is rational and satisfying, even though they have
no idea what philosophy is. They need a goal which lies within
their ability to reach, and a sense of it being worth their effort
to attain it. In other words, they need more insight into their
PROBLEM IN SOCIAL ADJUSTMENT 95
lives and condition. Like all the rest of us, when they are without
vision, they easily run amuck. It is by the methods of mental hy-
giene that such disclosures are made and they constitute in reality
the essential accomplishment in every successfully adjusted case
whether specifically done through a Clinic or not.
It is unfortunate that the daily press so often features with
maudlin sentimentality any innovation in the treatment of break-
ers-of-the-law, regardless of possible intrinsic value. In the attempt
to portray the sensational, the emphasis has been placed upon the
offender as "the poor criminal" even to the extent of picturing
prisons as gentlemen clubs. The concept of partial responsibility
has been misunderstood, too, and mental examinations to determine
such responsibility, are by some considered mere palliative measures
to impress and confuse the Jury. But with the Court itself, such
conditions do not hold. Being informed as to the type of person
before him, the Judge can the more intelligently not only "make
the punishment fit the crime,'' but considering the individual, may
impose such a sentence as will tend to remove the cause and op-
portunity of repeating the offense. The study of these statistics
shows how much salvaging needs to be done even with the Clients of
but one Court in a single city. By inference they indicate how
wide spread is the need for rehabilitating the socially maladjusted.
Summary
A statistical study of 13,385 consecutive cases examined at the
Neuro-Psychiatric Clinic of the Municipal Court of Philadelphia,
over a period of five years, ascertains the following facts:
1. Of the total number examined, 23.7 per cent were diag-
nosed as normal; 36.8 per cent as subnormal (moron) ; 19.3 per
cent as psychoneurotic and the remaning 20.2 per cent cover the
Psychoses, and pathological neural conditions, the undetermined
diagnoses and all others not previously accounted for.
2. The Juvenile Group (7,664 children under 16 years of age)
Was wholly unselected and consists of dependent children as well
as those charged with delinquency. It is roughly divided in half
as between the Normal and those presenting some abnormal nervous
?r mental condition. This group expresses its abnormality chiefly
m the field of intelligence.
3. The adolescent delinquents (971 cases between 16 and 21
years of age) react with increasing emotion. Intellectual deficiency
96 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
is further complicated by emotional instability, often to the extent
of making it their chief handicap. This group is somewhat selected
being largely comprised of the "more difficult cases" referred from
the Misdemeanants (male) and the Domestic Relations Divisions.
4. The adult group (4,750 cases above 21 years, chiefly from
the Domestic Relations Division) confirms the tendency toward
emotional instability observed in the adolescent group. Here the
psychoneuroses more than double the cases of deficient intelligence.
5. Of the total number examined, 56 per cent belong to a
Borderline Group?i.e., in spite of their defect or instability they
are capable of considerable social adjustment.
6. The total non-adjustable group, those of unfavorable prog-
nosis, approximates the normal group in extent.
Conclusions
Since some degree of deficiency in mental alertness or emo-
tional stability characterizes the majority of individuals coming to
court for social and civic adjustment, it is obvious
1. that a causal relation exists between social inadequacy and
mental deficiency, even though the deficiency be of relatively small
degree; and
2. that unless such individuals as do not require custodial
care, receive adequate mental treatment and training, no perma-
nent social rehabilitation is possible.
