Lester: A Study in Diagnostic Teaching
=======================================

By Samuel Lipshutz, and Lorraine McNally, Clinic Teacher,
University of Pennsylvania,
* To start a clinical study of Lester with a recital of his scores
in the various psychological tests would be to start at the wrong
end. For Lester is one of those fortunate individuals who are
born with the uncanny ability of confounding psychologists by
amounting to so much more than their test scores would indicate.
In contrast to those elements of his personality which make the,
above statement true, Lester has, I must admit, his defects. The
business of weighing these and trying to determine how much they
will mean to Lester when he is full grown and ready for the world
is a delicate one.
To begin with first impressions?which is the only logical way
to begin anything?there can be no doubt that Lester is as healthy,
as well-developed, as full-grown, and as active an American boy
as could be found anywhere. He likes to swim, to shoot, to ride,
to drive a car, to run a motorboat, and to play ball. He has done
all of these things, though his fourteenth birthday is half a year
ahead of him. He hates to go to dancing school, does not like girls,
does not like to go to prep school, or to church. In all of these
ways and in many more he demonstrates his complete balance?
his almost perfect adjustment to his world. His family background is of the best, with a history which starts with William
the Conqueror and comes down to the D.A.R.
With the advantages of health, education, money, and position,
it is not surprising that Lester has turned out to be so completely
normal in almost every respect. It is a bit surprising that he
should have failed to be normal in two ways. One of these is the
defect which brought him to the University for clinical examination and teaching; the other is a very real ability?a very important talent. The second of these more than makes up for the
first.
Briefly, Lester cannot spell. He has improved much in this
respect in the last few months, but he can still read much better
than he can spell. Furthermore, he is not very good at the arithmetic which he should be doing at his age level and grade. These
are his troubles. The talent I mentioned will be discussed in full
later.
LESTER?A STUD1 205
The brief introduction to Lester finished, we may now proceed to look at him in greater detail. He was born in October,
1914, which made him thirteen years and two months old when
he was examined in December of 1927. He was brought to the
clinic by his teacher in a private school. He was in the sixth
grade at school; had no significant medical history; the family
health was good; and he had two sisters, aged eleven and four.
The reason for the examination was given as inconsistent school
progress. The diagnosis was normal mentality; the recommendation was clinic teaching. The Intelligence Quotient was 104. He
completed the Witmer Cylinder test in 70 seconds on the first trial,
and 47 seconds on the second trial?about the 30th and the 40th
percentiles of the fifteen year group. Since his own age was 13,
these results are about average, perhaps a little low.
In the auditory memory span, he scored 6, and 7 on two
repetitions. In the visual, he scored 9, with 10 on five repetitions.
In the auditory reverse, he scored 3; in the visual, he scored 6.
The difference between his visual and auditory performance gave
the final clue, both to his difficulty and to its treatment.
He could read with astonishing rapidity. He was diagnosed
as the visual type, with underdeveloped kinaesthesia. His auditory
imagery was particularly poor. It was patent that this accounted
for his inability to do spelling and arithmetic. In the spelling
tests the words were spoken aloud; Lester could not form a picture
of the word from the sound. Nor could he retain a kinaesthetic
memory of how the word was formed. It was visual?or nothing.
The clinical examiner further reported that his I.Q. was at
the thirtieth percentile for high school boys; that he had marked
inadequacy of feeling where the spelling field was approached; and
that he be started with second grade work.
The spelling deficiency was so much more marked than the
arithmetic that I decided from the start to devote the whole term
to it. It was plain that whatever good might be accomplished with
this case would be through practice; through the gradual development of auditory and kinaesthetic images by means of drill.
To attempt too much would have spoiled everything, and if I have
erred at all, I have erred in attempting too little, for Lester has
succeeded in learning everything I have asked him to learn. We
started at the second grade level; he is now doing sixth grade
spelling with intelligence.
I noticed at the first meetings of the term that Lester invari206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ably brought a different magazine to school each day. These were
of the popular type?the Saturday Evening Post, Liberty, Collier's, and so on. He read the stories with comprehension. I asked
him to read aloud to me; his reading speed was remarkable. He
read so fast that he gave me another clue to guide me in my attempts at teaching. He could not spell the individual words because he had never taken a good look at them!
It was literally so. Lester had the ability to read almost a
page at a glance. He had a vague idea that a certain group of
letters formed a certain word, but the exact position of them in
order was not important to him. The most fleeting glimpse of the
combination of letters gave him the meaning of the word; but when
he attempted to spell the word later he could reproduce only the
letters; never the correct order. Our first drill then, was, strangely
enough, on slow reading. I wagged my finger judicially and had
Lester read a single word to each wag. This slowed down his
speed. We continued this until he got into the habit of looking
at words as words, not as parts of sentences.
He was intelligent through it all. He realized he had a problem on his hands, and he worked with me. He knew what the
goal was; I had even gone so far as to explain kinaesthetic and
visual and auditory imagery to him, and to tell him what we were
trying to do. I think the procedure was a wise one, for he grasped
it instantly. We had to develop the kinaesthetic and the auditory
images, and we entered upon the harassing business of doing so.
We started with a list of twenty words. I carefully selected
second grade words which he could not spell, together with a few
at the third grade level. These included "wishes" and "whistle"
and other similar combinations. He would spell one for the other
every time, because of their visual similarity. We drilled perhaps
four hours on those twenty words. As soon as he learned to spell
one he would forget the other, so that results were not immediately
encouraging. I would pronounce the word. Lester would try to
spell it. After he had failed, I would spell it for him while he
wrote it on the blackboard. While he wrote it he would call off
the letters. This was the form of our drill during the whole term.
In this way we combined the kinaesthetic and the auditory elements of spelling with the visual, and we made progress.
At the start I consulted several texts on the subject of the
psychology of spelling. Without exception they gave me no help
at all. They were all beautifully general or else uselessly introLESTER?A STUDY 207
spective; I think there is room for a practical manual on the teaching of spelling to deficients.
The weeks of the term passed. After a time Lester could learn
ten new words an hour and remember seven or eight the next time.
We reviewed and reviewed and reviewed, keeping a record of all
the word lists from the beginning of the term. Constantly we went
back to the very beginning, to see how much Lester could remember, and to see what progress he was making.
Noticing his intelligent interest in the problem, I next proceeded upon what normally would have been a very doubtful step.
I taught Lester various rules, one at a time, about the long and
short vowels and where they came; about the sequence of vowels
and the sequence of consonants; about the doubling of consonants,
and so on. I did this experimentally; the experiment succeeded.
He learned the rules and slowly learned to apply them. The fact
that there were rules was a complete surprise to him, and they
aided him enormously in that they taught him to look upon words
as problems. A problem challenged him at once, and he never gave;
up. It needed urging at first and a great deal of pounding. I do
not wish to convey the impression that Lester was an intellectual
giant, despite the average I.Q. He was an average boy?but he
did have a certain acuteness.
It helped greatly to know that he was cognizant to the difficulties. He was slightly under the influence of an inferiority complex in the field of spelling; this wore off as he progressed. And
now, after four months of drill, he is doing his school spelling at
a very high level. His spelling average cannot be less than ninety
now?and it may be ninety-five or more. When the term ended
Lester could learn twenty Sixth Grade words one day, come back a
day or two later and remember eighteen or nineteen. These he
would learn, by the drill method I have described, and then he
would know them for good.
There was one fortunate circumstance that helped me greatly.
It was more or less of an accident. We had been drilling along
until there were about one hundred words and a half dozen rules
fixed in Lester's mind. He knew them, but his performance was
spotty. Sometimes he knew them better than at others?a very
annoying situation. Just then his Easter Holidays broke, and
after them, ours, so that he did not see me for almost a month.
When he returned, though he swore he had not studied, he knew
every one of the words and all of the rules. He had needed the
208 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
rest, and the cessation in drilling. After that and until the end
of the term we proceeded at top speed. The very end of the course
brought corroboration from his teacher that his spelling was much
improved.
And that was that. On the surface, Lester had learned a few
hundred words and a handful of rules. But really he had learned
a great deal more than that. He had learned how to look at a
word steadily; how to analyse its difficulties, and how to fix it in
his mind. He was "spelling conscious"?it meant something to
him. Just before the term ended we had a talk about it. He
promised faithfully to bear his rules in mind, and to apply them
to all the words he would have to write or spell in the future.
He seemed serious about it, and I am of the opinion that Lester's
period of clinical teaching in the field of spelling is over for good.
He has learned his lessons, and he is the sort of boy to realize
that he has done something?hence to value it and stick to it.
I have discussed his defect and the course of training he
underwent in the effort to rid himself of it. It will be recalled
that I mentioned at the beginning a certain great talent he had?
a talent which outweighed his deficiency. It is this talent I would
talk about now, for the clinical picture of Lester would be woefully incomplete without it.
To understand this talent it is necessary to get a picture of
Lester as he carries himself and as he behaves. Perhaps the most
outstanding characteristic of the boy is his ease?his poise. He is
always jaunty, always sure of himself. In fact, during our first
few meetings, he was much more at ease than I was. He has the
sort of personality which is valuable to a salesman, or to any man
of business, and added to this he has the talent I have mentioned
?the talent for business.
He is a master at the delicate art of buying and selling. He
deals in old coins, in all sorts of curiosities, in knives, and has a
small armory of pistols and rifles. He buys such things as cigarette lighters and sells them at school. He does all of this in a
thoroughly commercial way, with little of the amateur about him.
In the case of the cigarette lighters, he sent to a firm in Connecticut for 100 of them, paying fifteen dollars for the lot. To sell
them he worked out a plan which is identical with the famous
demonstration method of present day business. He gave five of
them away. The five lucky boys went about the school, lighting
the things. Others asked where they had obtained them, and
LESTER?A STUDY 209
were referred, of course, to Lester. Lester proceeded to sell the
ninety-five remaining lighters at the price of thirty cents each,
cleaning a substantial profit. Agents sold some of them for him;
these he allowed one cent per sale. I remarked that the commission was rather small, but Lester pointed out that they would
rather make that than make nothing, and the point seemed to be
well taken.
In a hundred other ways has the boy shown his ability in
this direction. At the advanced age of thirteen he has decided
to go into the real estate trade, and believes that there is more
money to be made in that than in anything else. He may be right
or wrong, but the fact remains that Lester will get ahead. He
has the ability, and he has the influence to give him the right start.
The way is smoothed for him, and I look for a career little short
of meteoric. He bites into his problems in a way which belies the
I.Q. of merely 104; bites into them the same way he bit into the
annoyance of his poor spelling. Probably the best argument I
used was the one that he would need spelling in business. That
was speaking the language he could understand, and the ambition
it gave him lasted almost a full week.
He spends money foolishly, sometimes. He spends it fairly
well, at others. But he knows how to make it, from what he has
told me, and that is a great merit these days.
