Psychological Concomitants of High Alveolar Carbon Dioxide, a Psychobiochemjcal Study of the Etiology of Stammering
====================================================================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1928, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XVII, No. 1
March, 1928

By Henry E. Starr, Ph.D.
(From the Psyclioiiochemical Laboratory and Clinic of the Department of
Psychology of the University of Pennsylvania)
Eeceivea for publication February 18, 1928
Introductory
In a former study of the metabolic etiology of stammering,1
I stated that the salivary pH and its determinants in the case
of lethargic stammerers, indicated the importance of the role of
carbon dioxide in the general diathesis. Further research of a
more strictly biochemical nature2 tended to corroborate this indication. It became apparent, however, that for a more direct study
of the problem, it was necessary to determine the carbon dioxide
content of the alveolar air of the so-called "sub-breathing" stammerer at various stages of his progress toward recovery.
The determination of alveolar carbon dioxide is readily made
by analysis of expired air. The tension, or partial pressure, of
the C02 thus ascertained very closely approximates that of the
arterial blood of the subject. For a prolonged research upon
psychological clinical subjects, this method is obviously preferable
to direct blood analysis. Perhaps the most convenient method
for the determination of the carbon dioxide content of alveolar air
1 Starr, Henry E. The Hydrogen Ion Concentration of the Mixed Saliva
considered as an Index of Fatigue and of Emotional Excitation and applied
to a Study of the Metabolic Etiology of Stammering. Am. J. Psychol. 1922,
xxxiii, 394-418.
2 Starr, Henry E. The Determination of the Hydrogen Ion Concentration of Human Mixed Saliva. J. Biol. Chem. 1922, liv, 43-54.
Starr, Henry E. Variations in the Hydrogen Ion Concentration of
Human Mixed Saliva. J. Biol. Chem. 1922, liv, 55-64.
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
is that of Fridericia.3 This method, while not the most delicate,
is sufficiently exact, in experienced hands, for the purposes of this
research and for general clinical use. It was employed throughout
the present study and to minimize errors arising from the personal
factor of the analyst, all of the determinations reported in this
paper were made by the same individual.
For more than two years the Fridericia method has been a
part of the regular psychobiochemical examination given at intervals to stammerers undergoing treatment in the Speech Clinic
of this University. Almost without exception, subjects displaying
definite physical stigmata of deficient habits of breathing have a
high alveolar carbon dioxide tension at their first examination.
Many others, usually lethargic in general reactions, but betraying
no pronounced anatomical evidence of "sub-breathing," exhale
air equally heavily loaded with carbon dioxide. In the case of
both groups or types, as habits of breathing improve, alveolar
C02 diminishes. And para passu, usually comes correction of
stammering. When ready for dismissal as "cured," the alveolar
carbon dioxide tension approximates normal average values.4
The high correlation just indicated was so apparent that, in
* See Fridericia, L. S. Berl. Tclin. Woch. 1914, li, 1268.
Poulton, Brit. Med. J. 1915, ii, 392.
4 The Speech Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania, under the direction of Dr E. B. Twitmyer, has been curing stammerers of various types
for more than a quarter of a century. Today many public schools of the
better grade are conducting classes for the correction of speech defects,
and conducting them successfully. It is, therefore, somewhat amusing to
note, en passant, the following statement which appeared recently in a scientific
journal. "As is well known, chronic stammerers are rarely, if ever, entirely
cured of their speech defects. All sorts of physical and mental training fail."
This statement serves, in part, to introduce the personal recollections of a
stammering girl's feelings with regard to her wet nurse at about the age
of 5 months. Even her description of her sensations during nursing in the
first six weeks of her life are gravely recorded and apparently accepted as
quite veracious by the writer of the article. After a psychoanalytic consideration, he concludes with a solemn warning against regarding all stammerers
as solely oral erotics, reminding the reader that he must also be on the
watch for anal and urinary erotism.
Those interested in the curiosa of stammering literature are referred
to L. Pierce Clark, M.D., New York, "A Study of the Psychogenesis of
Stammerers," Jnl. Nerv. and Ment. Dis. 1926, lxiii, 238-245.
HIGH ALVEOLAR CARBON DIOXIDE 3
1926, the writer reported on it briefly before the American Psychological Association.5
Since then, the evidence has been cumulative and conclusive,
involving several factors not heretofore reported.
Experimental
The Fridericia method requires a certain amount of intelligent
co-operation on the part of the subject, who, without either holding his breath or taking a preliminary deep breath, must blow
into the apparatus when told to do so by the examiner. It is
therefore not adapted to young children, the very stupid, or the
quite highly excitable of any age. Consequently the stammerers
and others reported upon in this study may be said to be a selected
group, in the sense of being able to co-operate to the extent of
blowing when told to do so. In all cases where there was any
doubt as to the actuality of co-operation of the subject, or the
validity of the findings, the results have been excluded from this
report.
Fifty determinations made upon thirty-five normal college
men are reported as controls. For although the literature upon
alveolar carbon dioxide is replete with "normals," the "normals"
as therein considered are not classified as to psychological traits
or reaction patterns. Physiological chemistry until quite recently
has been practically entirely under the iEgis of medicine. As a
result, in most of its literature, anyone or anything is reported
as "normal" which is not so grossly pathological as to require
medical treatment. The "normals" and other subjects considered
in this study were all ?' well'' from the point of view of pathology,
according to preliminary medical examination. In addition, the
normals, herein regarded as such, were so diagnosed by competent
clinical psychologists?not mere psychometrists.
Fifty determinations of alveolar carbon dioxide tension of
19 cured stammerers, originally of the sub-breathing type, are
included in this report. The criteria for the diagnosis of "cured"
in this research are that the patients so regarded themselves, were
so diagnosed in the Speech Clinic, and after the lapse of a year
or more have not returned to the Clinic for further treatment
5 Starr, Henry E. Physiological Chemistry in the Service of Psychology
as illustrated by Determinations of Alveolar Carbon Dioxide Tension and the
Hemoglobin Content of the Blood, correlated with Clinical Diagnoses. Abstr.
in Psychol. Bui. 1927, xxiv, 186-187.
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
which they are urged to do in ease of a relapse. As a matter
of fact, subjects who do relapse are not slow to accept this invitation to return for further treatment. A chart (No. 4) showing
the "rise and fall" of such a patient is presented in this article.
One hundred alveolar carbon dioxide tensions of an equal
number of sub-breathing stammerers at the time of their initial
examination are also included in this study.
To ascertain whether or not a high blood content of C02
does, per se, promptly and invariably produce stammering, six
normal subjects were placed and kept on a high carbohydrate
diet until their alveolar C02 was considerably increased. The
diet employed was adequate in calories, vitamines, mineral salts
and protein. Examination of the urine was made each morning
to note any appearance of glycosuria.6 None of the six subjects
referred to in the present paper had any idea that their habits of
speech might be affected, but were under close observation to
detect any indication of incipient stammering. The element of
suggestion was thereby eliminated.
In every instance, the specimens of alveolar air were taken
about 3 p.m., i.e., after the normal rise in alveolar C02 following
the ingestion of the midday meal, and before the evening meal
was taken.7
Inasmuch as it is the partial pressure or tension of the alveolar
C02 which closely approximates that of the arterial blood, it is
therefore a more direct and definite indication of the conditions
obtaining in the circulatory system than is the alveolar carbon
dioxide per cent. Consequently, the barometric pressure was carefully noted at the time of each analysis, and the tension calculated
by the usual formula of Tension = volume per cent X (barometric pressure ? 40), when the temperature is constant, as it
is when the Fridericia method is properly conducted. The tension
8 The qualitative test was that of Benedict, the osazone test being employed for confirmation. When both yielded positive results, Benedict's
quantitative method was employed.
7 That digestive activity is accompanied generally by a rise in alveolar
CO, was pointed out by Higgins, Am. J. Physiol. 1914, xxxiv, 114. For a
confirmatory and illustrative table of findings on six normal subjects, see
Starr, Henry E., J. Biol. Chern., 1922, liv, 57, Table 1. The rise as shown
in that table may range from 0.0 per cent to 0.6 per cent.?Cf. subject
GXT, alveolar COa 20 mins. before eating was 5.45 per cent, 40 mins. after
eating, 6.05 per cent.
HIGH ALVEOLAR CARBON DIOXIDE 5
or partial pressure thus calculated is, of course, in terms of millimeters of mercury.8 The 40 mm. deducted in the equation are for
tension of water vapor at body temperature.
Results
The results obtained in the studies just indicated are presented
in the following Charts. In the charts the value of the nearest
whole number is taken in each case and the plotting done in terms
of relative frequency, except, of course, in the individualistic
Charts 4 and 5.
Discussion
Charts 1, 2 and 3, with Table 1, indicate quite clearly that
while virtually all of the alveolar C02 values are within the physiologically normal limits, there is a very definite range characteristic
of each group. The Normals tend toward the lower limits 'and the
sub-breathers crowd the upper. The Cured group occupies a
rather intermediate position, showing a general movement toward
the lower values characteristic of the psychologically normal, but
not altogether coinciding therewith. Perhaps this latter condition
indicates that in some cases the treatment should have been continued.
Chart 4 shows a typical curve of a stammerer in process of
treatment. The subject, R.A., came to the Speech Clinic in December, 1925, discharged himself as "cured" in May, 1926, went
on a prolonged summer vacation and had a relapse. He returned
to the Clinic for treatment in September and was again speaking
normally in December, 1926.
Chart 5 illustrates well the increase and decrease in carbon
dioxide tension in response to dietetic changes as above described.
It also illustrates an unsuccessful attempt to produce an experi* See Henderson and Morriss, J. Biol. Chem. 1917, xxxi, 217.
It is unfortunate for the interest of scientific accuracy that alveolar CO*
is so frequently reported in terms of per cent rather than tension or partial
pressure. Even J. S. Haldane in his epoch making work on " Kespiration''
(Yale University Press, 1922) has reported many of his most interesting and
important tables of results in terms of per cent, without any indication of the
barometric pressure obtaining at the time of the determination. There is no
doubt that his assumption of approximate constancy of barometric pressure in
the course of his experiments was justified. It is to be regretted, however,
that he has set a precedent which is a dangerous assumption for lesser lights
to make.
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
IQ.
n_r
JLTL
30 AlvtoliLr C02 Twsion iH*W
Chart 1
Relative frequency of Alveolar C02 tensions in normal subjects
30 ftheoldY CO2 Te/vs/o/v M
Chart 2
Relative frequency of Alveolar C02 tensions in cured subjects
n_TL
4=L
3?M"a Uokr CO, W3? ^ T ^
Chart 3
Relative frequency of Alveolar C02 tensions in sub-breathing stammerers
Chart 3
Relative frequency of Alveolar C02 tensions in sub-breathing stammerers
HIGH ALVEOLAR CARBON DIOXIDE 7
Table i
Significant Values in Charts 1, 2 and 3
Alveolar Carbon Dioxide tension in the following:
Chart 1, Normals Chart 2, Cured Chart S} Stammerers
Significant Value
mm. Hg. mm. Hg. mm. Hg.
Minimum   30 33 40
Maximum   52 57 60
Median   41 45 50
Mode   41 46 49
Mean   40.50 44.76 50.29
mental stammer by a brief period of overloading the system with
C02. In each of the normal cases thus experimented upon there
did result an uncomfortable lassitude and in several a certain
slowness of speech most marked in periods of fatigue. In no
case, however, has a true stammer been produced thus far.
It is quite evident that the sub-breathing stammerer is overloaded with carbon dioxide. Not over-loaded beyond physiological
limits to such an extent as to be classified as pathological, he is
over-loaded beyond the limits of the psychologically normal. As he
improves under treatment?largely by means of intensive breathing exercises?his alveolar C02 diminishes and with it, of course,
the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood. His improvement is not alone in his speech. His behavior throughout becomes more vigorous. His alertia is increased and he becomes more
active. Not until such a point is reached is he amenable to simple
speech training.
We have, then, in the alveolar carbon dioxide determination
a means of ascertaining the treatment required by any subject
who is identified as a "sub-breather."9
The value of the determination as an index is not affected by
the problem of whether or not it is the carbon dioxide per se which
does the damage. The partial pressure of C02 may be merely
indicative of the excessive or deficient amount of some other subtle
'The general symptomatology of the "sub-breather," as the term is
used in this paper, embraces both slow and shallow breathing, with occasional
deep inspirations, high alveolar C02 and a tendency toward lethargy. Another part of the picture is a distinctly low salivary pH. In 1922 I stated
that this group constituted about 74 per cent of the stammerers applying
to the Clinic for treatment. After six years further study, I believe 80
per cent to be a closer estimate. (See Starr, H. E. Am. J. Psychol, xxxiii
pp. 415-416.)
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Chart 4
Fluctuations of Alveolar Carbon Dioxide concomitant with variations in speech
of K.A.
5 lp
Chart 5
The Alveolar Carbon Dioxide tension of a normal subject, upon a diet overloaded with carbohydrate, but, otherwise adequate. (Determinations
made at 3 to 4 p.m. each day.)
Chart 5
The Alveolar Carbon Dioxide tension of a normal subject, upon a diet overloaded with carbohydrate, but, otherwise adequate. (Determinations
made at 3 to 4 p.m. each day.)
HIGH ALVEOLAR CARBON DIOXIDE 9
metabolic factor which is of primary etiological importance. Undoubtedly the question of adequacy of oxygenation is involved.
The role of oxygen in the metabolic etiology of stammering, however, constitutes a separate research from that reported upon in
this paper. It is now being attacked from several angles in this
Psychobiochemical Laboratory.10 Another possibility which at once
suggests itself and which is also being studied here, is that of the
elaboration within the organism of a toxin or toxins which may
specifically attack certain parts of the nervous mechanism of
speech. This paper, however, is limited to a consideration of the
role of carbon dioxide.
It is a physiological truism that, speaking somewhat broadly,
rate of breathing is under neural control, largely a function of
the vagus; depth of breathing is under hormone control?and
carbon dioxide is the chief hormone involved, either directly or indirectly through its effect upon the hydrogen ion concentration of
the blood. With such nicety of precision does the regulation usually take place that, as Haldane has pointed out, there is most
frequently but little change in alveolar C02 per cent under various
conditions of quiet and exercise. At need the respiratory center,
no doubt the pneumotaxic center, responds to the stimulus of increased carbon dioxide given off into the blood stream in increased
metabolism, by increasing the depth of respiration. It is, indeed,
only in emergencies that both depth and rate are increased for
the preservation of the organism. Ordinarily rate and depth vary
rather inversely so that the actual total ventilation tends to remain
constant. Yet in the case of about 80 per cent of stammerers, we
are faced squarely by a group, with high partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide, who nevertheless breathe both slowly and
shallowly, with only an occasional deep inspiration. As a matter
of fact their respiration appears to resemble the apneustic breathing described by Lumsden, or rather a mean between pneumotaxic
and apneustic.
In the typical sub-breather's lethargic behavior, liable to
imbalance, however, there may be noted what might well be interpreted as the toxic effects of excessive amounts of carbon dioxide.
The same is true, albeit to a lesser degree, of the normals who
became lethargic on a high carbohydrate diet, with concomitantly
high alveolar C02. For while carbon dioxide is a powerful respira10 The results will soon be published as the doctorate thesis of Max
Trumper under the caption: "A Hemato-Kespiratory Study of 100 Consecutive Cases of Stammering."
10 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tory stimulant, yet in excessive amounts it is recognized as a
general depressent. It appears not improbable, then, that the
apparent anomaly of the behavior of the sub-breathing stammerer
arises from a faulty pneumotaxic respiratory center, relatively insensitive to its normal hormonic stimulus, or with an abnormally
high threshold, so that the organism is forced to tolerate an unusually high partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood stream.
Along with this hypo-function of the respiratory center, the individual may react in other respects normally or with heightened
sensitivity to carbon dioxide, the accumulation of which in his
blood may render him lethargic. The tendency toward lassitude
or lethargy was apparent in the normal subjects as just noted
when, by means of diet, their alveolar C02 was raised to levels
comparable to these obtaining in general among the sub-breathers.
A damper thus being put upon the mental activity of the
sub-breather, to attempt to train him in new habits of speech before his system is freed of the excess carbon dioxide is folly.
He is in a mental haze of lowered receptivity. Obviously his resistance to modifiability is increased above normal levels. Not
until breathing exercises or diet or both have begun to show definite
results in terms of reduction of partial pressure of alveolar CO?
can any improvement in speech take place.
To this theory may be objected the fact that certain stammerers who present the general syndrome of the sub-breather do well
in certain branches of athletics. Instead of conflicting with the
general thesis, however, these particular cases appear confirmatory.
In terms of response to a stimulus, a "high threshold" is but
another term for "increased tolerance." Such individuals, and
I could name at least seven, are able to function in their daily
life normally, except as to speech, despite their over-load of carbon
dioxide. Their tolerance is high or some compensatory factor
is at work. At all events, on the basis of the theory here presented,
there is a high threshold obtaining in the respiratory center. It
would, therefore, indeed be strange if these subjects could not
tolerate a greater accumulation of C02 and other products of
fatigue than can a normal individual.11 Consequently, their endurance in athletic contests, whether boxing, wrestling, or playing
u The products of fatigue tend to increase the blood hydrion concentration, to unusually high values of which the respiratory center miist be
relatively insensitive if it is relatively insensitive to carbon dioxide stimulation, which amounts at least indirectly to the same thing.
HIGH ALVEOLAR CARBON DIOXIDE 11
tennis, croquet or ping-pong, would necessarily be greater than
that of a normal person. A careful study of the "superiority"
of these sub-breathers in any athletic contest has shown that what
made them "superior" was merely endurance?never alertia.
A more difficult problem now presents itself. Of two individuals with equally high alveolar carbon dioxide tension, why
does one stammer and the other speak without stammering ? There
are at least two answers to this question just as there are at least
two types involved.
As to the first group, obviously lethargic sub-breathers: they
are so lethargic to the extreme that they make but little attempt
to speak. If they tried to speak more than they do?they would
stammer. This is in no sense intended to dodge the issue. In
both clinical and private practice, the writer has encountered many
such. For practical and scientific purposes this type may be considered as stammerers.
The second group is quite different. In it we must consider
the subjects placed upon so high a carbohydrate diet that their
alveolar C02 tensions were on par with those of the usual run
of stammerers. In the first place, it is not unlikely that, because
of their complaints of dullness and lassitude, they were not continued on the prescribed diet long enough to develop characteristic
speech symptoms. If they were continued long enough, however,
or if a single one of them was, none having developed an experimental' stammer, it would be evident that there must be a fundamental difference between the individual who stammers when his
alveolar C02 reaches a certain tension and one who doesn't stammer
when his alveolar C02 reaches the same value. That such a fundamental difference does exist is indicated by the overlapping in
Charts 1, 2, and 3.
It is obvious that further investigation must be made of factors of predisposition and compensation. One form of metabolic
compensation will be considered in the forthcoming report of
the Hemato-Respiratory studies (10) of Trumper. A possible
factor in predisposition is the imaginal type of the sub-breathing
stammerer, which is now being studied in this Clinic. Inasmuch
as excessive carbon dioxide tension may depress clarity of kinasethetic imagery, it appears not unlikely that the predominantly
voco-motor individual with a relatively insensitive pneumotaxic
respiratory center, would be predisposed to stammering. A definite
conclusion must await the results of further research.
12 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Summary and Conclusion
1. The alveolar carbon dioxide tension values of 50 determinations of 35 normal controls, 50 determinations of 19 cured former
stammerers, and 100 determinations of 100 sub-breathing stammerers, are presented graphically in terms of relative frequency.
2. Charts illustrative of C02 tension values of stammerers
under treatment and of normals on a high carbohydrate diet are
included.
3. It is evident that sub-breathing stammerers, constituting
about 80 per cent of the stammerers applying to the Speech Clinic
for treatment, have characteristically high arterial carbon dioxide
partial pressure. As progress toward cure is made, this partial
pressure is lowered.
4. The findings of this research indicate that there is relative
insensitivity of the pneumotaxic respiratory center of the subbreathing stammerer, resulting in excessive carbon dioxide, deficit
of oxygen, and probable elaboration of toxins in the blood stream.
Studies of specificity of action, predisposition and compensation
are now in progress in this laboratory.
5. The results of this present study render it obvious that the
first step in the treatment of the sub-breathing stammerer should
be training in adequate habits of breathing. A specific diet
adapted to the individual is also definitely indicated.
