Tommy: Preliminary Report on a Superior Child
==============================================

:Authoer:  Miles Murphy, Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania
"Virtue," says Halevy, "is more dangerous than vice, because its excesses are not subject to the restraints of conscience."

Serious as may be these excesses of virtue, they are so infrequent
as seldom to be a cause of concern for a clinical psychologist. Divers indeed are the problems presented by those who come and go
through a psychological clinic, but a father bringing a boy excessively devoted to telling the truth offers a problem of a most
unusual and unexpected character. Such was Tommy, a huskylooking tow-haired youngster of seven years. He had bright,
quizzical eyes and his face always seemed to wear a frightened
and inquisitive smile.

The father, who is a bacteriologist of thorough scientific training, has reviewed Tommy's case thoroughly, and says that so far
as he knows, the boy has never told a lie. One occasionally hears
an adult person making this claim, but the claim, if it is meant
seriously, must be attributed to some hiatus in memory. Tommy's
father realizes the universality of this defection, but still insists
that his son unfortunately can not be classed with his fellows.
Since his earliest years, Tommy has shown an insatiable desire
for detailed and ultimate explanations of the things coming to his
attention, and he has been given a truthful and adequate answer
to every question within the limits of knowledge. As his father
expresses it, he has been given a tool with the edge that he can
use. For example, he has known all the essential details of the
physiology of reproduction in humans for the past three or four
years. Naturally, he does not realize why this subject should be
less appropriate for public discussion than any other, much to the
embarrassment of guests in his home, and to prim hostesses when
the family goes calling.

As an example of his intellectual curiosity, when four years
old he demonstrated an interest in numbers and spoke much of
millions and billions. He had no accurate conception of the significance of these amounts because he could not yet handle the common small numbers with facility. One day he said to his father:
"There isn't anything more than a billion, is there?"
"Yes, there is."
"Oh, father, you're only joking; there couldn't be anything
more than a billion."
"Yes, there is."
"Oh, father, really? What is it?"
"It's a trillion."

Tommy's curiosity was naturally aroused by this exceedingly
fascinating information and he inquired whether there might not
be something more than a trillion. He was willing to believe
anything now. He was told that there were still higher numbers
and the series was continued on up to a decillion, where the youthful imagination seemed willing to rest.
He reflected a few moments and then said seriously, "When
I get big I'm going to have a decillion silver dollars." His grandmother had previously given him a silver dollar as a present.
"Yes, but there isn't enough silver in the world to make that
many dollars," his father replied.
"But suppose there would be."

"Well, even if there would be enough silver, there wouldn't be
enough room on the earth to put the money," said the father.
"It would cover the earth and we would have no place to live."
Not distressed by this possibility, Tommy answered that we
could just live on top of them. "But where could we grow food
to eat?" asked his father.
"We would cover them with dirt."

Tommy was equally thorough in practical affairs. On one
occasion, his father told him something about disease germs. It
was explained how these microorganisms were present almost
everywhere, how they get on a boy's hands in playing, and therefore why hands should be washed thoroughly before eating. After
this discussion, Tommy was seen to wash his hands religiously, and
after he finished, he washed the faucet which he had touched in
turning on the water. t He reasoned, of course, that if there were
germs on his hands some of them might have gotten on the faucet.
This curiosity and thoroughness, while striking, did not cause
the parents any great concern. Tommy had not yet developed
his anxiety to tell the truth to the point where it interfered with
his every day life.

The present condition dates from about December, 1926.
Tommy had been isolated in the hospital with scarlet fever. During his illness, he suffered from a good deal of mental confusion.
The scarlet fever was accompanied by severe otitis media. When
the boy returned from the hospital, he seemed unusually disinclined to talk, but the parents at first attributed this to the probability that his strength had not yet fully returned.
One day soon after Tommy had returned from the hospital, his
mother thought she heard his younger brother cry in another room,
and she asked:
"Tommy, did the baby cry?"
"Did he?" was the only reply.
The mother then insisted, "Tommy, answer me, did the baby
cry?"
There was no reply to this request although it was repeated
several times. The mother became exasperated and pressed the
boy for an answer, but it was not forthcoming. The baby shortly
settled the question by crying lustily.
Tommy answered laconically, "Now, there you know."
Tommy continued in this condition characterized by an unwillingness to commit himself when asked a simple question for
about six weeks, after which time he was persuaded that a positive statement in regard to a question asked him would not make
him responsible for facts beyond his knowledge. He recovered
slowly, but completely, it seemed, until the condition recurred
about November, 1927. Since then every statement of fact or
answer to a question is invariably followed by an interrogative, '' is
it?" "Don't I?" etc. Coincidentally, he has never, according
to the knowledge of his parents, knowingly given a promise. He is
obedient to their wishes, but so great is his fear of telling a lie that
he never makes a promise lest he might break it accidentally, unavoidably or forgetfully.
The practice of refusing to answer questions definitely was
followed even with children of his own age. The only exception
is that he has finally consented to answer his teachers at school
because they made so many threatening and insistent demands.
He explains to his parents, however, that he is "lying" to the
teachers only because they are so insistent and he does not feel
quite the same responsibility to them as to his parents.
This attitude was brought out in his examination in the clinic.
The examiner pointed to a table in the room upon which were
lying three books, and asked, "How many books are on the table,
Tommy ?''

"Three." The father was pleased at this definiteness.
"Are you sure?" the examiner asked.
"Yes."
It was then necessary for the examiner to leave the room and
upon his return, the father asked Tommy to leave the room. Then
he related what had happened in the meantime.
When the examiner had gone out the father asked, "Tommy
how many books are on the table?"
"Three, aren't there?" This time the boy would not commit himself definitely. The father insisted, but with no avail.
Finally the father said, "Can't you tell me how many books
are on the table?"

Tommy answered, "Is that a table?"
He was then asked why he would give a positive answer to
the examiner, but not to his father. He replied, "Oh, father,
can't you let that be?" He was genuinely vexed. The father
was silent.

After the father had recounted this incident, Tommy was
brought back into the room. The examiner then asked the boy
why he gave a positive answer to him while he refused to give a
similar reply to his father. He looked up very simply and said,
"Well, if I must lie, I would rather lie to you than to my own
father.''

The examiner thought that perhaps the boy might be subdued
by logic, and said "Does that mean you told me a lie? Was it a
lie when you told me there were three books on the table?"
"No."
"Well, then if it wasn't a lie, it must have been the truth."
"Yes."

'' Now, if it was the truth, why couldn't you tell your father ?''
Tommy was silent, but the father explained to the examiner
afterwards that he was not convinced, but merely marshalling his
forces. He did not have time to do so. The examiner asked, "Why
did you ask your father whether that was a table?"
He replied that the object had two drawers, and that tables
did not always have drawers. He reflected awhile, and finally said
spontaneously as if he had arrived at truth, "There are three
books on the table with two drawers."

He seemed satisfied until he was reminded that in order to be
thorough, he should have added that the table was made of wood.
Examiner and boy were both silent for a time. Tommy was
scratching his head and seemed to be thinking. The examiner
asked, "What are you thinking about?"
"I am wondering when you are going to release me from
this?"

The father explained later that Tommy was not at all impressed by this logical method. He scorned the examiner and
probably didn't think him worth a serious answer. Argument
seems to be of no avail in combatting Tommy's condition. The
boy's father once laid a knife on a table and asked, "Tommy, do
you see the knife?"

The boy replied in terms that implied he was not altogether
sure.
"Do you see the knife?"
"Do I?"
"Well, give me the knife."
The knife was given to the father. Then, he asked Tommy,
"How could you give me the knife if you didn't see it?"
The problem seemed to have been solved by this appeal to the
pragmatic method, and then came this from the youthful epistemologist, "What is 'see'?"
Tommy is delightfully consistent. In his school, they have a
platoon system in which each child has a home room, but any
single desk may be occupied by a number of children. On one
occasion, Tommy was called back to his home room to be interrogated in regard to a piece of torn paper found in a desk occupied
jointly by him and another boy. As a matter of fact several children had been in the seat since Tommy's last occupancy of it and
he was probably innocent of tearing the paper. He refused to
answer the teacher. She threatened him, but he still refused to
say whether he had torn the paper or not. Later, his father questioned him concerning the incident and received the following explantation :
"I really didn't know for sure whether I tore the paper. I
put my books in the desk and took them out again. Maybe the
paper was caught and got torn that way. How could I be sure?"
Some weeks ago, Tommy's father gave him a stop watch, first,
because such an accurate measurement of time would be interesting to his curious mind, and second because it might speed up
the process of dressing, always a long drawn out one with Tommy.
The stop watch measured fifths of seconds which interested Tommy
very much. He inquired whether stop watches were made which
measured still shorter intervals of time. His father told him that
some stop watches measured tenths of seconds. He reflected for a
time and then said, "Father, wouldn't it be a fine thing to have
a watch that measured tenths of seconds, seconds, minutes, hours,
days, months, years, and centuries?"

"Well, I suppose such a watch could be constructed, but it
would be very complicated and not very practical, particularly
the part which told you the century. No one lives more than a
century, and it would not be necessary to have a watch to tell what
century it is."

Tommy realized this fact, but he was still attracted by the
possibility of such a watch as he had suggested. "You could have
such a watch, though, couldn't you father?"

"Yes."
"You see if I had such a watch and some one came to me and
asked, 'What century is this?' I could pull out my watch, look
at it and say, 'This is such and such a century?if my watch hasn't
stopped!"
From many points of view, Tommy is a strange combination
of maturity and normal childishness. Here are two of his prayers,
offered during January, 1928, when he was seven and a half years
old.
s
"Our Father?take me to sleep?help me to sleep
late in the morning. Make me to be strong, healthy and
husky. Make me a good citizen of thine. Help me to
treat my country's flag better. Ask Jesus to bless me,
will you? Ask him to bless father, mother, D., and especially H. Help me to sleep late in the mornings. Make
me strong and healthy, and help me to be a good boy.
Amen.''

"Oh Lord watch over me while I do my rest?and
help me to sleep late in the morning?and the next? and
the next. Oh Lord help me to recover power to speak out.
Make me grateful to others. Father send an angel from
thy host to lift me up to dwell with thee forever if I
should die while the night is on. Oh Lord bless father,
mother, D. and H. and make Tommy a good boy.
Amen.''
