A Pre-School Character Rating Chart
===================================

:Author: K. M. Banham Bridges
Psychologist, McGill University Nursery School

The educational function of the nursery school differs considerably from that of the primary or secondary school. Nursery
school education is concerned mainly with the development of
character, of social behavior and of emotional adjustment and only
to a lesser degree with the imparting of information and training
in manual and linguistic skills. In schools for older children the
educational aims are the same but the emphasis is reversed and
more attention is given to the development of intellect and skill
than to the development of character and social behavior. There is
need in both kinds of schools for performance, language, general
intelligence and school achievement tests, for the purpose of comparing the abilities of different children and of checking their
school progress. But the nursery school wants in addition to performance and language tests some methods for comparing the
social behavior, the emotional adjustment and the character development of its pupils.
For the past year the writer has been trying out a scheme
for measuring roughly the social and emotional development of
pre-school children in the McGill University Nursery School. A
report of this work will be published at a later date. In addition
to this scheme a short rating chart was devised primarily for the
use of the nursery school staff in order to help them estimate the
children's characters and follow their character development. This
rating chart is described in the following paragraphs together with
a few results obtained from its application in the McGill University
Nursery School.

The chart was made at the suggestion of the senior teacher,
Miss G. A. Watkins, and was intended as a practical device to
serve temporarily in the absence of more exact methods for measuring the components of character. Throughout the period of
experimentation with this character rating chart, Miss Watkins
cooperated closely, offering suggestions and criticisms based on
her long experience with pre-school children thus taking a considerable part in the devising of the chart.

Method of Construction of the Chart

Since the aim in making the character chart was to create
something which would be practical and useful to nursery school
teachers who had had little or no training in psychology, there
were three facts necessary to bear in mind. First that the chart
would need to utilize expressions that would be readily understood
by the teachers and would mean the same to all. Secondly, that
persons unused to making scientific observations of people tend
to form and give opinions rather than to see and describe facts
of behavior; and thirdly that the statements of these persons are
usually colored by moral and social evaluation. Parents and
teachers not trained in scientific methods can scarcely be relied
upon to make unbiased statements or judgments with regard to
children's behavior.

In order to meet the above difficulties it was decided to make
a rating chart which would utilize the normal tendencies, to give
opinions and to evaluate, rather than have them as interfering factors in a more scientifically exact measuring scale. To offset the
bias of one individual it was decided that the children should be
rated by at least three or four raters who were frequently in
contact with the children.1 The teachers' own wording was used
in the chart, as it was found by actual experiment that there was
less difference in the meanings they ascribed to the more common
though vague terms of popular speech than to the more definite
but less familiar terms of the psychologist.

Lists of adjectives and statements describing children's character and behavior were drawn up by the writer and Miss Watkins.
From these items were selected all those which would tell something it was desirable to know about a child's character, apart
from intelligence and skill. Although some of the items indicated
aspects of temperament, the more general term "character" was
considered best as a heading for the list. Among the items were
adjectives qualifying behavior, such as "affectionate," "rough,"
"trustworthy," and statements about behavior such as "plays
alone," "shows off intrusively," which could not be put satisfactorily into adjective form. Synonyms and statements describing
similar aspects of character were eliminated, also phrases describing character types rather than traits. Long phrases were shortened so as to fit into a compact form or chart.
Finally, fifty concise items were selected which described
different aspects of a child's character of which the teachers desired to have some estimate. These were arranged as alternative
statements or characteristics in paired opposites, the more socially
desirable characteristics being placed first. The paired items were
grouped roughly under three headings, social, individual (which
was later changed to personal) and emotional. The first half of
the social group contained items referring to a child's relation with
other children and the second half contained items referring to
his relation with adults.

Twenty duplicate charts were typed, one for each child in
the McGill University Nursery School. The members of the school
staff who came into frequent contact with the children then rated
each child on the chart according to directions which are given
below. No standard of comparison was suggested, neither child to
child nor group order-of-merit. The raters were simply required
to mark a stroke for each item where the first alternative applied
more nearly to the child, a zero where the second alternative applied better, and both a stroke and a zero where both items applied
equally well. Dashes were to be placed against doubtful items.
By this means the teachers could see roughly at a glance the distribution of strokes and zeros on the chart apart from numerical
scores. Scores, however, were obtained by allowing a point for
each stroke, half a point for each stroke and zero, and nothing
for a zero. Percentage scores based on the number of items marked
(i.e., omitting all doubtful items marked ?) were calculated and
the average of the percentage scores for each rater was found.
This average was taken as the Character Rating Score for each
child. After a few trials it was found necessary to omit from the
average the score of any rater who had marked ? against ten or
more items, as such scores were too unreliable and were found to
vary considerably from the scores of other raters.

After several ratings had been made at intervals of one or
two months conferences were held with the staff and the chart was
revised. Some of the items were eliminated as being too ambiguous
and difficult to rate, some were re-phrased to make them more definite and one or two new ones were added. Wherever there had
been considerable variation in scoring among the staff the items
were carefully checked in order to detect ambiguities in meaning.
The social desirability of the alternative characteristics in each item
was considered by the staff, and the items were again arranged so
that, in the opinion of all, the first alternative represented the more
desirable characteristic. Tendencies of the staff to be biased in
their ratings of different children were noticed, but when the estimates of all four raters were pooled these tendencies were seen to
be counterbalanced to some extent. The revised form was used
again in the Nursery School, ratings being made on the children
at intervals of one or two months.

Below is a sample of the Character Rating Chart in its final
form together with the directions for rating and scoring the chart
to be given to each rater. The columns at the side of the chart
are used for markings by four raters, more may be added if desired.

Directions for Rating
----------------------

Which characteristic predominates? From your personal observation,
not from someone else's report, mark (1) if the left hand and (0) if the
right hand characteristic applies more nearly in each case. Mark both (1)
and (0) if both apply equally well, and mark (-) if neither is applicable.
Mark (-) also against the item where no observation has been made.
Do not look at the marks of other raters. Cover them with a strip of
paper before marking each chart.

Directions for Scoring
-----------------------

Score one point for each (1) and half a point for each (1 0) marked
by a single rater and add the total number of points, disregarding an odd
half point.

Find the percentage score by dividing the total number of points
(multiplied by 100) by fifty minus the number of items marked (-).
-r, . Total score (items marked (1) X 100
Percentage score = - v ' ??- .
50?items omitted (marked (?))
The Character Rating Score for each child is the average of the percentage scores of all rates. If any rater has marked 10 or more items (?),
his or her score is not included in the average.

McGill Pre-School Character Rating Chart

DateSOCIAL

1. Plays with others or plays alone
2. Leaves others alone or interferes
3. Gentle or rough with others
4. Helps or does not help other children..
5. Keeps order or creates confusion
6. Studies or ignores others' behavior. . .
7. Leads or follows older children
8. Defends or does not defend own rights.
NamePRE-SCIIOOL CHARACTER RATING 65
9. Popular or not popular
10. Not domineering or domineering
11. Unselfish or selfish
12. Sympathetic or not sympathetic
13. Affectionate or not affectionate
14. Cooperative or not in routine
15. Not very talkative or very talkative
16. Not very silent or very silent
17. Unobtrusive or shows off intrusively
18. Does not seek, or seeks attention
19. Adjusted to, or reacts against authority. ..
20. Obedient or disobedient
21. Sensitive or indifferent to criticism
22. Trustworthy or not in adult's absence
Personal
23. Independent or dependent
24. Self-confident or not self-confident
25. Energetic or lethargic
26. Quiet or noisy
27. Quick in action or slow in action
28. Persistent or gives up easily
29. Careful or careless
30. Purposeful or aimless
31. Concentrates or is easily distracted
32. Questioning or incurious
33. Not destructive or destructive
34. Original or not original in play
35. Imaginative or unimaginative

Emotional
-----------

36. Cheerful or grave
37. Not variable or variable in mood
38. Spontaneous or restrained
39. Not self-conscious or self-conscious
40. Not nervous or nervous
41. Not deceptive or deceptive
42. Not excitable or excitable
43. Controls tears or cries easily
44. Venturesome or timid
45. Little or much disturbed by observation..
46. Deliberative or impulsive
47. Does not show temper or shows temper
48. Does not sulk or sulks
49. Patient or impatient
50. Forgiving or revengeful
Score
Average % score Number scored
% score

Results
---------

All the children in the McGill Nursery School were rated on
the chart seven times between March, 1927, and April, 1928, by
four raters: the teachers in charge of each group, the psychologist
and the Director's assistant. No child was rated who had been in
the school less than a month. There are twenty children in the
school, nine girls and eleven boys, divided into two groups according to age. The seven or eight children between two and a half and
three and a half years old play or work together supervised by an
assistant teacher, and the remaining twelve or thirteen children between three and a half and five years old play or work in another
room supervised by Miss Watkins. These groups are referred to
below as Group A and Group B, respectively. For half of each
morning the children of both groups play together outdoors.
In March, May, and October, 1927, the first form of the
chart was used, and in December, 1927, January, February and
April, 1928, the final chart, as here presented, was used. As the
first form varied only slightly from the second a summary of the
results obtained from the use of both forms is given below. In
the tables the results obtained when the first form was used are
marked I, and when the second form was used they are marked II.
All scores here presented are per cent scores brought to the nearest
whole number.

The scores of individual children varied considerably, ranging
between 31 and 94 per cent, with the majority falling between
60 and 80 per cent. The average scores for each school group and
for the whole school are shown below in Table I. There were
Table I. Summary of Character Rating Scores

Date
Group A Av. Group B Av. School Av
I. March, 1927..
May, 1927. . .
October, 1927.
Average. . .
62
64
68
65
73
77
69
73
69
72
68
70
II. December, 1927.
January, 1928..
February, 1928.
April, 1928
Average. . .
66
64
69
68
67
71
65
71
74
70
69
64
70
72
69
I and II Average.
66
71
69

equally high and equally low scores in the two school groups though
the majority of scores in Group A were lower than most of the
scores in Group B. This difference is shown in the average scores
where Group A average is slightly lower than Group B average.
The scores may not be read directly down the columns to see
the effect of age and school attendance on the scores as different
children were in the groups when different ratings were made.
Some of the monthly ratings, however, may be compared. Most
of the changes, admittance of new children in the place of those
leaving and promotions from Group A to Group B, occurred in
October and January at the beginning of the school terms. Thus
the scores for March and May, for October and December, and
for January, February and April may be compared together as
they represent ratings for the same children. From these comparisons it will be seen that there is a small increase in the scores
with age and school attendance. The slight drop in the scores from
May to October and December to January is probably due to the
above mentioned factors, admittance of new children and promotions from Group A to Group B.
Age Differences

There was a noticeable correspondence between Character
Rating Score and age. Taking the results of all seven ratings, between March, 1927, and April, 1928, together, the average score
for children between two years and four months and two years
eleven months was 60 per cent. The average score for three year
olds, between three years and three years eleven months, was sixtydght; and the average for four year olds, between four and five
years, was 76 per cent. This age difference was noticeable even
m half year stages as may be seen from Table II.

The scores should be read across the columns and not down
them, for in many instances scores in the same age group for
the different months represent ratings on different children. The
age differences though fairly consistent are, however, small. This
is what might be expected, since the children were rated with regard to temperamental and character traits which change relatively slowly as compared with the development of intelligence
and skills. One would expect that character ratings would not
correlate so highly with age as do intelligence test results. The
scores on the Character Rating Chart indicate individual differences rather than age differences.
It will be noticed, however, that the average scores for the

Table II. Average Scores in Half-Year Age Groups.
Month
2 to 2-5
years
2-6 to
2-11
years
3 to 3-5
years
3-6 to
3-11
years
4 to 4-5
years
4-6 to 5
years
I. March, 1927..
May, 1927....
Oct., 1927
Average
54
59
71
61
71
65
64
67
68
71
57
65
72
74
75
74
80
82
71
78
II. Dec., 1927
Jan., 1928
Feb., 1928
Apr., 1928
Average
52
59
56
65
55
62
63
61
75
74
79
70
75
55
59
65
70
62
72
82
71
75
77
77
78
82
79
I and II Average. .
56
61
71
64
74
78

children between three and three and a half years old are higher
than the scores for children between three and a half and four
years of age. This may be accounted for perhaps in the following
ways. It may be in part a result of the school's being divided
into two age groups as previously mentioned. The raters then
tended to make comparative judgments with regard to each item
in the chart, comparing each child with the others in his school
group. Thus a child of three years and five months about to graduate from Group A would be scored high as a result of comparison
with the younger children, whereas a child only a month older
in Group B would be scored low as a result of comparison with
older children in the group.

Moreover, the problem of adjustment is harder for the younger
child in the group than for the older child. One kind of character
trait may be brought out when a child has to compete with others
more able than himself, while quite another set of traits may be
manifested when the child knows more and is more able than others
in his group. A reason for the specially large difference between
scores of these two age groups obtained December, 1927, to April,
1928, is probably the fact that there were two unusually well adjusted children in the three to three and a half year group during
this period, while there were two very poorly adjusted children in
the three and a half to four year group. Since there was only an
average of four children in a half-year age group an extreme in
any one child's score was bound to make a noticeable effect on
the group average.

Effect of Promotion in School
-------------------------------

The average of the scores of the eight children who were
promoted from Group A to Group B during the year was found
for the months before and after promotion. Before promotion
the average score was 69 per cent and after promotion the average
score of the same children was 66 per cent. This slight drop in
the score may be accounted for in the same way as the drop in
the average score of the three and a half year age group.

Effect of Length of Attendance at School
-----------------------------------------

The scores of the children in Group A and B obtained from all
the ratings were tabulated according to the number of months since
the admission of each child to the school, regardless of the age of
the child. The average score was then found for children who had
entered school only a month ago, for those who had entered
two months ago, for those who had entered three months ago
and so on up to fifteen months. In this way it was hoped
to show roughly the effect on character rating scores of
length of attendance at school, although no allowance was made for
absences or vacation periods. The age factor was eliminated in
Group A as children were admitted to this group at all ages varying from two years and four months to three years and five months.
In Group B the age factor was not quite eliminated. The new;
children admitted to this group were mostly under four but their
number was almost balanced by those who had graduated from
Group A at three and a half years and who had been in the school
several months. In addition to these was an equal number of
older children between four and five years of age who had been
m the school a year or more.

The results for Group B showed an increase in score after
six months' attendance at school. But the results for Group A
showed no increase in score with length of school attendance.
Even the increase in score for Group B may be accounted for, in
whole or in part, by the fact that the children who had been in
the school longest were for the most part older than those more recently admitted. This failure of the scores to show increase with
time spent at school is probably due to the fact that differences
in score due to school attendance were entirely obscured by the
large individual differences in scores. As previously mentioned,
the scores in Table I show a slight increase due to the combined
effect of school attendance and monthly increase in age. Table III
below shows the average scores arranged according to school attendance in three month intervals.
Table III Average Character Score in Relation to
School Attendance
Months Since Admission to School
1-3 mo.
4-6 mo.
7-9 mo.
10-12 mo.
13-15 mo.
Group A
Group B
68
67
67
67
68
74
66
80
67
76

Comparison With Intelligence Test Results
-------------------------------------------

The character rating scores obtained in May and in December,
1927, were compared with the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Quotients of the children and also with their median scores on the
Stutsman performance tests. The character rating scores were
found to increase somewhat with Intelligence Quotients but they
showed practically no relation to performance test scores. The coefficient of correlation, by the rank difference method, between the
character scores and the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Quotients in
May was + -39 and in December, -f- .67. The coefficient of correlation between character scores and median performance scores
in May was .123 and in December -f- .003.

The reason for the correlation of character ratings with Stanford-Binet Intelligence Quotients will probably be apparent to
those who have worked with the Binet tests at the lower age levels.
In order to do his best on a Binet test a child must be fairly well
adjusted socially and emotionally. He must cooperate with the
examiner, do what he is bid and answer questions. These tests,
therefore, measure to some extent temperamental and character
traits such as are scored on the Character Rating Chart. Since
in this rating chart intelligence factors are mostly eliminated, the
scores obtained from its use might prove to be a helpful check on
intelligence test results. A low score on the Binet tests might be
shown to be due to lack of social adjustment rather than to lack
of intelligence. It is obvious, however, that both intelligence tests
and character ratings are measuring in part the same things, for
character and intelligence can never be entirely separated.
The performance test situation is somewhat different from the
Binet test situation. The child is freer to do as he chooses with the
material. The tasks that are set for him to do are more in accordance with his spontaneous interests, and he is not required
to repeat so many words. A timid or negativistic child might do
fairly well on the performance tests and yet be scored low on
the Binet tests and the Character Rating Chart.

Comparison of Sexes
--------------------

The average scores of the girls and the boys in Groups A and
B were found for all seven ratings. These are presented in Table
IV. As may be seen, the scores show almost a negligible difference
in favor of the girls. This difference is probably so slight as to
be due entirely to chance or individual differences in such a small
number of cases.

Table IV. Average Character Scores According to Sex
Girls
Boys
Group A, Form I
Form II
Average
66
62
69
67
66
Group B, Form I
Form II
Average
72
71
72
67
72
70

Comparison With Order of Merit Rating by the Staff
----------------------------------------------------

In the absence of any means of testing the reliability of the
Character Rating Chart, the scores for March, 1927, and January,
1928, were compared with order-of-merit ratings of the children
by the staff. A week before they scored the children on the charts
each member of the staff was required to arrange the children in
Group A and Group B in order of merit with respect to general
character, including social, personal and emotional characteristics.
Considerable agreement was shown by the staff in these ratings.
By allotting marks according to rank a final order of merit list
was drawn up which comprised the pooled ratings of the four members of the staff. This list was compared with the rank order of
the children obtained later according to the character rating scores.
In both March and January there was very close agreement between these lists. In January the coefficient of correlation, by the
rank difference method, for Group A was -f- -99 and for Group B
-{- .98. These results indicate very strongly that in marking the
children on the Character Rating Chart the raters were wittingly
or unwittingly comparing each child with the others in his group
in respect to each item, and in this way they arrived at an order
of merit rating of the children.

The ratings of the different members of the staff agreed fairly
closely. The average coefficient of correlation, according to the
rank difference method, between the ratings of different raters
throughout the year was -j- .78. More agreement was shown
towards the end of the school term than at the beginning. This
was probably due to the fact that by the end of the term the raters
had had more time to observe the children and therefore knew them
better.

Conclusions
-------------

The Character Rating Chart described in this article has shown
its usefulness in roughly differentiating pre-school children in a
group with regard to general character. The staff of the McGill
Nursery School who tried out this chart agreed that it had helped
them to clarify and regulate their opinions with regard to the
children. It also showed them more clearly than they could guess
unaided where the stronger and the weaker points in a child's
character lay; in his social behavior, in his personal characteristics,
or in his emotional control.

The numerical scores obtained by the McGill Nursery School
staff could be treated in no way as exact measurements, as they
were determined by the personal opinions of raters who were comparing each child with his associates. As the children in the school
change then the basis for comparison for each child changes. No
fair comparisons, therefore, can be made between the results obtained by different raters for children in different schools. The
results from the McGill Nursery School are quoted here as an example of what may be done with the chart.
In addition the chart might be of use in pre-school clinics.
Of course, in all cases in clinics or in nursery schools, care would
need to be taken to secure reliable raters who had had the child to
be rated under observation for some time. The limit of a month's
observation by the McGill Nursery School staff was found to be
fairly satisfactory, though results were more reliable after a longer
period.
