Orthogenic Cases
=================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1929, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XVII, Nos. 6 - 7
November - December, 1928

XVI?George: Mentally Restored to Normal but
Intellectually Deficient
:Author:  Emma Repplier Witmer and Lightner Witmer, Ph.D.

One of the most appealing ages in children is surely between
four and five years, when a little of the adorable quality of infancy
still lingers to lend an added grace to the self-possessed air of
childhood. But any such appeal was singularly lacking when we
beheld George for the first time. True, he was four and a half
years old, but he lacked all the endearing qualities associated with
that period. Even his hair, which was abundant, and light in
color, was marred by one of those barbaric hair-cuts which pitilessly
exposed his rather large ears and rendered grotesque his narrow
but not ill-shaped head. His eyes were light blue with long, curling eyelashes,' but they looked strained and they flickered from
spot to spot, never lingering for more than a second's attention.
His color was high but blotchy, and around his mouth were the
red, chapped places?tell-tale marks of his habit of sucking and
eating many extraneous objects not intended for human beings'
daily food.

He did not talk, but made his wishes known by squeals, grunts,
and other strange sounds. His gait was jerky and uncertain, like
that of a child between one and two who is learning to walk, and
at any unevenness of the ground he fell headlong. His hands
were babyish, the fingers flaccid, with no grip or power in them.
He was able on command to point to his eyes, nose, mouth,
ears, hair, feet and hands, but not knees, and he could obey simple
directions, like ''stand up," "sit down.''

At his first meal, he wholly rejected the difficult feat of wielding a spoon, and dug into everything with his fingers, cramming
the food into his mouth, spilling a great deal, and swallowing the
rest without apparent mastication. He drank water from a nursing
bottle, and it was his custom, as reported by his mother, to take
such a bottle filled with milk to bed with him.. He had no control
over his sphincters, wore diapers, and had to be changed a dozen
times a day. If left alone, he would smear the fseces over himself,
on the wall, and even put them in his mouth. Such was George
on June 21, 1918, when, at the age of four years and seven months,
he entered Dr Witmer's School of Observation and Diagnostic
Teaching.

Was there, then, somewhere hidden in this distortion of childhood, this small animal in human shape, the material out of which
a normal boy could be created? On that very first day of his
arrival, he revealed one human trait, and one which proved afterwards to be a strong and fundamental characteristic. The laundress was hanging up some clothes, as George came out of the house.
The box with the clothes pins was on the ground at a little distance. With his uncertain, wobbling gait, George made for this,
picked it up and handed it to the woman. In this one act he
had revealed that combination of helpfulness and desire to have the
right thing in the right place, a sense of order and neatness, which
amounted later to a passion. He had so little initiative that it
required some such strong feeling to force him to display it.
His love of candy would usually provide this stimulus. On his
second day in the school, he stole a caramel from a bag in his
teacher's room. When asked where he got it, he took her hand,
drew her into the room, and pointed to the bag, which was hidden
far back in the corner out of sight.

Diagnostic teaching is a peculiar method of teaching, first employed by Dr Witmer at the University of Pennsylvania, in the
year 1896, when he began to examine and teach children who were
brought to him because they were not making as much progress
as their teachers or parents thought they should. Diagnostic
teaching is a method of teaching which develops as it goes along.
First, as much is discovered concerning the child's ability as may
be found out at one examination and in consequence of one attempt to teach. If the teacher is an expert psychologist, he learns
more about a child's potential abilities the more he tries to develop
whatever ability the child has or, in other words, he discovers
how educable a child is by observing the response he makes to a
prescribed course of educational treatment. The aim of diagnostic
teaching is to use whatever ability a child has most of, in order
to get him to take the next step forward in the right direction.
George's best ability was his sense of order?an orderliness amounting almost to a passion, and very nearly his only talent.
His history was as follows: He was born in November, 1913,
and, until he was a year and a half old, he was apparently normal.
His mother reported that he had begun to walk and say a few
words. In the summer of 1915, he began to chew wood. He chewed
the edge of window sills, the edges of doors, and would pick up
chips and trash from the hearth and eat them. It is not surprising
that from this time he was never a well child. He had diarrhea
and vomiting. When he was two years old, he stopped walking.
He was taken to a well known children's specialist, who diagnosed
the case as nervousness and anasmia, and prescribed cod-liver oil
and iron. After taking one dose of this, he vomited for a whole
day; after that he stopped talking entirely. He was nearly four
years old when he learned to walk all over again, but he said
nothing intelligible except'' mamma.'' What had hit him remained
a mystery?a touch of infantile paralysis, of encephalitis, an arrested development due to poisoning and malnutrition??the exact
cause will probably never be known?only the tragic results were
there for all to see.

George had apparently little or no play instinct. He would
take handfuls of blocks out of a box and put them back again.
By actual count, he did this twenty-nine times, and only once did he
vary the performance by piling six blocks on top of each other.
Except for the fact that he was contented so long, the performance
was that of a child of less than two years.

On July 10, three weeks after he came to the school, he was
given the Witmer Formboard. The square, circle, and oblong
blocks he put into the proper grooves the first time. On the others,
he made several wrong tries. The next day he was taught how to
place all the blocks, and the following day he put them all in place,
without help, in four minutes on the first trial, and two minutes
on the second. On July 14, he put them all in position at the
first attempt, in two minutes.

The first time he was given the peg board his teacher put
in the first two pegs and told George to put in the rest. He did
not stop until he had put in place every one of the fifty pegs. This
was a congenial task for him. Repetition of something he could
do without much effort always gave him pleasure.

These performances with the form and peg boards showed
promise, but six months later, George was still monotonously put156 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ting pegs in and taking them out. However, in August, after a
memorable struggle, he put together slices of pasteboard to form
animals. He began with the picture of a cat, composed of three
pieces. He hated doing it, and for a long time the only evidence
that he knew how the pieces went was that he never by any chance
put them together right. Even after he had fitted the pieces properly many times, he would again and again put the head of the
cat on upside down. This stubbornness of George's was more than
obstinacy. It was not even the "noble firmness of the mule." It
was stronger than he was. It was a pathological state, an exaggerated resistance to suggestion from without, which is called
"negativism." It was always lying in readiness those first days.
The moment anyone tried to get his full attention the fight was on.
He resisted with all his puny strength. If you forced him; his face
became set and stubborn, the eyes blood-shot, and the tears literally
streamed down. He appeared to manufacture an extraordinarily
large variety of tear, and in a few minutes his face was fairly submerged. This deluge did not at all mean that the fight was won.
Often it was only the prelude to a morning's battle. Sometimes,
if you let him move freely about, this resistance could be taken off
its guard. If you then put a question to him or asked him to imitate a sound, you might get a quick response. This was proved
once when another child in the room was being taught to say
"and." Suddenly George, who was busy with a puzzle, said "and"
clearly, but when asked to repeat it, could not or would not do it.
After a month, he put all the sliced animals together without
trouble. He was then promoted to jig-saw puzzles, and, after the
usual determined balking and tears, he made progress. Two months
later, he was putting together, without help, a puzzle of fifteen
pieces, though his motor control was often so poor that his trembling fingers would displace one or more pieces while inserting a
new one.

The Witmer Cylinders George enjoyed, taking two minutes to
the task, and using judgment, not trial and error. After this, he
learned with wooden letters to put together the words cow and cat,
though he was not always certain which was which, and though
he could neither name nor sound most of the letters.

He had now been at the school six months. By this time, he
had made some improvement in his behavior. He ate and digested
better, and he was house-broken. Physically, there was no reason
why George should not talk, and his performance with puzzles and
letters tends to establish the fact that he was not feebleminded. He
apparently lacked one of the essential characteristics of a human
being?a desire to talk. For the first month of his stay, he could
not be induced to even try to imitate a sound. After two months,
he could say, o-oo-ah-bah-no. For two weeks, liis teacher, Miss 0.,
had tried in vain to get him to say ee. At the end of six months, the
difficulty of learning a new sound was so great as to seem to his
teacher insurmountable. It took a month of hard, daily drill to
get him to say the word shoe?and then only as two syllables?sh-oo.
And, added to his very real difficulty in making a sound, was his
negativism. He hated and opposed this work with every fibre of
his nervous, jerky little body. After nine months of training, he
could say I and Do, but not I do. About this time, Miss 0. wrote
in her notes: "Today I feel that there is only one word to use
as far as George's speech is concerned?and that is 'impossible.' "
Yet the daily grind went on, and, imperceptibly, with slippings
back and creepings forward, infinitesimal progress did take place,
though to his teacher this progress seemed so doubtful that she
could only just make herself go on. It took months to get the word
we, but, a few days later, by holding out a piece of candy, for
which he had a passion, Miss 0. got the first sound or word out of
him without a struggle?ee and then t-ee-t. For a long time,
he confused a and o. With s, he had a six months' struggle,
always sticking his tongue out to form the sound instead of placing
it against his teeth. With b and p, he also had great difficulty.
After putting his lips together to make the sounds, he couldn't
open them, and finally exploded the sound with violence, getting
red in the face with the effort. After he had been in the school
thirteen months, his teacher wrote, '' If anyone asked me this morning about his talking, I should say he would never talk. The only
words he uses voluntarily are 'morning' and 'hello.' He never
points to anything and names it. He knows Don's name well, rooms
with him and hears it constantly repeated, yet he has never called
him." Just one month after this seemingly justified prophecy,
when out walking, he pointed to and named, "car, boy, lady, baby,
horse, and man." At this time he said his first complete sentence
without assistance. In answer to the question, "What do you
see?" he replied, "I see a ball." He had now fifty-five words in
his vocabulary. A month later, he surprised his teacher by saying
very slowly " au-to-mo-beel." He then asked how to spell it. It
was written on a piece of paper, and he put it in his desk, and after158 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
wards learned it without help. When out walking another day, he
made his first spontaneous and complete sentence, "I like that
Christmas tree.''

After a little over a year of this gruelling fight?gruelling for
both pupil and teacher?the resistance began gradually to lessen,
and there were even days when George could almost be said to enjoy his speech work. His manner of talking at this time was an
elliptic masterpiece. He omitted articles and prepositions, used inverted word order, and always said "mine" for "my." Usually,
he would only say the key words which clarified the situation, discarding all adjectives, adverbs, pronouns, articles, and conjunctions.
For instance, he ran in one day, crying, '' Tooth-my-out." When
asked who did it, he replied, '' Me-cry-pull-bleed,'' thereby covering
all the major points. "Little Boy Blue," he would recite thus:
'' Boy Blue-blow horn, Sheep-meadow; cow-corn.''

George's handicaps were many, one of the chief ones being his
defective motor control. Right and left arm drill took two months
of training. He hated it, and, after being in the school over two
years, it was always a matter worth comment if George knew which
was his right or left hand or foot, in spite of almost daily drill.
He had to be trained to walk up and down steps, to hop and jump,
all of which presented dreadful difficulties to him. He was always
falling down and hurting himself, often cutting his head or face
as he lacked sufficient motor control to save himself by putting out
his hands. These accidents continued, though less frequently, even
after he was seven years old. Six months after he entered the
school, he tried without success to button a Montessori buttoning
frame. Five days later, he buttoned the frame in ten minutes.
However?his poor, fumbling fingers were bad servants to him.
Teaching him to dress himself was a matter of months. It took
one hour and ten minutes to teach him to lace one shoe correctly.
He used scissors very awkwardly. After many months of trial, he
could only cut roughly around an outline, and even up to the time
he left the school, he was never able to follow an exact line. In
playing croquet, he could never knock the balls in any required
direction. In January, 1922, a year before he left the school, it
seemed quite miraculous to see George, in coasting down the hills,
steer his sled without mishap.

Initiative expresses itself in an ability to respond?that is, to
take cognizance of one's social and material environment, and, with
the knowledge thus gained, to direct and control a performance.
George, however, had very little ability to respond. He had to be
trained to form habits of responsiveness. He lacked motivation,
in other words, strong desires, aversions or emotions. He also
lacked another expression of initiative?originality, intelligence, invention, the doing of something new. George hated a new or different task. What he enjoyed was doing things?things which had become easy with practice?over and over. And yet, while he possessed this one requisite to efficiency, he was far too handicapped
by poor motor control and memory to be efficient. Teaching consisted in forming certain habits of response, then using those habits
to build up his initiative and, if possible, his motivation.
That he had some initiative was shown those first days by the
two incidents of the clothes pins and stealing the piece of candy,
but it required a very powerful motive to make him display it. Besides his love of candy and his passion for putting things in their
right place, he had a great desire for new clothes. Several weeks
after his coming to the school, he was taking his daily afternoon
rest in bed. He had been wearing everyday brown shoes and
stockings. This particular day, when the nurse came to get him
up, he had a pair of white socks in his hand, which he was trying
ineffectually to put on. In order to get these,/ he had to stand
precariously on the very edge of his bed, reach up to a drawer in
the chiffonier, open it, find the socks and take them out. It sounds
a simple enough proceeding, but to anyone who knew George at
that time it was so unusual as to be almost unbelievable. Apart
from the initiative required, the fact that he noticed the difference
m color was surprising. He was especially difficult on color cubes.
When he arrived, he did not know the colors by name, and could
not be induced to match them. Six months later, he could not copy
a triangular design made with two blocks. After seven months,
he could turn up the blue side of a block to match his teacher's
model, but apparently could not produce a red block at command.
After a year, he was able to match colors, and could shift the blocks
around in different arrangements, following his teacher's example,
but he was not able to make the designs by himself. At this time,
though he could match red and green perfectly, and even say the
two words in a fashion, he refused as a rule to give red or green
?n command. This work bored him and seemed to deepen his
resistance.

George's attention, when he came and for a long time afterwards, was as distractible and fleeting as a monkey's. It was pos160 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
sible to hold it for a few seconds or a minute; then it was gone.
He did not look and did not listen. He had to be taught to do
both. The next step was to teach him to remember.

He was thought at first to have a memory span of one. In
January, 1920, when he was being taught to spell, he had to deliberate a long time on each letter. Even if the word was spelled
over beforehand, it did not increase his speed very much. This
would seem to indicate that he had no real after-image. Apparently, the after-image was only two, but he was beginning to develop an operative span of three and sometimes four. He could
give two letters in rapid succession, but he could not give three.
If forced to give three rapidly, even in words he knew how to
spell, he would drop one of the letters. If a word was written
on the blackboard as he named the letters, he could not spell it.
If merely auditory stimulus was used, he forgot what he was spelling and lost all continuity, even though he pronounced the word
first. The same was true of arithmetic. When he would give
persistently the wrong answer in oral drill, his teacher would say,
"Go to the blackboard and write it down." Sometimes, before
he got there, sometimes when he picked up the chalk, he would
call out the right answer, as if even the idea of writing clarified
his visual images. If given 2 and 2 and 4 to add, he could not
carry in his mind the sum of the first two, but if allowed to write
the additional 4 on the board, he could then complete the sum in his
mind, and say 8. In January, 1921, he was adding and subtracting
numbers 1 to 10. If written down, these were generally correct,
another proof that his visual memory was the least defective. In
two weeks, with a little drill every day, he had learned to play
Dominoes, as far as recognizing and matching the pieces were
concerned. The first time he played parcheesi, he was able to transfer his visual memories of the spots on the dominoes to the dice, and
did very well, though in counting the spaces, his fingers would go
faster than his tongue. His memory was constantly improving.
On March 18, 1921, he was given a spelling review of 92 words of
two to seven letters, and missed only six. In October, 1921, he
memorized a poem of eight lines in ten minutes. The following
month, he learned to name the first four days of the week in succession. A four letter word was learned generally in four repetitions. After a month's drilling on days of the week, he surprised
his teacher by applying his newly acquired knowledge, and announced, "Friday, Miss A." on her arrival that morning.
The strain of teaching George in those first two years was
not only his wandering attention, lack of persistence, his fits of
obstinacy, his poor motor control, and defective speech?his hands
and body were hardly ever still. He would squirm and wriggle,
pull at his clothing, fuss with his stockings, bite his nails, put his
fingers in his mouth, chew his tie or handkerchief, but never would
he keep still! Around his mouth were always the telltale marks?a
chapped area?the result of sucking or chewing something; in the
beginning, things he would pick up; later on, it was his fingers,
his tie, the ends of his sleeves, his sweater. Towards the end of
his stay, he made noticeable efforts to break himself of this habit,
especially when he was told that he would stay in the baby class
until he did stop.

He learned to read at the same time that he was learning to
talk, the two processes going on together, but speech was so difficult for him that he knew words and their letters some time before he could articulate the sounds. It could therefore be said
of him with truth that he read before he talked. His reading lessons began by making him pick out certain letters at command.
These letters were the large wooden kind, which, by their size
and shape, offered the least difficulty. Nevertheless, he opposed
this phase of his instruction with all the will he possessed. Given
this pathological resistance and a very poor and fleeting attention,
it was not surprising that his teacher was often in despair, and
the improvement almost imperceptible. It took him half a year
to put together his first word, cow, with these wooden letters. It
took him two weeks to make the big advance from one word to
two?cow, cat. Even after he had given every proof of knowing
the name t, and after he had used this letter in the formation of
words, it took ten days to make him pick out the letter t from a pile
of letters on the table. The transition from wooden to small cardboard letters was made without difficulty, and again later to printed
ones. After nine months, he could spell with cardboard letters the
words cat, rat, hat, on, cow, boy, pig, man, see, and eye, but only
three of these could he pronounce, and then very imperfectly. At
this time he could* point at command to any letter of the alphabet.
One year and eight months after entering the school, he was reading
daily in Monroe's Primer, and, what is more remarkable, he showed
evidence of liking it. He read very slowly and painstakingly in
a voice devoid of inflection or expression. It took a little over a
Month's drilling for him to read "The Little Red Hen," but his
next story, '' The Gingerbread Boy,'' he learned to read perfectly in
fifteen days, showing how rapidly his reading ability improved.
The absence of resistance, and his growing interest in reading
helped to overcome his handicaps of poor attention and deficient
imageability. Seven months later, he took just a week to learn to
read "Billy Goat Gruff," and spelled easily the most common words
in it. He continued to read with extreme slowness and often
skipped words or whole lines, due to his poor attention, so that it
was a long time before he could read without his teacher's pointing
pencil. Once he mastered a story thoroughly, he could always read
it well in a review, showing he possessed a retentive memory.

George was always subject to sudden fatigue. His eyes
would fill with tears, and he would stammer and give the same answer to every question. This was a signal to his teacher to quit
work for a play or rest period.

Subject to attacks of mental confusion, these would often occur if any new demands were made of him. Drilled a long time
on "may I have," and feeling sure he had got it, his teacher then
gave him "may I sit." This change temporarily upset his mental
balance so that he could say neither one nor the other. Given a
drill in the days of the week, followed by a drill in telling time, he
twice answered questions as to time by days of the week. He was
given this problem, "You have six pennies in your pocket. You
lost two. How many have you left?" Even when this was acted
out with real pennies, he still had great difficulty. The insertion
of the several ideas of a pocket, of money, of losing, put him all off
the simple sum of six minus two, which he knew well. Four months
later, he solved orally sixteen simple problems like this one, although he was greatly fatigued at the end.
On account of his weak motor control, the trembling, inefficient
fingers had great trouble in handling chalk, and later a pencil. At
first, it was impossible to get him to make a vertical or horizontal
line. It took weeks to teach him to print the letter k. He was in
the school a year before he could print with incredible slowness and
difficulty a few short words. Often, unless held and directed by his
teacher, his pencil would slip about and wander at random over
the paper. Those early efforts looked as if the writer had held
the pencil between his toes instead of his fingers. More than two
years after his education began, any attempt to make him write on
a line was an absolute failure. Yet, two months later, he was given
his first lined copy-book, and, stimulated by this novelty, he made
quite a creditable effort at following the lines. It was natural
that he should hate writing considering the enormous effort it involved, and in this work he fatigued more rapidly than any other.
One day he said, "I sick tired writing, Miss A., no more." His
dislike of the task had forced this unusual initiative of speech. In
his third year at the school, he transcribed two or three sentences
from his reading book. A month earlier, unless prompted, he could
not copy words in their sequence. The letters were very large and
straggling, but recognizable. At this time, July, 1921, he began to
compose a diary every morning in class. He did this at first with
anagrams, so that he would only have to struggle with one difficulty
at a time?that of expressing a thought. When he mastered this,
he was given a pencil and a book in which to write the thought.
Seven months later, he wrote his first letter. It consisted of four
words and was a triumph of effort and training over disability. It
read?"Mother, I love you." It is interesting to compare this
feeble production, the top-notch of his ability at the time, with his
Christmas letter the year he left the school. He wrote it himself
without any help or suggestion from his teacher. "Dear Everyone?Thank you for the books, Tinker-Toy, Erector, Screw Driver,
and the candy. Santa Claus brought me a little gray racer car,
some boats. In my stocking he put a horn and a horse. I got
some candy and I got an apple and candy cane. Love from me.
George." To hear George talk or read at this time was to get the
impression of a mechanical human boy in operation, an infantile
'robot." He had not yet infused these processes with personality.
Nevertheless, he was developing a marked personality.

His love of order and his desire to be helpful were fundamental. Before he knew how to put on his own clothes, he tried
to help a little, crippled girl put on her sweater. He hung up his
teacher's hat and coat without ever being asked. On walks through
the woods, George could always be depended on to hold back the
branches of trees so that the others could go through. He was excellent at helping to clean up a desk, tidy a room and arrange
details. He would spend many happy hours putting weeds, stones,
aud leaves into his little wagon and dumping them in the right
place, returning with a smile for more. One day, before he had
learned to talk, he came agitatedly into Miss P's room, took her by
the hand and drew her swiftly down the hall to the bathroom. Miss
hurrying anxiously along, thought that one of the pipes had
burst or that some untoward situation had aroused his dormant
initiative. Arrived at the bathroom, she could see nothing amiss,
but George pointed excitedly to the mirror on the wall which hung
crooked, and made signs for her to straighten it. Never did George
have to be reminded to fold his napkin at table nor to put away
his belongings. Writing about coasting in his diary, he ends up,
"I put away my sled." What is to most of us the "fly in the
amber" and "the rift within the lute" was to George the culminating point of satisfaction. His diary, written in October, 1921,
reads, "Friday night I played ten pins with Miss P. and Don and
Calvin. The little baby children went to bed first and I put away
the chairs." The following month, he wrote to his mother?"Dear
Mothers, Thank you for the new coat. It fits me. I put it away
in the closet. Love from me. George." Dates and their exactness gave him great pleasure. He never made a mistake in dating
his diary, and, perhaps because it was a daily task, he grew to
love it, and was most upset if it was ever omitted. He learned by
himself to use an index and liked wherever possible to make use
of one.

Imageability is the great expression of initiative, so it was not
surprising that George was most deficient in this quality. Lacking
imageability, he lacked imagination, good after-images and a power
of imitation. At first, he seemed to have no imagination at all,
but in time developed a small amount. In December, 1921, when
asked for an oral reproduction of the story of Cinderella, he had
a lapse of memory and was obliged to trust to his invention for
the rest. '' Once a woman had two daughters. Her daughters were
proud and selfish like herself, and her step-daughter was sweet and
lovely. She made her do all the work and sleep in the poor,
hard bed. The bed was in a dark garret. Now, the Prince gave
a ball, invited all the great people to come. The sisters invited to
the ball. The people went to the ball. The sisters planned, ' I wear
my red velvet gown.' 'I wear my dress with flowers of gold for
the party.' (Here his memory failed and he had to improvise.)
'When the Prince is gone, not let us kill the girl, and the girl like
him and he like the girl,' and the girl said, 'I will go too and we
not chop wood,' and she said?'Don't kill no girl,' and the girl
said, 'Please don't cry, little girl.' Her godmother is not dead.
She is in the purple house and the house was near the woods and
the house was a nice baby house and the house was in the dark
corner and the corner was the chimney corner and the Prince went
into the little red house. No one was in the house. A dark big bed
was in the house " It reminds one a little of the most iconoclastic type of modern literature?say an extract from Gertrude
Stein. In spite of its repetition and incoherence, it does show a
greatly increased vocabulary and some imagination. In the spring
of 1922,'he was given four objects to weave into a story?fox, duck,
blue sky, pond, and he produced the following: "I saw a little red
fox. I saw a little red duck. I saw a blue sky. I saw a pond and
a white bridge. The fox went for a walk. A duck went for a
walk?not (here George laughed) the blue sky went for a walk.
It can't walk. They went to Valley Forge Road. When the fox
saw the duck in the pond, he wanted to eat him. The fox jumped
right into the pond; he wanted to eat him. The fox jumped right
into the pond and was drowned and a big frog will eat him up.
The duck swam in the water for an hour. Then he went home."
Though some imagination was required to produce this, the white
bridge and the Valley Forge Road were well-known sights in his
daily walks. George was the opposite of the dreamy, imaginative
type of child. He had a good bump of locality and knew the roads
around the school well. What ability he had was practical, and his
chief pleasure was to apply any bit of knowledge he obtained.
The plus sign in his little arithmetic sums was always called '' and.''
One day, before he said more than a few words, he was out walking, andy as they passed the Catholic Church, George pointed up
at the gold cross which, at that particular angle, looked very much
like the plus sign, and asked "and?"

Without ever appearing alert, George developed a very keen
observation. We find traces of this in his diary: "Friday afternoon I went with Miss A. to get my arctics. My arctics are 3Y. I
can put my arctics on all myself.'' One day, coming in for dinner,
he said, "I smell fish. I hate fish. I love ham. Ham on Wednesday." Very little escaped him that went on in the school. He not
only knew where his own things were, but the whereabouts of all the
other children's belongings. He could generally tell you which of
the maids had her day out, what teacher was on duty, where any
given person was and what they were doing. He came to be known
as the School Detective. Once his new overcoat was borrowed with
great secrecy for Don, whose own coat was too shabby to wear in
town. All went well till just as Don was opening the front door,
a forlorn voice with a rising inflection drifted down the stairs,
"You bring back my new coat, Don?"

Devoid of affection at first, he had been in the school about
a year before he evinced a sign of it. Then, one day, he was discovered dissolved in tears, watching out of the window the departure for the day of his extremely undemonstrative nurse. He
did not bestow his affection lightly, but, once given, it was never
withdrawn. Miss A. was the only other person in the school to
arouse this strong feeling. He has cherished every line she has
written him, and, though he has not seen her now for nearly two
years,j he still writes to her and talks of her. George could even
wax sentimental on occasion. Once, when a very pretty little girl
visited the school, he followed her around everywhere, never taking
his adoring gaze away, nor was the young lady averse to his attentions, for George had developed into a noticeably handsome boy
with blond, curly hair, a pink and white skin, regular features, and
large, innocent eyes. Another time, he spied a red poppy that had
withered and begged his teacher to come and look?"The poor,
dead poppy, the red poppy?who killed the poppy, Miss A. ? " He
appeared as grief-stricken as once when he saw a dead robin.
Where his affection was bestowed, he was extremely generous and
unselfish. This was shown in his attitude toward his roommate,
Don, for whom he fagged unceasingly, and to whom he gave his
most cherished possessions.

Though his negativism was practically conquered, he was still
subject to fits of obstinacy. After he acquired a small vocabulary,
he would put this mood into words, and, one day, when told to read,
said, "Not I like to read. No, not I read. I not like that story.
Not I read." Held to the task, he wept, but finally gave in. For
five minutes on another day he resisted doing a simple problem in
arithmetic. Finally, he remarked: "I show Marie my new suit
after dinner," and thereupon answered the problem correctly. Thus
a change of ideas would break the spell.

George's progress in school work in the last two years was
noticeably "more rapid. He began to make use of words that occurred in his reading lesson, and bit by bit a faint originality entered into his speech. He had a bad cold and was overheard praying?''God, take that cold away from me"; thus making up an
original sentence which he had not read or been taught was a
marked improvement. Pointing to the belfry on a church, he
exclaimed, "The chimney to ring." When the wheel-barrow got
stuck in the snow, Jack cried, "Will you un-stuck it?" And one
morning he announced, "I sleep so fast, so fast as a beaver under
the covers.'' When the waitress told him that it was her birthday,
after a moment's thought he said, "Merry Birthday, Catherine."
His first oral reproduction of '' The Goose who laid the Golden
Eggs" was as follows: "I read about the man and the goose. The
goose laid a egg and the man killed her. And in his haste to get
gold he lost all he had. He wished he had not been greedy again.''
Before he left us he could give clear oral reproduction of quite a
few familiar stories.

His power of concentrating increased and he developed an
ability to reason. Asked how many days to Christmas, he could
not answer. Miss A. wrote on a piece of paper?"Today is December 20th. Christmas is December 25th," and gave the paper
to George. He replied at once?"Five days." He displayed this
ability in solving his little arithmetic problems. Looking out the
window one morning at the snow, he said, "They can't use the gig
because it snowed. They want the sleigh."

In his reading lesson one day, he came across the new word?
"snow flakes" which he promptly called "corn flakes," an article
of food which he loved. Each time he read it he would call it corn
flakes to the end of the lesson, in spite of being corrected every
time. Often he would avoid saying a word he found difficult to
pronounce, for instance, the word "spider" was very hard for him,
so each time he came to it in his reading he called it'' bumble bee.''
One day, he was reading the story of a little Indian boy, called
Hiawatha. He was very much interested and asked his teacher
how to spell many of the words in this story, but when they came
to "Hiawatha," he said, "Let's leave it, Miss A." He had completely forgotten the long, agonizing struggle of learning to read
and each day augmented his pleasure in the exercise of this hardly
won accomplishment. In the Book Department at Wanamaker's,
he went into ecstacy over all the Primers and Readers, and wanted
to buy them all. In class the next day, stimulated by his interest,
he read the first twenty-seven pages very well,' although quite a
few words were strange to him. He began this reader on January
26, and finished it on March 23. "When he left us, he had read
about fifty pages in Winston's Third Reader. This reading proved
difficult on account of the many new words, and at first he did only
three or four pages a day. The last story he read was a long one
about the Biblical David. Seeing it was long and difficult, his
teacher suggested that they should skip it, and go on to the next,
an easier and shorter one, but George wouldn't hear of it. His
sense of order was outraged, and so he was allowed to read it.
His oral account of the story, when questioned, shows an increasing
ability to understand, as well as to incorporate new words into his
speaking vocabulary, like "troubled," "sorrow," "ill," words
perhaps heard, but never before spoken by him.
Question?''Who was David?'' Answer?''Jesse's son.''
Question?"What did David do?" Answer?"King Saul,
King of Israel, became ill. David played his harp. He said to
David he was well again."

Question?"What did David do then?" Answer?"Went
home. The servants said he sang away the King's sorrows. The
King said I can never go to sleep.''
Question?"What did David do when he went home?" Answer?"His father said?I am troubled about your brother. Take
some food and visit your brother, and he hurried away."
This shows a great advance over his first effort with the '' Goose
that laid the Golden Eggs."

The first of June, 1922, when he left the school, George was
eight years and seven months old. He knew all the plus and minus
combinations up to thirteen, and could add and subtract any numbers providing there was no carrying. He had developed an excellent mechanical memory. If he forgot a combination, he could
always solve it on paper by using strokes for counters, but he
could not reason out the correct answer mentally, no matter how
simple the question. He had acquired his two and three tables
and knew them unless tired.

His numerals and his writing were steadily improving, and
his last diary, if shown as the work of an eight year old boy, would
have been accepted as about average,?'' Tuesday afternoon I picked
up stones and weeds and the sticks. I said to myself I should put
on my summer hat. Miss 0. packed my box. I am going home
tomorrow.''

To sum up George's defects is to realize what a tremendous
number of handicaps had been met and either reduced or overcome. He had lacked a desire to talk, he had a delicate body, defective motor control and was deficient in both attention and persistence. He was negativistic, and had a memory span of one or two
at the most; he had poor initiative and imageability, thus lacking
imagination, good after-images and the power of imitation. In
other words he would have been called feebleminded by most doctors
and all laymen.

It was unfortunate that at this point in his training George
had to leave us and go home. He was out of the darkest, densest
woods, but he had still some rough, difficult ground to traverse, and
he needed expert physical and mental care. His family engaged
a special teacher, who came to his home and taught him. She reported after nearly a year's work, that at times she felt he had
not made one single bit of progress, though at other times she felt
greatly encouraged. It was to be expected that he would show a
great falling off, due to the general laxity of family life as opposed
to the steady, watchful care and discipline, the regular hours and
habits of school life. This marked deterioration took place. His
hands shook so that his writing became almost illegible, and he displayed many signs of acute nervousness. Gradually, he became
better adjusted to his environment and evinced greater control.
His diaries of 1923, sent to us by his teacher, show improvement in
variety of subject matter and wording.
