A Vocabulary Study of Children in a Foreign Industrial Community
=================================================================

By Alice M. Jones, Ph.D., Clinical Psychologist
Beaver County Child Study Bureau
The Problem
This study was undertaken in the attempt to help solve a
practical clinical problem. The writer is the director of a child
study clinic and has referred to her for examination and study
large numbers of children from foreign, industrial communities. It
is her custom to include the Stanford Binet in a minimum examination schedule. In dealing with the child of foreign nativity or
foreign parentage it is clearly necessary to evaluate very carefully
mental age scores based on tests involving language. The particular problem approached by this study is the determination of
what can be expected of the normal child of foreign parentage and
industrial background when the Stanford Binet is used.
The obvious approach to this problem would be the testing of
fairly large nationality groups with the complete, individual Stanford examination. Time for research through this clinic is limited,
and such a large project was viewed as impractical for the present.
Since in dealing with the foreign groups the chief variable factor
is presumably the language factor, it seemed likely that some light
might be thrown on the problem of expected performance on the
Stanford Revision by the use of the vocabulary test. It was therefore decided to approach the larger problem by giving the oral,
individual vocabulary test to the children of an entire elementary
school system located in a largely foreign industrial community, to
see what were the tentative norms obtained by such an investigation.1
The Group
The school district selected was that of Aliquippa, Pennsylvania. In Aliquippa is located a part of the Aliquippa plant of
the Jones and Laughlin Steel Corporation. The vast majority of
the workers of the town are employed in the steel mills.
1 That the use of the vocabulary test is justifiable for some predication
of general success on the Stanford Binet is indicated in Doctor Terman's article, "The Vocabulary Test as a Measure of Intelligence," J. of Ed. Psychol.
1918, 9, 452-456. The implications of this article will be stressed in the discussion of the results of this study.
14 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The group under consideration consists of all the public school
children in Aliquippa up to the eighth grade, who were eight years
of age and over at the time of the testing. This does not include
all the school children of the community; there is a flourishing
parochial school. (Judging from her experience in testing parochial school children in this district, however, the writer is convinced that a similar study in the parochial school would result
in lowering rather than raising norms found for foreign children in
the public schools.)
The children of the group range in age from eight to sixteen
years and in grade from first to eighth. In nationality they distribute as follows:
Nationality Number of cases
Italian   178
Slavish   172
Mixed American   56
Serbian   35
Grannish   20
Kroatian   20
Hungarian   16
Jewish   13
Russian   11
Slovanian   10
Polish  6
Lithuanian   5
German and Austrian  4
'1 Kreiner "  2
"Onvalt"   2
Roumanian   1
Tyrolean   1
Total 562
This group is polyglot in the extreme. Approximately 90 per
cent of the children are of foreign parentage. Of this nonAmerican group, 70 per cent are distributed about equally between
the Italian and Slavish races.
The economic situation in the town is, in general, good. Wages
are adequate. Foreign living standards prevail for the most part.
The church and school are the only available cultural sources.
There is no attempt at formal adult Americanization work in the
town itself.
VOCABULARY STUDY 15
Procedure
The examination consisted of an oral, individual vocabulary
test, using the first list of words in the Stanford Revision, standard
procedure. Two examiners2 worked simultaneously during most of
the study. Both examiners were Ph.D.'s in clinical psychology,
and both were accustomed to the use of this test with foreign
children. An analysis of the vocabulary scores was made, by age,
grade and nationality. A further analysis of the successes and
failures on each word of the list, also according to the age and
nationality, is in preparation. All distributions include the small
American group.
Results
The first distribution made was unselective as to sex and
nationality, and based on the chronological age of the pupils.
This table shows the score range, the quartiles, median, and
probable error at each age level from eight to fifteen years. The
number of cases at each age level is, of course, regrettably small but
it is large enough to show tendencies.
At the right of Table I appear three other measures, made by
the writer because of her interest and curiosity concerning the
situation revealed. The first column in this group shows the
number of eases at each age level at or exceeding the expected norm
for their age (scores 20 or more at year 8, 25 or more at year 9,
30 or more at year 10, etc.). Column two in this group shows the
number of cases at each age level scoring 19 or less. This score
was selected since 20 is the minimum score considered in the standardization. Column three of this group shows the number of children at each age level who make a score only half their expected
score or less (10 or less at year 8, 12 or less at year 9, 15 or less
at year 10, etc.).
To persons accustomed to using the Stanford Binet with foreign children, a rather close scrutiny of these results is worth-while.
The range of scores is at all levels very wide and peculiar in
that the minimum scores attained are so extremely low. The medians are, in all cases, also, very low. At the ten year level, for
instance, the median is 16, with an expected median of 30. This
is the most striking case, but there is a consistent wide discrepancy
2 The author is indebted to Doctor Eebecea Learning Fieger, former
director of the Beaver County Child Study Bureau, for her assistance in conducting these tests.
16 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
between the expected score and the actual score. In no case does
the upper quartile even approach the expected median score, while
the lower quartiles are fantastically low.
The total number of children in this school who score at norm
or better for their age, is eighty, or 14.9 per cent.3 This includes
Table I
AGE DISTRIBUTION?UNSELECTIVE
Age
8 yrs.
9 yrs.
10 yrs.
11 yrs.
12 yrs.
13 yrs.
14 yrs.
15 yrs.
16 yrs.
Number
Cases
95
96
71
71
78
60
47
27
4
Score
Range
2-34
2-35
6-40
8-48
6-62
18-62
10-62
16-60
Upper
Quartile
14
20
21
31
36
42
44
46
Lower
Q10
10
12
17
22
25
28
28
Median
12
16
16
23
28.5
30
34.5
36
P. E.
4.5
7
7
8.5
Not included
No.
Cases
at norm
or better
12
15
6
14
13
12
5
3
0
No.
Cases
score
19 or
less
83
64
45
23
14
3
6
1
0
No.
Cases
50% or
less expected
score
33
34
29
19
14
8
9
2
1
the American group. Within the American group, thirty, or 53.5
per cent reach the expected score. Removing the American group,
of the foreign group, fifty, or 10 per cent, of the children reach or
exceed the expected score. Removing the American and Jewish
group, leaves forty-one cases of the mixed foreign group (8.5 per
cent) who reach or exceed the expected score.
Two hundred and thirty-nine cases score 19 or less. This includes children (presumably normal children) at every age level.
Forty-two per cent of the entire group have a vocabulary score
of less than eight years. No child in the group is less than eight
years of age, and only seventeen per cent of the group is under
nine years of age.
One hundred and forty-nine children, or 27 per cent of the
whole group, make only half the expected score or less.
* Since so small a percentage of the cases were able to achieve the expected norm, the nationalities represented were distributed. That distribution
is as follows: American 30, Slavish 16, Italian 13, Jewish 9, Russian 3,
Grannish 2, Kroatian 2, Hungarian, Slovanian, Lithuanian, German, each 1
case.
VOCABULARY STUDY 17
Table II shows the distribution of these cases according to
grade in school. The score range, quartiles, median and probable
Table II
SCORE DISTRIBUTION?GRADE
Grade
No.
cases
Min.
Max.
Med.
Mode
25%
75%
P. E.
Cases at
norm.
or
better
Cases
below
norm,
median
Age
grade
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
12
48
119
133
42
73
63
62
2
4
2
6
18
10
21
28
16
21
34
35
50
48
54
62
12
14
18
28
31
31
42
10
12
None
16
None
38
None
42
14
25.5
23
27
37
x
14
16
23
32
36
36
50
x
3
4
4.5
3.24
7.5
4.5
6.5
0
1
21
3
5
18
12
47
98
130
34
65
58
44
Total
522
64
488
error are given for each grade. The median age for the grade as
distributed is given for comparison with the median scores obtained. The number of cases at or exceeding the norm for the
Table III
TO SHOW RELATIVE SUCCESS OF VARIOUS NATIONALITY GROUPS
Nationality Group
No. cases
No. cases at
norm or better
No. cases
50% or lower
Italian
Slavish
Mixed American
Serbian
Grannish
Croatian
Hungarian
Jewish
Russian
Slovanian
178
172
56
35
20
20
16
13
11
10
13
16
30
1
2
2
1
9
3
1
57
42
1
14
7
10
5
0
4
1
median age for their grade is reported and also the number of
cases scoring at a point 50 per cent of their expected score or
less.
18 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
There appears to be very little of contradictory significance
in Table II. As much vocabulary handicap is encountered (relatively) grade by grade as age by age.
Table III is inserted to show the relative success of the various nationality groups as measured in terms of the number of children able to reach the expected age norm, and the number who
score half or less of the expected score for their ages. Only nationalities where ten or more children were recruited are included in
this table. The most superior group (although the number is so
small as to make generalization dangerous) appears to be the Jewish. The poorest group is the Serbian, with only 2.8 per cent of
the cases scoring at norm or better, and 40 per cent giving a score
of half the expected score or less. There seems to be a slight advantage in favor of the Slavish as compared with the Italian group,
although both these larger groups show an extreme retardation
with reference to both measures.
Discussion
It becomes at once apparent from these tentative results that
if we are to use this vocabulary test intelligently in the diagnosis
of foreign children, we must build up separate norms for foreign
children.
These children constitute a normal group of the type which
may be found in any industrial town of the same general nationality constitution. A recent survey of the school by the Illinois
tests does not show the school to be retarded with reference to the
established norms on that test. The writer has worked in and
through the Aliquippa schools for three years. In spite of the
language handicap, these children make satisfactory progress with
a course of study planned without especial regard to their special
needs to meet state and county requirements. There is nothing
whatever to support the contention that we are dealing here with
a group of subnormal children. That they progress under their
handicap might be interpreted as evidence of superior rather than
inferior intelligence.
It might also be suggested, with reference to the group, that
the economic and social status of the children in this community are
such as to limit their vocabulary scores. The inclusion of the
American group in the same school, living under similar social and
economic conditions, seems to have invalidated this criticism.
American and Jewish children within the group show satisfactory
scores for their ages and grades.
VOCABULARY STUDY 19
Anyone working with the foreign child problem realizes, of
course, that we must carefully weigh mental age scores in the
light of the language handicap. The relation of vocabulary mastery
and self-expression to intelligence ratings has been discussed at
length upon many occasions. But clinicians on the job everywhere
do continue to use the Stanford Revision and cannot help but be
somewhat impressed by low mental ages and I.Q.'s as at least a
part of the composite picture presented by a given case.
There is surprisingly little investigation of the Stanford vocabulary test alone reported in the literature to date. Dr Terman4
in 1908, has an article in justification of the vocabulary test as a
test of intelligence. In this article, he meets certain objections
advanced by his critics, to the use of a vocabulary test as a test of
intelligence. His article has an extremely interesting and direct
bearing on the present study.
His method of demonstrating the validity of the vocabulary
test consisted in correlating mental age and vocabulary scores.
For a miscellaneous group of six hundred thirty-one school children the coefficient of correlation between mental age and vocabulary score was plus 0.91. Doctor Terman further states in the
same article, that "the probable error of a mental age based on
the vocabulary test alone, is only 9.6 months in the case of school
children, and that the chances are approximately six to one that
such a mental age will be in error more than a year and a half."
Correlation between vocabulary score and mental age score
would, of course, justify the vocabulary test as an intelligence
measure if one admits the validity of the mental age as an intelligence measure. On the other hand, from the point of view of this investigation, the high correlation which Doctor Terman discovered
merely indicates the close interdependence between vocabulary and
mental age, in other words, the vital importance played by vocabulary in a mental age rating on the Stanford Revision.
Doctor Terman states in the same article that "Portuguese and
Italian children from homes where a foreign language is spoken,
are, for the first two years of school life, considerably below the
median for American children of the same mental age. The difference, however, entirely disappears by the time the child has attained the mental age twelve years. (It is obviously true that the
child cannot attain the mental age 12 years without an adequate
* Terman, L. M. The Vocabulary Test as a Measure of Intelligence, J. of
Ed. Psychol. 1918, 9, 452-466
20 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
vocabulary, in view of the verbal nature of the tests at year 10 and
12, especially with a correlation of pins 0.91 between mental age
and vocabulary score.)''
The author does not here wish to comment upon the value of
correlation of this type in showing the validity of a part of a test
as an intelligence measure.
In the light of Doctor Terman's statements concerning the
high correlation between mental age and vocabulary, it becomes
inevitable that a vast number of these children who appear in the
present study are foredoomed to a low mental age rating and a low
I.Q. Every week the writer has occasion to examine children from
one or the other of these nationality groups with findings somewhat uniformly depressing. Test ratings on these cases, rigidly
interpreted, would result in diagnosis of Borderline or Moron for
children who probably are not even dull, as compared with their
own nationality group.
If 27 per cent of unselected mixed foreign children do
not do better than half as well on vocabulary as American children
of their chronological age, then we must view with extreme caution
findings in terms of mental age on children recruited from foreign
groups. Especially, caution should be observed about "labeling"
as borderline, doubtful, or possibly defective, children who may
represent an average sampling from their own linguistic group.
The writer has had enough clinic experience and contacts to realize
the extent to which such ratings are prevalent. Pintner,5 in an article on the comparison of American and foreign groups, shows
the relative standing of foreign children and American children on
the National Intelligence Tests, and on a non-language test. His
results show the foreign groups uniformly inferior on the National
Intelligence Tests, but the total foreign group as equal to the
American group, and the Polish and German groups as superior
to the American on the non-language involving tests. He concludes with a wise note that "Caution is needed in drawing conclusions as to the intelligence of foreign children when tested solely
by means of tests which pre-suppose the knowledge or reading of
the English language." Just how much caution is needed is, I believe, indicated, at least, by these very significant vocabulary findings.
* Pintner, E. Comparison of American and Foreign children on Intelligence Tests, J. of Ed. Psychol., 1923, 14, 292-295
VOCABULARY STUDY 21
It is to be feared that many cases have been rated as dull, borderline, and defective, and consistently treated as such in school,
and by social agencies, where the controlling factor in the mental
age score was the vocabulary.
Summary
Tests of 552 children in a foreign, industrial community, entire public school population, eight years of age and over, with
vocabulary list I, Stanford Revision Binet Tests, oral, individual
presentation shows:
1. Very wide range and extremely low medians at each age
and grade level. Medians in some cases scarcely more than half
expected score. (Tables 1, 2, and 3.)
2. Only 14.6 per cent of school population attain the expected
score for their age or better. Of the mixed foreign groups (excluding American and Jewish cases) only 8.5 per cent reach the
expected norm or better. Of the included small American group,
living under identical economic and similar social conditions, 53.5
per cent attain the expected norms for their age.
3. 40 per cent Serbian, 32 per cent Italian, 24 per cent Slavish
children tested attain only half the expected score or less. Of the
entire group, 27 per cent fail to reach a score of more than half
the expected score for their age.
4. 42 per cent of the entire school have a vocabulary score
of less than eight years. No child in the group is less than eight
years old, and only 17 per cent are under nine years of age.
Conclusions
1. Since, in justifying the use of a vocabulary test as a test
of intelligence, Dr Terman showed a correlation of plus 0.91 between vocabulary score and mental age score on the Stanford Binet,
it becomes obvious that a large number of the children in this study
are fore-doomed to a low mental age score.
2. The study emphasizes in a striking way the care which
must be taken in the evaluation of mental age scores on children
of foreign parentage. Extreme injustice may be done a foreign
child in classifying him as dull, borderline, and defective, when
he is, as a matter of fact, giving a performance average or better
for his race and economic group.
3. If we continue the use of the Stanford Binet in a minimum
psychological examination, it is imperative that we build up
special norms for each foreign-language group.
