Buster
=======

By Kathleen A. McIlvaine and Charlotte Easby, Clinic
Teacher, University of Pennsylvania
Brown eyes, light hair, delicate features and a firm chin?
rather an interesting inventory of the face of a six year old whose
outward appearance is not unlike most children of his age who
have been brought up in a cultured environment by intelligent
parents, whose best interests are centered in their eldest child.
Buster came to the Psychological Clinic of the University of
Pennsylvania as a member of a group of three children, subjects
of an experiment to determine whether slightly superior children
of five, six and seven years, can acquire as much elementary knowledge of school subjects during one hour of individual, concentrated
instruction as children of the same age acquire during five hours of
regular class instruction.
The general plan of the experiment, which extended over a
period of about three months, was that each of the three members
of the group receive an hour of actual instruction from individual
teachers in separate rooms. At the expiration of the lesson period,
the children assembled in a common play room where they were
served milk and crackers, after which they were supervised in some
form of organized play. Thus, the children could be studied not
only as individuals but also as members of a group.
Upon his first appearance in the clinic, Buster was given the
regular psychological examination, including a battery of six-yearold tests, which he solved efficiently and planfully. His mental
age on the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon scale was 7 years,
3 months. He was able to recognize and name both small and capital letters on a printed page, to count by one's, five's, ten's, to one
hundred, and to do the "plus one" table.
As a result of the first contact, it was decided that Buster was
of somewhat superior mentality and well qualified to become a
member of the experimental group.
In the three months during which Buster attended clinic, he
learned to write all the letters of the alphabet in small and capital
letters; to read all of the Winston Primer and the first few pages
of the Winston First Reader; to spell most three letter words and
a few four letter words; to do addition and subtraction of digits to
the sum of ten, and the two multiplication table.
BUSTER 215
During the lesson period, Buster was usually cooperative and
anxious to learn. He fatigued rather easily if kept at a given task
too long, a reaction expected at his age level, but it was seldom
difficult to arouse new interest and enthusiasm by the presentation
of a new problem. Thus, our program usually started with reading, which was continued until there was evidence of fatigue; then
spelling for a short period of possibly ten minutes, followed by some
drill on the recognition of new words found in the reading lesson
of the day. Arithmetic seemed to have a very special appeal for
Buster, and was often used to revive a fluctuating interest. When
tired of writing, which was especially difficult and by far the poorest of Buster's performances, he would ask to be allowed to do some
arithmetic. It was not difficult to hold him down to the completion
of a writing lesson by the prospect of getting on to addition or multiplication when the writing lesson was finished.
The fact that Buster became fatigued so easily gave evidence
of a lack of energy which lowered his endurance. These factors
seemed to be bound up with his general health condition which is
reported as merely "fair." On the other hand, Buster attacks
his new problems with such vivacity and carries on with such a
show of concentrated analytical and persistent attention until the
fatigue element enters, that he is likely to do as much or even more
than a child who is less alert and interested, but who is able to
resist fatigue.
Buster's school work on the whole was entirely satisfactory
and his case has helped to show the value of the experiment by
proving that a child of intelligence rated slightly better than average was able, in three months of concentrated individual instruction for an hour a day, to do the work required of a child in a
regular grade in a prescribed school day.
So much for individual instruction, but we must not lose sight
of the possibilities of group organization.
During the play hour, in which the children worked together,
Buster displayed a distinctly social attitude. He was pleased to
be a member of the group, friendly and cooperative. He seemed
quick to observe and understand the behavior of the other children.
Always he was willing to consider the other fellow in his plans for
Play!
Buster took great pleasure in his own accomplishments and
proudly took home evidences of work performed, whether it was
a lesson in writing, or a toy made during the play hour.
21G THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Buster displays the ability to solve new problems, which enables him to achieve new successes with little effort. His analytic
and persistent concentration of attention figure largely in his successes. Buster's home environment is a decided asset to a child of
his type, so that it is possible for him to go on being the " Pride
and Joy," not only of his small family circle, but of his teachers
and instructors who will naturally welcome a child of his status
as he progresses academically.
