General Paralysis
==================

264 Art. IX.?.*
:Author:  Philip Zenker, A.M., M.D.
To the majority of physicians insanity in many of its aspects
is a sealed book. Their intimate relations with people of all
ranks and all grades of intelligence sharpens their natural
powers of discrimination, and enables them to say in this or
that case, there is a departure from the normal, there is a
degree of mental unsoundness. But, as regards the different
types of insanity, their development, modes of manifestation,
and pathological substrata, they are usually not informed. Nor
can it be demanded of the busy practitioner that he should
possess that special knowledge, whose attainment demands of
the specialist years of diligent study, the services of the latter
being always at his call. But there is one form of insanity
which attacks" the most valuable members of society, ablebodied, hard-working, intelligent men, which comes on insidiously and threatens the deepest interests of the family and
society, that every physician should know, and know well. It
is that usually termed general paralysis of the insane, or dementia paralytica.

To the intelligent being there is nothing more interesting
than observing the development of intellect, to see it budding
in the crowing infant and prattling child, unfolding its powers
in the youth whose increasing knowledge and growing mastery
over self display his strengthening character, or achieving its
wonderful conquests in the realms of industry, science or art in
the adult man. But the study of this disease brings before us
quite an opposite development. We will have to do with the
decay, the saddest chapter in the history of intellect. In its
retrograde course it will not infrequently remind us of the intellectual status of the infant and the child.
Within the limits of a brief article we will necessarily be
enabled to do but partial justice to our subject. Many points
we must pass in complete silence. Some, even of importance,
can be barely mentioned. Again, others we will try to enter
into fully, especially such as are of great practical value, or
whose thorough comprehension may be necessary for a proper
understanding of the disease.

General paralysis is essentially an affection of the anterior
portion of the cerebrum, of that part which the study of comparative anatomy and anthropology indicates to be the seat of
intelligence, and "which modern experimental investigations
indicate to contain the motor centres. And it is morbid manifestations of intelligence and of the motor functions occurring
simultaneously and progressing co-relatively that constitute the
essential features of this disease.

The pathological anatomy consists of changes in the membranes of the brain, usually most marked in the anterior portions, and changes in the cortex and subcortical region affecting
chiefly the anterior cerebral convolutions. The minute changes
in the brain substance are still matters of controversy. In this
place, where we wish to enter into important practical considerations only, we will not complicate our study with the many
theories and facts in this relation, but content ourselves with
the knowledge that the result of the pathological processes is
atrophy of the brain.*

With the question of causation we will also be brief. The
disease occurs chiefly in men, only in adults and at the prime
of life. Hereditary influences, or other predisposition to cerebral disease, as former disease or structural defect, seem here to
play little or no part. It appears to be caused directly by the
injurious influences with which one has to contend in the
struggle for existence. We find the disease usually' in those
who have just been performing unusually prolonged and difficult
intellectual work. But as mental overwork scarcely ever has
that disastrous influence exerted by passion or other undue
strain of the affective life, so we can seldom, if ever, attribute
the production of the disease to intellectual strain alone ; but
will find also a history of unusual excitement, of anxiety, or
perhaps most frequently of great disappointments. In proof of
the overwhelming weight of these factors the disease is especially rife after great financial crises or political revolutions.
The importance and frequency of these causes are universally
recognised. Some believe that alcoholism, excessive venery
and syphilis (?) are frequently causes of the disease. It occurs
with different degrees of frequency in different nationalities.
In the highlands of Scotland and Ireland its occurrence is
* In advanced stages of the disease the atrophy is very apparont. Meynort has
further established, by weighing separate portions of the brain in a large number
of instances, that the atrophy is most marked in the anterior cerebral convolutions.
The pathological processes that lead to such atrophy are still subjects of discussion and far from being established. We will mention two of the most plausible
theories. The first, that of LubinofF, is that there is primarily a hyperaemia due
to disturbances of the sympathetic nervous system, this hyporaemia causing a
mechanical obstruction to the lymph circulation, and thence leading to further
changes. There is much that speaks for the correctness of this view. The second
theory referred to is that the disease is an insterstitial encephalitis.
rare. Steinen declared that it is hardly known in Java. Its
frequency has been ascertained in some coloured races. Altogether it can scarcely be doubted that it is most frequently
found in the most highly civilized countries, just as it is most
frequently found in highly intellectual individuals.*
We come now to the symptomatology, the most important
part of our subject.

He, who has previously been active and diligent in his
business transactions, is observed to become listless in his manner and careless of his affairs. Instead of going to his place of
business he lies listlessly about the house, or he appears to be
absent-minded, forgets his hat and cane, or perhaps takes an
entirely purposeless drive. It is usually said that at this time
his memory is already weaker, as he cannot recall the events of
the day, cannot tell what he has just eaten at a meal, &c. But,
we would little comprehend his mental condition should Ave
attribute such occurrences to mere impairment of memory.
The latter, as ordinarily understood, is as yet unaffected. The
events of a past time can be as readily recalled as ever before.
It is only of present occurrences that he takes little cognizance
and has no recollection. It is because his power of attention is
beginning to fail that he notices only slightly things about him,
and therefore does not remember them. In this disease the
highest faculties of intellect are first to fail. Memory can
scarcely be called one of its highest faculties. See the many
gifted men with but ordinary memories, and occasionally a but
poorly gifted individual with marvellous powers of recollection.
But the powers of attention, concentration, abstraction, are
most marked in the highest intellects and when the mind is in
its best condition. Our patient, in whom these high attributes
are failing, is in the condition of a day dreamer. He but
follows the association of ideas as they uncontrolledly flit
through his consciousness. He has lost the power of attention
which brings things singly into consciousness, and makes them
to be easily remembered.

With the failure of the power of attention is early associated
an impairment of the judgment. He mismanages his business.
He entertains senseless projects. And soon those delusions
begin to appear, which, to the laity, have always been the most
noticeable and marvellous features of this disease, which the
French have termed delire des grandeus, the delirium of
grandeur. Faint indications of this kind may be early detected,
but the outspoken delusions are only present when the judg* In a paper read at the last International Medical Congress on the " Race
Relationship of General Paralysis," the author suggests that the uso of the potato
for a diet is perhaps the cause of the infrequoncy of the disease in Ireland!
ment is entirely in abeyance. At this time anything that is
desirable seems possible to him. If the patient be a female
delusions are most likely to be on the subject of dress. Though
she be attired in rags she speaks proudly of her silks and
satins, of her jewels and precious stones. In man the delusions
are usually of riches, of power or glory. In his squalid den he
gratuitously dispenses millions, and proclaims himself a prince
or a sovereign. And, further, on account of his low state of
intellectuality, his delusions are constantly changing.
The grandiose character of the delusions of this disease has
been attributed to irritation of the cortical hemispheres. But,
it seems to me, an explanation based upon psychological data
would be clearer and, perhaps, more correct.

In the great majority of cases a feeling of elation and well
being is dominant during the whole course of the disease. The
patient never has any feeling of illness but seems to overflow
with a sense of health and power. Hutchinson has well insisted
upon the fact that temperament is usually but the expression of
the state of physical health or bodily comfort. In cases of
strutting health with the prevailing feeling of well being we
will ordinarily find a sanguine temperament, while a melancholic is perhaps the result of past disease or present suffering.
Nowhere else, so much as in general paralysis, does this feeling
of physical health so domineer every thought and utterance. It
renders the disposition an exceedingly joyous one, and it makes
of every vagrant fancy an uttered delusion. The infant, with
its sense of muscular power, stretches his hand towards the
moon in order to grasp it. The paralytic who has scarcely
more judgment than the infant, and whose weakened intellect,
unobservant of external things, dwells only on the ego, in his
sense of health and power believes everything belongs to him,
that everything is possible to him.

But in the later stages of the disease, when a smile or laughing face is nearly always present, and the, most absurd delusions
the only utterance, we must not suppose these to express an
active joyousness or ambitious projects. He has arrived at that
stage where life is scarcely more than animal life, and actions
and words scarcely more than reflex actions. We all have seen
how happy a mother is when she for the first time sees her
infant's smile in response to her own. She thinks she sees
a happy soul behind that smile, and knows not that it was
merely the reflex of her own act. In our patient, in this last
stage of the disease, his smile scarcely expresses a deeper feeling
than the infant's. His face is only a mirror of what is passing
about him. If you smile before him his face broadens in
laughter; if you assume a mournful countenance he breaks
into tears. His uttered delusions are but the remembered
words and phrases of a former life.

Coincidently with the impairment of the intellect the
emotions and the will become equally affected. As the power
of observing external tilings and the judgment become weaker,
the higher kinds of feeling, those which give tone to our character, the aesthetic, the ethical, &c., become fainter, and only
the lower, the tranritory, those excited by sensuous perceptions,
arise in the consciousness. The will yields equally. Actions
become impulsive, responding to the fleeting emotions, the controlling influences, which give their determined and purposive
character, being lost. We can thus easily account for the impulsive and irresponsible actions of the paralytic, and have only
to add that the intensity of his emotions and the energy of his
actions have also become much enfeebled.

We have now reviewed the general changes in the intellect
and character of the paralytic in their general decay. We
have attempted to view them from the higher standpoint
of their psychological causes, as learned from the natural
development and decay of mind. We have given no full
description of his mental condition, of the many delusions he
may entertain, of the mental weakness displayed, as much
in the easy manner in which he is diverted from his schemes
as in the schemes themselves, in his utter incapacity to judge
of the acts and motives of others as well as his own, and,
further, of his defective moral sensibility and of his apparently
motiveless actions. We cannot pretend to give a full description
of this ever-varying picture. To do that it would be necessary
to mention all the possible conclusions of a weakening judgment,
all the feelings of a narrowed egotistical existence, and all the
actions of a wavering mind. But, where it exists, the competent observer will be able to recognise the picture of mental
weakness. For he, who has learned to know the springs of
human actions, who knows something of the capabilities of the
human mind, will be able to judge whether the performances
of the individual correspond to the ability with which he has
been hitherto credited, whether his actions are prompted by
such motives as in a normal mind.

We come now to the second set of symptoms, the motor
phenomena of this disease. These are of great interest for they
recall and corroborate facts gained by experimental investigation. The paralyses are cortical in their origin. Experiment
has shown that cortical lesions leave but very slight paralyses,
which are chiefly manifested in complex movements. This is
the exact character of the paralyses of this disease. They are
mostly not readily observable, and are brought out by complex
movements requiring the delicate play of muscles. The paralyses usually observed are those of the facial muscles, dilatation
of the pupil (usually on the same side as the affection of the
facial, and that generally on the right side), and tremor of the
Hps and tongue. Of these we will again speak when on the
subject of diagnosis.

We have said that the above are the usual paralytic manifestations of general paralysis. We might add they are in the
great majority of cases the only paralyses due to the cerebral
lesions. But?and here we are approaching the most inexplicable part of our subject?in very many cases of this disease
there are spinal as well as cerebral lesions. It is a striking
fact that in the most common of the organic diseases of the
cord, locomotor ataxy, cerebral symptoms due to lesions of the
optic, third, sixth, and other nerves are often present, and in
this, the most common organic disease of the brain, spinal
lesions are frequently found. For the connection of the spinal
with the cerebral disease, as in the other case the appearance of
the cerebral symptoms with spinal disease, there has as yet been
no satisfactory explanation.*

The spinal symptoms are mainly those of paraplegia. The
impaired gait may be like that of lotomotor ataxy, due to
incoordination of movements, or the spastic gait of spastic
spinal paralysis, or merely a weakness of the muscles not characterised by either of the above types. The pathological
anatomy is sometimes that of typical locomotor ataxy, sclerosis
of the posterior columns. Sometimes myelitis of the anterolateral columns.f In cases with the symptoms and pathological
changes of locomotor ataxy, the cerebral symptoms of that
disease, myosis, paralysis of the occular muscles, &c., are often
present.

The spinal symptoms may precede those of mental derange* The explanation that when the posterior fasciculi are affected, there has been
ascending disease from the cord, -when the lateral columns are affected, descending
disease from the brain to the cord, is not tenable. _ There has been no anatomical
evidence of such a continuity of disease, and clinical histories are often not in
accordance -with such a development.

t In the last number of the Archiv f. Psychiatric und Nerven Jcrankheitcn,
Zachler reported a case with the ordinary manifestations of what has been termed
spastic spinal paralysis, paresis, muscular rigidity, exaggerated tendon reflexes, &c.,
in the lower extremities, in which he found no changes in the cord. Hence, he
has claimed that these symptoms may be duo jto cerebral rather than spinal diseases. Although the set of symptoms just mentioned which Erb and Charcot have
attributed to disease of the pyramidal tracts in the cord have not yet with certainty been associated with any exact pathological changes, yet in the great
majority of such cases, where post-mortem examinations have been made, very
decided spinal lesions have been found. So that, notwithstanding the above mentioned case, I believe, we need not hesitate to assign that complex of symptoms to
spinal, and not cerebral lesions.

ment, but more frequently they occur later. Westphal, who
discovered that the absence of the patellar tendon reflex is
nearly always a sign of disease of the posterior columns of the
cord, has enabled us to detect spinal lesions even when the
symptoms of such disease are not present. He has thereby
been enabled to determine that spinal disease occurs more
frequently in general paralysis than is usually supposed, and
has proved on the post-mortem table the correctness of the
diagnosis of spinal disease where during life there was no spinal
symptom.

Before concluding the subject of symptomatology we will
mention a few facts, exceedingly important in themselves, but
of which our limited time will allow but the mere mention :
that is the occasional occurrence of epileptic or apoplectic
attacks, and the not infrequent outbreak of acute maniacal
excitement.

The occurrence of peculiar disturbances of vision, first
noted by Fiirstner, and since then by a few others, and the
effort to bring them in relation with certain changes in the
cortex, have an interest for the physiologist, rather than any
clinical importance.

We just now enter into that part of our subject, practically
so important, the diagnosis of the disease.
When the patient has become a maniac, when his speech
consists of mere utterances of his delusions which amuse even a
child, the physician is no longer called upon for a diagnosis,
though even then mistakes of a kind to be later mentioned are
sometimes made. The family no longer needs his advice to
avert financial ruin or personal calamity, and the patient has
probably been removed for safe keeping to the asylum of the
alienist. It is in the inception of the disease when the weakening judgment, the germinating delusions of the one still considered by society as a responsible agent is leading him into
ruinous enterprises and senseless extravagancies, possibly to be
attended by an outbreak of madness which threatens human
life, that the ready perception of the physician, a correct
diagnosis proves of inestimable value. And at this time a
correct diagnosis is peculiarly difficult.

In the beginning the changes are usually slight such as are
only noticeable to those intimately acquainted with the patient.
There may be some change in his disposition, but what is
especially noticeable is that he does not observe and take
interest in things as before, neglects his own affairs. Already
there is some impairment of the intellectual faculties. But the
examiner must be pardoned if he cannot yet detect a slight
defect in one whose mental powers equal, and possibly surpass.
his own ; for, as we liave already stated, it is the gifted, the
intellectual, who are most frequently affected. At least the
practitioner will require all his acuteness to enable him to form
a correct estimate of the mental condition of his patient at this
time. He must rely partly on those who know the patient
intimately, as to changes in his mental status. He must,
observe whether there is an apparent spirit of boastfulness, not
formerly present (the first indication of the delirium ot grandeur) ; try to determine whether the patient can perform higher
intellectual tasks, mathematical, conversational, &c., as well as
before, test patient's memory and reasoning powers, in short,
test patient's intellect in every possible direction. If the disease
be already well advanced his task will be easy, in the beginning it may be beyond his powei\ At the same time he
must look for motor symptoms, differences in the pupils, paresis
of facial muscles, tremor of lips and tongue, or difficulties of
speech.

If these and the mental symptoms are observed (and fortunately for the diagnosis the two, even in the beginning, are
usually found together) the diagnosis, even in the inception of
the disease, is established with a high degree of certainty.
The paralytic symptoms, as before mentioned, are very
slight and may be difficult to detect. If you will permit we
will dwell briefly on the best methods of making such slight
manifestations cognizable. To detect slight differences in the
pupils let patient look at some surface evenly lighted, as the
whitened ceiling, and the observer stand in such a position as
not to shade either eye. If the facial paralysis is not observed
in the drooping of one corner of the mouth, or the less prominence of the naso-labial fold on one side when the face is in a
state of rest, slight changes of this kind may become more
distinct after the patient has spoken for some time; or may be
made apparent through his squeezing the hand of the physician,
when the involuntary facial expression thus elicited will reveal
slight differences in the muscular innervation of the two sides
of the face.

The ordinary modes of detecting facial paralysis, by the
patient exposing his teeth or laughing, are such coarse movements that they conceal rather than reveal the slight motor
defects. The tremor of the lips and tongue can also be best
detected after the patient has been speaking for some time.
But the best test of slight changes in the speech-making
organs, and one of the most reliable of the diagnostic symptoms,
is the affection of speech. We do not find the scanning speech
so characteristic of multiple sclerosis, but one of a different
character. There is a kind of stumbling in his articulation.
Words are brought out with difficulty, and are frequently cut
short, letters or entire syllables being clipped off.
We repeat, such slight paralyses are characteristic of general
paralysis. Only at a late period does the tremor of lips and
tongue sometimes become excessive, the speech become altogether unarticulate, or the facial paralysis very decided. As
regards the other motor symptoms, of spinal origin, they will
seldom aid us to make a diagnosis of general paralysis.
Let us consider the distinctive character of the delusions of
this disease. The delire des grandeurs occurs in other kinds
of insanity, but there is something distinctive of it as here
manifested. In other forms of insanity, where the delusions of
greatness are present (excepting in some forms of dementia,
kindred to general paralysis, to which we will later refer) the
delusions have a certain logical basis, and are more or less
permanently in one form. If one believes himself to be a
prince, that delusion is based upon some erroneous conceptions,
which have become a part of his mental existence, and "will
remain steadfastly with him. But in our case, as already
stated, those delusions result from an entire absence of judgment. They are the mere expression of a vagrant fancy. They
are characterised by their senselessness and their variability.
Complications which may make the disease difficult of recognition are the occurrence of apoplectic or epileptic seizures,
or an outbreak of acute mania. Sometimes the disease is
ushered in by one of these conditions. In that case a diagnosis
is, as yet, impossible (though in some cases, even during the
period of maniacal excitement, indications of mental weakness
or the presence of the peculiar paralysis will reveal the true
condition). If such a complication occurs during the course of
the disease the diagnosis must be based on the previous
history.

We must now speak of the diagnosis of the fully developed
disease. First in importance and frequency, among the diseases which may be confounded with it, is alcoholism. Chronic
alcoholism may produce all the symptoms of general paralysis.
Or the two diseases are not infrequently present at the same
time. In cases of chronic alcoholism with symptoms of general
paralysis we must abide by the rule so often imposed upon us
in obscure cases, that is, allow of a certain lapse of time before
making a diagnosis. The importance of this rule in such cases
cannot be over estimated. For want of it mistakes are only too
frequently made.

A second class of cases which may be mistaken for general
paralysis is that where coarse lesions of the brain, most frequently due to hemorrhage or embolism, are followed by
dementia. In such the paralysis are usually more decided than
in general paralyses, and point to a focal lesion. But the
history will settle the diagnosis.

There is another class of cases, but a very rare one, in
which a correct diagnosis is far more difficult; that is, cases of
localised meningitis (usually primarily pachymeningitis, perhaps hemorrhagic) occurring especially in the neighbourhood of
the central convolutions. That cases of this kind are often
classed under general paralysis cannot be doubted. The diagnosis is often impossible. The course of the disease will alone
(but not always) be able to clear it.

Lastly, we will only mention multiple sclerosis and cerebral
syphilis, instances of which diseases being sometimes exceedingly difficult to distinguish from general paralysis. We must
look for special symptoms of these diseases, and if these will
not determine their character, we must again rely upon the
course of the disease.

We have frequently mentioned the " course of the disease/'
This is clinically of the greatest importance. We know the
disease rather by its course than its symptoms. The symptoms
may be found in various other conditions, but the disease has
a particular course peculiar to itself. Its average duration is
three years. It almost invariably terminates fatally. Its
duration is usually longer in woman than in man, longer in
cases of a melancholic type than in others; and in some cases
in which there are periods of improvement or apparent recovery its duration is indefinite. There is usually a gradual
progress in all the symptoms, mental and motor, from bad to
worse. Sometimes there are sudden and rapid changes, as an
apoplectic attack followed by a considerable increase of the
dementia; sometimes an improvenent of indefinite duration.
Death is sometimes caused by a gradual failing of all the bodily
functions ; more frequently it is caused by an apoplectic attack,
decubitus, pneumonia, tuberculosis, or disease of the bladder or
kidneys.

In the preceding description we have given the symptoms
of the usual or classical type of the disease. Other symptoms
may be present, producing quite a different appearance from
the ordinary picture. Sometimes instead of the usual slow
manner of thinking and acting, there is a very flood of ideas, an
unusual vivacity in thought and manner. Not infrequently
there are outbreaks of maniacal excitement, when, it must
never be forgotten, the patient becomes dangerous to his
surroundings. Again we meet with conditions of mental depression. There are cases in which a depressed hypochondriacal
state of mind marks the whole duration of the disease. In
some instances delusions, usually so characteristic of this
disease, are never detected. Hallucinations may or may not
be apparent in a particular case. Spasmodic muscular affections complicate the history in some instances.
And so we might add other symptoms which give peculiar
appearances in certain cases. But, and this is the important
part which cannot be too much emphasized, whatever the
clinical manifestation presented, the diagnosis is based upon
the impairment of the intellectual faculties, and the peculiar
paralyses, and is confirmed by the course of the disease.
The following cases are very briefly described to illustrate
the preceding remarks. Cases illustrative of the incipient
stages of the disease would be more valuable, but the material
is lacking. For the opportunity to examine these patients and
their histories, I am indebted to Dr Harmon, of Longview
Asylum :?

T. D., age 34, bank clerk; duration of disease, two years;
excessive venery, also addicted to excessive use of alcohol. The
first history of mental disorder is that of delusions of various
kinds. His speech was soon observed to be slow and hesitating,
his talk foolish, did not recognise his surroundings, believed
himself to be in a barracks. Habits filthy.

At the end of eighteen months he had an attack of durable
hemiplegia. Since then more pronounced delusions, especially
of wealth.

Present condition. Secondary contractions and rigidity of
muscles of right arm and leg. Facial paralysis on the right
side. Eight pupil larger than the left. Tongue tremulous.
Speech indistinct. Mind almost a blank.

In this case the diagnosis is based on the history. The dementia is the only symptom present pointing directly to general
paralysis. The high degree of paralysis would, were it not for
the history, lead us to exclude this disease. It is one of these
rare cases in which an attack of hemiplegia, occurring in the
course of this disease, is durable. The subsequent contractures
lead to the inference that the disease lias been complicated
with a cerebral hemorrhage. Yet purely cortical lesions have
appeared in some cases to produce secondary degeneration of
the pyramidal tracts, with subsequent rigidity of the paralysed
muscles. We will again call attention to the fact that the
mental condition became rapidly worse after the attack of
hemiplegia.

Gr. R., age 35, farmer, married ; duration ten years; cause
unknown. In the beginning it was noticed that his actions
appeared to be aimless, that lie appeared to be always contented
and happy, was always smiling. Soon observed delusions of
wealth, also tremulousness of lips and tongue, and difficulty of
speech.

Present condition. Paresis of facial muscles on the right
side. Tremor of lips, tongue, and hands. Gait feeble. Can
obtain no utterance from him. He appears to be entirely
demented.

In this case there is the typical history, but the complete
silence, and the absence of every facial expression, are unusual
in this disease. We can only account for them by supposing
complete dementia.

PART II. VOL. VIII. NEW SERIES.
