Another Failure Of The Lunacy Law Reformers
============================================

187 ART. III.?
By HENRY SUTHERLAND, M.D.
On the 3rd of May last a futile attempt was made by certain
misguided members of the House of Commons to effect a so-
called reform in the lunacy laws of this country. The prime
mover of this attempt has yet to learn that union is strength,
and that to dissipate his powers upon two distinct subjects
instead of concentrating them upon one, is not the most rapid
or the most certain method to ensure success.
We are told that the honourable member " rose to call
attention to the impropriety and danger of permitting private
persons to make pecuniary profit by keeping in their custody
lunatics of the wealthier classes, and to the unfairness of
requiring the ratepayers to maintain lunatics of the middle and
lower classes." The last of these two propositions is easily
dealt with. If the honourable member had only taken the
trouble to get up any information at all before he addressed the
House on so important a subject, he would have found that at
all country and borough asylums there is a system of payment
enforced upon the relatives of the lunatic to assist in defraying
his expenses at the asylum; that in quite recent numbers of
the medical journals, the eminent superintendent of the Kent
County Asylum advertises to receive private patients at the
uniform rate of seventeen shillings a week ; and that at St.
Luke's Hospital, Northampton, Cheadle, and many other similar
establishments, those patients are received gratis who are
unable to pay, and, at the same time others are admitted, at
varied charges, whose means enable them to contribute part or
the whole of the sum necessary for their maintenance. Conse-
quently the ratepayers are not so hardly used as he would lead
us to suppose.
But it is the first of the honourable member's propositions
that we have chiefly to consider. During the last few years we
have heard a great deal of sensational nonsense about private
asylums. The instigators of this so-called reform remind us of
a parcel of dirty little boys splashing up the mud in the gutter,
and not caring how many of the passers by they may bespatter.
The Home Secretary, the Commissioners in Lunacy, old esta-
blished private asylum proprietors, medical men who take single
188 ANOTHER FAILURE OF THE
patients, and attendants, all come in for an equal share of
indiscriminate abuse.
The reformers add to their number a few discontented escaped
lunatics, and band themselves together under the leadership of
a few third-rate sensational novel writers. A friendly member
of Parliament is persuaded by these infatuated individuals to
bring a motion before the House. This agitation culminates in
a Commission of Inquiry. Interested and disinterested wit-
nesses are examined. Many days are consumed in sifting the
evidence concerning the supposed abuses of asylum life. And
with what result ? That out of thousands of lunatics incar-
cerated in a period of not less than twelve years, no single case
of illegal detention can be proved.
Some of the statements made by the honourable member
and his seconders are in truth rather startling. Whence does
he obtain his facts and statistics in support of his affirmation
that " it is quite possible to retard the cure of a lunatic by
the administration of drugs " ? Is one of his seconders aware of
the fact that private asylums are inspected six times in the
year by the Commissioners in Lunacy, whose visits are at
uncertain and unexpected hours and periods ? And is such a
mode of inspection compatible with the statement that " there
could not be such a thorough inspection and publicity as were
desirable" ? How often, may we ask, would he have the
already over-worked Commissioners make their periodical visi-
tations ? Then, again, another honourable member informs
the House that the proprietor of an asylum chooses the medical
men, who sign the certificate, and then, he adds, " the trick
is done "; that is to say, a sane person is incarcerated. Where
did this piece of information come from ? Another equally
well-informed member next informs the House, that " private
asylums ought to be subject to the inspection both of the
Lunacy Commissioners and the magistrates." Does this gen-
tleman know anything of the law of lunacy, or of what is
actually done regarding the metropolitan and county licensed
houses ? To crown all these mistakes, another zealous member
informs the House that there are not less than 6,300 private
asylums in the country; and a few moments later makes the
statement that there are 6,454 private lunatics in the country,
which is equivalent to saying that there is about one private
asylum to every private lunatic. It is true that the honour-
able member afterwards corrected this statement; but when
our legislators rise in the House to make accusations against a
respectable body of people, it is as well that they should at
least master the bare statistics of the subject upon which such
accusations are grounded.
LUNACY LAW REFORMERS. 189
But the debate was not one-sided. Other members, whose
speeches had a ring of genuine knowledge about them, main-
tained that there had not been proved a greater number of
cases of assault in private than in public asylums; that the
average period of detention was shorter in private (two years
and five months) than in public asylums (three years and seven
months) ; that the percentage of cures in private asylums was
50 per cent, as compared with 44 per cent, in public asylums ;
and finally, that it was impossible that any person could be
confined in an asylum, unless not less than six independent sets
of people conspired to commit a most dangerous fraud, and
one, moreover, which could not fail to be easily and speedily
discovered.
The motion met with the fate which it deserved?a complete
failure. The House divided, and the numbers were :?
For the motion . . . . .34
Against . . . ? ? .81
Majority . . ? 47
The motion was therefore negatived.
Before leaving this subject we should like to ask the
honourable members who originated this motion one or two
questions.
Does it occur to them that by any possibility the proprietors
of private asylums can be gentlemen?gentlemen, moreover,
who on admission to the medical profession have taken a
solemn oath to act honourably to their patients and to the
. public ?
Do they think that an asylum which had the reputation of
keeping all its patients incarcerated, and of effecting no cures,
would be likely to have a long or a prosperous existence ?
Are they aware that public asylum superintendents are the
pick of the profession, both in social position and in scientific
attainments, and that they have undergone an amount of
competition to obtain their appointments, which is unknown
in any other profession ?
Do they know that certain private asylum proprietors have
enjoyed the confidence of the public for a period, in some cases
extending over three, and even four generations ? And do
they think it likely that such proprietors would for a paltry
sum of money do anything to endanger the reputation which
their asylums have so justly held for so many years ?
Many other questions might be asked of a similar character,
but we venture to affirm that if those members who have
raised their voices in favour of the abolition of a much-needed
and honourably conducted class of establishments, will only
consider the matter fairly, they will arrive at the conclusion
190 FAILURE OF TI1E LUNACY LAW REFORMERS.
that they have been misinformed, and that they had much
better leave things as they are. By their own statements the
ratepayers are already sufficiently burdened with the support
of insane paupers, and is it likely that they will consent to pay
for the maintenance of rich lunatics, whose relations are both
willing and able to afford them appropriate luxuries and com-
forts within the walls of one of the many well-conducted private
asylums in this kingdom ?
