Lunacy for Scotland
====================

200 Art. VIII.?
Twenty-fourth Annual Report of the Commissioners in
Lunacy for Scotland.
One of the most striking features brought out in the Report
of the Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland is the very con-
siderable increase in the number of pauper lunatics registered
during the past year. This increase exceeds that during any
year since the establishment of the Board, and amounted to 333,
the numbers being 337 pauper patients over and 4 private
patients under the numbers for 1880. The distribution also of
pauper patients in private dwellings continues to show con-
siderable increase, the number for the period under review
being 52 ; it should be remembered, however, in this connection
that in Scotland no pauper lunatics are accommodated in
private asylums, the public establishments alone receiving them.
The admission of voluntary patients in the year amounted
to 38, this number 11 less than in 1880, and the same figure
under the average admission between 1875?7 9. The names of
and particulars respecting these patients are preserved in a
separate record, and of the system according to which they are
admitted the Commissioners say :?
" We have for some years been able to state that nothing
has occurred to indicate any difficulty or disadvantage traceable
to the presence of this class of patients in asylums ; and we
continue to be of opinion that it is a useful provision of the law
which permits persons who desire to place themselves under
care in an asylum to do so in a way which does not require
them to go through forms from winch they naturally shrink,
and yet affords sufficient guarantee against abuse. At the
visits of the Medical Commissioners to asylums all voluntary
inmates are seen, and they have then an opportunity of making
statements in regard to their position, should they desire to
make any. Where there is reason to suppose that they in any
way fail to understand the conditions of their residence, we con-
sider it proper to explain these conditions ; but we have never
found that the nature of their position has been intentionally
concealed from them."
Discharges numbered, among recovered patients, no fewer
than 1,188, 206 private and 982 pauper. These figures are
both higher in respect to annual rates and to averages ; and it is
curious that a precisely similar relation exists also between the
LUNACY IX SCOTLAND. 261
deaths recorded in 1881 and in previous years. Thus during
the year there were, among private patients, 206 recoveries, or
39 in excess of the previous year, and 12 above the average for
the five years 1875-79; of paupers, 982 recoveries, 41 more
than 1880, and 121 over the average for the quinquennial
named above. One hundred private patients died during 1881,
or 8 more than in 1880, and 1 above the average for 1875-79;
and of paupers, 539 removed by death, 21 more than in 1881,
and 57 above the average. Of course the figures quoted above
must be regarded throughout in connection with the population
movements already noticed, and especially with regard to the
increase in pauper lunacy; but even then the disproportion is a
considerable one, and when reduced to a percentage comparison,
still shows decided increase on the preceding year. In 1880,
the total rate among private patients was 6*6 ; in 1881 it rose
to 7*1 ; among paupers it amounted to 8*0 per cent, in both
years.
The Commissioners devote a good deal of attention to con-
sideration of the causes which have operated to increase the
amount of pauper lunacy so considerably, and are able to show
very conclusively that the rise is mainly attributable to the
Government grant in aid of pauper lunatics. This grant was
first given in 1875, and was immediately followed by a large
increase in the class of insane it was designed to relieve. The
questions involved in this greater outlay of public money have
presented themselves to the Commissioners, who declare a
belief that " To some extent the increase in the number of
persons treated in private dwellings as pauper lunatics is an
advantage both to them and to the public. But," they add, " in
so far as it is a placing upon the State of burdens, which indi-
viduals are capable of bearing and which it is their duty to
bear, it cannot be productive of benefit. The persistent and
rapid increase in the number of persons placed as pauper
lunatics in establishments is, however, unless it can be shown to
be necessary, an evil of great magnitude. The unnecessary
detention of any patient in an asylum is to be deprecated as in
itself an evil. But when it is considered that, according to the
average cost of asylums, such an increase in the number of
pauper inmates in district asylums as has taken place last year
involves, for the mere ccst of land and building, an addition ot
from ?30,000 to ?50,000 to the burdens on the county rates,
besides the expense incurred by the parishes in maintaining them,
it becomes evident that even on financial grounds it is impor-
tant that the increase should not be greater than the welfare of
the insane and the interests of the public will justify."
It would seem that the consequence of the grant his been
262 LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
to ameliorate the condition of the poorer classes of lunatics in
Scotland, and, so far, even though at no small expense, it must
be held' to have produced satisfactory results. No doubt the
steady increase in yearly expenditure occasioned by it will
demand very careful consideration, but the conclusion of the
Commissioners already points to the direction it must have for
the future. After fully considering the various ways in which
the influences due to the grants have been exerted, and the
effects observed, brought about, they sum up the whole question
thus :?" Both of the objects of the grant, or reasons for giving
it, are to a large extent not fulfilled, and it does not appear
that the extent of the fulfilment will be increased by increasing
the grant. It has now reached an amount which may be con-
sidered a fair contribution from the State to a local tax over
the expenditure of which the State exercises a certain control,
and it seems probable that all the objects of the grant would be
as fully attained as heretofore if it were fixed for the next five
or more years at the amount expended lest year?the adminis-
tration of it remaining substantially as at present."
During 1881 the lurge number of 310 escapes from Scotch
asylums took place. Of these, 206 were brought back within
24 hour?, 61 in less than a week, and 21 after more than seven
days. The remaining 22 were not returned during the course
of the authority on which they were originally detained. They
are accounted for thus: 3 recovered, 1 improved; 7 were
relieved, 9 were unimproved, 2 were reported as still insane.
The number (310) of escapes was the largest ever occurring in
a single year, but did not represent the highest percentage
proportion on the whole number of lunatics under control, this
having been attained in 1876 of the present decade, when 272
patients, or 39 per 1,000, escaped; the proportion for 1881
reaches 37 per 1,000.
Accidents during 1881 numbered 141, 11 ending fatally.
In several instances there is tolerably certain proof of self-
destruction ; but, as the Commissioners point out, it is always a
difficult matter to prove the actual suicidal purpose in many
instances. The deaths recorded were brought about under
various circumstances. One male patient cut his throat in a
very determined manner; another was choked through oeso-
phageal obstruction by food, and consequent pressure on the
trachea; a woman died from the effect of a burn ; a man was
poisoned by accidentally drinking a liquor intended for dipping
sheep ; a woman was killed through having a tooth thrust down
her gullet; and two patients, one male and one female, were
found drowned. Two fatalities were caused by violence, one
resulting from injuries inflicted by one patient on another with
LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 263
a spade ; the other was due to violent treatment at the hands of
attendants, but in only a minor degree. An attendant was
killed by a patient he was bringing in from the grounds, and
who retained possession of a spade he had been working with.
The last accidental death was that of an epileptic patient who
fractured his skull by falling while in a fit.
There were five cases of attempted suicide, resulting mostly
in slight injury, and in no case terminating fatally. In 45
cases the accidents involved fractured bones or dislocated joints.
These were occasioned in 22 cases by falls, in 7 cases by assaults
made by fellow-patients, in 5 by struggling with fellow-patients
or attendants, and in 10 cases the cau?e was not ascertained.
The remaining accidents consisted of 17 injuries to the head by
falls, by assaults by patients, or by acts of the sufferers them-
selves ; 21 flesh wounds, abrasions, burns, and scalds; and 42
injuries of unimportant character. A considerable number of
the accidents as usual occurred in the cases of epileptics. The
Report speaks most favourably of the present condition of the
asylums under the Commissioners' supervision, and gives a
good account of the progress made in treatment during the year
dealt with ; it is enriched with many admirable and laboriously-
prepared tables, which afford abundant useful information on
the subject of lunacy in Scotland ; and in every respect the
Report is fully deserving of the earnest attention of every
practical alienist.
