Suicide
========

240x Art. VI.-SUICIDE.
No. 2.
It would be in the highest degree discouraging to an educational reformer to be told that the success of his endeavours to
persuade the masses into diligent cultivation of their intelligence
might be gauged by the frequency with which suicide was
committed. And yet, if we carefully analyse the nature of the
influence which culture exerts on self-destruction, we are driven
to the conclusion that it is an eminently evil one. Those
nations which occupy the vanguard of civilisation are to be
found contributing high percentages of suicides ; while the more
degraded peoples, intellectually, are less suicidally inclined
in proportion?all other things apart?as they are inferior in
mental qualifications. We cannot avoid considering this point
in connection with the equally important subject of the relation
between suicide and density of population, for it is apparent on
examination that there is a much more marked tendency to
self-destruction among inhabitants of large towns than among
a similar number of persons living scattered throughout a large
tract of country. There is no difficulty in presupposing that
this might be found to be so, but it is less easy to demonstrate
the conditions determining the difference. One great cause,
however, is that centralisation of intellectual energy in large
centres of population which is attendant on civilisation at all
times. In a city there are, proportionally number for number,
many more busy brain workers than exist among rural populations ; there are also collected together, under conditions arising
out of situation and necessity in towns, an infinitely larger
number of active thinkers and workers than could find reason
for exercising their capacities under the circumstances of
extra-urban existence. Consequently, if these conditions are in
any way such as to favour suicidal inclinations, they must of
necessity find a fostering growth wherever the signs of intellectual excitement exhibit themselves.
The narrowest definition of intelligence must perforce
include multitudinous manifestations of it; in daily life it is
not scholars only who display mental attributes of a high order ;
nor is it simply in schools and colleges and private studies that
worries incident to brain exhaustion, brought on by excessive
head work, are experienced. The train of civilisation drags
along as necessary elements of its greatness and growth, the
merchant, the speculator, and the practical professional man,
SUICIDE. 241
each of whom is as essential to human progress as the man of
books, through whose devotion and encouragement imaginative
studies maintain a place in the curriculum of every cultured
individual. Each one of these classes, moreover, is a possible,
nay more, a probable source from whence the ranks of suicides
are recruited.
In order, however, to arrive at some conclusion respecting
the manner in which the suicidal frenzy is developed in these
different sections of society, it is necessary to consider them, to
some extent, apart; and it will be profitable to deal, first, with
the more strictly professional. We must avow the truth, that
in the same degree as this class is increased, so does the deathrate from suicide grow also, and it is precisely in those countries
where the professions are more considerably recruited that
voluntary deaths show a higher figure. Indeed, the fact may
be stated yet more barely and clearly, by saying that as instruction becomes more universally imparted, as scholars and schools,
that is, increase, so do suicides become more numerous. That
this is strictly in keeping with what has already been asserted,
will be seen when it is reflected that, as the proportion of educated to the unlettered population increases, so also will the
number of aspirants for higher instruction, and for professional
status, be augmented; for there may be as much ambition
awakened in the breast of a youth whose parents have been
illiterate, while he has enjoyed the advantages of education, as
in the son of a man already occupying a professional position.
Moreover, the very freedom with which, in civilised countries,
higher professional posts are thrown open to ambitious competitors,
encourages a struggle that entails the worst evils as a nearer or
remote consequence. It may not be at once that the strain of
intellectual effort betrays itself, although it is no uncommon thing
for overwrought school children to show signs of the injury they
endure from over stimulation of their powers. Later on in life,
however, the system yields to excessive pressure brought to bear
on it, weakened in all such cases by undue exertions in previous
years, ere yet the full strength of maturity had been gained,
and the unfortunate victim of false education degenerates
either to a life-long lunatic, or at once ends existence by his
own act.
For this termination to many promising careers it is possible
to blame nothing so much as the antiquated method of education adopted in the present day. Though it is so far true that the
advancement of instruction and suicide appear to go hand in
hand in all civilised countries, yet it is by no means so certain
that the two need to be thus miserably associated. It must surely
be conceivable that mental training of young children might be
242 suicide.
conducted on principles which, though differing widely from
the method now in use, should nevertheless he equally useful
with it in developing to the utmost healthy extent the capacities of the mind entrusted to its exponent's care. The sad
truth that must be faced is the stern and cruel lesson of the
past, a lesson which teaches how invariably insufficient are the
methods so long deemed all-sufficing, how grossly inadequate to produce the looked for result, and how by prematurely
forcing the intelligences of school children, we have, in reality,
been creating in many instances the nucleus of a future lunatic
and possible suicide. Little as we know with certainty concerning the physical bases of madness, we are guilty of no presumption in judging that a wholly healthy brain forms no part of
the insane person's organism, or that until some sort of structural change (unrecognisable by existing aids to observation
though it may be) has taken place in the brain, the phenomena
of madness are not exhibited. Every such change, however,
must be set up through the action of a cause, and what
that cause precisely is forms the principal object of search to
the practical psychologist and alienist.
Eecent events largely serve to indicate that many other
forces are at work amidst the supposed influences of civilisation, to extend the area of mental affliction ; and that, considerable though it may be in determining suicidal forms of
madness, education is not alone in promoting those cerebral
disturbances that result in the development of insanity.
Difficult as it is to discuss the necessary relations between
emotional state and brain mischief, and careful as we must
needs be in defining the limits and meanings of the terms
employed, it is yet very essential that this aspect of the question should not be passed unnoticed. In the hvper-sensitive,
and hyper-emotional sections of society, but a slight incentive
is needed to develope even extravagant outbursts of excitement,
the direction of which is mainly determined by the ruling
influence of the time. We are familiar just now with that
phase of religious excitement, reaching in many cases to actual
temporary mania, which is associated with salvation revivalism,
and which most large towns in the country have witnessed to
some extent through the operations of the Salvation Army.
Apart entirely from all questions of the religious importance
of the movement, we are able to study it in the light of its
effect on the numbers who are brought within the play of
those forces which mainly contribute to the army's success.
Enthusiasm of an intense description undoubtedly animates at
least the subordinate members of the converted class, and its
numbers are so large, that many must be found in it always to
suicide. 243
respond in the fullest degree to calls upon imaginations wrought
up to a great pitch of excitement by the harangues, and the
accompanying bodily motion indulged in by salvation orators.
It may be deemed, perhaps, invidious to assume a connection
between these performances and the very serious increase in the
number of pauper lunatics in London and elsewhere. The
fact, nevertheless, is incontrovertible, that within the period
during which the Salvation Army has been most actively
engaged in its peculiar labours, the proportion of insane persons among the classes especially appealed to and influenced by
the new religious body has been visibly augmented. The
lesson taught by this is but a repetition of what has previously
been inculcated, and is to the effect that all purely emotional
disturbances of masses of people are attended with the development of a higher proportional degree of insanity. Nor is it
at all impossible to perceive that constant excitement, and the
presence of a ceaseless anxiety in respect to personal well-being,
must react in a serious manner upon the organisation of the
individual so affected, while the nervous system will in all such
cases be peculiarly liable to especial disturbances. The very
intensity of a convert's convictions will be detrimental to his
mental stability; in the same way as the extent to which he is
demonstrative under ' saving ' influences, will serve to indicate
the limits of his intellectual strength. The less educated a person,
the readier, in a general sense, will he be to adopt extravagant
modes of testifying the depth of his feelings and convictions;
while the more intelligent and cultured members of society,
though as deeply stirred, will yet be reticent in giving outward
expression to their thoughts and aspirations.
It is not being unduly, or ungenerously critical, to trace
the connection between emotional excitement of an extreme
degree and cerebral disturbances which demand careful treatment of those in whom they are exhibited. Keen observers,
men unlikely to be misled by appearances, are convinced that
such connection does exist, and do not hesitate to give public
expression to their beliefs ; while also we have the unquestionable evidence afforded by the Commissioners in Lunacy that,
from some cause or other, the proportion of insane persons to
mentally sound is undergoing increase.
The search after principles in this connection is one of the
darkest and least promising that can be engaged in ; and in
order to insure any degree of successful prosecution, it is
essential that every chance path that offers any prospect of
leading to a truth shall be followed as far as possible. For this
reason we may for a moment consider how far, and in what
way, that phase of intellectual activity, which finds expres^PAKT II. VOL. VIII. NEW SERIES. S
244 suicide.
sion in the movements of so-called liberators, affects the
growth of suicides. That it does influence it we cannot
for a moment doubt, and in a fashion that must seriously
tend, under certain circumstances, to multiply the numbers who seek by it to escape either from the difficulties
which actually surround them, or those conjured up by their
excited imaginations. In every country there is at this time a
vast section of the population which is dominated by the teachings of socialist and nationalist leaders. In some cases the
results which flow from this are no more than the legitimate
rewards of very general aspirations, such as are naturally bom
of improved mental and social states. In others, however,
stimulated by conditions into which this is no place for
inquiry, the passions aroused by propagandists find no method
of satisfaction which fails to carry with it the worst consequences of social misrule, and, as we have too often witnessed,
the worst type of outrage.
The effects, however, of these occurrences are not only those
immediately following in the region which witnesses them;
they spread far and wide wherever the ramifications of socialism
have rooted; and they influence hundreds of thousands of
minds which, while being capable of yielding to direction rightlyapplied, are at the same time too little versed in self-guidance to
be able to reject evil tendencies when they appeal to untrained
sentiment. The working population are year by year yielding an
undue quota to the total of suicides, and a careful study of the
details of siicli suicides afforded in accounts provided for public
perusal, will enable anyone not ignorant of the history and
method of socialism to draw a connection between the great
movement in which the working classes claim an interest, and
suicide. The leaders who initiate and direct these movements
are invariably distinguished for their intellectual superiority:
by reason of it they sway the opinions of the crowds who adopt
their precepts; but unlike them, the latter are not armed
against the reactionary powers exerted by disappointments and
failures to which all great schemes, and especially those involving social revolutions, must in all times be liable. In these
periods of depression, reproach, remorse, and despair find ready
admission to the minds of unfortunate speculators in possibilities, and the weakest of them will not be proof against the
blank misery facing them, or able to withstand the temptation
to avoid its horrors.
That some such cause as this is in operation at the present
time in every civilised state is assuredly true ; and equally true
also is it that this is a natural and predicable consequence of
that progress in civilisation which is one of our proudest boasts.
suicide. 245
We cannot improve at no cost to ourselves, and tlie most terrible
price we pay is unquestionably that which is reckoned in the
annual sacrifice of life by suicide.
In any study of suicide the influence exercised by the
nature of professions engaged in must occupy an important
position, and will offer also some very remarkable facts for consideration. Thus it would hardly be imagined a 'priori that
two such utterly dissimilar employments as those of soldier
and domestic servant; would exhibit any connection in the
proneness of their followers to self-destruction. And yet this is
so, the strongest tendency among the latter class being seen in
those dwelling in cities and considerable towns. With regard
to frequency of suicide among military men, many suggestions
are to be found in the statistics which have been collected on
the subject, and from which it-appears that the number of
suicides is greater in countries under conscript rules; and in
England it has shown a steady increase since the plan was
adopted of sending troops from home. Thus Dr. Morselli quotes
Mr. Millar to the effect, that the mortality by suicide in the
English army was 0*379 per 1,000 of the forces, the rate among
men between 20 and 45 years of age of the civil population for
the same period having reached only 0*107, The suicidal propensity was therefore three times as strong in the army as in
other branches of the population together, and this intensity
even augmented as time advances. From 1862 to 1S71 it
grew from 278 per million to 400, and in 1869 was as high as
569. Dr. Morselli, commenting on these figures, remarks
(" Suicide," p. 260) :?" The tendency, then, increases with the
sending away the troops from Europe, so that in the kingdom
(at home) the number is 339 per million, but in the English
possessions in India it rises to 468. We may suppose that
here nostalgia, and the fatal influence of climate, play a large
part. With regard to the diversity according to the arms,
the unfortunate pre-eminence of the divisional corps (0*864
per 1,000 of the forces) and of the cavalry of the line (0*498)
is a fact which agrees with what Lever said as long ago as
1839, lamenting the high mortality by suicide of the English
dragoons, when it also was actually 785 per million. The
artillery follows with 0*343 ; the infantry with 0*309 ; and the
foot guards, 0*204 ; the engineers, 0*178 ; and the household
cavalry, 0*164. Taking into consideration the ages of the
suicides among English soldiers, we thus learn the harm of
prolonged service, because the mortality by suicide, as well as
that from any other cause, rapidly increases every five years
from 20 to 40 years of age."
It must not be overlooked, however, that high as the pros 2
246 suicide.
portion of suicides is among1 military men, even with tliem it
does not reach the extent to which it is found among- followers
of the higher professions, amongst whom habitual and excessive
brain work is a constant concomitant of existence. This relation in proportion, moreover, offers a suggestion in explanation
of the causation of suicide, which will not be without value,
as showing the direct, dependence of the suicidal tendency on
disorganisation of the cerebral functions. In mental labours it is
easy to understand how a strain is created on the nervous tissues,
which in time must react injuriously in all cases where a perfect
adjustment is not normally maintained. It may be insidious
in action, unnoticed and unnoticeable, until attaining a limit
at which normal action gives way to abnormal; but as surely as
the regular processes by which the health of the brain and its
surroundings is maintained are disturbed, so surely will this disturbance sooner or later result in manifestations of mental
derangement. With the weak and invigorous the time is less
considerable than with the robust and hearty. In the one case
we can imag'ine that less resistance, due to reduced constitutional
powers, will be offered to deteriorating influences than in the
other, and though the result may in both cises be the same, the
duration of unimpaired activity will be different.
In the case of soldiers stationed away from home the causes
leading to impairment of mind are less complicated, more
purely physical. Organic disturbances are mainly the instruments brought into play, and through almost every vital
channel the brain is attacked with more or less intensity. The
busy professional man does much to help the effect of brain
worry by inattention to his own physical necessities; by irregularities in eating, &c., all of which are so many modes of shaping his own destruction. Without these additional helps the
foreign-placed soldier has to fight against climatic influences,
the depression produced by separation from home and friends,
and the numerous other discomforts of a situation so wholly unaccustomed. We might well expect that amid such unfavourable surroundings, long maintained, no inconsiderable number
of minds would yield to the influences reacting1 on them with
the result that suicides would become more numerous.
An inexhaustible and highly interesting study is opened up
to anyone who will devote time and attention to working out
the comparative influences in this direction exerted by the
different recognised professions, and their branches, or subprofessions. Hitherto it has not been pursued to any great
extent, but material for its prosecution is both abundant and
obtainable with only a reasonable amount of difficulty.
Suicide among prisoners presents many points of interest to
suicide, 247
make it deserving- of being- carefully considered. That this
class of the population is more prone to self-destruction than
the unincarcerated there can be no question; and it is an
equally incontrovertible fact that such deaths are always more
numerous among prisoners in jail than amongst those in convict prisons, which, urges DivMorselli, "still more confines the
close relation there is between madness, crime, and suicide,
the three great corruptors of the human mind.7' The same
authority writes that " suicide is more frequent amongst young
prisoners under thirty years of age; but according to the
returns of the population at large it always preponderates
amongst the single and childless widowers. Peasants give
54 per cent., and the proportion of the workpeople and servants is yet higher; whilst the numbers among the liberal
professions is few (in Italy 1866-74). It is noteworthy that
those guilty of crimes against the person make up more than
half the suicides in the prisons, and those only suspected of
crime reach 38 per cent, of the total. We shall find very
frequently amongst the determining motives for suicide in
general, shame and remorse for crimes committed, or fears of
judicial condemnation. Also in the penal establishments, the
habits of an active and laborious life seem to diminish the
outbreak of the tendency, since 70 per cent, of the suicides
of prisoners are by those without work. Then the proportion
is heavy (about 10 per cent.) among those afflicted with
nervous disease, hallucinations, hypochondria, epilepsy, syphilis,
affection of the tubercles, which agrees with the opinion so
vigorously maintained by Despine in France, Thompson, Nicholson, and Maudsley in England, Lombron and Virgilio in Italy,
that degeneration or criminal psychoses affect the constitution
in all its functions, from the cerebral to the morphological.*
I)r. Morselli's meaning is quite clear as shadowed forth in
this passage, although the words he employs sometimes tend to
obscure it; the influence of disordered nutrition long maintained sooner or later affects the cerebral centres, and on the
nature of the disturbances created therein will depend the
ultimate developments of invalidism ; whether, that is, they
exhibit themselves in the chronic variety of neuroses, or in the
acute forms which carry in their train mania and suicidal
inclinations. Perhaps it might help more fully to comprehend the nature of the problem sought to be unfolded in ? this
connections if we could follow out the consequences of the
treatment of individual cases, noting the direction in which
remedies are of avail, and the character of each in respect to
* Op. cit. p. 263.
248 suicide.
its object. To do so, however, would involve an inquiry of
wearisome length, and leading to at the best but doubtful
good, while it is a step gained if we can definitely satisfy ourselves that existing knowledge enables us to assume the
suicidal tendency to be a necessary development of certain
recognisable conditions of ill health. That it is so, undoubtedly,
who can dispute ? Who would think to find an individual
possessed of the mens sa?ia in corpore sctno depriving himself of existence with his own hand ? So universally is the fact
of disease in connection with self-destruction recognised that
an " unsound mind" is the invariable excuse offered for the
suicide in this country, and with civilised people everywhere.
The task which lies before us in the future is to discover
the nature and extent of such unsoundness; to locate it, and to
ascertain the conditions which give rise to and maintain it. We
need not question the possibility of being enabled at some, probably not distant, date, to diagnose incipient suicidal tendency
with as much precision as an approaching fever can now be
predicted. In order, however, that progress may be made
in this direction, it is first of all necessary to appreciate the
absolute differences that separate the phenomena attending
disease of the mind and disease of the body. The greatest
misfortune under which psychists labour at present is their
ignorance of all that relates to structural lesions of the nervous
centres until these lesions are so markedly developed as to be
perceptible by the coarse methods of examination open to us.
For prevention to be applied with hope of successful interference, we must be able to perceive, at any rate, the existence
of subtle changes in the brain structures, of which no indication
has ever yet been forthcoming to observation.
And yet, notwithstanding this apparently hopeless outlook,
the prospect is far from being completely poor. Such considex-able strides have been made in recent years in the science and
practice of cerebral medicine, that it would be unwise to
despair of even seemingly impossible conquests in the future ;
and especially in the field of mental pathology, and in the
lessons taught by the study of pathological anatomy, are we
entitled to look for information of vast importance. Practical
superintendents of asylums, who fully appreciate the nature of
the resources open to them, are never weary of lamenting the
absence of systematic and universal research among their order.
As a rule there is too much reason to conclude that the ordinary medical officers of these establishments are extremely
neglectful of the opportunities they possess for extending the
limits of special knowledge of diseases incident to insanity ; and
until such time as a more widespread attempt is made to utilise
suicide. 249
the materials so abundantly accessible, there is but little hope
that any tangible result will be forthcoming. We must not,
however, while taking note of these shortcomings be unjust to
the extent of forgetting that even now some few observers are
energetically pursuing investigations of a valuable and fruitful
description ; and of a kind akin to those which in the past have
been eminently productive. What we need particularly is that
this description of inquiry shall become general, and the
naturally accepted and recognised duty of every official charged
with the scientific treatment of the mentally unsound. Possibly
a special training may be requisite to enable a sufficient use of
opportunities to be used, &c. by this class of practitioners ; but
?even under these circumstances there ought to be no interference with the proposer of an important and very necessary
improvement.
An}7 attempt to formulate theories in connection with
suicide must be useless, except in so far as they are supported
by an appeal to facts and to statistics. The essential bearings
of statistics in this direction have already been pointed out in
some detail, and it would be little to the purpose to dwell
further on them. There is, however, one aspect in which, as
being incontrovertibly supported in fact, we may be permitted
?to place the matter, and that is, that suicide is, above all
things, an indication of psychical weakness which comes into
play under certain conditions in response to the action of an
unerring and irresistible natural law. This has been so well
expressed by Dr. Morselli that we cannot do better than quote
the passage in full as a conclusion to this article.
" If there was no other reasoning," writes the learned professor, " by which to demonstrate that suicide amongst civilised
peoples is a consequence of the struggle for life, the inverse
proportion which it has to crime would be sufficient to prove it.
Assassination, theft, violation are maniacal acts made use of to
obtain satis.action ?f some want or instinct; they represent, in
short, the morbid weapons of the competition for life. The
more incapable the individual is to struggle with superior
powers, the more he inclines to conquer his rival by violence.
The same things happen amongst animals whose struggles
are almost always stained with blood, inasmuch as they both
fight in order to kill and devour the other. To conquer
in such a battle the inferior organisms employ every kind of
weapon, that is to say, cutting and stabbing arms, agility,
poison, benumbing the currents (animal electricity), frauds,
deceit, dissimulation, the alliance of the strong against the
weak, and coquetry. Man makes use of these means with
the greater facility the nearer he approaches to the savage
250 SUICIDE.
state; tlie morals of the inhabitants of Terra del Fuego and
Australia, who devour their women in time of famine and
smoke their old people to death when they have become a
burden to the tribe, are very different to ours. It may well
be said that criminals instinctively revive these savage orgies
among civilised peoples. They have needs, very powerful
passions and desires, whose voice they blindly obey in direct
ratio to the weakness of their mental organism. The criminal
man, who has not wherewith to satisfy these wants, will kill
and rob the other man ; he, on the other hand, in whom education instilled the sentiments of duty, will cut the thread of
existence with his own hand rather than make use of these
homicidal and harmful weapons. The final result is the same ;
both are depraved in body and mind, and they will go forth
from the combat by ditferent ways, but with identical effects;
these by means of suicide, those by way of the gallows or the
hangman, and this is why suicide and crime are found alternately, as already proved does come to pass among European
people. It is clear that the two social phenomena have an
analogous signification ; it is always the weak who give place to
the stronger if it is a question of crime, and it is a weak character who is destroyed in the struggle for life when it is a question
of suicide.'"
