The Genesis of Ideas In the Blind Deaf Mute
============================================

999 Art. Y.?
By Mrs. BURNET.
Crimplesham Vicarage, Downham Market.
Few and comparatively scanty are the records of tlie very early
life of most of those who have lived deaf, dumb, and blind. It
has been estimated that one infant in every million is a congenital blind deaf mute. Yet of these small indeed must be
the number who survive early infancy ; as the causes which led
to the deprivation of the organs of sense would often lead also
to other complications, such as paralysis, idiocy, deformity, or
extreme decrepitude. From very early times occasional allusion has been made to these unfortunates. St. Augustine
observed of the blind deaf mute of the gospel, that St. Luke
purposely makes mention that he was only dumb to sign unto
us the greatest ill that could befall him. Ecclesiastical writers
report that one, Amagildus, who was both deaf, dumb, and
blind, was restored to all his senses whilst he prayed unto St.
Julian I John Eulwer, writing in 1648, says: "But most
miserable are they who are deaf, dumb, and blind, an example
of which wretched condition we have in Platerus, of a certain
abbot who could no other way understand and perceive the
minds of others than by their drawing letters upon his naked
arm with their finger or a piece of wood, expressing some intimation thus to him, out of which singly, by themselves apart
perceived, he collected a word, and of many words a sentence ;
which, how miserable a case it was, one may easily understand."
A similar account is to be found in Governor Winthrop's
Journal for 1637, of an old woman in Ipswich, who came from
England : " Her son would write upon her hand some letters of
a name, and by other such motions would inform her of any
man's name, or make her understand anything." A very remarkable and melancholy account was given by Dr. Howe, in one of
his reports, of a boy of 14 who became deaf, and subsequently
blind, from morbid sensibility of the brain, after undue and
precocious mental activity. His mind was not affected at all,
but it was getting closed up in the body, and as much beyond
the reach of other minds as though his body was in the act of
being enclosed in solid masonry. Dr. Howe recommended that
immediate advantage should be taken of what hearing remained,
THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN THE BLIND DEAF MUTE. 223
to tcacli him the manual alphabet, because afterwards it would
be a very slow process ; and the sequel was not told. Several
examples might be easily found of congenital deaf-mutism,
complicated with blindness, idiocy, &c., which would throw
little or no light upon the subject under consideration. Such
shattered and crippled wrecks of humanity seem oaly to float
upon the stream of life that they may awaken the love and
command the succour of hearts the most benevolent and
philanthropic.
Two cases of much interest were discovered by Sir W. R.
Wilde during his investigations under the Census Commission
in Ireland. Daniel Cole, of Dublin, a boy of ten, the seventh
of eight children, was born deaf, dumb, and blind. The
mother attributed the defect in her child to a fright she had
received. It was much to be regretted that this poor child's
education had not received the attention which it deserved.
Sir W. Ii. Wilde, in the appendix to his work on "Aural
Surgery," says : " This boy, whom I have had many opportunities of examining, is delicately formed, and had an attack
of hydrocephalus in infancy. The head is natural, but the face
and general appearance convey at first sight an appearance
of idiocy, the eyes being very large, egg-shaped, turned permanently downwards, and completely covered by the thinned
eyelids?The tongue is nearly double its natural size, it is incapable of being retracted, and the mother says it has remained
in this state from birth." It is the more surprising to hear
after this description that " he is by no means devoid of intellect, and is in all other respects healthy. He has already
acquired certain signs by which to express his peculiar wants,
and his mother, who is a person of intelligence, and exhibits
much affection for her child, has taught him several letters of
the manual alphabet by making him feel her fingers, lie can
thus figure the letters upon his fingers, forming bread and
several other words. His sense of touch seems particularly
acute, and he feels with great care every substance with which
he comes in contact, and especially the dresses of persons around
him. He is cautious of the fire, and in moving about the
room carefully avoids it, keeping at a particular distance and
walking up and down before it when he wishes to warm himself." 'G-reat caution with regard to fire was also noticed in
Hugh Gorman, of the county Tyrone, an intelligent boy of six,
born deaf, dumb, and blind. His mother placed him near the
fire, and he cautiously passed from one side to the other, keeping
at an equal distance all the way. Some considerable importance
may well be attached to this trait in considering the relative
intelligence of blind deaf inutes, who should certainly show
224 TIIE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN THE BLIND DEAF MUTE.
it whenever they have been in the slightest degree burnt, for if
an infant of but five months old be allowed to slightly burn its
finger in the flame of a candle as it for the first time essays to
grasp one, its caution with regard to heat is very marked from
that time forward. It will connect the appearance of steam
with heat, and refuse to taste any food when it sees steam
issuing from it, until it has assured itself by repeatedly feeling
the exterior of the vessel containing it, that it is sufficiently
cool. Hugh Gorman's sense of touch appeared to be particularly
acute; he also smelt everything he touched with which he was
not previously acquainted. Daniel Gilbert Tait was a blind
deaf mute found in the Shetland Islands ; he had been so little
cared for that he could not even walk erect. Hannah Lamb,
born 1799, deaf, dumb, and blind, was burnt to death 1808,
which was also the sad fate of Mary McLeod, born blind at
Portobello, near Edinburgh, 1824. She lost the power .of
speech at three, and moved about on her hands and feet like the
neglected Tait; she was like him too in her habits, which were
more or less idiotic.
It would seem, indeed, impossible to find an authentic
instance of an individual born deaf and blind, yet withal
capable of any high degree of intellectual and moral development. The evidence seems rather to prove with overwhelming
conclusiveness that the unconscious memories of the first two
years of life are of inestimable importance in the genesis of
ideas in the blind deaf mute. Even Margaret Sullivan, who
lived in Rotlierhithe workhouse, cannot be claimed as an
exception. For the fact of congenital deafness would appear
from a note appended to Dr. Fowler's published papers, read
before the British Association at Plymouth, to be at least
doubtful. Mr. Johnson, writing from the workhouse, states
that the early history of the case was very obscure, that she
probably lost all three senses from smallpox at the age of four.
It was also said that she distinctly remembered the time of her
illness, anf1 having been previously able to see and hear. She
was after ,/ards enabled to see partially. Dr. Howe, when on a
visit to England, went to see her at the workhouse; he found
that the tradition there was that she had cried out her eyes
when a little child, because her father deserted her. She was
twenty-three years old when Dr. Howe saw her, learned very
readily twenty words and all the letters during the six lessons
which he was able to give her. He considered that she made
wonderful progress, and learnt more in two hours than Laura
Bridgman did in two weeks.
Probably by far the most pathetic history on record is that
of Jacques Edouard Meystre, of Lausanne. When eleven months
THE GEXESIS OF IDEAS IN TIIE BLIND DEAF MUTE. 225
old, and just able to lisp papa and mamma, he became deaf
from smallpox, and being made blind at seven years old from
the accidental discharge of a pistol loaded with small shot,
retained through life the most vivid remembrance of all that
he had thus lost. He could never of his own accord bear to
allude to the cause of his blindness, and turned pale as he so
touchingly told his highly-gifted and philosophical instructor
that he also had had two eyes and that it was very agreeable
to see.
Lucy Reed, born at Derby, Vermont, October, 1827, became
blind and deaf when three years old from scrofula and abscesses
in the ears. She was fourteen years old, said to be deranged at
times, and was altogether a very low type of humanity when taken
to the institution for the blind in Boston. She had never been
controlled, and for a long time violently resisted all efforts to
approach her. She made some progress during the five months
she was allowed to remain there, although her ungoverned will
and stolid indifference were undoubtedly serious obstacles.
Anne Temmermans of Bruges, who was educated by the Abbe
Carton, is another blind deaf mute who made considerable, but
very slow, progress. Dr. Franz Lieber, who saw her in 1844,
described her as very different from the world-famed Laura
Bridgman, as well in natural endowments as in cultivation of
mind, and the developed state of the soul. He writes : " I can
never forget the contrast between the coarse and painful appearance of Anne and the intelligent Laura, as I have often seen her
by the side of a friend, her left arm around the waist of her
companion, and her right hand on the knee of the other, who
was imprinting with rapidity in Laura's open hand what she
was reading in a book before them. They thus formed the
personification of the great achievement which Dr. Howe has
gained over appalling difficulties, never overcome, and scarcely
attempted to be overcome by anyone before him?the picture
of a communion of minds in spite of the enduring night and
deathlike silence which enwraps poor Laura?an example of the
victories in store for a sincere love of our neighbour combined
with sagacity, patience, resolute will, and what Locke calls
'sound round-about common sense.' "
Oliver Caswell was born November 1, 1829. He was a
bright, healthy boy, in the full possession of all his senses, and
able to prattle freely until, at the age of three years and four
months, he had scarlet fever and canker-rash. At the end of
four weeks he could not hear, and a few weeks later was blind.
He articulated with less and less distinctness, and at the end of
six months lost all power of doing so. He was in the habit of
feeling his own lips and those of others when talking, probably
22G TUB GENESIS OF IDEAS IX TIIE BLIND DEAF MUTE.
to ascertain whether he had them in the right position. He
smelt and felt everything. Whilst with his parents he had
been present when a pig was killed, and taught to understand
the operation! He did not enter the Boston Institution until
he was twelve years old, thus many years were wasted before
his education began. Still he showed much intelligence, and
made fair progress, learning to read and to write child-like
letters. Seeing a dog trembling with cold one chilly day, he
said he would not go out. " Walk no, rain, shake cold dog."
He is described as a noble-minded, fearless, truthful, courageous,
manly boy, with a keen sense of propriety, innate honesty, and
much amiability and sweetness of temper. He was skilful in
mechanical employments, and readily comprehended machinery.
But he had not much disposition to inquire into causes, nor any
rapidity of thought and action. With a small brain, decidedly
lymphatic temperament, and always slightly ailing, it is small
wonder that he was often almost melancholy, and lacked keen
zest and the animal spirits which force to mental activity.
Mademoiselle Morisseau, who became blind at thirteen in the
Parisian Institution, is said to have been born deaf or to have
become so at a very early age. The deaf and dumb Massieu
taught her, she often recalled past memories, showed much
curiosity, and was never weary of learning, and said, "Time
passes so quickly," or " I am thinking of God ; He is so good."
Jane Grill, of Gosport, near Portsmouth, was born deaf, and
retained a little sight until three years old, or, according to
another account, until seven or eight. It was enough to carry
her clear of large objects, and to make her avoid danger. Her
power of distinction and memory from touch wa^ remarkable.
Dr. Howe, who saw her, said that she manifested clearly the
possession of the germs of the reasoning faculties, that she compared things with each other, took notice of differences, and
reasoned from cause to effect much more than animals and
idiots. She was then about forty, and quite uneducated, but
Dr. Howe inferred from her general appearance, the activity of
her movements, and her cranium, which was of the average size,
long, rather narrow and high, that there was no constitutional
incapacity for mental development. She loved life, liked eating
and drinking, respected the rights of property, was fond of
children, and showed social feeling generally. She measured
time, cared much when young to wear pretty clothing, and to
be neat as she grew older, and always went to grown-up people
for everything she wanted, obeying and respecting them more
than she would children. Samuel Elbridge Eames, described by
Dr. Thomas Whipple, a physician in Wentworth, New Hampshire, became deaf, dumb, and blind when about two years
TIIE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN THE BLIND DEAF MUTE. 227
old. He was very intelligent and skilful in small mechanical feats. He died when only sixteen and a half. He had
keen susceptibilities to vibration, and detected any person's
manner of opening and shutting the door by the jar which he
felt; his sense of smell, too, was very acute. This latter
peculiarity was also very striking in Julia Brace, who was
born July 13, 1807. She was a bright, quick-tempered child,
was taught to say prayers, to spell and to read words of
two syllables, and went to school for a short time. When
four years and five months old she had typhus fever, which,
in the course of a few weeks, destroyed entirely the organs
of sight and hearing, and left her such a total wreck that
it was long doubtful, whether she could survive. She used
speech until she could no longer recollect the positions of the
different parts of the mouth and throat, and then relapsed into
total silence. When thirty-five years old she was admitted to
the Boston Institution, and did not appear to be a very hopeful
subject for instruction. There was a certain passivity denoting
habitual inattention to external objects, whicli contrasted unfavourably with Laura Bridgman, or Oliver Caswell, who seemed
always on the alert, their spirits striving to get abroad. She
had also been allowed to acquire a habit of sleeping or dozing
for hours in the day time, which caused her to be disinclined to
mental activity and incapacitated for its long continuance. She
was always pleased to learn new words, but could not remember
them any length of time. There had been, for too long a time,
almost total inactivity of brain, and she had passed the age when
the percepiive faculties are vividly and almost spontaneously at
work. Of intellectual expressions she had none, only vague
signs to express animal wants. She seemed to think that the
tallest people ought to rule. She cared much for new clothes
and dress, showed kindness to children, a feeling of propriety
and sense of the rights of property. Her sense of touch was as
wonderfully acute as her sense of smell; she could feel the
thread as it entered the eye of a needle pressed upon her tongue.
Unsuccessful attempts were made when she was in the Hartford
Asylum to convey to her mind the idea of an Almighty
Creator.
In the interesting account of James Mitchell, in Dugald
Stewart's works, vol. 4, we find that the lineaments of thought
were very observable on his countenance. That he behaved
himself with great propriety in company, owing to the extreme
care of his parents and his elder sister. He loved new clothes,
and thought it a great punishment to wear them torn ; he fed
himself, used touch for sight, and was capable of strong family
affection. When his sister meant him to understand that he
PART II. VOL. VIII. NEW SERIES. R
228 THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN THE BLIND DEAF MUTE.
should have something in two days, she shut his eyes and bent
his head down twice in order to intimate to him that he must
first sleep twice. He amused himself by selecting from the bed
of the river stones of a round shape, nearly of the same weight
and having a certain degree of smoothness. These he placed in
a circular form on the bank, and then seated himself in the
middle of the circle. The mother of James Mitchell discovered
in his very early infancy that he was blind from his showing no
desire to turn his eyes to the light, or any bright object, and
afterwards that he was deaf from the circumstance that no
noise, however loud, awakened him from sleep. He soon discovered a most extraordinary acuteness of the senses of touch
and smell. It is said that when lie began to walk he was
attracted by bright and dazzling colours, and that though he
derived little information from the organ of sight, yet he
received from it much sensual gratification. Although his
history is destitute of many of the details which impart so
thrilling and soul-stirring an interest to the lives of Laura
Bridgman or Edward Meystre, it shows us the gulf which
separates such an one from the idiot, and justifies the indignant
protest of so great an authority as M. Blanchet against the
inaptness and inaccuracy of the term " idiocy by deprivation," as
applied to blind deaf mutes simply because they are uneducated.
If the lunatic may be well compared to some noble fabric
fallen into decay, giving at times sublime glimpses of its former
grandeur athwart the ghastly ruins, the blind deaf mute
reminds us rather of a perfect edifice with all modes of ingress
and egress forgotten, and the idiot can only recall to our minds
some very partially begun building suddenly blasted and thrown
down by a terrific wind, or cruel bombardment of shot and shell,
before the onlooker could grasp the design of the architect; the
blurred outline leaving a beholder but feebly able to conceive
what might have been. To imagine for a moment the contrast:
could a small colony of some twenty idiots be cast adrift from an
early age on a fertile uninhabited island, and an equal number
of blind deaf mutes, who had lost their senses by accident or
scarlet fever during the third year of life, deserted on a similar
one ; the mutes would soon become wonderfully skilful in
communicating with one another by touch, in process of time
they would develope rude arts, and act in concert. At the
same time they would doubtless appear far less rational than
they really were, and it would take years of training to bring
them into thorough harmony and possibility of communication
with us. But the channel of intercourse once fairly established
we might be amazed to find of what they had jointly been
THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN TIIE BUND DEAF MUTE. 229
capable, whilst the idiots would miserably perish, or soon
degenerate into such wild beings as we have from time to time
had graphic accounts as wild boys, or wolf boys. We should
behold in them beings utterly unable to act in concert, living
for the most part on nuts and berries, but their diet varied by
the indulgence of their strange likings for the most inedible and
disgusting substances. The blind mutes would have intelligence
enough to concert together, and to devise means to mutually
shelter themselves from rain and storms. The idiots, with the
wandering propensity strong upon them, would stand unmoved
amid the biting sleet or pitiless tempest. Whereas the mutes
might gradually attain to wonderful perfection in communicating by touch, the insensibility of skin of the idiot would be
an insuperable barrier to this kind of communication. In fact,
the very varying degrees of development of brain would
separate each idiot from his fellow by a gulf almost as great
as that which would exist between animals of different species.
Neglected at the age when much might have been done for
them, with no wise guiding mind to' lovingly and eagerly
watch for faint glimmerings of the Grod-like, and lead them
gradually and tenderly towards a faint approach to the true
type of manhood, they would be indeed capable of small
measure of improvement after those twenty wasted years.
For the fullest details ever recorded of the life of a
blind deaf mute, we must refer to Dr. Howe's reports .of
Laura Dewey Bridgman; remembering that her education
was begun under his immediate direction at the early age
of eight, whilst Oliver Caswell was twelve, Edward Meystre
eighteen and a half, and others much older before any definite
attempt was made to impart to them instruction suited to
their condition. Never, perhaps, has it been the lot of an
obscure maiden to arouse such world-wide interest as Laura,
this American girl, who was deaf, dumb, and blind. Inseparably linked with her name is that of the' late eminent philanthropist, Dr. S. Gr. Howe, who conceived and carried into
execution the wonderful scheme for her education, and won by
this imperishable renown in both hemispheres. Greatly it is
to be regretted that he never gave to the world a complete
account of her education, as her gifted teacher and biographer ;
Mrs. Lamson, says that he had often intimated in conversation
his intention of preparing such an account. He probably
renounced it some time before his life closed, as he writes in
one of his later reports: " There will yet, perhaps, be found for
her a biographer who has the qualifications necessary to gather
from her story the abundant materials which it furnishes to
illustrate many curious mental phenomena, and to draw from it
n 2
230 TIIE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN THE BLIND DEAF MUTE.
the many beautiful moral lessons which it may be made to
teach. Whatever I have written, or may write, can be regarded
only as ' MemOires pour servir.' "
Laura Bridgman was born at Hanover, N.H., the 21st
December, 1829. She is described as having been a very pretty
and sprightly infant, with bright blue eyes, but so puny and
feeble that her parents hardly hoped to rear her. Subject to
severe fits, which seemed to rack her frame almost beyond its
powers of endurance, life was held by the feeblest tenure. But
when eighteen months old she seemed to rally, the dangerous
symptoms subsided, and at twenty months she was perfectly well. She displayed, until two years and a month
old, a considerable degree of intelligence, and even knew
some of the letters of the alphabet. Then scarlet fever
attacked her. For five months she was kept in a darkened
room. A year passed before she could walk unsupported ; a
year more before she could sit up all day. Her two older
sisters had died of the disease, and Laura alone thus slowly
fought her way back again to a life which some might have
called a living death ; for sight was gone, hearing destroyed,
taste blunted, and scarcely any sense of smell left. We shall
never know what vague, impassioned yearnings the tiny imprisoned soul may have often sent forth during those long
months of weakness, for the past bright days of sunshine and
gladness, when she was so eagerly drinking in knowledge by eye
and ear, as well as by touch and taste and smell. A singular
feature in Laura's whole history is the persistent way in which
Dr. Howe, as well as those who taught her, kept to the theory
which they propounded at first, that all recollections of her
babyhood were effaced, that she must begin life anew, and this
in spite of the strongest evidence to show how very much she
owed to the unconscious memories of those twenty-five months
of enjoyment of her physical senses and powers for the form
and manner of her future mental development.
It was said that she had "probably no reminiscence of
sounds or of visual objects from impressions received before the
attack of scarlet fever." The only proof they seemed to find
of this was her inability to recollect any words she had used,
or to bring back at will any scenes of babyhood. It would be
difficult in the extreme to find those in the full possession of
all their faculties, who would remember words they had used
before they were two years old. Thoughts may be stereotyped,
but not the form in which they passed through the mind ;
indeed thought and desire may be possible to a certain extent belore ihey can take form in words. The thoughts may
consist of mental pictures and imagined sensations. An
THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN TIIE BLIND DEAF MUTE. 231
infant may, when seeing a dress made, feel that it is of a
colour it much dislikes, and hope that some other child may
have to wear it. When not allowed to wear a ribbon of its
favourite colour, it may scream with passion, and thwarted
self-will, although only six months old, and perhaps not able to
put the thought even mentally into words ; rather would it
have a gratifying mental picture of the Colour beside it, the
muscles would reiterate the adjustment of a bye gone sensation,
and it would feel itself touching the texture of the ribbon, and
scream to find its pleasant visions and sensations recede instead
of becoming realities. The dominant idea of every infant up
to the age of two appears to be, " I must try to find out all
by myself." Later on it discovers how much too slow its rate of
progress will thus be, and it begins to ask questions; but before
this it has formed its own opinions on many a subject. It
should be remembered that during the later months that Laura
was in the full possession of all her senses she was just at the
age when the novelty of the sensations of hardness, pressure,
weight, temperature, roughness, smoothness, slipperiness, adhesiveness, elasticity, and the like, induces the infant to bestow
some considerable attention to them. Laura Bridgman had
also two older sisters with whom to compare all these early
impressions and sensations, thus deepening considerably their
impress on the mind. After the fever her mind was evidently
left clear, her intellect was keen, her memory unimpaired.
Why should we not suppose that unconscious dormant memories
were of even more value to her than they would have been to
another individual not so exceptionally circumstanced ? Nor
need this view lessen our interest in the records of her life, but
rather heighten and intensify it. To those in the possession of
all their faculties, it thus becomes easy to conceive her great
delight at acquiring knowledge. It would seem, indeed, to
have been a merciful provision that the worst sting of the
poor child's pain was gone with the loss of conscious memories.
That sorrow's crown of sorrow, the remembering happier
days, had been taken out of her life, and all the unbounded
capabilities of mysterious ioy at their revivification left to her
to the full.
In accurately considering the gain and lasting benefit which
she may have derived from those first two years, by comparing
the different degrees of development attained by children
endowed with all their senses, great difficulties have to be surmounted : not so much in comjDaring the degrees of knowledge
then acquired but rather the variety of forms which such early
knowledge assumes. And this more often through the inherited bent of each one's character, than from the varieties of
232 THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN TIIE BLIND DEAF MUTE.
experience, and the foree of environing circumstances. How
early will one infant show that it possesses a soul attuned to
melody, and another that it is destitute of ear for music, although
its leanings towards philosophic subtleties are very apparent.
In alluding to ordinary children it may be most to the point to
take as typical instances those only who are of a similar
physical type to Laura Bridgman, with apparent very special
hereditary predisposition to smallpox, scarlet fever, or typhus
fever. Certain common features mark such children : they are
usually very impressionable, vivid and emotional, and retain
through all their after lives many early memories, especially if
they have brothers or sis' ers with whom to revive them. Laura
lost the latter all-important channel for keeping alive conscious
memories, by the death of her two elder sisters from scarlet
fever at the epoch of her own illness. The keen eye of a physician might perhaps detect signs of too delicate an organisation
in such children, but by the ordinary observer they would be
looked upon as remarkably healthy. Possibly the chief peculiarity consists in the over-stimulating quality of the blood, and
a too rapid cerebral circulation. They are a type quite distinct
from the precocious child with consumptive or scrofulous tendencies. It would not appear that if they live their breadth
of intellectual grasp is specially narrowed, or in any sense
diminished, by the too early development of their moral and
emotional natures. The chief danger appears to be to life itself
when fever attacks them. Then the brain, especially if it has
been unduly taxed, and the child allowed to greedily drink in
on all sides the knowledge it so craves, seems peculiarly ready
to take deeply into the circulation the deadly fever poison, and
speedily acute delirium and deadly coma ensue. If the intellectual powers have not been strained in this way, death itself
may even have been said to have taken place, and yet the child
will strugg1 back to life, and survive for many years with its
mental and physical powers unimpaired.
The normal infant of two is not capable of the higher or
intellectual emotions, nor has it as yet either any power of
intellectual perception, synthesis, and induction, or the power
of uniting intellectual apprehensions into an explicit affirmation or negation. All other intellectual powers in it probably
differ only in degree?not in kind?from those of the adult.
It has sufficient power of abstraction to reason from cause to
effect, self-consciousness, and reflection; it shows intellectual
memory by actively searching for and so recalling past thoughts
or experiences ; also intellectual analysis, deduction, and ratiocination ; and to some extent intellectual intuition and rational
language. It also possesses a power of, on certain occasions,
THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN THE BLIND DEAF MUTE. 233
deliberately electing to act?or to abstain from acting?either
with or in opposition to the resultant of involuntary attractions
and repulsions. It can intellectually apprehend the relations
between objects and perceive their being. It intentionally
seeks to recollect. It can draw attention to its feelings and
emotions, and deliberately choose to sacrifice an immediate
sensual gratification for the sake of more prolonged pleasure of
another kind. It not only feels, but has self-conscious thought
to know that it is feeling, and even to be aware and able
to describe afterwards its very inadequate powers of expressing
feelings of pain or sentiments of affection. For reliable observations of this kind it is sometimes best to watch for chance intimations from children themselves after intervals of about a
year. Such spontaneous accounts being less likely to be distorted than the revived memories of adults after the lapse of
many years. A child, not three years old, who described the
grief it felt a year before when ill at having made its mother
think it only cared "for its nurse, was probably ignorant of the
conflict it had gone through between the desire to show
affection for its mother and the sense of physical well being
which induced it to prefer to be in the nurse's arms. It only
retained the memory of the pain it had felt at fancying itself
misunderstood.
There is a wonderful analogy to be traced between the
earliest mental efforts of the blind deaf mute and the mental
processes of the lowest races of men as well as of infants. This
may be noticed especially with regard to number and time. Sir
Samuel Baker, who has never visited any savage tribe who had
not numerals, says that: " They usually count in tens, taking
for the base of their calculations their digits, which appear to
be the original root of numbers." Mr. Galt.on, in " Tropical
Africa," says that the Damnaras are unable to count further
than three, and consequently have no numerals in their
language. If they lose an ox they miss a face they know,
rather than find out that the herd is diminished. Yet this
power of counting up to three is rather significant of a more
primitive mental operation with regard to numbers. Dr
Wilbur gives an instance of it in an idiot ten years old who
could obey a few simple commands and had learnt the name?
of a few familiar objects. He was taught the first ideas of
number before the names of the numbers were imparted. I)r.
Wilbur says: " I found him one day, to my surprise, stringing
thirty-five black and white beads alternately," the size of the
beads varying. "I found on still further examination that
number was comprehended to the extent mentioned without
language." This power of grouping objects visually or
234 THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN THE BLIND DEAF MUTE.
mentally into two twos or three threes is often intuitively possessed by infants at the age of nine months. An
infant who did this with its ninepins at ten months, tried,
when eighteen months old, to draw with a pencil a dog, and on
being asked which were the legs, indicated four scrawled lines,
saying, " There they are, two-ey, two-ey ; one-ey, two-ey; one-ey,
two-ey." Another infant, at the same age, said one-another for
one-two and another-another for twice two. This incomplete
comprehension of numbers seems to be much the earliest of
which the infant is capable, and precedes, by many months,
knowledge of the simplest operations of arithmetic, or even the
ability to really count. Yet if the old familiar story of the
crows be based on fact, it goes considerably beyond their power
of counting, as they could count three only, but not groups of
threes. Oliver Caswell counted fifty on his fingers, but always
" fived," reckoning, for instance, eighteen objects as both hands
one hand three fingers. Counting by twenties?all the fingers
and toes?is said, by Tylor, to be a strongly-marked Celtic
characteristic, which breaks out through the decimal coinage
system in France. Among Australian tribes addition makes
two-one, and two-two express three, and four; in Guachi twotwo is four; in San Antonio four and two-one is seven ; in a
Tupi dialect two-three is used to express six; West African
negroes reckon with pebbles or nuts, and every time they come
to five, put them aside in a little heap. The Gruaranis count
up to four with their native numerals, and when they get
beyond, say innumerable, like children who glibly talk of
" thousands."
Just as the lowest races of men identify intervals of time
only by migrations of animals and the flowering of plants, &c.,
so children, during the second year of life, connect the seasons
with primroses, violets, roses, the falling of the leaves, and snow.
Laura Bridgman was pretty accurate in measuring time, and
seemed to have an intuitive tendency to do it. She reckoned
time by the Sundays, saying September 9, 1841, "I will go
home after six Sundays"; to express an indefinitely great number
she said, " hundred " ; if she thought a friend was to be absent
many years, she would say, " Will come again hundred Sundays," meaning weeks. The same infant who described four as
two-ey, two-ey, reckoned in sevens?seven?fourteen?twentyone, at three years old. Its mental operations with regard to
time, when little more than two, and ignorant of the names of the
days of the week, was to assign to each Sunday a yesterday, a
day before yesterday, a day before the two yesterdays, a tomorrow, a day after to-morrow, and a day after the two
to-morrows; thus the Thursday in last week was described as
THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN TIIE BLIND DEAF MUTE. 235
" last Sunday's day before the two yesterdays," and a month
hence as the time when those four next Sundays with all their
yesterdays and to-morrows have gone by. This child could
not learn, without an undesirable mental effort, to connect the
arbitrary names of the days with the inner mental conception of
them until some months later. No doubt many other children
might realise in a similar way the lapse of time, and give no
evidence of the fact. Just as defective intelligence is not to
be inferred from defects in the organs of sense, so the measure
of the early development of those organs is not necessarily the
measure of intelligence. For whilst it is very doubtful whether
the powers of speech of an infant ever keep pace by any means
with its ideas, it is quite certain that its power of thought
bears no constant proportion to its power of expression. It
would be indeed difficult to reconcile purely materialistic views
of the origin of language with the mental processes of infants
or blind deaf mutes. On all sides are we confronted with the
inner form of language, the " mental word," as generating and
preceding the power of making those thoughts intelligible to
another. Very great conscious effort is no doubt made by the
infant in the acquirement of language, but the effort is
an intensely pleasurable one. The power of an emotional
stimulus in resuscitating the previously dormant faculty of
articulate language has been often dwelt upon. A remarkable
instance where the sudden stimulus to speech, after thirteen
years of mutism consequent on fever, seemed purely volitional,
occurred some years since in a London institution for the blind.
No account of it has ever been published so far as the writer is
aware. A boy, in the full possession of all his senses, became
blind and deaf from fever at the age of twelve; as his parents
were very poor, little attention was bestowed upon him, and he
became dumb and remained absolutely so for more than thirteen
}rears. After this period, whilst at the institution, he one day
caught hold of a key and called out its name. After this he
was taught to speak, could repeat two hundred hymns, and learnt
to read the raised letters quite as well as any of the other
inmates. May it not be that in the case of those who lose
their senses at a very early age, a somewhat analogous process
may go on ? May not the sense of touch open up in a marvellous way long obstructed paths of association in the brain, and
give the power of imagining bye-gone sensations ? Thus the
child would derive much benefit from what it has seen and heard
when in the full possession of all its senses, and the ideas of
sound be made possible, although the perceptions of it were irrevocably lost. Laura surprised her teachers by using the letter 0
when s was exhausted. May not this same tactile channel be
23G TIIE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN THE BLIND DEAF MUTE.
alone necessary to recall former knowledge as visual also, so
that, although the blind mute cannot by willing it raise in his
mind the long bye-gone sensations, and only remembers unconsciously much that he has seen and heard, yet the effect of
the sense of touch, heightened by attention, volition and the
exertion of mental effort, blends the memories of the past with
the achievements of the present, and makes possible a degree of
moral and intellectual development which could not otherwise
be attained ? When Laura was eleven and a-half she began to
ask the colour of everything, and her teachers say that they
could not discover where she got the first idea of it; for two
days she was so much interested that she would have liked to
devote her whole lesson to it; she had also attached an idea
of inferiority to red. An unsuccessful effort was made by
questioning to trace the origin of her dislike, and it was surmised that the article she had in her hand when first told of the
colour red may have been harsh and disagreeable to the touch.
Must we not, remembering that the perception of colour is oneof the earliest of which an infant is capable, go farther back for
a true explanation of this ? It is so painful during fever,
especially scarlet fever, to see anything red, that perhaps a permanent dislike to the colour may be sometimes left. Later on
a lesson led to the subject of the Erie Canal and Niagara Falls.
" It might be supposed," writes her biographer, " that they
would be m^re commonplace topics to her, and that the most
vivid description could not convey to one who had never even
seen water the faintest idea of their beauty and grandeur. Just
what ideas she did receive it is impossible for us to know, and
also the cause of the excitement she manifested when told about
them." When, in 1855, Laura was asked to write an account
of her life at home before she came to the institution, she savs:
" I flinged sand, stones, and gravels, and branches of aged trees
into the brook. I enjoyed that game exceedingly." To quote
again from the journals of her teachers. " I asked her about
the steam from a kettle over the fire ; at first she seemed to
know nothing about it, but suddenly the memory of a burn she
got from it when a little girl came to her, and after that she
understood it. She told me that she had seen her father ' burn
short trees' in the ground (meaning stumps, I presume), and
asked why he wanted to do it. From time to time some conversation seems to suggest things which she knew about when
living at home, and we see by her questions how much she
observed and thought wonderingly about." She told for the
first time on February 27th, 1842, another story of her early
childhood, and on another occasion showed how young lambs
had been placed by her mother in a basket, and wanted to
THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN THE BLIND DEAF MUTE. 237
know why they were covered over with a blanket. Although
she usually dreamt that she talked with her fingers, she once
dreamt that she talked with her mouth, and at another time
that she saw with her eyes.
She sought to trace back all to a First Cause, asking: "Water
is very strong; who made water? Who put fishes in water?
Why do sun not come??Because clouds are over it. Who shut
clouds ? " She was much troubled by mosquitoes and asked
at a later period of her history : " Why did God make mosquitoes
to bite us?" An idea of resurrection was gleaned by her
from observing Nature. Speaking of a lady who has died, and
whom she saw in Hanover two years ago, she said : " Will
Mrs. M. come back when sun is warm ? Where is Mrs M. ?
Are you sorry not to see Mrs. M." The next day she asked :
"Where are the flies gone?" I told her the cold made the
Hies die. " Will flies come when warm ? "?Yes. " I am sorry
lady will not come when warm." Meystre's instructors also
found in him the idea of resurrection without knowing how
lie obtained it. He showed boundless satisfaction at having
learnt the name of God. He found it so natural that everything should have an author that he did not seem surprised at
the power of G-od.
I)r. Howe has said in one of his reports, that " the teacher
plays a much humbler part in the intellectual development of
children than he is usually supposed to do." It is certainly
not a little curious to find, in how many small details, the
spontaneous acts and thoughts of both Meystre and Laura
were precisely those of very young ordinary children. Laura
enacted very complete dramas with her dolls, and turned round
the faces of a monkey and little dog belonging to her " to have
them see the pictures on the wall," just as an only child of
two. or one, isolated through weakness and illness, usually
would. However fluently the latter may talk, it will appear
intensely mortified when it first hears a parrot speak, and be
only consoled by finding that it is incapable of thought.
This is a subject on which Laura is described as " somewhat
sensitive; for it is a singular fact that, while she expresses no
feeling that men, women, and children can talk and she cannot,
she always feels it when she hears of any of the lower animals
speaking or hearing." She supposed a monkey could talk, and
when told he could not, she looked as if much relieved, though
she asked immediately if he could see. An ordinary child of
three will say with astonishment, on seeing for the first time
some nearly imbecile child, that " it looks only half-alive."
Laura always regarded with contempt those weak in intellect, and recognised the fact by a muscular intuition. Her
238 THE GENESIS OF IDEAS IN TIIE BLIND DEAF MUTE.
biographer says: "There was at one time in the house a very
gentlemanly young man who was not blind. He was well
dressed, and his appearance did not betray the deficiency of
intellect which really existed. Laura had not met him until the
day he was introduced to her. He could not speak with Ids
fingers, so it was merely a shaking of hands that passed between
them. Instantly after she dropped his hand she raised hers,
letting the fingers hang down, and said to the person who introduced her, " Is he a fool ? " Meystre, too, estimated a man by
the force of his mind, and the sagacity he showed in this
respect was surprising. Whilst his instructor was one day
occupied in attempting to teach a young blind and deaf mute
girl to speak, Meystre remarked, with a sign of contempt, that
she had no intelligence, and that nothing could be done. But
after a moment of reflection, this contempt changed to sadness. "Jeanne does not think of God," he said, locking his
hands on his heart in sign of sorrow. He reflected again; the
convulsive movements of his lips announced that his mind was
painfully occupied. The physiognomy again changed ; suddenly beaming with joy, he rose and repeated: " Jeanne does
not think of God, but God thinks of her, and that is enough."
A singular blending of ideas of a Creating Deity with the
benign influences of the sun in nature may be often found in
children before they are three years old. Their fancy figures
the golden glory of rays of sunshine as the very pathway from
heaven to earth. A child in the most dolorous stage of mumps
will exclaim, "Oh God,come down from heaven above and help
us children here, for we have no light without the sun or moon
or stars!" Another, given to doggerel rhyming, will say,
" Back to his heaven our God is going, now the dull evening is
drawing nigh, God who is tender, merciful, loving, to us all on the
earth below the sky, for now that thp golden sun is setting 011 this
the best, brightest happiest day. God is still watching over our
windows, God is nevermore very far away." Laura asked " Can
God be at the sun ? " Meystre, finding the blind pupils one
evening with their hands clasped in prayer, asked one of them
if they were speaking to the sun. Religious ideas had been up
to this time carefully avoided in his lessons. He had great
respect for the sun on account of its agreeable and beneficent
heat, and expressed boundless satisfaction at having learnt the
name of God as the creator of the sun. He found it so natural
that everything should have an author, that he was less surprised at the power of God than at the impotence of the miller
who could not make the grain. He said, " Man thinks. Things
which do not live do not think. The man who prays thinks of
God." He began to pray in the evening tefore retiring to rest,
THE GENESTS OF IDEAS IX THE BLIND DEAF MUTE. 239
repeating many times the words, " I am thinking of Grod." He
was one day found occupied in concentrating the rays of the
sun with a lens, and as his hand was touched, he said, " Jejoense
aDieu." Acting on some such apparently innate tendencies in
the child to seek a Creator through his works, Dr. Howe was
most anxious to let the mind of Laura Bridgman have its due
period of infancy in religious ideas, although it was necessarily
a prolonged period, because she seemed, in many respects, like
a child of three when really fourteen. Dr. Howe could only
compare her knowledge of language when fifteen years old, after
she had been seven years under instruction, to that of a child of
six. He compared her when she was ten years old to a child
of three. He encountered not a little opposition and much
animadversion on account of his strongly expressed wish that
Laura's religious education should be so long deferred. It
might be that he was to some extent unconsciously biased by
his own phase of religious thought, but it seems difficult to conceive that without this gradual and harmonious development
of the mental powers, Laura Bridgman would ever have been
capable of the wonderful grasp of religious truths so ably described in the latter part of her biography, and shown in her
letters. Dr. Lieber quotes from the Eighteenth Report to the
Trustees of the Perkin's Institution for the Blind, Boston, 1850,
where it is recorded that Laura often says, in the fulness of her
heart, " I am so glad I have been created." This psalm of
gratitude poured forth by her whom we pity as the loneliest of
mortals ?this hymn of rejoicing in the possession of life?
expresses infinitely more strongly and loudly what Dr. Howe
has done for her than any praise of others could do. A gleam
of sunshine on her face, a warm south wind, the soft grass under
her feet, a growing plant or an opening flower, any of these
things awaken a feeling of pleasure, and often lead her thoughts
upwards to Him who created them.
Very much may doubtless be done for every blind deaf mute
in brightening his existence and ameliorating his so sad, sightless, speechless, soundless lot. But it would appear that,
although the instances of the most successful education ot blind
deaf mutes are glorious examples of what scienceand philanthropy
can, hand-in-hand, achieve; and whilst they indicate the inestimable value of the earliest months and years of life in the
mental and moral development of every human being, they
yet give no warrant for supposing that the efforts of the philanthropist can ever be rewarded with any such brilliant success in
the case of the congenital blind deaf mute.
