On Suicide.? Verdicts of Felo-De-Se
====================================

Art. III.?
? *
Tiie late and mucli lamented death of tlie distinguished and rising
Burgeon, Mr. Morton, has again directed public and professional
cognisance to the subject of suicide. With the view of exposing
many of the fallacies existing in the public mind in connexion with
this subject, and of directing professional and general attention to
i the importance of watching with earnest care the incipient indica-
tions of that condition of brain and nervous system, which so often
leads to the act of self-destruction, the editor of this Journal pub-
lished a letter on Suicide in an influential and ably conducte
* The Report of tlie iiiquest on the ilentli of the late Mr. Morton.
20
ON SUICIDE.?VERDICTS OF FELO-DE-SE.
morning paper.* The subject is of sucli vast importance, tliat we
consider no apology necessary for recapitulating the facts and obser-
vations contained in the article referred to.
We have for a long period of our professional life devoted much
attention to the consideration of that form of morbid mind accom-
panied with the suicidal impulse, and we have always been under the
impression that the deranged feeling which so often leads to the com-
mission of self-destruction has not been investigated by medical psy-
chologists in a manner commensurate with its vast importance. We
consider that great and incalculable advantages are likely to accrue
from the dissemination of sound views in relation to this matter.
The public mind cannot be too much enlightened as to the real causes
of disease, nor can any evils arise from a general acquaintance with
the first manifestations of disordered action, be it of body or mind, or
with the principles of medical treatment. Let us illustrate this ob-
servation by referring to the subject of suicide. It is the prevalent
opinion among persons ignorant of the science of psychology and
pathology, that the desire of self-destruction is, in the majority of
cases, a mental act, unconnected with a disturbed condition of the
bodily functions, and incurable by any process of medical treatment;
that the depression of mind which is so generally associated with the
suicidal tendency is an affection of the mind per se, the physical or-
ganization having no direct connexion with what is termed the spiri-
tual impulse. This, we regret to say, is the generally received opinion,
even among men of great attainments and of a high order of intellect.
This metaphysical view of the matter is fraught with much mischief,
and we have no doubt has led to the neglect of cases of actual
insanity, and to the sacrifice of many valuable lives. It is a matter
of the highest moment that the public mind should be undeceived
' upon this point. Right views on this subject ought to be generally
diffused?it is of consequence to establish the belief that the suicidal
idea is almost generally connected with a morbid condition of the
mind, and is often the only symptom of such an affection?that it is,
with a few exceptions, universally associated with physical disorder
disturbing the healthy balance of the understanding?and that this
bodily affection, which is, in nine cases out of ten, the cause of the
mental irregularity, is easily curable by the judicious application of
the principles of medical science. The tendency of the spiritual or
metaphysical view of the question is to create a distrust in remedial
measures; and the poor man who is struggling against an almost
oyerpowering desire to destroy himself is either induced to run to
Morning Chronic/p.
ON SUICIDE.?^VERDICTS OF FELO-DE-SE.
21
the clergyman or to liis prayer-book for assistance, or to neglect en-
tirely liis lamentable condition under the belief that lie is literally
placed beyond the reach of curative agents, and that the only remedy
for his mental suffering is death.
If a person in this unhappy state of mind is induced to believe
that his mental despondency is but a consequence or effect of a dis-
turbed condition of certain organic functions, influencing either di-
rectly or indirectly the natural and healthy operation of the brain and
nervous system, and giving rise to perverted ideas?that his malady
is curable?he may be induced to avail himself of the means which
science has placed at the disposal of the physician, and thus be pro-
tected against his own insane impulses.
Where no disease is suspected, no remedy will be sought. Tell
a man who has attempted to slay himself, that he is perfectly sane?
that his judgment is sound?that his will is not perverted?that the
impulse which drives him to the commission of suicide is not asso-
ciated with any deviation from corporeal health,?and you inculcate
ideas not only fallacious, but most pernicious in their character and
tendency. We might with as much truth tell a person playing with
a lighted taper at the edge of a barrel of gunpowder, that his life
is not in jeopardy, as to say to a person disposed to cut his throat,
blow out his brains, poison or hang himself, that he is in the perfect
enjoyment of health, and requires no moral or medical treatment.
It may be laid down as an indisputable axiom, that in every case of
this kind, bodily disease may, upon a careful examination, be detected.
We never yet saw a case where a desire to commit suicide was present,
in which there was not corporeal indisposition. Instead of incul-
cating the notion that this morbid propensity is independent of
material lesion, it should be our constant endeavour, and in fact
it is our duty, to establish the necessity of obtaining medical advice
directly the idea of self-destruction takes possession of the mind.
We have seen the most happy results ensue from adopting such
a course. "To know ourselves diseased is half our cure," is a wise
maxim when applied to this subject. It ought to be our object
to persuade those so unhappily afflicted, that the unnatural pro-
pensity is but the consequence of physical ailments, which are
amenable to those medical principles which direct the practitioner
in the treatment of other diseases. We ought to diffuse through
society generally the notion that it is a matter of essential im-
portance, that the patient whose mind is haunted by the idea of
suicide should instantly subject himself to medical treatment. He
should be informed that his feelings are but the effect of p.n sical
22 ON SUICIDE.?VERDICTS OF FELO-DE-SE.
disorder, which can be easily removed if he will confide in the
judgment of a medical practitioner. We have seen, in cases of this
description, a strong and apparently uncontrollable suicidal impulse
yield to a few simple remedies. The physician, when consulted in a
case of suicidal mania, should carefully ascertain whether there be
congestion of the brain or abdominal viscera. The latter affection
is often present in this class of patients. The condition of the liver
should also be inquired into. In the majority of cases that organ
will be found in a morbid condition. Much may be done by medical
treatment in cases of insanity attended by this symptom.
The practitioner should endeavour to obtain the confidence of
the patient. It is often possible to reason or to frighten a person
out of the desire to commit self-destruction. Suicides are generally
cowards. The very act of suicide implies the absence of courage.
If the medical man, when consulted in these cases, acts with firmness
and resolution, he may often succeed in turning the current of
morbid thought. We were once in the presence of a person who had
attempted suicide. A friend of the party said to the patient sneer-
ingly, " Pooh, you commit suicide 1 you have not the courage to do
it?it is all nonsense and bravado; take this knife and cut your
throat." Although Ave questioned the propriety of thus addressing the
individual referred to, it had nevertheless a good effect: he never
again attempted his own life.
Dr. Darwin states that a gentleman, being apprehensive that his
friend meditated self-destruction, obtained from him a promise that
he would not do so before four o'clock the next day. He fulfilled
his promise, but blew out his brains as soon as the hour was expired.
A patient evidently bent on suicide, asked M. Falret for razors to
shave himself with. Trusting to his knowledge of the case, M.
Falret complied. This physician observes, " The patient, after having
shaved, looked at me, and observing that I remained tranquil, he
exclaimed, ' How well you know me !' From this time I had all his
confidence." It is important to ascertain the presence of the early
symptoms of suicidal mania; for in the premonitory stage, medical
and moral treatment may be had recourse to with very great ad-
vantage. The experienced physician can easily detect the existence
of suicidal mania. There is in these cases a peculiar expression of
countenance, which constitutes an important diagnostic sign.
For some period before the individual manifests a morbid pro-
pensity to sacrifice his own life, the mind may have dwelt upon the
idea of self-destruction. In some cases the impulse is apparently
sudden in its development; but it will commonly be found, upon
ON SUICIDE.?VERDICTS OF FELO-DE-SE.
23
inquiry, that the notion of suicide lias been haunting the imagination
for a considerable time before the act is perpetrated or attempted.
When the mind has been directed or engaged in a particular train of
morbid contemplation for any length of time, the face assumes a
peculiar cast, which is present in no other state of mental feeling.
The practitioner who has had any experience in these cases, can
easily detect the existence of the suicidal propensity. With the view
to the prevention of self-murder, how important it is that the phy-
sician should make himself practically acquainted with this indica-
tion. Parkman relates that Lord M. haying requested Stuart, a
distinguished artist in London, to paint a portrait of his brother,
a captain in the army,?he did so with great accuracy. When Lord
M. saw the portrait, he exclaimed, " This is not the portrait of my
brother,?it is the portrait of a madman." The painter requested
another sitting; his Lordship saw the painting again, when ho
observed, " My brother appears more mad than beforeH Three weeks
after the Captain blew out his brains!
It is not difficult to conceive the intense agony of the mind in
which the idea of self-destruction is constantly uppermost, and when
the most powerful of instincts?viz., that of self-preservation?is
mastered. The struggle?and a fearful one it often is?between a
stern sense of religious and social duty, and a highly-wrought
sensitiveness of mind and an overwhelming impulse to suicide, has
been known to be of months', of years', duration ; the unhappy
individual being left a prey to his own morbid yearnings?nothing,
literally nothing, being done to remove the physical derangement
causing the mental disturbance. It is a rare occurrence for a suicide
to take place in which the evidence before the coroner's court does
not establish that, for some period before the act was committed,
" great mental depression " was observed, " the person was incapable
of exercising continuity of thought," " was guilty of deviations from
his natural course of life," " manifested irritability of temper,
" quarrelled with his family or friends," " neglected his business,"
became " irregular or intemperate in his habits," was " inattentive
to his personal appearance," exhibited "great caprice of temper.
We appeal to the recollection of our readers whether we are not
correct in asserting that evidence of this character is generally
adduced at the inquiries instituted by the coroners in cases of
suicide? Occasionally an instance occurs which baffles all our
psychological knowledge, and in which no apparent cause for the
suicidal feeling can, on the most careful scrutiny, be detected,
gentleman, happy in his domestic relations, in the possession ot
24,
ON SUICIDE.?VERDTCTS OF FELO-DE-SE.
considerable property, loved, admired, and respected by a large
circle of private friends, was sitting at the head of his dinner table,
having a few select companions as his favoured guests. He had
given no previous indication of bodily or mental disease. During
dinner he was noticed to be more than usually cheerful and viva-
cious. He had lost none of his wonted brilliancy of wit or smart-
ness of repartee. Before the repast concluded, the gentleman in
question apologized for leaving the table abruptly. He retired
suddenly to his own room, went to his razor-case, held his head over
a bason, and deliberately cut his throat ! The announcement of
the dreadful event was made at the moment when liis chosen and
convivial friends were in the act of drinking his health ! We have
in our private case-book the particulars of several instances of this
kind, inexplicable and subtle in their character, but the one we
have cited is sufficient to illustrate our view of the subject. These
cases are exceptions to the general rule; and it is essential that this
view of the matter should be generally entertained. It ought never
to be forgotten that the disposition to suicide may be the only sign
present that indicates the existence of disturbed mind ; that the
commission of suicide is often the overt act of insanity ; and that
when the feeling is present, the individual himself may feel assured
that his health is out of order, and that he requires the aid of the
physician, as well as of the metaphysician and clergyman. How
indisposed are relatives and friends to believe the fact that the mind
is in an unsound state, even in cases where the disorder is most
obvious and apparent ! A gentleman holding a high public situa-
tion manifested for some weeks great depression of spirits, but he
was not considered sufficiently ill to justify the family in summoning
to his aid their ordinary medical adviser. One day he was found
suspended by the neck, was fortunately cut down before vitality
was extinguished, was placed in his carriage, and taken to the house
of a physician. It was soon ascertained that the poor man's bodily
health was in a sad condition. By his own confession he had not
closed his eyes for six days or nights ! He recovered, and is at
this moment exercising his official duties in the full enjoyment of
" mens sana in corpore sanoIt is an occasional occurrence for
persons labouring under great disturbance of the general health,
accompanied with a morbid desire to destroy life, to seek advico
from experienced medical men. These cases, if subjected to treat-
ment at the early period of the malady, arc generally curable. We
say this to comfort those (and they constitute, we fear, a large class)
ON SUICIDE.?VERDICTS OF FELO-DE-SE.
25
wlio, from erroneous views, are led to consider that the door of hope
is for ever closed against them.
We have known the suicidal idea completely dispelled by the
application of a few leeches to the head. Purgatives judiciously and
appropriately administered often act beneficially in these cases.
The various preparations of opium, if given with judgment, and in
cases where the suicidal impulse is not dependent upon or connected
with congestion of the brain, frequently act like a charm in tran-
quillizing the nervous system. The cold shower bath, warm bathing,
seclusion from excitement, issues, are all excellent remedies in some
cases of suicidal mania.
The question of the propriety and justice of verdicts of felo de se,
has again been mooted in one of our courts of law. In the Bail
Court, before Mr. Justice Patterson, Sir F. Thcsiger was instructed
to move for a certiorari to bring into the court an inquisition taken
by the coroner for the borough of Leeds, and also the depositions.
The inquisition was held on the body of a person of the name of
Mary Ann Waley, and a verdict was returned of felo de se, the object
being to traverse the inquisition; but at the same time he thought
it right to state that, when the inquisition was brought into this
court, if he found any substantial defects, he should wish to have the
opportunity of taking advantage of them. The circumstances of this
ease were of the most extraordinary and mysterious character. Mary
Ann Waley was the daughter of a very respectable person residing
in London, and on the 21st of June last, she married Mr. Waley,
her husband, who was a wool dealer, residing at Holbeck, in the
neighbourhood of Leeds. She was twenty-seven years old, and he
was thirty, and they were married with the entire approbation of
the parents of the lady. After the marriage, they proceeded first to
Leamington, and afterwards to Scarborough, and from both these
places letters were written by the wife to her sister, expressing, in
the most artless and simple way, her happiness in her new state.
They arrived at home on the 2nd of July, and on the 7th of that
month a letter was written to her sister, which he would not trouble
his lordship with, but it was written precisely in the same strain as all
the others. There was nothing exaggerated, but it was a most simple
and artless account of her own happiness, and ending in this way:??
" It has just struck 5 o'clock, and as my dearest William makes his
appearance about that time, I must draw to a close and make ready
for his tea; so, dearest Susanna, with our united love, I remain your
affectionate and happy sister." On the 9 th of July she was seen as
26
ON SUICIDE.?VERDICTS OF FELO-DE-SE.
late as half-past 11 o'clock in the morning in perfect health and
spirits} she was of a very cheerful disposition, of a quiet, well-
regulated, and religious mind. She had breakfasted with her
husband that morning, and they had parted on the most affectionate
terms?the husband going to his daily business, and in five minutes
after she had been seen in the state he had described, she was found
stretched upon the floor of her bedroom, with her throat cut from
car to ear, and with a razor between the finger and thumb of her left
hand. An inquest was held, and upon the direction of the coroner,
under these circumstances, the jury were almost compelled to find a
verdict of felo cle se. The coroner's direction, which was sworn to,
was of a most extraordinary kind. He said, " Anything leading to
show how deceased came by her mortal wound was involved in deep
mystery. According to the evidence of Mr. Price, the wound might
have been self-inflicted or not, and no just inference could be drawn.
However, had it been done by some other person, struggling would
have been expected, and it was probable, but not certain, that the cut
would have been irregular. That she might have done it, as Mr. Price
put it, involved so much doubt, that they could not come, upon his
single testimony, to any definite conclusion; supposing that she would
do it from the impulse of the moment, it appeared singular that she
should use the left hand to the left side of the neck, as the other would
have been exerted more readily and more powerfully. But the jury
must respect the medical testimony, in stating that it was possible for
deceased to have inflicted the wound even in the manner described.
There were no grounds for suspicion against any one. The servant
girl's evidence was corroborated, and therefore there were no grounds
for supposing that she was an agent in the death of her mistress.
Was it possible, in the interval spoken of, for any person to have
entered the house 1 This he could not determine, as persons had
been so officious and had cleared all away before the jury or any other
person capable of forming an opinion on the matter had seen the
place. No inference could be drawn from Mr. Kerr's statement, as
lie was so confused. Looking to the probabilities, it was exceedingly
probable that the deceased had done the act herself; but on the other
hand it was quite possible that a stranger might have done it, and
they knew that murders were sometimes committed without the
slightest apparent motive. If they had evidence to show that de-
ceased had exhibited eccentricities, or been easily excited, it would
then have favoured the assumption that insanity had supervened,
and would have been strong evidence that she had destroyed herself.
But she Avas perfectly sane at half-past 11 o'clock; and if the jury
ON SUICIDE.?VERDICTS OF FELO-DE-SE.
27
should be of opinion that deceased destroyed herself, the next thing
to consider was the state of her mind at the time. It was painful to
him to say that he could not see any possibility of her insanity at the
time when this occurred ; he had thought the matter carefully over,
and with the evidence before him he could not reconcile himself to
such an opinion. It would be erroneous to say that because persons
destroyed themselves they were not of sane mind. In this instance
?and it rendered the case more remarkable?they had the strongest
evidence, up to five minutes before death, of her sanity. They had
better find a verdict of felo de se, than, by giving an open verdict,
throw a suspicion upon any party, which might, however unjust, en-
dure for the remainder of life." Under this strange direction the
jury found the verdict of felo de se after three hours' deliberation. It
being clear that no suspicion could have attached to any one, if the
jury had found the verdict that, if she destroyed herself, it must have
been under some sudden attack of madness for which the human
mind was not prepared, that would have been a proper verdict, as all
knew that such awful visitations had taken place at different times;
but, under this direction of the coroner, the jury had returned the
verdict oi felo de se. The family of this lady were extremely anxious
to remove this stain upon her memory, and they felt a strong desire
that she should have Christian burial j he therefore applied for a
certiorari to traverse the inquisition; at the same time lie Avould tell
his Lordship that if he found the inquisition defective he should take
advantage of it.
The judge consented to the application. We are not prepared to
assert, as our opinion, that the commission of suicide is invariably the
act of an insane mind; but we maintain, whenever the tendency to
self-destruction exists, and a person lays violent hands upon his own
life, that the presumption is strongly in favour of the suicide being
the consequence of derangement of mind. We know how difficult it
often is to prove the fact of insanity in cases about which Ave enter-
tain no doubt. Many persons are driven to suicide whilst under the
influence of a delusion known only to themselves ; which delusion,
it has been established, has haunted them for years. The coolness,
self-possession, cunning, and cleverness which many manifest, just
prior to the commission of self-destruction, is no argument in favour
of the presence of sanity. The most extraordinary power of control
over the thoughts and actions are consistent with the existence of
suicidal mania.
Again, we have no right to infer the absence of insanity, because
we have it in our power to trace the act of suicide to a real, and,
?B
28
ON SUICIDE.?VERDICTS OF FELO-DE-SE.
perhaps, its probable cause. A man is exposed to some great mental
excitement, reverse of fortune, accession of wealth, or is accused of
the commission of some terrible crime; and under the influence of
one of these exciting causes, he sacrifices his life. The disposition of
juries, under such circumstances, is to bring in a verdict of felo de se;
but we consider such a course unjustifiable. Who can define what
degree of mental perturbation is necessary so to disturb the balance
of the mind, as to deprive the person of all sane control over his
thoughts and actions 1 If our brains were organized according to a
given standard, and we were all on a par as to intellectual vigour
and nervous energy, then we might safely predicate the results fol-
lowing exposure to certain states of the moral atmosphere. But for
wise reasons the nervous apparatus is very dissimilarly organized in
various individuals, and an amount of mental excitement which would
overturn many minds, could be borne with impunity by others. This
fact?and it forms an important element in the argument?should
never be lost sight of in considering the question before us. The
majority of cases of suicide which take place in the middle ranks of
life, arise from an over-taxation of the functions of the brain. It is
useless to cavil about words, or to conceal a valuable physiological
truth in obedience to the prejudice of weak and ignorant minds. As
physiologists, we are compelled to consider mental phenomena as a
function of nervous matter. We do not pretend to explain the nature
of this union?we consider it as a matter of demonstration. Ad-
mitting this truth, it is not difficult to understand why an excessive
straining of the functions of the brain should frequently derange the
operations of the mind. Great anxiety?an undue application to
business, requiring much mental exertion?the excessive excite-
ment of mind, often necessarily concomitant with speculations con-
nected with great fluctuations in the value of property?all tend,?most
remarkably tend,?to lay the foundation for insanity, and to inducc the
suicidal disposition. The brain, in these cases, is overworked; its
peculiar powers or functions are called into unhealthy exercise, and
derangement of ideas, or in other words insanity, is, in certain organ-
izations, the inevitable consequence.
It cannot be too generally known that disturbed thought (quite irre-
spectively of suicidal feeling) is as much a symptom of mischief (we
do not say organic) of some kind going on in the brain as severe
pain of one of the joints of the foot, accompanied with a swollen
condition of the part, is evidence of an attack of the gout. All
sudden and prolonged deviations from the natural disposition,
thoughts, character, temper, feelings, affections, and habits, should
ON SUICIDE.?VERDICTS OF FELO DE-SE.
29
awaken grave suspicion in the person's own mind, and lead him to
ask himself the question, "Is there not something wrong with my
bodily health, interfering with the smooth and normal current of my
thoughts and feelings'?" It is better to be too much upon our guard
against the first inroads of deranged mind than to wilfully overlook
and neglect, as is, alas! often the case, the glaring evidences of dis-
ordered intellect.
But to return to the consideration of verdicts of felo de se.
The act of suicide ought not to be considered as a crime in the legal
definition of the term. It is not an offence that can be deemed cognizable
by the civil magistrate. To punish suicide as a crime is to commit
a solecism in legislation. The unfortunate individual, by the very
act of suicide, places himself beyond the vengeance of the law; he
has anticipated its operation; he has rendered himself amenable to
the highest tribunal?viz., that of his Creator; no penal enactments,
however stringent, can affect him. What is the operation of the
law under these circumstances 1 A verdict of felo de se is returned,
and the innocent relations of the suicide are disgraced and branded
with infamy, and that too on evidence of an cx-parte nature. It is
unjust, inhuman, unnatural, and unchristian, that the law should
punish the innocent family of the man who, in a moment of frenzy,
terminates his own miserable existence. It was clearly established,
that before the alteration in the law respecting suicide, the fear of
being buried in a cross-road, and having a stake driven through the
body, had no beneficial effect in decreasing the number of suicides;
and the verdict of felo de se, now occasionally returned, is pro-
ductive of no advantage whatever, and only injures the surviving
relatives.
When a man contemplates an outrage of the law, the fear of the
punishment awarded for the offence may deter him from its com-
mission; but the unhappy person whose desperate circumstances
impel him to sacrifice his own life can be influenced by no such fear.
His whole mind is absorbed in the consideration of his own miseries,
and he even cuts asunder those ties that ought to bind him closely
and tenderly to the world he is about to leave. If an affectionate
wife and endearing family have no influence in deterring a man from
suicide, is it reasonable to suppose that he will be influenced by
penal laws?
If the view which has been taken of the cause of suicidc be a
correct one, no stronger argument can be urged for the impropriety
of bringing the strong arm of the law to bear upon those who couit
a voluntary death. In the majority of cases, it will be found that
30 POLITICS AND INSANITY.
some heavy calamity lias fastened itself upon the mind, and the
spirits have been extremely depressed. The individual loses all
pleasure in society; hope vanishes, and despair renders life in-
tolerable, and death an apparent relief. The evidence which is
generally submitted to a coroner's jury is of necessity imperfect; and
although the suicide may, to all appearance, be in possession of his
right reason, and have exhibited at the moment of killing himself
the greatest calmness, coolness, and self-possession, this would not
justify the coroner or jury in concluding that derangement of mind
was not present.
If the mind be overpowered by " grief, sickness, infirmity, or other
accident," as Sir Matthew Hale expresses it, the law presumes the
existence of lunacy. Any passion that powerfully exercises the
mind, and prevents the reasoning faculty from performing its duty,
causes temporary derangement. It is not necessary in order to
establish the presence of insanity to prove the person to be labouring
under a delusion of intellect?a false creation of the mind. A man
may allow his imagination to dwell upon an idea until it acquires an
unhealthy ascendancy over the intellect, and in this way a person
may commit suicide from an habitual belief in the justifiableness of
the act. If a man, by a distorted process of reasoning, argues
himself into a conviction of. the propriety of adopting a particular
course of conduct, without any reference to the necessary result of
that train of thought, it is certainly no evidence of his being in
possession of a sound mind. A person may reason himself into a
belief that murder, under certain circumstances not authorized by the
law, is perfectly just and proper. The circumstance of his allowing
his mind to reason on the subject is a prima facie case against his
sanity; at least it demonstrates a great weakness of the moral consti-
tution. A man's morale must be in an imperfect state of develop-
ment who reasons himself into the conviction that self-murder is
under any circumstances justifiable.
We dwell at some length on this subject, because we feel assured
that juries do not pay sufficient attention to the influence of passion
in overclouding the understanding. If the notion that in every case
of suicide the intellectual or moral faculties are perverted, be gene-
rally received, it will at once do away with the verdict of felo de se.
Should the jury entertain a doubt as to the presence of derangement,
(and such cases may present themselves,) it is their duty, in accord-
ance with the well-known principle of British jurisprudence, to give
the person the benefit of that doubt; and thus a verdict of lunacy
may be conscientiously returned in every case of this description.
