Ittscllancotts Jiottces
=========================

On the Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment of Eccentric Ner-
vous Affections. 
:Author:  William Anderson, F.R.C.S. London:
Churchill. 1850.

We have been much pleased with this work. It is evidently the
production of a reflecting, painstaking, and intelligent man. Dr.
Marshall Hall has established that the diseases of the nervous Bystcm
may be divided into those which have their origin at the nervous
centrcs, and those which occur at a distance from these centres, in
fact, into those centric and those eccentric in their character. Mr.
Anderson proposes to confine himself to the latter class of affections,
being, as he says, far more numerous than is generally supposed.
The eccentric nervous affections arc often formidable in their nature,
and, alas ! frequently intractable. They run their course with great
rapidity, and give rise to the most frightfully violent symptoms.
The introductory part of the work before us contains an admirable
account of the circulating system, and an excellent resuin6 of the
present state of our knowledge of the properties of the blood, of
assimilation, and reflex action. He then proceeds to consider the
pathological division of affections of the nervous system, and subse-
quently treats, at some length, the following diseases : hysteria,
epilepsy, delirium traumaticum, delirium tremens, hydrophobia, <kc.
We had marked several passages in Mr. Anderson's work for
extract, but the crowded condition of our pages compels us re-
luctantly to deprive our readers of the pleasure and advantage they
were sure to have derived from their perusal. Wo trust, however,
the work itself will find its way into the hands of our friends.
Mr. Anderson cites many cases illustrative of his peculiar views?
many of these cases came under his observation during his pupilago
at St. George's Hospital, where our author, we understand, studied
his profession with great industry and zeal under the official instruc-
tion of that able physician, Dr. Scyiuour, who was at that period
senior physician to the hospital.

Health, Disease, and Remedy. By George Moore, M.D., M.B.C.P-
<fcc. London: Longman, Brown and Co. 1850.
In* more than one number of this journal we have had occasion to
speak most favourably of the writings of Dr. G. Moore, the well-
known author of the work entitled, "The Power of the Soul over
the Body."

The volume now under review, although in many of its features
differing from the writer's previous productions, inasmuch as it
refers less immediately to psychological subjects, is nevertheless one
of great interest and value, particularly so at this time, when the
great question of public health is under the consideration of the
legislature. Dr. Moore writes scientifically, and, at the same time,
intelligibly, on the art of preventing disease. The volume is replete
with sound, judicious advice. It would be well for the community
if the rules so clearly and forcibly laid down by the author, were
literally followed. We arc glad to see Dr. Moore run a tilt at
homoeopathy and its celebrated founder, the illustrious (!) Hahne-
mann, who had the genius to discover that thejnost formidable diseases
have their origin in that " ancient miasm," the itch ! Dr. Moore, how-
ever, qualifies his censures by saying that it is a consolation to think
that "homoeopathic medicines do not poison," and expresses his thanks
to these practitioners " for their facts, as they (the liomceopathists)
teach us the importance of doing nothing to thwart nature." We
have first to learn that they are legitimately entitled to such thanks.
They teach us not to " thwart nature!" The immortal Sydenham,
the great Heberden, the illustrious Hunter, taught us this doctrine
in unmistakable language long before Hahnemann dawned upon
this poor benighted world, and dazzled us by the splendour of his
pathological discovery ! The evil of homoeopathy, and, in fact, of
every other description of quackery, consists mainly in the false con-
fidence inspired to the exclusion of other and more efficacious and
scientific remedies. A man with a serious disease allows his health
to be trifled with under the vain delusion that a " decillionth degree
of the solution of nux vomica" will restore him to health. As
nothing is literally done to cure the disease or arrest its fatal
progress, what was, perhaps, in the first stage, when under the carc
of the homoeopathic practitioner, a functional disorder, and, conse-
quently, easily removable by judicious means, becomes organic,' and
places* the poor patient irretrievably beyond the reach of the most
efficient treatment.

We regret to perceive that Dr. Moore is disposed to offer some
qualified praise to another section of practitioners, the hydropathists.
It is the bounden duty of all medical men who wish well to the com-
munity, and who arc anxious to uphold the dignity and respectability
of the profession, to discountenance in every way, and on all occa-
sions, those who leave the beaten track and resort to empiricism,
whatever garb it may assume.

Elementary Sketches of Moral Philosophy, delivered at the Royal
Institution, in the years 1 SOi-y-G. By the late Rev. Sydney
Smith, M.A. Longman. 1850.
It was our intention to have laid before our readers an analytical
review of these able lectures. The work certainly deserves to receive
more than an ordinary and passing notice. We must, however,
defer the publication of the analysis until our next number. We are
much struck with the novelty of many of the views of this eminent
422 MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES.
divine and wit. We particularly direct our readers' attention to the
chapter " On the Faculties of Animals as compared with those of
Men," as it contains a fund of anecdote, original thought, and racy
humour. In our next number, we hope to do the author full justice.
Of the Nature, Causes, and Treatment of Palsy and Apoplexy, $c.
By James Copland, M.D., F.R.S. London: Longman. 1850.
The greater portion of this work has already been published, in the
" Dictionary of Practical Medicinc," edited by Dr. Copland, and
some of the chapters formed the substance of the Croonian Lectures
delivered at the Royal College of Physicians in the years 181G-<.
Dr. Copland is too well known to the profession to need any com-
mendation from us. llis " Dictionary of Practical Medicine" con-
stitutes one of the literary pyramids of the age in which we live,
and speaks with " trumpet tongue" of the editor's extraordinary
industry, sagacity, knowledge, and perseverance. The work before
us being in part a re-publication of a portion of the Dictionary,
necessarily partakes more of the character of a compilation than that
of an original treatise. We certainly should have been better pleased
if the author had given us more of his own views, and less of the
opinions of others. Combined, however, with the literature of each
point discussed, Dr. Copland frequently speaks in his own proper
person, and then we immediately perceive the discerning, observing,
and reflecting physician. It is this circumstance that makes us the
more regret the frccptcnt references to the diversified and conflicting
opinions of others with which the work is so replete. However,
with this exception, we ofler the author our meed of praise, and
congratulate the profession on the appearance of his work, it will,
we have no doubt, soon find its way into the library of every reading
man in the profession.

Etheroloyy and the Phreno-Philosophy of Mesmerism and Mayic,
Eloquence, &jc. By J. Stanley Chimes, revised and edited by
W. G. Le Due. Boston and Cambridge, United States. 1850.
AV e think the less that is said of this work the better the author will
be pleased. Wc could, if we were so disposed, deal some heavy
critical blows, but wc feel reluctant to say anything offensive to the
feelings of the aspirant for fame who 1ms allowed his name to bo
published on the title page of this volume. It is much to be regretted
that so much paper, composition, and print should have been ex-
pended in such a cause; but paper-manufacturers, printers, book-
binders, to say nothing of critics, must live, and trunk-makers
occasionally require the means of giving to their productions an
internal tunic. Thus the world wags. Our author, if he has no
other consolatory reflection, may comfort himself with the assurance
of doing the "state some service," in thus contributing his mite to
the support of a section of his fellow-men with much more humble
pretensions than he appears to lay claim to.
On Instinct anil Reason. By Alfred Smee, F.R.S. Reeve, Benliam,
and Reeve: London. 1850.

This volume contains n fund of interesting anecdote, having reference
to the subject of instinct. We do not, however, agree with the
author's generalizations; nevertheless, the work is likely to find
readers and admirers. The volume contains some excellent illus-
trations. We particularly refer to some admirably coloured engrav-
ings of injectcd animal tissues. Wo cannot close this short notice
without directing the author's attention to a curious and unexplained
circumstance?How is it that the history of the " Aphis Vastator"
is printed in the chapter on " Perverted Reason 1" Surely our friend
Mr. Smee is a bit of a wag.
Researches on the Natural History of Death. By Ben NET Dowler,
M.D. New Orleans. 1850.
A very interesting and instructive essay, by a sensible physician.
The subject of premature interment has occupied much attention
on the other side of the channel. We are not astonished at this
when we hear that the number of premature interments in France
prevented in one year amounted to ninety-four ! Of these, thirty-
five persons awoke of themselves from their lethargy at the moment
the funeral ceremony was about to take place; thirteen recovered in
consequence of the affectionate care of their families; seven revived
upon the coffin in which they were inclosed falling; nine owed their
recovery to wounds inflicted by the needle in sewing their winding-
sheet ; three to the sensation of suffocation they experienced in their
coffin; nineteen to their interment having been delayed by fortuitous
circumstances; and six to their interment having been delayed in
consequence of doubts being entertained of their death. Dr. Dowler
refers to the extraordinary French story of a lady who died and
was buried. An old lover hearing of the fact, undertook a long
journey to.France to procure a lock of her hair. He disinterred the
body at night for this purpose, and was rejoiced to see his mistress
alive. As the lady had the misfortune to be married, the lovers fled
to America, and after the expiration of twenty years returned to
France. The husband, Mr. Rennelle, claimed his wife. The question
came before the judicial tribunals, and the court awarded the body
to the party who disinterred her, and restored her to life. Dr.
Dowler gravely expresses his disbelief in the truth of the narrative;
and with great naivete asks, " How could the lady live so long under-
ground without fuel, food, and air ?" We would add?without the
use of a toothpick 1 Dr. Dowler refers to the penchant which exists
in France for resuscitated wives marrying previously rejected lovers,
which he thinks may possibly explain a maxim ascribed to a French
philosopher, viz.:?That marry whom yon will, you will afterwards
find that you have married quite a different person. Pleasant dis-
covery !
Memoir oj Dr. Prichard. By Dr. J. A. Symonds. Bristol.
1850. Pamphlet.

"We have to apologise to the author of this pamphlet for not before
directing the attention of our readers to his able, interesting, and
classical piece of instructive medical biography. Dr. Symonds gives
us a rapid but cori-ect account of the cax-eer of the late Dr. Prichard,
with an admirable resum6 of his numerous writings. The pamphlet
does great credit to the intellect and heart of the author. We regret
that our space will not admit of our publishing a more detailed
account of this memoir. All who are interested in the life of the
distinguished ethnologist must procure the pamphlet. It will repay
perusal.

Lunacy and Lunatic Life. By A Late Superintendent op an
Asylum. London. 1850.

This volume contains a popular account of lunacy and lunatic
asylums, and will be found of service to all who have friends and
relatives mentally afllicted. Its pretensions are of a humble character;
but, nevertheless, it may be consulted with advantage.
