The Trial of Robert Pate
==========================

445
Art. II.?
-
Since the publication of the last Number of our Journal, a trial of great
importance has taken place, involving the elucidation of points of
interest to all medical jurists and psychologists. A man, who once
had the honour of holding her Majesty's Commission, has been arraigned
at the Central Criminal Court for the commission of a most cowardly
assault upon the Queen. In one of the most public thoroughfares in the
metropolis, in the open face of day, and whilst surrounded by her children
a person, having the exterior of a gentleman, had the audacity to strike
her Majesty with a cane across the face with sufficient severity to leave
behind perceptible marks of his brutal and cruel violence ! At the
trial, an attempt was made to obtain this man's acquittal on the ground
of insanity; but the judge and jury indignantly repudiated the plea,
and Pate was accordingly sentenced to seven years transportation !
It is our wish to direct the particular attention of our readers to this
case. In the first, and in subsequent numbers of this Journal, we
have fully discussed the question of criminal insanity. It will there-
fore be unnecessary for us to enter again into any detailed exposition of
the principles which, in our judgment, should guide those entrusted
with the grave responsibility of deciding as to the existence of'insanity
in any given case of crime. The plea of insanity is one of the most
important that can be urged in a court of justice in extenuation of the
criminal acts of individuals. It should never be advanced except in
clear and obvious cases, Avhere little or no doubt can be entertained as
to the existence, not only of derangement of mind, but of derangement
of such a hind, and to such a degree, as to justify the immediate admis-
sion of the fact, and the necessary and consequent acquittal of the
prisoner. The greatest caution should be exercised in the use of the
plea, and medical men especially engaged in the study of mental
diseases ought, above all others, to be particularly upon their guard in
giving evidence in these cases, exhibiting a jealousy lest their opinions
should be used for the purpose of shielding great criminals from the
legal penalties awarded as a punishment for serious inroads upon the
recognised laws which bind society together. In matters of this kind,
the public and profession naturally place a high value upon the expe-
rience and judgment of men Avhose peculiar studies and opportunities of
obtaining a practical insight into the morbid phenomena of the human
mind, sj)ecially qualify them for the elucidation of difficult points con-
nected with criminal insanity. If it be found that the most eminent of
British psychologists are disposed to stretch this important and valuable
plea beyond its legitimate limits, then a reaction will certainly take
place in tlie public mind, and these questions will be decided in
our courts of law without having recourse to medical evidence, and
points of lunacy will be left altogether to the judgment and common
sense of an English judge and jury. That a disposition of this kind
unfortunately exists, is very evident.* This feeling, we lament to say,
is not confined to those organs supposed to represent public opinion, but
medical journalists have joined in the hue and cry against the abuse of
the plea, and in doing so have, we think, most unjustifiably, endea-
voured to undervalue the evidence of those usually called upon, in con-
sequence of their enlarged experience, to substantiate it in our criminal
courts. These are important signs of the times; and although they
ought not, in the slightest degree, to deter the psychologist from the
manly, independent, and honest expression of his scientific opinion,
they certainly should induce him to act with great caution and judgment
when called upon to give evidence in any cases involving the intricate,
subtle, and important questions of crime and insanity. Of the value of
the medical evidence of those whose specialty it is to investigate the
wonderful changes which disease effects in the human mind, there
* We cite the following passage from the Morning Post of July 13, as illustrative
of the attacks to which medical men are subject who give evidence in these cases:?
"Had the jury suffered themelves to be swayed from the legal as well as common sense
view of the question by the perverted metaphysical refinements of Drs. Conolly and
Monro, the consequences of the course into which the mischievous guidance of those
fanciful gentlemen would have led them must have been eventually most disastrous.
" Dr. Conolly appears to have devoted his attention so exclusively to the various
shades of mental disease that his own understanding on these points has lost the power
of discrimination, and he has refined away to such an extent all distinctive boundaries
between the phases of progressive mental abberration, from occasional eccentricity to
utter loss of reasoning power, that he can apparently no longer distinguish where
absolute madness begins and moral and legal responsibility ceases. There are very
few of our fellow-subjects, we suspect, who could get from Dr. Conolly a certificate of
perfect sanity?very few who would not, judice Dr. Conolly, be properly located at
Hanwell. Di his view, all persons who ambitionlcss saunter along the path of life,
without setting before them any especial object for attainment, exhibiting, with a feeble
and indolent controlling will, occasional outbursts of passion or erratic impulses, aro
of unsound mind, and fit subjects for exemption from the ordinary consequences of the
infraction of the laws by which the rest of society is bound.

"We believe we have not in the least degree strained the interpretation of the
evidence given by Dr. Conolly, as reported 011 this occasion in the columns of our
contemporaries, as well as in our own. Nay, Dr. Conolly goes even further than we
have represented; he admits that Mr. Pate undoubtedly knew the distinction between
a right and a wrong action, that he was well aware that it was wrong to strike the
Queen, but still he comes to the conclusion that Mr. Pate is of unsound mind, because
the action was apparently motiveless and the result of a strange uncontrollable
impulse. Is it possible that Dr. Conolly, who has concentrated his attention for so
many years on the diseases of the mind, is not aware that across the soundest minds
flit occasionally wild desires, strange imaginings, and fautastic fancies, which the will
feels a strange anxiety to yield to, with no greater motive than that of enjoying the
pleasure of putting them in action, and which it is only restrained from doing, either
by the dread of certain consequent human punishment, or the more powerfurcontrol
of religious principles ?"

cannot, among thinking, sensible, and unprejudiced men, be two opi-
nions. It lias been said that the psychologist sees insanity where the
ordinary medical philosopher can recognise no shade of deranged mind,
and that his natural bias is in favour of the existence of insanity in every
case where the faintest suspicion has arisen as to its presence. This
is foolish twaddle. Why should not the psychologist be capable of
giving as honest an expression to his opinion as any other section of
the medical profession? No one dreams of questioning the judgment or
sagacity of a Bright, a Rees, or a Bird, when called upon to decide as
to the pathological condition of the kidney, in any given case?no person
would have the audacity to challenge the opinion of a Brodie, a Law-
rence, or a Fergusson, 011 any matter involving a complex surgical point
of practice; no person would have the presumption to whisper the
semblance of a doubt as to the profound practical sagacity of a Seymour,
Watson, Latham, or a Williams, in any medical case, requiring, for its
successful elucidation, a mind enriched by the vast resources of medical
art and science; 110 sane person could doubt the extreme value of the
opinions of a Christison or a Taylor on a point of medical juris-
prudence ; and yet, if we were to carry out the principle advocated by
some who have undertaken to enlighten the profession upon these
abstruse points, no greater weight or authority is to be attached to
the opinion of these distinguished men than we should extend to less
informed and cultivated minds, who have not enjoyed a tithe of the
opportunities of acquiring a knowledge of the more profound branches
of pathology and therapeutics possessed by those who deservedly are
placed, by almost common consent, in the foremost ranks of the profes-
sion. The psychologist, Avliatever may be the natural and original
strength of his understanding, the acuteness of his powers of observa-
tion, perception, and reflection, and the extent of his opportunities of
acquiring a minute knowledge of the subtle characteristics of disordered
mind, iu all its erratic forms, with the best intentions to arrive at the
truth is liable to errors of judgment; but to state that his opinion is of
no more value and importance in the elucidation of the action of a mind
clouded by disease, or thought to be so, than that of a practitioner
whose attention has never been directed to the study of insanity, and
whose opportunities of becoming practically acquainted with the habits
of the insane have been less than nothing, is to state what is intensely
absurd, and utterly at variance with the common sense of the profes-
sion. Such attempts to distort the truth, and to pander to low and
vulgar prejudices, are unbecoming the members of a liberal profession.
The men who thus endeavour to lower, in public and professional esti-
mation, the opinions, learning, and labours of the British psychologist,
mi o-ht as well think of levelling St. Paul's Cathedral to the ground, by
hutting their empty heads against its porticoes. Whilst we give this
warm expression to our opinion, we nevertheless think it our duty, as
public journalists, to caution this section of our profession against a
lax use of the plea of insanity; we must not give our enemies in and
out of the profession the slightest excuse for these illiberal and unjust
attacks upon a body of men deserving, in every point of view, the con-
fidence and support of all enlightened men. Having premised these
few observations, we would address ourselves to the special subject of
this paper. In another portion of the journal, we have printed, in extenso,
the trial of Pate. Notwithstanding the respectability of the medical and
general evidence adduced, we are compelled, by a stern sense of duty,
to express our concurrence in the verdict of the jury. We do not
belong to that section of psychologists, who maintain that in every
case the plea of insanity should be held as conclusive and valid, without
any reference to the kind and degree of the mental disturbance which
lias been supposed to give rise to the criminal act. This is no recently
formed opinion. In a work published in 1843, we have placed upon
record similar views.* We then observed:?

" In a previous part of this work, I have ventured to express an
opinion, opposed, I know, to that generally entertained by many who
have written on this subject. I again repeat, that I am not prepared
to give an unqualified assent to the dogma, that in every case of mental
derangement,?without any reference to its degree or character,?ought
the person to be screened from the penalty awarded by the laws for
criminal offences. I am ready to admit, that if insanity be clearly
established to exist, a jirimd facie case is made out in favour of the
prisoner; but that because a person may be proved to be strange and
wayward in his character, to fancy himself a beggar when he may have
the wealth of a Croesus, or to be ill when he is in the buoyancy of
health?to believe that such a person ought, of necessity, to be
exonerated from all responsibility, is a doctrine as unphilosophical and
untenable as it is opposed to the safety and well-being of society."
Our opportunities of extended experience have been great since the
publication of this opinion. The more wc have seen of insanity, parti-
cularly among criminals, the stronger are our convictions that this is the
sound, the safe, and philosophical view of the question of derangement
of mind complicated with crime. If the extreme view of the subject is
recognised, and acted upon, society would not be safe ; if every shade of
disturbed mind, if any amount of eccentricity, even when evidently
associated with unhealthy cerebral organization, or even incipient
insanity, is to shield persons from the just punishment awarded for
offences against life and property, we might be justified in closing the
* The Plea of Insanity in Criminal Cases. 1843. By Forbes Winslow, M.D.
doors of our criminal courts, and superannuating the judges who are
intrusted with the administration of the laws ! If we carried out this-
principle to its full extent, many great criminals would elude the hands
of justice, and escape the just punishment awarded for crime.

As we have stated in a previous number of this Journal, a sufficiently
just and scientific distinction is not drawn between the actions of a
naturally eccentric, ill-regulated, -perverse, and wicked mind, and the
mental disturbance, perverseness, caprice, and viciousness which are
clearly traceable to disordered mind, consequent upon physical disease.
There is a natural and healthy eccentricity, caprice, distorted and un-
natural affection, vice, and disposition to acts of violence and cruelty,,
which are quite independent of that disturbance of the current of thought
and perversion of the will, the clear and evident consequences of physical
disease or disorder resulting in a morbid action of the faculties of the
understanding. As a man may have a natural physical, so lie may have
a connate mental defect, apart altogether from disease of the mind, and
which undoubtedly places him among the responsible portion of society,
Natural eccentricity, oddity, and perversion of the mind are sometimes J
confounded with the products of disease; and this has led to much
misconception of opinion, useless disputation, errors of conduct and
judgment. We see nothing in the case of Pate which removed him
from the responsible class of society. We are ready to admit that a
sufficient degree of eccentricity and irregularity of thought and action
was established to justify the grave suspicion of his mental unsound-
ness, and entitled his case to serious inquiry ; but that the history of the
case, and the evidence adduced at the trial, justified the acquittal of the
prisoner on the pica of insanity, we are not prepared for a single instant
to admit.

"If we confine," says a contemporary,* "our attention to what
transpired on the morning of the outrage, Ave shall discover nothing in
the least degree indicating that he was insane. He left his home as
usual: joined the crowd at Cambridge-gate as other people did ; watched
quietly for the approach of her Majesty's carriage ; and accomplished
the attack with great quickness and dexterity. When seized upon the
spot, he was perfectly sensible of what he had done; he knew it was-
her Majesty whom he had struck; and there was not the least appear-
ance of incolierency either in his manner or his observations. If we
take the retrospect of his life, which was furnished during the trial, and
ransack the incidents of his personal biography, we must still come to
the same conclusion; true, he was eccentric enough, but not more so
than other men, were we only able to observe the peculiarities which
constantly occur in the solitary and private life of almost every indi-
vidual. He lamented the death of his dog?we have seen a high-
* Medical Times.

minded and very illustrious professor shed tears over the death of a
nohle Newfoundland dog, which was wickedly and spitefully poisoned.
He lamented the loss of his horses?we have seen young men at College
half maniacal over a much less calamity befalling a favourite hunter.
He shouted and sang aloud when he was in his bath?we were not
many weeks ago at Brighton, and there heard an eminent Chancery
barrister and a celebrated Italian artist, in the swimming bath, shouting
and fighting with the watery element as if they were stark mad. He
put whiskey and camphor into the water in which he bathed?an old
woman's remedy, which many sensible persons adopt at different water-
ing places, particularly in the north. He bought some nursery rhymes,
and read them through?very lately we met a learned friend of ours,
who had bought, for sixpence, a copy of JEsop's Fables, and was read-
ing them witli great delight. He walked about the streets in a hurried ?
manner, switching his cane to and fro, and we are told looked wild?
perhaps so, but he took care never to be run over, or to meet with any
other accident. He ordered a cab-driver to come to his door daily at a
given hour, and drive him over to Putney-heath, where he walked for
about ten minutes among the furze?how many hundreds daily take a
far more monotonous drive in Hyde park ? Lastly, he had a dyspeptic
attack, and talked about having bricks and stones in his stomach?but
there is no evidence to show that these substantive expressions were
meant to convey more than a description of the uneasy sensations he
endured. Where, then, is the evidence of this Robert Pate's insanity?
He discharged his duties in his regiment ' to the satisfaction of his
superior officers, and was esteemed by them and everybody in the
regiment.' At his lodgings, his conduct was exemplary?' lie paid his
accounts very regularly, put them away, and kept the receipts;' but
notwithstanding all this, Dr. Conolly declares his opinion that this man
was of unsound mind. ' I form this opinion,' he observes,' from the
conversations I myself have had with him, and from all the other facts
I have heard, but principally from the former. It seemed to me that
he has a very small share of mental power, without object or ambition,
and unfit for all the ordinary duties of life. In conversation lie tooidd
undoubtedly know the distinction between a right and a wrong action,
but I should say that he would be subject to sudden impulses of passion
We cannot conceive more inconclusive reasoning. Does it follow that
because a man has a ' small share of mental power,' and is without
'object or ambition,' that therefore he is not amenable for his actions to
the laws of society 1 The opinion of Dr. Conolly, that he was ' unfit
for all the ordinary duties of life,' is directly at variance with the
evidence to which we have referred. Dr. Conolly admits, that ' in
conversation he would undoubtedly know the distinction between a right
SOc L- b? and a wrong action.' Why then should his conduct not have been
governed by his perception of right and wrong, since it is admitted
there was no lesion of his intellectual faculty 1 1 But I should say,'
adds Dr. Conolly, ' that he would be subject to sudden impulses of
passion.' So are men of evil disposition and bad moral habits; but
surely this unhappy mental condition ought not to be allowed as an
extenuation of crime. Dr. Monro states, that lie had examined the
prisoner five times since his committal, and was of opinion tliat he was
of unsound mind; but his reasons for coming to that conclusion do not
appear to have been elicited upon cross-examination."

Again, another medical journalist* observes?
" "We do not remember to have met with a case in which the plea of
insanity was advanced upon weaker grounds than in this. Admitting
Dr. Conolly and Dr. Monro to be correct in their opinion that the
prisoner was of unsound mind, it is clear from the present state of the
law, that his unsoundness or weakness of mind had not reached that
degree to render him irresponsible for offences committed against
others. Mr. Pate was not so mentally unsound as to be unsusceptible
of correction by punishment; and the verdict returned against him will,
we think, have the good effect of preventing others in the same weak
mental condition from committing an assault upon her Majesty. If
the moral powers of such persons are not sufficient to control their
criminal impulses, the recollection that a similar act was punished by
seven years' transportation, may suffice to restrain the arm thus wan-
tonly raised against the Sovereign."

The law, as laid down by the judges in the House of Lords, when
this important question was brought under their consideration, distinctly
asserts that no defence on the ground of insanity is to be considered
valid, unless it can be clearly established that the person alleged to be
insane is unacquainted with the distinction between right and wrong.
If he be conscious that he is violating the law, and has sufficient capacity
to appreciate his relative position to the law of the land, he is justly
held amenable for his conduct. We must have some test of responsibility,
and this, by universal consent, is considered by those who have the
administration of justice, the best standard that could be devised. It
is the only test (however imperfect it may be) of the plea of insanity
recognised by the law of England. As both of the medical gentlemen
who were examined distinctly affirmed that Pate knew the distinction
between right and wrong, the verdict was in strict uniformity with the
law, as expounded by all our great judges. But, apart from the strict
legal and technical view of the case, we have no hesitation in stating
that the jury came to a just decision. The medical evidence certainly
did not warrant any other result.

It should never be forgotten that there is always afloat upon the
surface of society a large body of strange, wayward, intemperate,
eccentric, half-cracked, and half-educated persons, individuals who
delight in deviating from the ordinary and recognised mode of thinking
and acting, who are subject to acts of great caprice?naturally impulsive
in all their actions?inflated with ideas of their own importance?
* Medical Gazette.

subject to uncontrollable and violent passion, (because they have never
been taught the art of self-control,) vicious, depraved, sensual, and
devilish, ever anxious to creep out of their natural insignificance, and
to make themselves the subjects of public notoriety. This constitutes
one of the most dangerous sections of society outside the walls of
Bethlem and St. Luke's. They endanger the public peace, give rise to
great anxiety on the part of their relatives, and engender in private
families an immense amount of heart-burning and unhappiness.
Again, there is a large class of persons "who, from want of education,
from the habit of pandering to vicious inclinations, or owing to the
existence of some natural constitutional defect, or from being exposed
to the depressing and exciting emotions, are brought very closely
within the domain of actual insanity, and are seen hovering between
the confines of sanity and mental derangement. Both these classes are,
in the strict signification of the term, capable of exercising self-control,
of knowing the distinction between right and Avrong, and therefore are
to be viewed as responsible agents. We cannot contemplate without
feelings of serious apprehension the inevitable consequences of an indis-
criminate and unscientific admission of the plea of insanity upon the
minds of the two classes previously referred to. If they are led to
suppose that it is only necessary to prove the existence of eccentricity,
extreme capriciousness, great deviation from the ordinary habits of life,
in order to escape the criminality of their actions, Ave feel assured that
an important controlling influence would be removed from a consider-
able section of society. These persons must be taught the necessity of
self-control; that their eccentricity and tendency to acts of violence,
whatever may be the motive that urges them on, will not protect them
from punishment.

The power of self-control is, in many instances, weakened, or alto-
gether lost, by a voluntary indulgence in a train of thought, which it
was the duty of the individual in the first instance to resolutely battle
with, control, and subdue. Insanity is thus often self-created:?
" King Phil. You are ns fond of grief as of your cliilil.
Constance. Grief fills the room up of my absent child,
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
l'uts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
Remembers me of all his gracious parts,
Stuffs out his vacant garments with hi? form ;
Then have I reason to be fond of grief."?King John.
The state to which grief has reduced the mind of Lady Constance
frequently precedes insanity, and is, to a certain degree, a voluntary act
of the mind; the intellect retaining its sanity conjointly with the power
of volition. Directly the will ceases to control the thoughts and emo-
tions, tlie understanding loses that balancing agent which preserves it
in a state of healthy equilibrium.

A man indulges in a depraved course of conduct ; harbours and
encourages a vicious current of ideas, his actions often corresponding
with the unfortunate condition of his mind and feelings, until all power
of volition becomes suspended, and he is actually reduced to a state
of lunacy.* A person, perhaps for some real cause, feels a degree of
animosity towards a particular individual who has injured him. Instead
of making an effort to conquer this feeling, he allows,?in fact, forces?his
mind to dwell upon it; the idea pursues him in all his walks; haunts
him in his waking thoughts; exercises its ascendancy over him during
the slumbers of night. The mind eventually becomes so absorbed in
the idea that the bitter angry feeling, which, at the first onset, was insig-
nificant and controllable, takes full possession of the mind, and influ-
ences and distorts every thought and action. The mind soon becomes
diseased, the insanity manifesting itself in an exaggerated and extra-
vagant conception of an idea which had some semblance of truth for
its existence. The self-created morbid idea may thus obtain a complete
mastery over the mind, and lead to the commission of crime.f
If self-control is to be exercised with any great advantage, it is cer-
tainly in the earlier or incipient stages of disordered mind; at this
period it is iwssible, even when insanity has clearly commenced its
inroads upon the intellect, to subdue the morbid thoughts, feelings, and
impulses, by a resolute and determined effort of the will. It may be
said that the disorder of the mind, which is so often palpable in the
incipient stage, is not insanity in the proper acceptation of the term ;
that it is not entitled to this appellation until the power of volition is
suspended. But this is not altogether a sound view of the case. We ?
are willing to admit the extreme difficulty?nay, the impossibility?of
drawing the line of demarcation between sanity and insanity, responsi-
bility and irresponsibility. Who will venture to point out the neutral
ground ? Where is, we might exclaim with a distinguished historian,
* " The indulgence of violent emotions," says Dr. Conolly, " is singularly detri-
mental to the human understanding?and it is to be presumed, that the unmeasured -
emotions of insanity are sometimes perpetuated in consequence of the disorder of the
brain, originally induced by their violence. A man is at first only irritable, but gives way
to his irritability. Whatever temporarily interferes with his bodily or mental functions,
reproduces the disposition to be irritated, and circumstances are never wanting to act
upon this disposition till it becomes disease. The state of the brain, or part of the
brain, which is produced whenever the feeling of irritation is renewed, is more easily
induced at each renewal, and concurs with the moral habit to bring on the paroxysm
on any slight occasion?other vehement emotions and passions effect the same
disorder of the miud."

j Ethical philosophers have maintained that man is responsible even for his
dreams. It is argued that the train of ideas occurring during the period of sleep is
palpably influenced by the voluntary thoughts during the day.
when discussing the propriety of the resistance made to the tyranny of
James II.,*?where is the frontier where virtue and vice fade into each
other? Who has ever been able to define the exact boundary between
courage and rashness, between prudence and cowardice, between frugality
and avarice, between liberality and prodigality ? A good action is not
distinguished from a bad action by marks so plain as those which
distinguish a hexagon from a square. Carrying out this view of the
case, we should ask who woidd be so bold as to define the boundaries
of vice and insanity? The extreme difficulty of the subject ought
to humble human pride, and make even the most confident and expe-
rienced among our psychologists cautious in deciding, without careful
investigation, on matters so subtle, mysterious, and complex.

As great power of self-control manifestly exists in the earlier periods
of mental derangement, and as many cases of incipient insanity are cured
by the determined efforts of the individual to keep in abeyance his dis-
position to engender a morbid train of thought, how important does it
become that those so unhappily situated should be assisted in their
efforts to ward off* mental disease? How is this to be effected? Not,
certainly, by withdrawing from them the moral and controlling influence
of the law. The majesty of justice must not only be vindicated, but the
healthy influence of the law be fully maintained. The eccentric, the
wayward, the capricious, the vicious, the habitually intemperate, violent,
impulsive, and passionate man, and even those more closely bordering
upon insanity, must be taught, in clear and unmistaJceable language,
that the tribunals of the country hold them responsible for their actions ;
that they cannot with, safety or impunity outrage the laws or decencies of
society, or shield themselves from punishment; that the law considers
them responsible for their actions. If this idea had been fully impressed
upon the mind of Pate, would he have committed so gross an assault
upon her Majesty? We doubt it. We are not justified, as members of
a Christian community, as citizens anxious to hold inviolable the laws
which bind and protect society, in advocating a doctrine calculated to
give full play and exercise to the unbridled passions and impulses of a
number of weak-minded, half-idiotic, morbidly-conceited persons, who
are constantly swimming upon the surface of every great community, and
ever anxious to make themselves objects of public notoriety, without
any regard to the means by which they cffect their object. Take for
illustration the following fact:?

" A person of the name of Edwin Bates, who stated that he was an
artist by profession, was charged at the Bow-street polico-officc with
having sent, with the view of extorting money, threatening letters to
His lloyal Highness Prince Albert. Mr. Jardine, the magistrate,
* Mr. Macnulny.
heard tlie case, tlie prosecution being conducted by Mr. Raven, of the
Treasury. It appears that the prisoner addressed a number of letters to
His Royal Highness, soliciting pecuniary assistance, with the view of
relieving him from alleged railway losses. Some of the letters contained
expressions implying that it was the intention of the writer to do His
Royal Highness some bodily harm, unless his letters and solicitations
were satisfactorily replied to. The letters were shown to the prisoner,
and he immediately admitted the authorship. In his defence, Edwin
Bates, the prisoner, accused His Royal Highness of unkiiulness. He
said that he had applied to other noblemen and gentlemen, who had
responded kindly to his appeal for pecuniary assistance. Prince Albert
declined to aid him. In pleading for a mitigation of his sentence, he
observed?' If you make an example of me, you will deprive me of all
the subscriptions. I hope your worship will consider the state of my
mind at the time of my writing these letters, and put a favourable con-
struction upon them, for I can assure you I have no hostile feelings
towards the royal family, and they have none towards me. You have
only to send to Dr. Monro to learn the state of my mind. When I was
tried for felony, thirteen years ago, I was considered insane. I do not
wish to speak of my own weakness; but it is well known that I am
not in my right mind.' "*

It is a fact well known to those who have had much to do with the
insane, that the power of self-control is not altogether lost even in
persons whose kind and degree of mental derangement are such as to
justify their forcible separation from home and society, and confinement
in an asylum. We have witnessed in very obvious cases of lunacy the
exercise, for a purpose, of great?even extraordinary?powers of self-
control. To say that lunatics are not amenable to many of the influ-
ences that regulate the actions of sane persons, is to assert what is not
the fact. Of course, the greater proportion of the insane are with
extreme difficulty controlled, and are incapable of controlling them-
selves ; but Ave arc disposed to believe that even this view of the case
may be exaggerated. It is the duty of the scientific and philosophic
physician intrusted with the care of the insane, to develop in his patients
the habit of self-control, and much of his comfort and success will
depend upon the extent to which he is enabled to effect this desirable
object.* If positive lunatics are to be influenced by expectation of
rewards and punishments, (and they certainly are,) it is not a great
stretch of fancy to suppose that those, be they insane, or bordering
upon insanity, who are allowed to be at large and mix in society, are
susceptible of the same moral influences; and if they do not possess the
* Times, July 23.

?J* " It is," says Dr. Prichard, " a great error to suppose that lunatics are not sus-
ceptible of moral discipliue, or capable of being brought under tbe control of motives
similar to those which govern the actions of other persons. It is very possible to
subject them to such a rule, and this constitutes, indeed, a very important and essential
part of the means of cure."

power, they ought to be taught the necessity of bringing their thoughts
and actions within the range of sound reason and judgment. We are
anxious that our views on this important subject should not be open to
misconception or be misconstrued. God forbid that we should stand
forward as apologists for those who maintain, even in these enlightened
days, that the criminal lunatic should be subject to the extreme penalty
>of the law ! The advocates of such a doctrine will find no mercy at our
hands. We question the propriety of even using the word punishment
in association with the really insane. If it be found necessary, in
order to bring them within proper control and discipline, to subject
patients afflicted with derangement of mind to certain stringent regu-
lations, it ought only to be considered as a part of a system of rational,
humane, and philosophic moral treatment. In every criminal case where
the question of responsibility arises in the course of judicial inquiry,
IF IT BE POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH ANY DEGREE OF POSITIVE INSANITY",
IT SHOULD ALWAYS BE VIEWED AS A VALID PLEA FOB A CONSIDERABLE
MITIGATION OF PUNISHMENT, AND AS PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR
OF THE PRISONER, AND IN NO CASE WHERE INSANITY CLEARLY EXISTS,
(WITHOUT REGARD TO ITS NATURE AND AMOUNT,) OUGHT TIIE EXTREME
PENALTY OF THE LAW TO BE INFLICTED. We feel convinced that tllC
principle just enunciated is the most safe and humane one to act upon;
it does not protect the pseudo-lunatic from just punishment, and it is
conservative in its operation upon society as well as upon those who
-are really under the influence of diseased mind, and are susceptible of
being controlled. Two great objects will be thus obtained. We feel
assured that this view of the question will meet with the support of a
large and influential section of the profession, as well as of that portion
of the public press which is ever ready to watch with a jealous eye the
evidence of the psychologist in favour of the extenuation of crime on
the ground of insanity.
