Causes, Cure, And Prevention of Idiocy
========================================

Art. II.-
.
This subject is occupying at this moment much public aiul pro-
fessional attention. Wc arc rcjoiccd to be able to say so. The con-
dition of the poor idiot has been sadly overlooked, at least in this
country. Psychologists, however, arc disposed to make ample
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 293
amends for their past " sins of omission," and the great question of
the eurahility of idiocy, in all its forms, is now being scientifically
tested in more than one portion of the United Kingdom. We have
been much pleased with an article on the subject, based upon some
American reports of the state of idiocy in that part of the civilized
world, which appeared recently in a transatlantic contemporary, of
great ability.* The paper in question is based upon some reports
which are not easy of access in this country,+ and as Ave agree in the
main with the writer's views, we make no apology for transfer-
ring his observations to our own pages. The writer justly remarks:
Next to the poverty of the body?nakedness and hunger?the
poverty of the mind is occupying public attention and anxiety, and
the insane have become, and are becoming, the objects of interest.
But it must be confessed, that this interest was excited in former
times generally, and in many places even now, not so much for the
good of the suffering lunatics as for the security of the healthy
people. The insane were supposed to be too dangerous to others to
be allowed to run at large; and they were, therefore, confined in
strong places, and other means of security were used, so that the
timid public should suffer no injury from them. Some were enclosed
in worse places than violent criminals; and the jail, both here and
elsewhere, divided its accommodations and its discomforts between
the law-breakers and the lunatics; for their recovery was not a
thing sought for or expected, and no plan was laid, nor means pro-
vided, for this purpose. These patients Avere deemed as permanent
nuisances, and Avere merely to be kept out of harm's Avay, but out
of the Avay of injuring others.
But, in the course of time, it Avas discovered that even these
hopeless sufferers could be improved; and that most of them, if
attended to in proper time and manner, could be restored to health.
Consequently, the insane, in many places, are provided Avitli all the
means of restoration, and receive as tender and as successful care as
those avIio arc afflicted Avith other diseases.
* The American Journal of Medical Science, edited by Dr. Hays.
+ Report made to the House of Representatives of Massachusetts on the Com-
mission of Lunacy. House Doc. No. 72, pp. 10. Boston, 184G.
First Report of the Legislature of Massachusetts by the Commissioners appointed
to inquire into the Condition of Jdiots within tlio Commonwealth, by Samuel G.
Howe. House Doc. No. 152, pp. 20. 1849.
Second Report of the Legislature of Massachusetts by the Commissioners ap-
pointed to inquire into the Condition of Idiots within the Commonwealth, by S. G.
Howe. pp. 147. Boston, 1848. Senate Doc.
Causes and Prevention of Idiocy, pp. 24. By S. G. Howe. Boston, 1848.
294 CAUSES, CUKE, AND PHEVENTION OF JDIOCY.
Notwithstanding these judicious provisions for, and attention to,
the wants and sufferings of the lunatic, there are many whose dis-
ease sank into dementia, and they are now left in hopeless fatuity.
There was another and much larger class, who were born without
mental capacity, or with it, at most, very imperfect; or, in whom it
had never been developed. These were the idiots. It could not be
said, that they were to be restored to health, because they had never
been in any higher condition from which they had fallen. Their
state was not a disease, that should be cured; nor a perversion from
which they could be drawn back ; but it was an original want of
power or defect of mental development.
Believing that nature had unalterably fixed them in their present
condition, that, as one class of men were created for intelligence and
self-direction, so these were created for idiocy and dependence, the
world has hardly entertained the suspicion that they could be im-
proved, and has therefore left them to themselves in their degrada-
tion, and only provided for their animal wants, and protected them
from harm.
Besides these congenital idiots, there were many others who had,
in their early years, more or less intelligence, and gave promise of
becoming like other men and women; but, from some cause or other,
and often from no cause that was known to their families or friends,
their minds withered away, and they sank into idiocy as deep and as
confirmed as those who were born to this condition.
All these, the demented, the congenital, and the supervened idiots,
constitute a large class in every country, and bear very heavily upon
every community for their care and support.
That fallacious document, the " United States Census of 1840,"
states, that there were then 1271 idiots and insane in the State of
Massachusetts, and 17,<15G in the whole Union.
Certainly there arc as many as, and, without doubt, many more
than are here stated; lor, wherever any trustworthy inquiries liavc
been made, the numbers of the insane and idiots have been found
greatly to exceed the statements of the national census.
These idiots were the outcasts of society everywhere, and yet they
were dwelling in the bosom of many families. For them and for
their friends, for those who supported them, and for the keepers who
sometimes guarded them, there seemed no hope of amendment.
There was, rather, a fear, and even an expectation, that they would
grow worse. The best that they could look for was, that they
might go through, and end their low and imperfect life as they had
begun it.
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 295
But, about fifty years ago, accident suggested to some persons in
France, that idiots miglit be improved. Some philosophers of the
sensualists' school, wishing to prove that all our ideas were received
through the senses, undertook to teach a wild boy who had been
discovered wandering in the forest. He had no language, and
apparently no ideas. But, after ineffectual attempts to teach him
according to the sensualists' theory, it was discovered that he was an
idiot. Yet the labour of Itard, the instructor, was not all lost, for it
showed him that his pupil, however low and small his intellectual
powers might be, could be educated in some degree. Itard, becom-
ing interested in this matter, continued his efforts in his enviable
work, until he was convinced, not only that his single pupil could
be improved, but that other idiots could be benefited by education.
Various attempts were made in France to do something for this
class, and with a success proportioned to the wisdom and energy of
the efforts. Among the most active was Mr. Edward Seguin, who,
by his writings and his example, enlisted others to co-operate in the
same work. Mons. Ferrus established a school for this purpose in
Paris, in 1828, and Dr. Voisin established another in 1839. Dr.
Leuret and Mr. Vallee also lent their powerful aid to the work.
The result of all these efforts proved, that humanity, even in its
feeblest and most degraded condition, can almost invariably receive
some advantage from education; and that the dormant power can be
roused, and the darkened intellect can receive some light from proper
instruction.
In the winter session of 1846, the Legislature of Massachusetts
authorized the governor
" To appoint three persons to be commissioners to inquire into
the condition of the idiots in this Commonwealth, to ascertain their
number, and whether anything can be done for their relief, and to
make report of their doings to the next general court."
Happily for the success of this scheme, Dr. Samuel G. Howe, the
philanthropic director of the Perkins Institution for the Education
of the Blind, was appointed chairman of this committee of inquiry.
He laid his plans with good judgment, and pursued them with his
accustomed energy.
In the winter of 1847, the commissioners made their first report.
But they had made but a partial survey of the State. They had sent
circulars of inquiry to the clerks of every town and city. They had
personally visited as many towns, and examined as many idiots, as
possible. The}- had obtained information from France, Prussia, and
290 CAUSES, CUKE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
Switzerland, in regard to the manner and success of the treatment of
idiots in the schools which had been established for their education
in those countries.
By all these means the commissioners had obtained much valuable
information, but not all that was desired. They were, therefore,
authorized to continue their inquiries through another year.
At the session of 1848, Dr. Howe laid before the legislature the
result of his second year's labour in this work; and the whole is
published by order of the government, in a pamphlet of 100 pages
of text, and an appendix of tables extending through 48 pages
more.
These reports of Dr. Howe contain a great amount of important
information relative to the personal and social condition, and the
numbers, of idiots, and to the supposed causes of idiocy; and are,
therefore, valuable contributions to science.
They treat of the number of idiots in Massachusetts; definition of
terms idiot and idiocy; capacity, condition, and treatment of idiots
in private families and in almshouses; cleanliness, alimentation, and
exercise of idiots; of European schools for idiots, and of a proposition
for the same in Massachusetts. In the supplement Dr. Howe treats
of a classification of idiots, the supposed causes of idiocy, parentage,
hereditary tendency to bodily and mental imperfection, circumstances
which predispose to idiocy, physical and moral condition of parents,
intemperance, self-abuse, intermarriage of relatives, and attempts to
procure abortion.
The appendix contains several tables, which describe the 574 idiots
who were examined, showing their origin, present condition, and
future prospects.
Dr. Howe personally visited many towns and examined a great
many idiots. Besides this, a competent and trustworthy agent, Mr.
Enos Stevens, was employed for the same purpose. In course of the
years 184G and 1847, they visited 182 towns, containing, at the last
census, 392,580 inhabitants, and discovered 755 idiots. If the same
proportion prevails in the whole state and nation, there arc 1418
idiots in Massachusetts, and 32,827 in the United States. They
carefully examined 574 of these idiots, and made a record of their
names, their physical, moral, and mental character and condition,
their parentage, history, and the probable causes of their disability,
and the whole, with the exception of their names, is published in the
Report before us.
There arc many minute details respecting the parentage, the
habits and condition of the relations of the idiots, the bodily state
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 297
and mental power of the subjects, the size and form of their heads,
&c., which to a careless observer may seem trivial and irrelevant.
But as " this whole subject of idiocy is new, and science has not yet
thrown her certain light upon its remote or even its proximate
causes, nothing connected with them can be too minute to be observed
by the philosopher who is in search of the origin of this low condition
of man."?Second Report.
Dr. Howe is a believer in phrenology, and has brought the prin-
ciples of that philosophy to bear upon this subject; and although he
has not attempted to base this investigation upon that science, yet
he has availed himself of its classification of the powers and qualities
of man in the conduct of his inquiry.
It seems to be established by the result, that the mental and moral
conditions are connected with the general bodily and the cerebral
organization, the stature of the idiots, the size and shape of their
heads, and the width and depth of their chests. These have been
measured, and the shape of their whole frames and limbs have been
examined, and the record of each fact is published.
A large portion?fourteen pages of the Second Report?is taken
up with an attempt to define idiocy, or rather an attempt to reconcile
the many various and conflicting definitions with which the medical
and legal writers have endeavoured to describe this state. Our space
will not allow us to enter upon this part of the subject, nor should
we hope to be more satisfactory than others who have gone before
us. Of all the definitions that we find, none include all who are
indubitably idiots, without including some who plainly belong to the
more intelligent classes of mankind: and these definitions are so
unlike, that no two of them, when applied, would include precisely
the same number of individuals.
There is and can be no distinct and definite line drawn through
society, on one side of which it can be confidently said that all are
idiots, and 011 the other side all are of sound mind. The several
moral and mental qualities and powers that enter into and make up
the mind and character of man, are very unequally distributed. One
person has much of one faculty, and a disproportionately small quan-
tity of another, and very little of a third, and perhaps none of a
fourth. And another may have a very different distribution of
power, and be strong in those in which the first is weak, and weak
where he is strong. Thus, No. 413 has perception of musical sounds
and ability to count, much above the average of men of sound minds,
but his skill in the use of his perceptive and reflectivc faculties is
much below them; but No, 139 1ms a very small arithmetical power,
298 CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
and is dull in regard to musical sounds, while his perceptive faculties
are equal to the average of mankind, and his reflective faculties only
half as strong. Then we often see a man who is sufficiently wise in
ordinary affairs, but has no skill in numbers?or very acute in his
perception of facts, but very dull in reasoning from them.
From the lowest idiot, who cannot even control his muscular power
so much as to move his limbs or masticate his food, who can neither
see, nor hear, nor feel, up to men of the highest order of intellect,
there are all intermediate grades of intelligence, without intervals
between them. And the mental and moral qualities arc distributed
in such various proportions in these persons, that it is impossible
to classify them strictly.
Idiocy is a dcfect rather than a disease, a deficiency of the several
powers in greater or less degree, rather than a disease of the powers
that are originally perfect. Dr. Ray calls idiocy a defective develop-
ment. This agrees with Esquirol, who says: " Idiocy is not a dis-
ease, but a state in which the intellectual faculties have never been
manifested." Most of the legal descriptions point to this. Blackstone
says, " an idiot, or natural fool, is one who hath no understanding
from his nativity." The old English law recognises the same origin.
After quoting several definitions of idiocy, Dr. Howe says, " With-
out pretending to scientific accuracy, idiocy may be defined to be that
condition of a human being in which, from some morbid cause in
the bodily organization, the faculties and sentiments remain dormant
or undeveloped, so that the person is incapable of self-guidance,
and of approaching that degree of knowledge usual with others of
his age."?Second Report, p. 19.
There are all degrees of this condition, from the weak-minded
man, who errs in judgment and needs counsel of others in the
conduct of his affairs, to the lowest idiot, who is but a mere
organism.
Writers have made various divisions, each one according to his
view of some prominent traits or defects of idiots. To these Dr.
Howe adds a division of his own, which is as applicable as any
that have been offered, and certainly is as convenient and practicable,
inasmuch a9?it has regard rather to the degree of helplessness and
dependence of idiots on others for direction and support:
" Idiots of the lowest class arc mere organisms, masses of flesh and
bone in human shape, in which the brain and nervous system have no
command over the system of voluntary muscles; and which conse-
quently are without power of locomotion, without speech, without any
manifestation of intellectual or affective faculties.
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 299
"Fools are a higher class of idiots, in whom the brain and nervous
system are so far developed as to give partial command of the
voluntary muscles; who have consequently considerable power of
locomotion and animal action; partial development of the affective
and intellectual faculties, but only the faintest glimmer of reason, and
very imperfect speech.
" Simpletons are the highest class of idiots, in whom the harmony
between the nervous and muscular systems is nearly perfect; who
consequently have normal powers of locomotion and animal action;
considerable activity of the perceptive and affective faculties; and
reason enough for tlieir simple individual guidance, but not enough
for their social relations."?Second Rep., p. Gl.
Idiocy, like insanity, may be intellectual or moral, or both, and it
may include all or any part of those classes of powers, and in any
variety of combination.
Having determined as nearly and stated as clearly as possible
what idiocy is, and what idiots are, Dr. Howe next describes the
condition of those who had been examined.
Of the 574 idiots, 420 were so from birth, and 154 were originally
intelligent, but became idiotic in subsequent years.
Most of them are poor, and a large proportion are public paupers ;\
22 have property of their own held by guardians; 62 belong to
wealthy families; 225 belong to indigent families, but arc not public
paupers; 220 are town or state paupers; the pecuniary condition of
45 was not ascertained.
In regard to their dependence or power of self-sustenance?
" Fifty-three are as helpless as infants; 74 are as helpless as
children two years old; 94, as children seven years old; 138 can
work to some small profit, if carefully watched and directed; 179 can
nearly earn their board if directed in work by others; and 36 can
earn their board and clothing under the management of discreet
persons."?Second Report, p. 22.
This shows very plainly the absolute and entire dependence of
most of this class, and the partial dependence of the rest, on the sound
and the healthy for support and direction.
Their ages range from six months to 103 years; eleven are under
five; forty-nine under ten; 200 under twenty five; 372 over twenty-
five years of age; and the ages of two are not stated.
The great end of all this inquiry was to ascertain tlie capacity of
idiots for improvement. Dr. Howe thinks that 174 of the con-
genital idiots and 22 of the supervened idiots under twenty-five
years of age, and 195 congenital and 97 supervened idiots over
twenty-five years old, are capable of improvement. These are proper
NO. XI. x
300 CAUSES, CURE, AND I'llEVENTION OF IDIOCY.
subjects of education; tliey can be taught to do some kinds of labour,
to acquire some kinds of knowledge, to attend to their own persons
and take care of themselves.
Of the younger class 13 congenital idiots, and of the older class
38 congenital and 38 supervened idiots, appear to be capable of
little or no improvement.
Besides their helplessness and dependence, the situation of these
idiots is deplorable indeed. Dr. Howe says of the public paupers:
" They are of all sorts and grades of idiocy, from the mere simpleton
who cannot take care of himself, to the drivelling idiot who wallows
in his filth." " Some are comparatively free from the dominion of
animal lust and appetite, and arc mild, affectionate, and docile;
others are a helpless prey to dreadful passions, depraved appetites,
and disgusting propensities."
Some want instruction, and, if properly encouraged and directed,
will co-operate with a teacher in their education; others arc as
insensible and unimprovable as the oyster, and can receive no
advantage from others, except to be fed, clothed, and sheltered.
A large portion of these idiots are kept in public almshouses, and
although Dr. Howe says that he met with no instance of wilfully
unkind treatment of idiots by keepers of any almshouses, and that
" in most cases the overseers of the poor have given orders for the
idiots to be treated with kindness," yet they suffer for want of proper
management; for however humane and discrcet in ordinary affairs
the keepers of these houses may be, yet that spccial character which
is best fitted for the direction of idiots, the peculiar talent which can
best understand their degree of intelligence, and adapt its use of
motives and its plans of action and government exactly to their
comprehension, docility and power, is not sought for; and if it is
found in any of the keepers, it is rather accidental than the result of
design and care on the part of the public authorities.
In consequence of their disability of mind and body, idiots arc
incapable of taking so much care of their own persons and doing so
much for themselves as others do; they therefore need more care and
aid from others to keep their bodies in proper condition. They have
a lower sensibility, and their skins are not irritated by foreign
matters which may gather upon them; and, moreover, their eyes are
not offended by the sight, nor their nostrils by the foul odour, of a
filthy surface. They require, therefore, an unusual amount of atten-
tion to keep them in a neat condition, and to preserve them from
offensive filthiuess of person.
But for pauper idiots, generally, the means of this extraordinary
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 301
attention are not provided; and, according to the rej^ort, " in a great
many of our almshouses they are disgustingly filthy. They change
their body and bed-linen only once a week, and never bathe." In
this last matter, idiots form no remarkable exception to a very large
part of the people, and we fear that if this were to be adopted as a
test of competent mind, very many who are considered as of sound
mind, would be thrown into the class of imbeciles.
Idiots do not need more cleanliness than other persons; but they
do need as much, and it requires much more care from others to
maintain their external purity; and if they are neglected, they become
more filthy and offensive.
Idiots have generally great appetites, and many of them eat
voraciously. Minute inquiry was made as to the quantity of food
which 444 usually ate, and this quantity was compared with that
which others of the same sex and age usually eat, and the result
shows, that 20 consume less than the average; 81, just the average
quantity; 343, more than the ordinary allowance; and 11G, just double
the amount that others eat, and the average for the whole 444 was
about 50 per cent, more than that required for other persons.
Besides this enormous allowance which they obtain by consent of
others, they often steal more, and some will devour the offal and the
waste of the kitchen, even the foulest and filthiest garbage, which is
intended for the swine.
This gluttony increases their natural stupidity, for the nervous
energies which might go to sustain a muscular or mental action are
all absorbed in sustaining the digestive process.
Idiots are prone to inaction. They do not love motion, and still
less, labour. They prefer to bask in the sun, and lie there in utter
quiescence of both body and mind. If they are required to work,
they do it so unskilfully, and need so much direction and persuasion,
that their labour is unprofitable, and those who have the care of
them find it easier to support them without, than with, their help.
Consequently, very few of them work for the profit or advantage of
the labour. Still fewer take any action for the sake of the exercise,
and for health. They will not do it voluntarily, and others are
unwilling to urge it upon tliem. Their bodies are therefore sluggish,
and their minds stupid. They have weak muscles, and, though their
frames may be sufficiently developed, and their limbs sound, yet it is
rather from fat than muscular fibre, of which they have compara-
tively little.
The general management of the idiots in private families is not
much better than in almshouses, and in many it is much worse. Of
x 2
302 CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
the 354 who were examined in private houses, only 5 were treated
very judiciously. These were submitted to the best influences for
education and direction; they were taught all that they could learn;
their powers were developed to the fullest extent; their propensities
and passions were therefore controlled or restrained, and tlicy were
made comparatively happy and useful.
But these idiots are generally found in the poorest and most igno-
rant families: they are the children of the weak and the foolish,
and sometimes of other idiots like themselves. There is, therefore,
manifested in these families a gross ignorance, both of the causes
and of the nature of their disability. Their children arc thus sub-
jected to the worst influences, the most improper treatment, and, in
some cases, to the strangest experiments for their improvement.
" Sometimes they find that their children seem to comprehend
what they hear, but soon forget it: hence, they conclude that the
brain is soft, and cannot retain impressions, and then they cover the
head with cold poultices of oak bark, in order to tan or harden the
fibres. Others, finding it is exceedingly difficult to make any impres-
sion on the mind, conclude that the brain is too hard, and they
torture the poor child with hot and softening poultices of bread and
milk; or they plaster tar over the whole skull, and keep it on for a
long time."?Second Rep., p. 32.
Some give mercury to act " as a solder, to close up the supposed
crevices in the brain," &c.
Some encourage their children in their ravenous gluttony, because
they think the poor imbeciles have no other enjoyment than appetite,
and they shall be indulged in that.
In conducting this investigation of idiots, each one was examined
personally; and inquiry was made of the friends in regard to every
point that would throw any light upon their present condition, or its
origin. Their parentage, their health, habits, powers, propensities,
were ascertained; their stature, their chest, and the size and shape of
their heads were measured. The answer to each inquiry was noted
in a memorandum book, and the whole digested and arranged into
tables, which we have in the second Report. The names are omitted
in the printed table ; but each individual is numbered, and against
this number are placed the answers to the forty questions that were
asked.
The questions related to?1. Age. 2. Commencement of the
defect, congenital or not. 3. Height. 4. Temperament. 5. Tac-
tile sensibility. G. Command of muscular contractility. 7. Dynamic
condition of the body. 8. Sensibility to musical sounds. 9. Skill
in the use of language. 10. Capacity of fixing the sight on visible
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 303
objects. 11. Ability to count. 12. Consumption of food. 13.
Manifestation of the amative feelings. 14. Depth of chest. 15. Width
of chest. 16. Greatest circumference of cranium. 17. Greatest
diameter of cranium. 18. Diameter from the root of the nose
to the occipital spine. 19. Transverse diameter over the ears.
20. Arc of cranium from the root of the nose to the occipital spine.
21. Arc from ear to ear. 22. Size of the lower frontal region.
23. Skill in the use of the perceptive faculties. 24. Size of the
upper frontal region. 25. Skill in the use of the reflective faculties.
2G. Size of the lateral region. 27. Activity of the faculties of self-
preservation. 28. Size of the posterior region. 20. Activity of the
social sentiments. 30. Size of the coronal region. 31. Activity of
the moral sentiments. 32. Size of the cerebcllum. 33. Activity
of the animal nature. 34. Degree of ability to support themselves.
35. Parents in normal condition or not. 3G. Parents drunkards or
not. 37. Number of cases of idiocy or insanity known among near
relations. 38. Scrofulous or not. 39. Given to masturbation or
not. 40. Teachable or not. 41. Remarks.
The 1st, 3rd, 14th, 15th, 16tli, 17th, 18th, 19th, 20th, 21st, and
37th questions are answered in numbers positively, in regard to each
one. The 4th is answered according to the preponderance and
order of the nervous, fibrous, sanguine, and lymphatic temperaments.
The highest is placed first, and the lowest last, against each idiot's
Dame or number. The 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th,
22nd, 23rd, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30tli, 31st, 32nd, 33rd,
and 34th questions arc answered in numbers, relative to the size,
power, and development of the same, in 1000 ordinary persons of
the same age and sex. In these, 10 is assumed as the normal standard
of size, power, etc., and those of the idiots are stated in numbers
higher or lower, according to the fact. Thus, No. 395, who ate the
average quantity of food, is stated as 10; No. 360, who ate double
the average quantity, is stated as 20 ; No. 259 has no language,
and is marked 0; No. 268 can use monosyllables, and is marked
1; and No. 190, who talks as other persons, is marked 10.
It may seem forced to state the sensibility to musical sounds, or
activity of the moral sentiments or reflective faculties, in numbers,
yet it is the most convenient way of showing the relative quantity or
force of the powers or affections. And as the comparison was made
on the spot, and at the time when the answers were obtained, it is
probable that these numerical statements are correct. The standard,
however, is arbitrary, and various persons, who associate with society
of more or less cultivation and talent, and have different fields oi
304 CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
observation, will have different standards, and consequently different
notions of the power of these idiots. Yet we know of no better way
of making and stating the comparison, and we put forth these state-
ments of Dr. Howe in confidence that the whole will be sufficiently
understood for the purpose of the author, who merely wished to give
the best notion of the mental, and moral, and physical condition of
these idiots.
The 2nd, 35th, 36th, 38th, 39th, and 40th questions are answered
"yes," or "no."
In the last column, there are other remarks in regard to most of
the persons examined, mostly in reference to parentage, health,
habits, and condition of parents and other relations, and also in
reference to the history and habits of the idiot.
This table includes idiots of all ages, from a babe of six months to
a superannuated idiot of 103 years. Comparatively few arc given
in the earliest years. Of the 418 congenital idiots whose ages are
stated, only 43 are under ten, giving a proportion of 114 per 1000
of all, in the first decade of life; whereas the whole population of
Massachusetts has 237 per 1000 of all, in this decade. Probably
many, perhaps most of the idiotic children, may have escaped the
notice of the commissioners.
Dr. Howe says that " there are a great number brought into the
world so deformed, that it is apparent that they must be idiotic, and
so feeble that they do not live through infancy." " Idiots of the
lowest class perish in great numbers in infancy and childhood: fools
last longer; and simpletons attain to nearly the ordinary longevity.
Perhaps it is safe to say, that the average longevity of the lowest
class of idiots is not more than six years." And in the opinion of
the commissioners, the average duration of all congenital idiots is not
more than twelve years.
As we arc not sure that we have all the congenital idiotic children,
we cannot determine the probable average longevity from this num-
ber. The avei'age of all these is 28 years and 2-? months. The
average age of all over ten years old is 31 years and months.
That of all the whites of the State of the same age is 31 years and
9 months. So far as any inference can be drawn from this, an idiot,
if he survive his tenth year, will live nearly as long as a person of
sound mind. This would doubtless be an error. Probably the true
longevity of all idiots, and of all above ten years old, is less than those
above stated. This viability depends, in great measure, upon the
perfectncss or imperfectncss of their organization. Hence idiots of
the lowest class, who have the lowest organization, perish early, while
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 305
simpletons, whose intelligence and organization are not much lower
than those of other persons, and who are saved much of the anxiety,
wear and tear of life, that affect responsible men, often live to a great
age. The one whose age is now 103 years belongs to this class.
" When a person appeared in infancy, or early childhood, to be
idiotic, he is considered to have been born so." Those idiotic persons
who never manifested more power than they now appear to possess?
who, as they passed from infancy to childhood, did not put forth the
talents of the new age?who, however low they may now be, have
fallen from no higher degree of intelligence, are considered as con-
genital idiots. They belong to the class whom Dr. Howe considers
as helpless as infants two years old.
There is another class, who appeared in infancy to be as bright as
other infants, and even when they were young children they showed
no observable deficiency, but, when they passed from this stage of
life to the next older, they put forth no more power, and remained
ever afterward as weak and helpless as young children of seven years
old. These are supposed to have some native defect of organization
that prevents any greater expansion of intellect, under the ordinary
influences, than they now exhibit.
Dr. Howe says?
t " It was probably the intention of the legislature to use the word
' idiot in the popular and common sense. We have considered,
therefore, all persons whose understanding is undeveloped, or de-
veloped only in_ a partial and very feeble degree, or who have lost
their understanding, without becoming insane, to be proper subjects
for examination."?Second Report, p. 21.
Of the 594 who were examined, 420 are reported as congenital
idiots, and 154 became idiotic after birth: according to the table, 29
of these in youth, and some in early manhood, were of sound and
active mind, and became afterwards insane and then idiotic. The
idiocy of the 154 is not caused, so far as can be known, by any dcfect /
of organization, but by some external cause or some habits or disease
in the course of life.
Here arise a confusion and doubt which, Esquirol says, many fall
into in regard to the distinction between idiocy and dementia. Shall
those who have once been intelligent, but gradually fell afterwards
into the idiotic stupor, without the intervention of lunacy, be
considered as idiots or as demented persons'? Esquirol solves the
difficulty, by disregarding the symptoms, and looking only at the
history in making his distinction. " Idiocy is a state in which the
intellectual faculties have never been manifested."?Maladies Men-
tales, ii. 284.
oOG CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY'.
" A man in dementia is deprived of that which he has once en-
joyed. He is a rich man bccome pool". The idiot has always been
poor and wretched."?Maladies Mentales, ii. 285.
The stature of 288 idiots was measured. The average height of
172 males was 64-7 inches, and of the 116 females, 60 inches.
These facts would be very valuable, if we had the standard height ot
healthy men and women with which wc could compare them. Un-
fortunately we have no such data. If, however, the general notion,
that 67-5 inches is the average height of adult males, this measure-
ment will corroborate our opinion, that idiots have a smaller stature
than other persons.
The vridth and depth of the chest were ascertained in 224 adults,
and their average corresponds precisely to that of other persons.
Temperament.?The temperaments of 117 idiots were ascertained
and reported in the table. The four classes?nervous, sanguine, lym-
phatic, and fibrous?are stated in the order of their preponderance
against each of the 417 persons. In 143 the fibrous, in 139 the
nervous, in 102 the lymphatic, and in 33 the sanguine, predominated,
and stand first in the table.
Tactile or cutaneous sensibility.?Some have very great, even an
unnatural cutaneous irritability; others have very little sense of touch,
so that they arc not disturbed by flies and other insects on the skin,
and take no pains to brush them off. This is not owing merely to
general want of power in the nervous system. One female, case
No. 210 in the catalogue, 1(J years of age, has so little cutaneous
sensibility, that she takes no notice of Hies on her skin, and very
little of tlie prick of a pin or pulling her hair. " But she is quite
animated by the sound of music, and will leave off eating to listen to
it." She is therefore marked 4 as to sensibility of touch, and 13 as
to musical sounds, 10 being the standard of each. The average of
the 476 examined was 8v52.
Command oj muscular contractility.?Idiots fail in the command
ot their muscles, and therefore they cannot control their limbs and
direct them with the energy or precision of others. Hence they
often walk with a waddling gait, and they make poor mechanics, for
want ot power to use tools and strike with exactness. The average
ot the 444 examined was 8'33 to 10 when compared with other
persons.
Dynamic condition of the body refers to " the general vigour of
health as manifested in the ability to put forth muscular strength.
504 were examined to ascertain this, and the average was 7-88 to 10
as compared with other persons of their age."
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCV. 807
Probably botli the last averages are too large. Dr. H. very pro-
perly says, that the former is too high. If a more careful examina-
tion could be made of the power and muscular control of these idiots,
with tools that require precision of action, and with protracted labour
that requires continued effort, a different and lower result would be
found in regard to them.
Sensibility to the musical sounds, like other powers, is veiy
various: some have none; others have it in a high degree; one is !
marked 18, almost double the average of men, and there are all
grades between them. Yet idiots are generally dull in this respect,
and the average of the 300 who were examined was only 6-3, less
than two-thirds of the power that is found in the rest of mankind.
Skill in the use of language, which is often made the test of intel-
ligence, is generally very small in this class of persons. A few enjoy
it as other persons. Of the 452 who were examined, one is marked
as high as 13, one 11, and ten are marked 10, and a very few 9 and
8; the rest are lower, and four have no language at all, and are /
therefore marked 0, and thirty-one are but little better, using only a \
few monosyllables, and arc marked 1. The average of the whole
452 is 5, one-half the skill of the rest of mankind.
Ability to count is another test of power which was applied, and
by which they Averc found wanting. Many cannot count at all?they
do not see the difference between 2 and 3. Many can count 1 and 2;
if avc give them one block, and ask how many they have, they may
answer one, and then two when wc add another; but when we add
a third and a fourth, they still do not see more than two. 461 were
examined with this view, and live had no conception of numbers,
and are marked 0. 157 had some power, though in the lowest
degree, and arc marked 1. On the opposite extreme, six arc marked
10, the usual average. One is marked 13, two 15, one 10, and one
18, having a power in the use of numbers which would be deemed
extraordinary, even among those who arc sound in mind.
"No. 175 has little use of language. He is marked but G in that
column; his intellect is very limited; he is, to all intents, an idiot;
yet he has an astonishing power of reckoning. Tell him your age,
and lie will, in a very short time, give you the number of minutes.
He is marked 18; he should, perhaps, have been marked higher."
The average of the whole 4G1 is only 3, less than a third of the
power of men of good condition.
Some idiots are unable to fix their eyes upon small objects; they
stare and gaze, but they do not see with distinctness. The image of
the object is formed on the retina, but no exactly corresponding sen-
BP
308 CAUSES, CUKE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
sation is cxcited in the brain. In this power there is less deficiency
than in others; 367 of 442 have the average power of fixing their
eyes, and are marked 10; nine have it in an unusual degree, and are
marked 11. The average of all is not given, and probably it would
not fall much below that of other men.
Size and form of the head.?The idiots who were examined have
somewhat smaller heads than others, but there is not so great a dif-
ference in this respect as is commonly supposed, as will be seen by
the following averages of measurements. The first column of
figures is the number of idiots who were examined, the second is
the average measurement of idiots in inches, and the third is the
average size of ordinary persons. M. and F. denote male and
female:?
Greatest circumference of cranium . . . M. Of). 21*9. 22-0.
Ditto ditto . . . . F. 59. 20-7. 21-5.
Diameter from root of nose to occipital spine . M. 94. 7*5. 7'8.
Ditto ditto F. 87. 7-3. 7-5.
Transversed diameter over tlie ears . . . M. 9-1. 5'5. 5*8.
Ditto ditto F. 87. 5-3. 5-5.
Arc of cranium from root of nose to occipital spine M. 87. 13*3. 13'8.
Ditto ditto ..... F. 01. 13-0. 13*5.
Arc from opening of one ear over to opening of
the other ...... M. 89. 14'0. 14-3.
Ditto ditto . , . . * F. 01. 13'D, 14*0.
Yet there is a very great difference in regard to the manifestation
of the several powers and propensities that arc supposed by phreno-
logists to be connected with several parts of the head.
Dr. Howe Avas the president of the Phrenological Society, and is
skilled in the practical application of phrenological principles.
The American editor observes?" His agent also was accustomed
to cranial measurements, to craniological examinations, and to ob-
serving the connexion between the cerebral developments and the
mental and moral manifestations. Phrenology has therefore every
advantage of skill, practice, and faith in its truth, to establish itself
more firmly by means of this investigation, and to give further
proof of the soundness of its doctrines, in the correspondence be-
tween the prominence or deficiency of certain parts of the cranium,
and the strength or weakness of certain powers, sentiments, or pro-
pensities."
But the following table, containing the result of Dr. Howe's ob-
servation, shows, at least, that he has found no new proof of prac-
tical phrenology in this new field of inquiry.
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 309
Comparison of the development of certain parts of the cranium,
and of the mental and moral manifestations, loith the same in 1000
ordinary persons, those in the class of sound persons being assumed
as 10:?
Development of the lower frontal region of the cranium . . .9
Skill in the use of the perceptive faculties
Development of the upper frontal region of the cranium . . .9
Skill in the use of the reflective or reasoning faculties . . .3
Development of the lateral region of the cranium. .... 8
Activity of the faculties of self-preservation, as cautiousness, cunning, &c. 4
Development of the posterior region of the cranium .... 8
Activity of the social nature, or attachment to others . . .0
Development of the coronal region of the cranium . . . .9
Activity of the moral sentiments ....... G
Development of the region of the cerebellum 7
Activity of the amative feelings . . . . . . .14
Average activity of the animal nature, estimated by the developments )
of amative feelings, the dynamic condition of body, and the con- > 10
sumption of food.* )
For ten of these statements, 11G?and in the eleventh, 114?in the
twelfth, 70?and in the thirteenth, 115 idiots were measured and
examined, and these arc the results, and they are generally corro-
borated by the measurements and examinations of most of the
others.
The average development of the several parts of the cranium of
these idiots is, in comparison with that of sound persons, as forty-
three to fifty?that is, nearly as large. But the average power of
the moral and mental faculties supposed to be connected with them,
as compared with the same faculties in ordinary persons, is as twenty-
four to fifty, less than one-half.
But, on the contrary, the cerebellum, which has a much smaller
proportionate development, as seven to ten, is connected with moral
manifestations which are all equal to, and some much larger than, the
same in men whose cerebellum is of the ordinary size. The activity
of the amative feelings is as fourteen to ten, and the activity of the
whole animal nature in these idiots is just equal to that of others, or
as ten to ten.
This great deficiency of power, in one case, may just be what a
phrenologist would expect from the small deficiency of cerebral
development. " We are not sufficiently acquainted," says the reviewer,
" with the minutise of this science to determine what gradations of
power should accompany certain gradations of development of the
brain. Nor are we prepared to say, whether the excess of the
* Second Eeport, Appendix, p; 52.
310 CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
amative feelings ought not to be expected from the diminished
cerebellum. We make no deductions from these facts. This we leave
to those Avho wish to establish or disprove the phrenological system
from them. We have no desire to do either. We will only say, that
these facts come to us from unquestionable authority, whose principles
and habits would lead him to give due attention and weight to all
facts that can have any bearing upon this science, but whose im-
partiality and regard to truth impel him to state every fact precisely
as he finds it, whatever may be the conclusion to which it may lead."
Dr. Howe says,?" It may be stated here, in general terms, that
the result of this examination and measurement shows, that no
dimensions of the head, except extreme diminutiveness, and 110 shape
whatever, can be relied on as criteria of idiocy. A few of the worst
cases of idiocy are those in which the head is normal as to size and
shape. Nevertheless, the tables show, that, taking the aggregate of
all the cases, an obvious relation is seen between the size and develop-
ment of the cranium, and of its different parts, and the amount of
intellectual power and of the different kinds of mental manifestation."
?Second liep., p. 65.
An inordinate appetite ranks high among the propensities of the
idiot's animal nature. More than a quarter of those examined con-
sumed double the usual quantity, and some were insatiable with any
amount of food. The average of the whole is fifteen to ten, as com-
pared with the food of other persons.
I11 some, the excessive eating was enormous. One child of five
years was in the habit of taking a gallon of milk daily, and " one
boy of thirteen has been known to drink six quarts of water a day,"
and another, after being reduced and limited as to his food, now
consumes just double the average used by others.
The manifestation of the amative feelings is the saddest part of
this whole picture; it reveals oftentimes the cause, and sometimes
the terrible consequences, of idiocy. I11 seventy idiots who were
examined, this propensity has a power, compared with that in sound
persons, as fourteen to ten. " I11 some eases it amounts to perfect
mania," and it continues long after the period of youth, even into old
age. One person, sixty-six years old, is given now to open and shame-
less masturbation. Another of sixty-three is given to " excessive
venery," another of sixty-five has been masturbating for forty-five
years, because, in these cases, although " the physical power breaks
down, the dreadful propensity continues unabated." Among idiots
masturbation is a very common vice; out of 389 idiots avIio were
examined, 2Q-1, of whom seventy-five are females, arc known to
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 311
practise it frequently. Cases were discovered of even little children
addicted to this destructive habit; and, worse than this, nineteen
little children were countenanced in this practice by intemperate,
foolish, or degraded parents or nurses, and even some took satisfac-
tion in this evidence of their children's precocity.
Physical condition.?Idiocy is often connected with other defects.
Of the 574 idiots, 21 are blind, or have deformed eyes, 12 are deaf,
23 have deformity of mouth and nose, 54. have deformed hands or
feet, 9G are paralyzed in some parts, 14 are torpid in feeling, 125 are
subject to fits; convulsions are produced in three by use of tobacco,
and in 29 by anger; faintness, nausea, and vomiting are produced
in 7 by fright. 491 out of 497 who were examined are scrofulous.
Degree of ability to support themselves.?In the long table of indi-
vidual idiots, in which is stated in numbers the degree of compara-
tive ability of each one to support himself or herself, 13 are said to
be able to do nothing, 48 can do one-tenth, 75 two-tenths, 96 three-
tenths, 138 four-tenths, 175 five-tenths, and 32 six-tenths of the
amount of labour sufficient for their support. And the average
ability of the whole is a little more than one-third sufficient for this
purpose.
There is some discrepancy between this statement and that which
we quoted before, in which it was stated 220 are as helpless as
children two and seven years old. But probably this might be
explained by the author. Perhaps this tabular and numerical state-
ment refers to the possible condition and power of the idiots when
under proper guidance, and the former statement to their present
condition and power, unaided by others. Nevertheless, both go to
establish the same principle, the dependence of this class of persons
on others for their support.
There is another element to be included in this estimate?that is,
these persons can do as much as is herein stated, "under the manage-
ment of discreet persons." Alone, their earnings would be much
less, and probably in most cases nothing; and when under the care
of indiscreet persons, as arc the parents of most of them, they do
little or nothing towards their own maintenance.
Pecuniary circumstances.?These idiots are mostly the children
of poverty. Of the 529 whose pecuniary condition was ascertained,
only 22 had property of their own, and G2 belonged to wealthy
families, 225 are members of poor families, and 220 are public
paupers.
Age.?200 of these are under, aud 374 over 25 years of age.
Dr. Howe thinks favourably of their capacity of improvement.
312 CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
He says "that 19G?almost the whole of the younger class?and
272?more than three-fourths of the older class?arc capable of
being improved in some degree, and raised somewhat from their
present miserable condition."
The causes of idiocy are matters of the greatest interest. Why
are so many, why are any human beings found in this low, wretched,
and dependent condition % This is a question that ought to interest
the physiologist, the philanthropist, and the political economist.
The causes of this low degradation of humanity should be ferreted
out, and, if possible, removed, and the increase or the future pro-
duction of idiots prevented.
Not knowing what are the necessary causes of this condition, we
must be content with learning what are the preceding or co-existing
events or circumstances, that, by their general or universal prece-
dence to, or connexion with, idiocy, may be presumed to stand as
causes. In this matter, Dr. Howe has done a good work. Without
pretending to settle this question beyond all doubt, he has thrown
much and valuable light upon it. He inquired into the history and
condition of each case. He ascertained the character and health of
the parents, the early and subsequent health of the subject, his or
her organization and propensities, his or her habits, exposures, and
indulgences; and the result of each inquiry is stated in the table of
his report.
The causes which produce idiocy?which prevent the development
of the ordinary mental and physical powers that arc essential to
normal life, or impair or extinguish them after they have become
partially or entirely developed?are probably many and various.
The first thing to be observed is the " low condition of the physical
organization of one or both parents."
It is not our intention on this occasion to give a dissertation 011
hereditary character, or the transmission of qualities from parent to
child. This subject requires moro time and space than we now can
give to it. Yet we hope ere long to see it discussed in all its bear-
ings here or elsewhere, and the connexion of generations explained
so clearly, that' the world may be warned and put 011 its guard
against every habit or action that may prevent the perfcctncss of
health in the children.
We would merely say in passing, that we believe that parents can
give to their children 110 other qualities or powers than those which
they themselves possess, and that, whatever may be the condition of
either parent when the germ, or the element, or the pabulum of life
is given to their offspring, that condition, or the peculiarity of orga-
L
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 313
nization which is susceptible of that condition, will probably be
transmitted to the child.
Dr. Howe has great faith in this principle, and rests much of his
argument and explanations upon it; and he has shown so many facts
to corroborate it, that it is not easy to withhold our confidence in his
reasonings and conclusions. He says, " if ever the race is to be
relieved of the tithe of bodily ills which flesh is now heir to, it must
be by a clear understanding of, and a willing obedience to, the law
which makes parents the blessing or the curse of the children; the
givers of strength, and vigour, and beauty, or the dispensers of
debility, and disease, and deformity."
We have already shown, that very few of these idiots, whose history
was ascertained, were the children of healthy parents. If they
inherited any constitution from their progenitors, it was a feeble one
at least; and, in many instances, there was a positive tendency to
disease or weakness. Many idiots are the children of idiots or
simpletons. Some whole families of these are idiotic, and others
are mixed, being in part idiots and in part simple or weak-minded,
and others are sound.
Fifty idiots were discovered, whose parents were one or both idiotic
or insane.
Forty-five parents have each two idiotic children; thirteen have
three each; eight have five each; one has five; one has seven; one
has nine; and one has eleven.
The report does not say whether, in any or all of these seventy
families, there were other and sound children; nor whether, in these
cases, both or only one of the parents were insane or idiotic. Another
remarkable fact shows the hereditary tendency. " In fifteen families,
all of the children of the first marriage were idiotic or puny, while
all those born of a second marriage of the surviving healthy parent
with a healthy person were sound in body and mind."
The idiotic taint or hereditary tendency may be considered as the
remote or predisposing cause, which in many persons lies dormant,
until it is stimulated to action by other and proximate or exciting
causes, and then both together produce idiocy. Or the hereditary
taint, acting alone, may cause only weakness, which under the best
influences and education may be counteracted, and thus the child
may prove to be merely a weak-minded man; or under other
influences, the child may grow to be a simpleton, or have some
oddities in his character. But under bad influences, such as the care
or neglect of weak, foolish, or wicked parents or associates, the
child may become an idiot. In the same family, there may be various
314 CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
exciting causes acting on the different children, and producing a cor-
responding variety of character among them. One child may he
merely weak, another simple, a third odd, and a fourth idiotic.
Some of the children of tainted families receive the predisposition
to idiocy from their parents, and carry it with them through life;
but very careful management and judicious education avert all ex-
citing causes, and these persons pass respectably through the world?
yet they may transmit their hereditary taint to their children. Then
this third generation, if not as well trained and guarded as their
parents, may meet with the exciting causes and become idiotic.
Or, if they pursue the faithful course of their fathers, the taint may
still lie dormant in them, and they may escape, but yet possibly
transmit the taint to the fourth generation, who may or may not be
idiots, according to their education and self-management. In this
way we may explain the apparent irregularity of hereditary character,
and the re-appearance of idiocy, insanity, or other hereditary disease
in the third or fourth generation, after the second or third has
enjoyed a perfect immunity from it.
Idiocy, therefore, although a hereditary disability, does not affect
every successive generation, nor all the collateral branches of the
same generation. Hence we find idiocy scattered among the various
individuals or branches of the same family, touching some and
omitting others. In such families, forty-nine idiots had one near
relative idiotic; nine had two; six had three; four had four; six had
five; three had ten; and one had nineteen, near relations like them-
selves.
The report does not state how many idiots were examined for this
purpose, or whether any, or how many, of the other 49G idiots were
ascertained to have no relatives like themselves. We are therefore
unable to make any deductions from this statement, as to the pro-
portion of idiocy which may seem to be hereditary, 01* the proportion
which may be entirely original in the subject.
Very few idiots marry. This is a blessing, and so far it is a safe-
guard to the race. Humanity requires that the succession of idiots
should be arrested. Yet many weak-minded persons within a few
shades of idiocy marry, and leave another generation more weak or
simple than themselves. Some persons who have been temporarily
insane or demented marry, and send their taint, or their liability, or
one or the other of these conditions, down to their children.
But the most lamentable and certain, though less frequent, cause
of congenital idiocy is the lasciviousness of some female idiots, whose
illegitimate offspring are almost always, like themselves, idiotic and
lustful.
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 315
Some persons who are irrepressibly addicted to masturbation are
advised to marry, as a means of protection from this ungovernable
propensity. This, probably, is very well for them?it may occa-
sionally answer the intended purpose, but it is a cruel thing for their
children. It entails upon them, perhaps the same propensity, cer-
tainly a feeble constitution; often weak minds, and sometimes idiocy.
Twelve of these idiots are the children of parents who were thus
married. The other children of the same families, if there be any,
if not idiotic, are probably feeble in body and mind, and enjoy a
lower degree of life than the children of better or more healthy
parents.
The near relationship by blood of the parents seems to be the
cause of, or, at least, it is the precedent fact to, many cases of idiocy.
We do not suppose that this connexion is, of itself, the cause of
idiocy. But if there are any weaknesses, or defects of body or mind,
or tendencies to disease, or oddities, in the family, they may be over-
powered, or cease to appear, in the next generation, if those who have
them marry with strangers, and mix their blood and life with those
who have not these peculiarities: and thus the children may escape
the imperfections or liabilities that otherwise might have been entailed
upon them. But when two persons of the same blood and character
unite together in marriage, their peculiarities are doubled in power
by being combined in their children; and the odd or weak traits,
which were subordinate in the parents, may predominate in their
offspring.
In the course of this inquiry the parentage of 359 idiots was
ascertained. In seventeen families the parents were near blood-
relations. In one of these families there were five idiotic children
born; in five, four each; in three, three each; in two, two each; and
in six, one each. In these seventeen families ninety-five children
were born: forty-four idiots, twelve scrofulous and puny, one deaf,
and one a dwarf; fifty-eight in all of low health or imperfect, and
only thirty-seven of even tolerable health.
The parents ofNos. 59, GO, 250, 251, were cousins, and had, be-
sides these four idiot children, four that were deformed.
Intemperance of parents.?The habits of the parents of 300 of the
idiots were learned, and 145 (nearly one half) are reported as "known,
to be habitual drunkards." Such parents transmit a weak and a lax
constitution to their children, who are, consequently, " deficient in
bodily and vital energy, and predisposed, by their very organization,
to have cravings for alcoholic stimulants." Many of these children
are feeble, and live irregularly. Having a lower vitality, they feel
NO. XI. y
810 CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
the want of some stimulation. If tliey pursue tlie course of their
fathers, which they have more temptation to follow and less power
to avoid than the children of the temperate, they add to their here-
ditary weakness, and increase the tendency to idiocy in their consti-
tution; and this they leave to their children after them. The
parents of case No. 62 were drunkards, and had seven idiotic chil-
dren.
Seven of the congenital idiots were the children of prostitutes;
seven others were illegitimate.
The condition of the mothers during gestation has some in-
fluence upon the health and character of the offspring. The com-
missioners made inquiry as to this matter in regard to as many as
possible, and discovered that two of the mothers of the idiots were
insane, two were drunken, sixteen were sickly and feeble, and seven
of these last suffered from fright, one had fits, and received a blow
on the abdomen, during their pregnancies, and another suffered from
violent parturition. All the children who were born from these
gestations were idiots from birth, with the exception of two, whose
mothers were sickly, and one whose mother was injured. These
three became idiots afterward.
Attempts to procure abortion may be injurious to the child, even
though it be carried through, and safely delivered at the end of the
full period. At least seven children were made idiots, says the
report, by these unsuccessful attempts. Young women thus some-
times try to get rid of their burden, or conceal their shame ;
not succeeding, they afterwards marry, and the child is born at the
proper time, but is idiotic. Other children are successively born of
the same parents, and give no evidence of ill health or unsoundness
of mind. Several cases of this kind are among those alluded to.
One woman had seven sound children, and another had six, born in
wedlock, though the oldest child of each of them, upon whom abor-
tion was attempted, was idiotic.?Second Report, p. 90.
Looking upon idiocy rather as a deficiency of power, or as a dis-
ability, than as a disease?as a negative, rather than as a positive
condition?it is easy to suppose that it may be produced by a single
cause, or by the co-operation of several causes which would not indi-
vidually be sufficient to produce this condition, yet each may con-
tribute its portion of influence to produce this deterioration of
mental and physical power, and aid in making the child an idiot.
Case No. 89 is an idiot of the lowest kind : he cannot walk, or
hardly creep; he cannot feed himself with a spoon; nor can he
speak. He has, apparently, no intellect. His father was intern-
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 317
perate, and was nearly related to liis wife by blood. Her family
were ti nted with idiocy, as she had an idiotic cousin. She was
much ?errified and distressed in mind during the early part of her
pregnancy, and was sick, and carried her child with much difficulty
through the latter part, and, " finally, her confinement was very long,
protracted, and painful." Possibly, any one of these circumstances?
the intemperance, hereditary taint, intermarriage of relatives, the
fright, illness, or difficult parturition?occurring alone, would not
have produced idiocy in this case, for the same parents had other
children that Avere not idiotic; yet any one of these may have the
effect very materially to diminish what would otherwise have been
the bodily and mental vigour of the child, to lower his tone of life,
and carry him so far toward idiocy: and thus the added or combined
effect of all these depressing causes may be sufficient to produce the
idiocy that was manifested in the offspring.
If, as we have supposed, the parents can give to their offspring
no other constitution than that which they possess at the time when
they impart their life to the child, then the low organization, the ill
health, the folly, the wickedness of the parents, or whatever reduces
their power of body or mind below the normal standard, must pre-
pare the way for a still greater deterioration or lower degradation in
their children. If, then, these hereditary weaknesses in the children
are not overcome by proper training, or if their hereditary tenden-
cies are not resisted and counteracted by the force of proper educa-
tion and management, by the cultivation of the highest health, and
the avoidance of every depressing cause acting on life, and of every
exciting cause of disease or idiocy, these children will transmit to
the next generation a lower degree of physical and mental vitality.
These causes existing in the parents produce idiocy in the chil-
dren, or that feeble and imperfect organization upon which, when
other exciting causes may be added, idiocy may supervene.
Besides the hereditary taint or depression of constitution, there
are many personal causes which operate directly upon the subject,
and produce original idiocy in him.
Masturbation appears to be the most prominent among these
depressing causes. The habits of 389 idiots were examined in
regard to this matter; and 204, more than half, were found to be
addicted to it. And, what is still moi'e worthy of notice, several
children?two of four years, one of seven, two of eight, five of nine,
one of ten, two of eleven, three of twelve, and one of thirteen,
(seventeen, not yet fourteen years old!) were addicted to this disgust-
ing and exhausting habit. No. 447 is stated to have been " healthy
y 2
318 CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY.
and intelligent until taught masturbation at six!" No. 343 is only
nine years old, and lias been addicted to " masturbation many
years!"
In some this habit is irrepressible, and in some it is " openly and
shamelessly indulged." It does not always cease with youth, but is,
in many, continued far beyond the middle age; eight idiots between
50 and GO, nine between GO and 70, one 78, and one 80 years old,
are reported as still addicted to this vice.
The venereal appetite, either from original organization, or from
frequent provocation or indulgence, is very strong in idiots. Besides
the many who are reported as masturbating, or as open prostitutes,
fifteen are reported as " very lustful," or given to " excessive venery
and even four idiots, who are more than GO years old, and one nearly
70, indulge in this vice. One of G3 is given to " shameless venery,"
and another of GI is " still lustful to excess."
Intemperance and fits are also prominent among the supposed
exciting causes of supervened idiocy.
These habits and conditions of the parents and progenitors of
idiots, and of the idiots themselves, are thus stated, not as the entire
and unquestioned causes of their present low state, but as the pro-
bable causes, and sucli as are supposed to be so by the families or
acquaintances of the idiots.
Besides the several items, which are arranged in forty columns,
and registered against each individual, as before stated, there are
also some other remarks, which could not be so easily classified. We
are unable to give any farther analysis of these, and yet we offer
some quotations as specimens.
" No. 57. Supposed cause, violence during parturition, sickly gestation; sub-
ject to fits till 14.
58. Supposed cause, drunkenness of mother in gestation.
59. { Parents related, and subject to insanity. Of 8 children, 4. are idiots,
CO. i and 4 deformed.
01. Parents intemperate.
02. Parents related; had 10 scrofulous children, 3 of tliem idiots.
03. Brother to 403; parents drunkards.
04. Supposed cause, sickly gestation.
05. Father drunkard, and mother scrofulous.
CO. Parents scrofulous and sickly."
" 102. Deformed, gluttonous, and pachydermatous.
1G3. From masturbation and gluttony.
104. Insane and intemperate at 20 years of ago.
105. Full of sores, and always puny ; skin pachydermatous.
1C0. Salivated in infancy; effects still continued.
107. Mother had fits during gestation, and received a blow upon abdomen.
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 3 J 9
No. 108. Mother mid grandmother scrofulous; nephew to above.
100. Fits in childhood, and formerly a drunkard.
170. Mother a simpleton. He is given to masturbation and venery.
171. Scrofulous and deformed ; growth of bones arrested early.
172. \ The parents of these were simpletons, cousins, and drunkards ; have
173. I 4 children foolish."
" 330. Father drunkard ; and the race all scrofulous.
.'340. Mother insane; cousin idiotic.
341. C Brothers: only children of a scrofulous mother and a drunken
312. I father; masturbation and fits from 10 years old.
343. Father intemperate ; masturbation many years.
344. r Masturbation ; very scrofulous breed.
345. I Brother of the above.
340. Very scrofulous breed.
347. Gluttonous; parents intemperate; mother a prostitute; sister a
simpleton.
348. Very scrofulous mother; father has healthy children by another wife.
349. Father drunkard; full of scrofulous sores."
These show from what a low and degraded race most of the idiots
have sprung, and what is their wretched condition now. Idiocy is
thus so generally connected with, or produced by, the depressing
causes acting on the health and life, with the exhausting habits, cir-
cumstances, or exposures that have nearly or remotely gone before
it, or immediately co-exist with it, that it may be considered as
merely the last step in vital depression.
In the long line of humanity, there are infinite numbers of degrees,
from the highest, where is perfect health of body and mind, to the
lowest, where is idiocy. Whatever wasting habit, circumstance, or
exposure, such as intemperance, debauchery, gluttony, or other de-
pressing cause, acts upon a person standing in any of these degrees,
exhausts some of his vital power, and carries him downward, more or
less, toward idiocy, and he is thereafter a lower man, weak-minded
or simple, or foolish, or idiotic, according to the force and protraction
of the depressing cause or causes.
It is to be regretted, that this commission could not have extended -
its inquiries through the whole State, and revealed the full extent of
the misery and degradation that have thus fallen upon humanity.
But this investigation was established only for a definite purpose,
which was, to ascertain the number and condition of the idiots, and
also, whether these could be improved, and whether enough of them
were teachable to justify the establishment of a school for them by
the State. The government justly inferred, that the 571 idiots, who
were examined, and whose condition and character were learned,
Were sufficient to indicate the character of the whole, and therefore
320 CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OE IDIOCY.
discontinued the commission, and proceeded to provide tlic means of
educating them.
Low and disheartening as is the picture which we have here given
of the mental and physical condition of idiots, it is not without hope.
Dr. Howe thinks that almost all of them?488 out of 574?are
capable of improvement, to a greater or less extent.
Two strong inducements for public action or interference to
relieve or diminish idiocy now present themselves. 1st. The enor-
mous expense of supporting 1400 persons?about one-five-hundredth
part of the whole population of this commonwealth?in a state of
idiocy: and 2nd. The motives of humanity, to give, if possible, to
these wretched creatures some idea of responsible life, some means
and power of self-sustenance, and some self-respect.
There arc two modes of action pointed out. One attempts to
remedy or mitigate the evil by educating such of the idiots as can
be provided with the means; the other strikes at the root of the
future idiocy, and endeavours to remove the causes and prevent the
recurrence of the disability hereafter. But we must confess, with
great pain, that weighty as is the task to do the first, greater and
more hopeless is the last. It is far easier to teach these stupid
idiots, even to create intellect where it does not seem to exist, than
to reform the morals of men and women, whose habits or indulgences
lead to idiocy in themselves, or in their children, or to impress upon
the world the necessity of looking only to the interests of the next
and future generations in their marriage-contracts, and in the
management of their own persons.
The extinction of idiocy must be a work of ages. Nevertheless,
it can be accomplished in the course of time. The causcs that
weaken or corrupt the human constitution, and produce ill-health or
tendency to idiocy, or idiocy itself, may be removed. The succcssive
generations of the weak, the unhealthy, and the tainted, may be each
improved, and raised, and strengthened in some degree. By care-
fully educating the children of the feeble and corrupted families, by
guarding them against the errors of their parents, by teaching theni
to avoid the exciting causes of idiocy, the hereditary taint may be
kept dormant, and even diminished, until finally, through the course
of successive generations, it shall be extinguished, and hereditary
idiocy appear no more.
For the education of idiots there is encouragement to hope. The
experiments which have been made in France, Switzerland, and
Prussia, prove that many of these, who otherwise would be idiots of
a low order, may, by proper training, be raised to such a condition,
CAUSES, CURE, AND PREVENTION OF IDIOCY. 321
that tliey may live in and enjoy the comforts of their families, and
that others may be made self-dependent, and pass respectably and
happily through life.
This, however, requires a peculiar kind of training. The usual
influences of home, and especially of the ordinary homes of idiots,
and the teaching and discipline of common schools, are not sufficient
for the education of this class of persons; they must have schools,
teachers, and apparatus, peculiarly adapted to their capacities and
powers.
We believe that there were, until lately, no such schools in America,
and that all the idiots of this continent were left to grope their way
in their original darkness and degradation, except a few rare cases,
whose intelligent parents provided the extraordinary and proper
means for their education.
The legislature of Massachusetts, at its last session, after receiving
these reports from Dr. Howe, appropriated the sum of twenty-five
hundred dollars annually, for three years, to educate ten idiots, in
order to try the experiment; and the whole was placed under the
general direction of Dr. Howe. Mr. James B. Richards was selected
as a teacher, and went to Europe to visit the schools which are there
in progress, and to learn their method of training and educating
idiots. Mr. R. returned in September last, and in October opened
his school at Boston with four idiots, and has now nine.
Although nothing decisive as to the extent of the power or the
capacity of idiots can be inferred from this small experiment, and
the short time during which these few have been under discipline
and instruction, yet enough has been done to show, that even these
stupid and apparently unimprcssiblc children can be roused, and
taught, and influenced.
To form any proper notion of their progress, it is necessary to
know their condition when they came to school. One boy of
fourteen was brought from a poor-house, where he had always worn
women's clothes. He is now dressed as other boys are, and enjoys
his new garments, and uses them as properly as they do. He could
not go up or down two steps, without getting upon his hands and
knees; now lie walks up and down, though with some hesitancy, in
the common manner. Five of these boys had 110 control of their
urinal or alvine evacuations; now they control them during the day,
and mostly during the night. They could not be trusted to feed
themselves, and some would steal food from the kitchen, or elsewhere,
and one would devour the offal that was set aside for the swine.
Now, they all cat as other boys, under the supervision of their
322 DR. davey's mental pathology.
teachers, who determine the quantity of their food. One who had
no use of his feet can now walk with assistance. Within the first
month, one boy of nine years learned to throw wood from the ground
on a pile, and another made still farther progress, and learned to
pile it straight, laying the sticks parallel with each other. They
learned to climb a ladder 011 the under side with their hands and feet,
and when they reach the top, they can turn around one of the rails
to the other side, and return by the upper surface. They could not
walk on either side of the ladder when they entered the school in
October.
They had no conception of numbers, or of the size or form of
objects. Now some of them can count as far as six or seven; they
understand the difference between a square and a round object,
and will select a quart or a peck, or other measures, when asked to
do so.
In their whole appearance and manner, there is more of self-
respect, and intelligence, and activity; and one cannot fail to observe
the very great difference in the expression of their countenance, when
comparing their daguerreotype likenesses, which were taken when
they entered, with their faces as they now appear.
It will not be suspected that we make these statements as proofs
of great success or progress, but only to show that the beginning of
the experiment offers sufficient encouragement for perseverance; that
the idiot's mind is not entirely blank; and that he is not, like the
brutes, immovably fixed in present low rank, and irrecoverably
doomed to remain there, in darkness and degradation, for ever.
