Trial of Robert Tate for the Outrage Upon Her Majesty
=======================================================

The prisoner was arraigned at the Central Criminal Court. The learned judges were,
Mr. Baron Alderson, Mr. Justice Patteson, and Mr. Justice Talfourd.

Upon the prisoner being placed at the bar,
Mr. Clerk read the indictment, which, in the first count, charged the prisoner with
having with a certain offensive weapon, that is to say, a stick, unlawfully and mali-
ciously struck at the person of our Lady the Queen, with intent to injure the person of
our Lady the Queen.

The prisoner pleaded " Not guilty" in a loud tone, and the jury were then impanelled.
The Attorney-General opened the case. When he considered, on the one hand, that
the object of the attack of the prisoner was a lady and a sovereign who had endeared
herself to her subjects by her great virtues, and that, on the other, the person charged
with the commission of the offence filled the position of a gentleman, and a man of
education, and who had also at one time held her Majesty's commission, he could not
hut feel that these were circumstances which very greatly aggravated the offence
imputed to the prisoner. The prisoner was the son of a gentleman of fortune and
station residing at Wisbeach, and who had filled the office of high sheriff for the county
of Cambridge, and the prisoner had for some years been cornet and lieutenant in the
10th Hussars. For some time, however, he had retired from the army, and it would
appear, that after this he had resided in London, and for a considerable time had led
a life of complete quiet and retirement. The learned Attorney - General then
proceeded very briefly to state the circumstances of the assault upon her Majesty,
and said these were the facts upon which the charge was preferred against the
prisoner, and he had no doubt he should establish them clearly by the evidence of
one or two witnesses. He went on to say that it was not for him to speculate as to
the motives that had led to the commission of the act?motives might be suggested,
but he did not think it would be discreet to do so. He could not tell what excuse was
to be offered for the prisoner, but he had heard that the unfortunate gentlemen, or his
friends acting for him, intended to endeavour to establish that he was not in such a
state of mind as to render him accountable for his actions. If this should turn out to
be the case, the jury would permit him to suggest that they ought not to give effect
to such a defence unless it was made out by strict and complete proof, and that they
should not permit the law to be evaded upon slight grounds.

The following witnesses were then examined :?
Colonel Grey, examined by the Solicitor-General?" I hold the office of Equerry to
her Majesty. I remember her Majesty leaving Buckingham Palace on Thursday, the
~'th of June, in an open barouche. The carriage drove to Cambridge House, where
her Majesty alighted. She returned to the carriage about half-past six, going out by
the east gate. Several persons had assembled outside. The carriage went out of the
gate very slowly, and at the same moment I saw a well-dressed man step up to the
carriage, and immediately afterwards he was seized by the footman. That man was
the prisoner. He was taken into custody immediately. When her Majesty arrived at
Buckingham Palace, Sir James Clark was sent for, and I saw her Majesty's head
bandaged, and blood coming through the bandage."

Robert Renwick said?" I am serjeant footman to her Majesty. I remember her
Majesty going to Cambridge House on the 27th of June. I was sitting behind the
carriage when it came out of the gate of Cambridge House. I saw the prisoner strike
the Queen with a small cane on the forehead. I seized him immediately. The crowd
closed upon him, and he was secured." By Mr. Cockburn?" He was roughly handled
by the crowd."

The cane was produced and identified by the witness.

James Silver?"I am serjeant of the A division of police. I saw her Majesty's
carriage leave Cambridge House on the evening in question, and hearing an exclama-
tion from the crowd, I looked towards them, and saw the prisoner with the stick in his
Land, which I now produce. The crowd were very indignant, and it was with difficulty
I could preserve him from their violence. The prisoner gave his name at the station-
Louse as Robert Pate, and said he was formerly lieutenant in the 10th Hussars. He
cautioned some of the witnesses who were being examined, and said they did not know
?whether he hit at the Queen's bonnet or her head, and added that it was a slight blow
?with a light stick."

Samuel Cowling said?" On the evening of the 27th of June, I was among the crowd
standing in front of Cambridge House. As her Majesty came out in her carriage, the
moment it came in front of me, the carriage stopped for a second, and the prisoner made
a step in advance and struck her Majesty."

Sir James Clark said?" I am physician to her Majesty. I was sent for to see her
Majesty on the evening in question, and arrived at the Palace between eight and nine
o'clock. I examined her forehead, and found a considerable tumour on the outer angle
of the right brow, and a small cut. It had been bleeding, but the blood had stopped.
I was surprised to see so much injury done by such a small stick, and I therefore infer
it was used very violently. Her Majesty's bonnet was cut through. I think the skin
?was cut by the stick, and not by the wire margin of the bonnet."

This was the case for the prosecution.

Mr. Cockburn then addressed the Jury for the prisoner. He said if the Attorney-
General, appearing for the prosecution, felt so deeply the painful nature of the case they
were now called upon to investigate, they might very well imagine how much more
painful was the duty which he, as the counsel for the prisoner, was called upon to
perform. An outrage had been committed upon a Sovereign who was revered and
loved by all classes of her subjects?upon a Sovereign who, perhaps, enjoyed the love
of those subjects more than any other who had ever filled the throne of these realms;
and he had to defend an unfortunate gentleman who was charged with the commission
of that outrage. His learned friend had truly anticipated the nature of the defence he
should offer. He would not attempt to trifle with the understanding of the jury by an
endeavour to deny that the prisoner had actually committed the act with which lie was
charged, but he trusted to be able to satisfy them that, at the time he committed it, he
was in snch a state as not to render him responsible. What motive could there be for
the commission of the offence? As to any traitorous design, that was quite out of the
question. A man did not attempt to carry out traitorous views of that character with
a small cane such as the one that had been produced. Was there any political motive ?
Nothing of the sort could be attributed to this unfortunate gentleman. To what, then,
could this act by possibility be referred but to the sudden impulse of a disordered
mind? Since the proceeding, the prisoner had been asked how he came to commit
the act, and he was unable to give the least explanation; all he could say w^s, that
the act was the result of a momentary impulse which he was unable to control.
The following witnesses were then examined for the defence:?

Colonel John Vandeleur said ? "I was lieutenant-colonel of the 10th Ilussars
when Mr. Pate joined the regiment in the year 1841 as cornet. He afterwards became
lieutenant. He remained in the regiment till the month of March, 1840. While we
were stationed at Cahir, I remember an accident happening to the prisoner's horses
and dog. From the moment the prisoner joined the regiment I thought there was
something strange in his conduct. His hair was cut very short, and I fancied his head
Lad been shaved. He discharged his duties as an officer very well; and as to his
being a gentleman there is no doubt about that. He was a person of mild demeanour,
and very much respected in the regiment. He had three horses and a Newfoundland
dog, and he was very much attached to them. The prisoner's horses and dog were
hitten by a mad dog belonging to another officer, and they were all destroyed. From
this period I observed a great change in his conduct, and he appeared very much
excited in consequence of a correspondence that took place between his father and the
Duke of Wellington upon the subject of these horses. A claim was made upon Captain
Wallington, to whom the dog that bit the prisoner's horses belonged, through the Duke
of Wellington, and the prisoner seemed hurt that his friends should have made
such a claim. He appeared to avoid company, and used to take long, solitary walks
by himself, and he complained to me that he was ill just before he returned to England.
He said he had applied to the doctor of the regiment, and he could give him no relief.
I asked him what was the matter with him, and he said his stomach and bowels were
full of bricks, and that the doctor had not the skill to remove them. To the best of
my knowledge the prisoner never replaced the horses that were killed, except one.
The prisoner was constantly on the sick list after this. I considered he was labouring
under a delusion. I sent him in command of a detachment from Newbridge to Dublin
in 1845, and he had orders to return the next day, but he left his detachment at Dublin
without leave, and returned to England. When he came back he appeared very well,
and he gave no explanation for his going away. I communicated with his father in as
delicate a manner as I could, and the prisoner left the regiment two months afterwards."
Captain Frith said?"Prisoner has also told me that there were stones and bricks in
his stomach. Sometimes he was very reserved, and at others very wild and excited,
?without any apparent cause, and I thought his mind was impaired by the loss of his
horses and dog. When he left the regiment he gave all his appointments to the
adjutant of the regiment, which was not a usual thing. They were very valuable."
Thomas Venn said?" I am a corporal in the 10th Hussars, and was in the regiment
when Mr. Pate joined. I remember it being discovered that his horses had been
bitten, and they went mad, and two of them were shot. Mr. Pate was very much
concerned at the loss of one of these horses. After the first horse was taken ill, he
said, that if anything happened to the other?his big horse, as he called him?he did
not know what he should do, and he should be inclined to make a hole in the river."
George Pitt, a Serjeant in the 10th Hussars, also spoke to the fact of the demeanour
of the prisoner when his horses were destroyed. After they were killed he appeared
very much depressed, and his conduct was very eccentric.

Thomas Martin, trumpeter to the regiment, gave similar evidence.
Mr. Robert Francis Pate said?" The prisoner is my son. I remember his leaving
the regiment in Ireland without leave. He came down to my residence at Wisbeach,
and I ascertained he had not got leave of absence. I told him I was astonished and
hurt at his conduct, and asked for an explanation, and he said he had been hunted about
Dublin streets by people, and he had seen the same people at the barracks, and he had
even seen them about the hotels in London, and he said he had made his escape from
Dublin in a vessel coming to Liverpool. I told him I could not let him remain with
me, and that he must return immediately to his regiment, and he promised to go back
the next morning The prisoner did go away, and rejoined his regiment, and I after-
wards received a letter from his Colonel, advising me to take him out of the regiment.
He had leave of absence afterwards, and I met him in London, and he then sold his
commission, without my leave or knowledge. I understood from the prisoner that, after
paying his debts, he had ?1,200 left. Application was afterwards made to me by
persons to whom he was indebted, and I went up to London and saw the prisoner, and
his appearance was so extraordinary that I was alarmed at it, and consulted Dr Conolly,
and he thought that the presence of the prisoner's sister might make him more comfort-
able, and advised that any treatment should be postponed for the present.
Charles Dodman said, that he was servant to the prisoner while he was in the 10th
Hussars. His conduct was always strange and eccentric. By the Attorney-General?
He paid his bills very regularly, and kept the receipts and put them away. Re-examined
He used to shout and sing and whistle in a very extraordinary manner, and the
people of the house used to observe upon his conduct.

Edward Lee, a cab-driver, said, he was in the habit of driving the prisoner from
November, 1847, and he fetched him regularly every day at one time?a quarter past
three. They always went the same route, over Putney-bridge to Putney-heath, aud to
one particular spot. The prisoner used to get out of the cab and walk through the
thickest of the furze bushes and the gorse, and he was out of his sight for about ten
minutes. Used to meet him again at one particular spot near a pond, and bad seen
him stand and look at the pond a few minutes and then jump into the cab. Sometimes
the prisoner would tell him to gallop, and then he would pull him up and make him go
at a foot pace. They used then to go to a particular place at Barnes-common, where
he got out again and walked through all the furze-bushes, and then they went home by
Hammersmith-bridge. Witness always thought he was not right in his mind, and in
the winter time he was alarmed at him. In all weathers, rain, hail, or snow, he used
to get out and walk through the furze-bushes, and he did so when it was quite dark.
Mr. James Starten deposed, that he was a surgeon, residing in Saville-row. He had
conversed with the prisoner, and, although there was certainly nothing insane in his
conversation, yet, from his mode of talking, he should not set him down as a man pos-
sessing a sound mind.

Dr Conolly, examined by Mr. Cockburn.?" I am the head physician of the Hanwell
Lunatic Asylum, and have paid great attention to the malady of insanity. I have con-
versed with the prisoner since this transaction, and in my opinion he is a person of
nnsound mind. I form this opinion from the conversations I myself have had with
him." By the Attorney-General?" I am not aware that he suffers from any particular
delusion. He is well aware that he has done wrong, and regrets it."

Dr Munro said?" I have had five interviews with Mr. Pate since this transaction,
and from my own observation, and what I have heard to-day, I believe him to be of
unsound mind. I agree with Dr Conolly that he is not labouring under auy specific
delusion." By Mr. Cockbnrn.?" From all I have heard to-day, and from my personal
observation, I am satisfied the prisoner is of unsound mind." Baron Alderson.?" Be
so good, Dr Monro, as not to take upon yourself the functions of the judge and the
jury. If you can give us the results of your scientific knowledge upon the point we
shall be glad to hear you; but while I am sitting upon the bench I will not permit any
medical witness to usurp the functions both of the judge and the jury."*
This closed the case for the prisoner.

The Attorney-General then made a brief and eloquent reply. What was the prisoner's
conduct when he was taken into custody? Did it not clearly show that he was
perfectly well aware of what he had been doing, and was his conduct anything like that
of an insane person ? All he endeavoured to do was to palliate his offence. He was
perfectly aware he had done wrong, and he sought to extenuate the act by saying that
the witnesses could not tell whether ho struck at the Queen's face or at her bonnet,
and he subsequently said that it was only a little blow with a light stick. This plainly
showed that he knew well what he had done, and that it was a wrong act, and it put
an end to the defence altogether.

Mr. Baron Alderson then summed up. He said they would have no difficulty
with regard to the fact of the prisoner having struck her Majesty, or that his intention
was one of those mentioned in the indictment. That lie intended to injure her Majesty
was apparent from the fact that he actually did injure her, and that blood flowed in
consequence of the blow. With regard to alarming her Majesty, probably from the
natural courage of the family to which she belonged, that was not done; but there
was no doubt that the former count, and also the one charging an intention to break
the public peace, had been clearly made out. The Learned Judge then read over the
whole of the evidence for the defence, commenting upon it as he proceeded. He went
on to say that the prisoner was un object of commiseration was quite clear; and that
he should also have been taken better care of, was equally true; but the question they
had here to decide was, were they satisfied that he was suffering from a disease of the
mind which rendered him incapable of judging whether the act he committed towards
the Queen was a right or a wrong act for him to do ? If they were not satisfied of
this fact, they must say that he was guilty; but, on the contrary, if they thought ho
was not aware what he was about, or not capable of distinguishing between right and
wrong, they would then say that he was not guilty on the ground of insanity.
The Jury retired at twenty minutes past three, and did not return into Court until
five minutes past seven, when they gave a verdict of Guilty.

The prisoner was immediately called up for judgment.

Baron Alderson addressed him to the following effect:?" Robert Pate, the Jury
have found you gnilty after a very long and patient inquiry, and there can be no
? The reprimand of the Judge was uncalled for, and unjustifiable and undignified.
Dr Monro was only answering the question put to him by the counsel.

reasonable doubt that they have come to a right conclusion. At the same time, it is
clear that you are a person of very eccentric habits, and in some degree differing from
other men, and it tis probable that it has pleased God to visit you with some mental
affliction, for which you are to be pitied. The offence you have committed, however,
is one of a very serious and important character. You have been found guilty of
striking a woman, which for a soldier is a very shocking thing; but when it is consi-
dered that this woman was your sovereign?that it was a lady entitled to the respect of
the whole country by her virtues aud her exalted position, that act which in an ordi-
nary case would be a very serious offence, under these circumstances becomes truly
heinous. I think the Jury were quite right, upon the evidence that was adduced, iu
not acquitting you ..upon the ground] of insanity. Under all the circumstances the
sentence that I feel it my duty to pronounce upon you is, that you be transported
beyond the seas for the term of seven years."

The prisoner heard the sentence without betraying the slightest emotion, and when
the Learned Judge had concluded his address he bowed to the Court, and immediately
turned round and without uttering a word retired to the gaol.
The trial lasted nearly nine hours.
