Politics And Insanity
======================

31
Art. IV.-
-*
This pamphlet is a reprint of a communication read before tlie
Academic de Medecine, on May 2nd, 1848, which, was noticed in
No. 3 of this Journal, containing in addition the report on the paper,
and the discussion which it originated.
Dr. Belhomme is the well-known director of an excellent private
lunatic asylum in Paris, which has afforded him the materials of this
paper, as well as two previous articles on the same subject. The
first contained the particulars of some cases admitted into his estab-
lishment shortly after the Revolution of 1830; the second, of cases
occurring during the stormy period which followed the accession of
Louis Philippe; the present memoir contains notices of eleven cases
placed under his care immediately after the Revolution of 1848.
Dr. Belhomme's intention is to show that popular commotions give
rise to numerous cases of insanity?that revolutionary excitement
may rightly be reckoned among the moral causes of the disease;
and he adduces these instances from his own practice in support of
his opinion. Our readers are aware that the Academic de M6decine
is in the habit of appointing a commission to inquire into the merits
of the communications made to it: the commissioners chosen to
inquire into Dr. Belhomme's paper, were MM. Falret, Ferrus, and
Londe. The following is the substance of their report:?
" This work comprises ten reported cases of madness coming on
after the events of February. The subjects were patients in the
establishment of M. Belhomme. All were strongly predisposed to
insanity, and five among them had been mad before the month of
February; the revolution then, as far as relates to these ten indi-
viduals, was, as M. Belhomme well remarks, merely the occasional
cause of insanity. The treatment employed by M. Belhomme, com-
monly crowned with success in a short time, has been no other than
that of which experience has sanctioned the efficacy: sedatives, (and
by this word we are far from meaning narcotics,) cutaneous and
intestinal revulsives and distractions," &c.
A discussion followed the reading of this report, in which M.
Baillarger made the following observations:?
" I think it desirable to indicate to the Academy the number of
patients admitted during the year 1848, into the Hospitals Sal-
petriere and Bicetre, and to compare it with the number of patients
received in the preceding years?here are the results. In 1848
there were admitted into the Salpetriere and Bicetre 1354 patients.
The admissions in 1847 were only 1220, which gives the striking
* " Influence des Evenemens et des Commotions Politiques sur le e\e oppe
ment de la Folie. Par le Docteur Belliomme. Paris, 1840."
32
POLITICS AND INSANITY.
increase of 134 cases in 1848. Still we must be careful to deduce
nothing from this fact, for if we look back to the five preceding years,
Ave shall find in fact that the admissions in 1845 were 1335, and 1331
in 184G, which gives the trifling difference of only 19 to 23 more
admissions for 1848. And even this slight increase is merely appa-
rent, for loss of fortune has compelled very many families to remove
their relatives from private establishments, and to have them trans-
ferred to the Salpetriere. From the Charenton establishment alone
thirty-two patients have been moved to the public hospitals, in con-
sequence of the inability of their friends to continue the payment for
their support. We may affirm, then, that the number of admissions
at the Salpetriere and Bicetre in 1848, would have been below those
of 1845 and 1846, but for the exceptional cause just mentioned.
" I am certainly far from asserting that 'political events do not give
rise to a certain number of cases of madness, for that would be deny-
ing evidence; but this number seems to me much less considerable
than is generally supposed. The publicity which attends the out-
break of insanity in notable persons during revolutionary times, has
contributed not a little to the belief in a kind of epidemic. I will
add but one more reflection, which is, that if political disturbances
bring with them real and powerful causes of insanity, yet that they
suspend other influences, which in calm and prosperous times often
produce the disorder. How many passions, even in the bosom of a
family, slowly sap the intelligence, and to which political events
afford a happy diversion. I do not know that the two kinds of
causes which I have mentioned compensate each other, and I confine
myself to pointing them out as elements to be considered in the
solution of the question."
M. Ferrus added?
" If there is an augmentation in the number of the insane, in some
particular parts, I must declare that this augmentation is not general,
and that I have not remarked it in the visitation which I have just
made."
The contradictory opinion of Dr. Baillarger draws from Dr.
Belhomme the following reflections:?
"What did I present to the Academy? A memoir, accompanied
with cases, and I advance that, at different revolutionary epochs, I
have received a certain number of mad persons, and particularly in
February, 1848, a revolution attended by such sudden and crushing
consequences: here I think are incontestable facts! Each commotion,
each emeute in Paris, gave me one or more insane persons?this is
clear! I have mentioned that these patients had already themselves
been insane, or had had insane persons in their family. Another
unequivocal remark! The madness which develops itself in these
unfortunate circumstances is of the acute form, and is commonly
easily cured.
" I am unwilling to contest the ingenious idea of M. Baillarger,
POLITICS AND INSANITY.
33
mt I believe that there are more causes of cerebral excitement
during revolutions, than during the happy times of a wise govern-
ment. The establishment of a republic gives birth to new passions;
men's minds are strongly moved by a multitude of ideas and pro-
positions more or less exciting. Another cause, not less dangerous
for the ideas and the passions, are the clubs and political meetings,
and the journals which breathe discord and civil war. In these
critical circumstances, arc there not, I ask, inccssant causes of mental
exaltation, and from the exaltation of the mind to its alienation
there is but a step! Let us then say it, and repeat it?political
commotions and events are a powerful determining cause of madness."
The preceding extracts establish how great a difference in opinion
exists among our Parisian brethren, upon what seems, at first sight,
to be a very simple question. Do political revolutions produce
insanity, or do they not? Popular commotions, do they, or do they
not, tend to augment the number of insane persons? Dr. Belhomme
answers in the affirmative, and we will state the general considera-
tions which induce us to agree with our author in his conclusion.
It is a rational opinion, which we believe is confirmed by statistics,
that a strong and orderly government is conducive to the mental
well-being of the citizens who live under its authority. Times of
licence and anarchy may perhaps be favourable to the display of in-
dividual genius, but the steady development of common talent takes
place only amidst order and tranquillity. A certain amount of bodily
ease and mental composure is required by the majority of mankind,
and without it there can be no application, and no real attainment.
Change and uncertainty are inimical to all pursuits which require
slow and assiduous labour; for repose is so pleasing to our nature,
that no man would voluntarily persist in working, unless there ex-
isted a reasonable prospect of his ultimately obtaining the reward of
his perseverance. Firmly constituted governments, in which per-
sonal freedom is secure and property rcspected, guarantee to their
citizens the safe enjoyment of the fruits of their exertions, be they
wealth, station, or honours ; but revolutionary States afford no such
assurancej in them all is uncertain and insecure. Now as it is gene-
rally admitted that regular occupation and rational hope are the best
preservatives of soundness of mind, it seems to us that a condi-
tion of things which precludes these cannot fail to be injurious to
sanity. The quiet course of public affairs, the orderly progression of
political events, and the tranquillity of social life, all exercise a bene-
ficial influence on the mind. The calm and order of the outer world
impress a peaceful image on the plastic soul. This is the link of
sympathy, which, in the language of the schoolmen, connects and har-
NO. IX. D
34
POLITICS AND INSANITY.
monizes the Microcosm with the Macrocosm, man's inner world with
the world without. Moreover, man is essentially imitative. In a
well-governed community he soon loses all disposition to act as an
individual, and conforms to the common mode and habits of life.
He voluntarily resigns a part of his distinctive character to assimilate
and associate with his fellow-men. He lays aside his personality to
obtain admission into society, and endeavours to conform with its
customs and its laws. As a rational being he observed those customs
and laws, and is governed and judged by them, so that any perverse
departure from them is deemed a want of reason and evidence of un-
sound mind. A charitable, enlightened, and consistent social code
would be the most efficacious check on individual aberration, but we
are of opinion that the present laws of society require revision on
many important points.
In every grade of life, in all countries, and at all times, there exists
a certain proportion of changeful, fitful, unsettled minds which lead
the unhappy possessors'to aftlict their friends, and astonish or amuse
their acquaintance, by the strangeness of their conduct. Such per-
sons have commonly an exalted sense of their own importance; filled
with an idea of their superiority, they disregard the common opinion
of mankind, and consider themselves privileged to commit any eccen-
tricity or absurdity. Society must bow to them, not they to society.
E:ich is the self-deified Olympian of his petty sphere. In childhood
such individuals are often distinguished by their vivacity and pre-
cocious talents. In youth their cleverness continues: they are quick
in apprehension, and ready in acquiring knowledge, excelling in those
pursuits which please the senses, or delight the fancy; but they can-
not, as a rule, master the exact sciences, or matters which require a
continuous effort of thought. Arrived at manhood they exhibit
something strange, irregular aud abnormal in their mode of life ;
they become gay, riotous, and dissipated, or misanthropic and re-
served. They turn scribblers, amateur artists, schemers, political
adventurers, constantly engaging in some fresh pursuit, and eager
after every novelty. Destitute of any sure principle of action, with-
out judgment, firmness, or perseverance, these unfortunate individuals
fritter away life in idle schemes and fruitless speculations.
They are the high priests of quackery, of quackery political, com-
mercial, literary, or scientific?moral or physical quacks, they become
self-styled curers of men, or would-be curers of humanity.
" To such quick spirits quiet is as hell;" they abhor tranquillity
their element is confusion ? they rejoice, therefore, in popular
commotions, which afford the excitement they desire. These are
POLITICS AND INSANITY.
tlie agitators and cliief actors in revolutions, and so long as
tliey continue in action, their minds may perhaps maintain a ficti-
tious equilibrium; but the first interval of repose is dangerous to
them, for their unstable reason is very likely to give way in the col-
lapse which ensues. Sometimes, however, the excitement itself is
fatal to them?they perish in the storm they have helped to raise ;
for, as Dr. Belliomnie observes, " There is but a step from exaltation
of mind to alienation."
But in all revolutions the number of actors is extremely limited?
the majority of the nation is content to suffer. The strongly-ex-
pressed will of a few noisy men, banded together for mischief, is suf-
ficient to coerce the weak and faltering wishes of the patient mass of
the community. In such times the active spirit of evil is infinitely
more potent than the passive principle of good. For one person
avIio immediately profits by a revolution there arc hundreds who
suffer; and Ave see in this fact a fertile cause for the increase of in-
sanity. Nearly all writers on the subject agree in ascribing a greater
influence to the moral than to the physical causes of the disease.
Pinel computed that the moral causes rather more than doubled the
physical : Esquirol, that the moral causes are to the physical as 4 to 1.
The nature of the subject docs not admit of very precise statistics.
For instance, Ave think it erroneous to class in all cases " hereditary
predisposition" among the physical causes, since the actual manifes-
tation of insanity in persons hereditarily predisposed is frequently
induced by a moral causc, under the influence of which tliey become
mad, but exempt from Avhich they might have remained sane for life.
HoAvever, let the exact proportions be Avliat they may, it is an esta-
blished fact, that the moral causes of insanity greatly exceed the
physical. Now Avliat are the moral causes'? We will take Esquirol's
1 a classification.
" Domestic grief?disappointed love?political events?fanati-
cism?fright?jealousy?anger?poverty, reverses of fortune?
Avounded self-loAre?disappointed ambition?excess in study?mis-
anthropy."
In perusing this list do avc not seem to enumerate most of the
evils Avhich inevitably accompany a subversive revolution ?
Indeed, the disasters Avhich attend the doAvnfal of governments pre-
sent so many mournful causes for the overthroAV of minds, that Ave
are surprised to find Dr. Baillarger denying their influence in in-
creasing the number of the insane, and are ready to decide Avith Dr.
Belhomme, that political events and public commotions are poA\Terful
d 2
c
I
30
POLITICS AND INSANITY.
determining causes of madness. The fact that ten cases of mania,
all produced by the events of February, were brought to Dr. Bel-
homme's private establishment, is in itself strong evidence in favour
of the correctness of his conclusion. For if ten cases fell to the share
of one asylum, the total increase must have been very considerable.
We do not think the argument of Dr. Baillarger conclusive?viz.,
that the number of patients in the great public hospitals was not
augmented by the revolution. Patients admitted into charitable
asylums belong almost exclusively to the poorer classes, and it is not
on them that the first shock of a revolution falls. To the mass of
the community, literally condemned to daily labour for their daily
bread, any change is welcome, and they favour universal commotion
as a means of improving a position, which they fancy cannot be ren-
dered worse. To them revolutions inspire more hope than anxiety.
This was peculiarly the case with the last French revolution, which
at once assumed a Communist character, and which was styled by the
popular press, the " revolution of the working classes." Every man
of the 200,000 " ouvriers " who defiled before the Hotel de Mille, on
the 16th of March, saw in the revolution a cause for rejoicing; but
how opposite were the feelings of the timid citizens, when they viewed
that monster procession passing before their windows. Without was
noise and exultation, within was misgiving and dread. The revolu-
tionary hydra was roaring in the streets, and no one knew who might
be its victim. " Care and anxiety, distress, grief, and mental disturb-
ances, are by far the most productive causes of insanity. These causes
are at all times influential in civilized countries, and hence one prin-
cipal reason why insanity prevails in proportion to the cultivation of
society."'"' And not only is insanity more frequent in civilized than
in barbarous countries, but in the most civilized state it is the most
highly-educated class which affords the largest contingent of sufferers.
In proportion as the standard of mental culture and intellectual re-
finement is exalted, so much the greater becomes the liability to a
departure from it.
It follows from this, that the ill-informed masses of the people are
not so likely as the educated to be affected by the outbreak of a revo-
lution?untaught and unteacliable by experience, ignorant of past
miseries, filled with false expectations of the future, they embrace any
change with hopefulness. The page of history is a blank to them;
they know neither its lessons nor its warnings ; they see not the use-
lessness of popular tumult, the errors of popular prejudices, the fal-
lacies of popular belief. They see but one thing?the chance of ob-
* PricLard. " A Treatise on Insanity," p. 183.
i'OLITiCS AND INSANITY.
37
taming their living without working for it. When, therefore, we
learn from Dr. Bail larger that the revolution of February did not
materially increase the number of admissions into the state pauper
asylums, we are by no means astonished ; nor do we think Dr. Bel-
homme's conclusions, drawn from private practice, at all invalidated
by that fact. There is also another circumstance which would re-
duce the number of applications for pauper lunatics,?namely, that
in times of great social disturbance very many cases of insanity
amongst the people pass unnoticed. When all the world is mad, in-
dividual derangement fails to attract attention. How many madmen
roamed at large in France between February and May, 1848, ha-
ranguing, denouncing, and propagandizing 1 How many fell behind
the barricades in June ? How many found their way into a prison
instead of an hospital ? How many carried their lunacy into other
lands ? The eloquent memoir of the lamented Pariset, quoted by
Dr. Belhomme, contains some remarks applicable to the point; and
although a translation of some portion of it is given in Dr. Prichard's
" Treatise on Insanity," Ave feel assured that our readers will excuse
our reproducing it.
" During the great tumult of revolutions, while all the social
elements were convulsed in every way, some thousands of cases of
derangement probably took place. Reverses of fortune, sudden
changes which exalted and humbled individuals, so many sources
of disaster opened at the same time, overwhelmed France with un-
exampled calamities ; cases of madness doubtlessly appeared in con-
siderable numbers, but were lost sight of in tloe currents of great
events. Moreover, those who know to what a degree the habits,
the disorders, the infirmities, of mind as well as body arc trans-
missible, will not think it rash to conclude that even the children
begotten at that epoch, experienced its baneful influence in their
mothers' wombs. In general, every great and rapid change, be it
in the physical or the moral order or things, is pernicious to the
health and to the reason. The sight of greatness overthrown, and
equal greatness acquired by strokes of fortune altogether unex-
pected, did not simply excite astonishment, but gave rise, even in
the rudest minds, to most dangerous hopes and illusions. Universal
reformers, founders of empires and republics, concoctors of consti-
tutions, showed themselves on every side ; simple artisans, and even
labourers, thought themselves destined to ascend a throne. These
Avild fancies, so flattering to self-love, are unfortunately the most
obstinate of aberrations ; for of all the kinds of derangement those
sprung from pride present the greatest resistance; they are so
suspicious and so irritable that they array themselves against all
who caress them, and are for that reason incurable. I may atk,
that they are very numerous, for it would appear that the diabolical
38
POLITICS AND INSANITY.
pleasure of ruling over men is the most exquisite delight of the
human race."
With the foregoing quotation we conclude our observations upon
this part of the subject. On analyzing Dr. Belhomme's eleven
cases, we find that they all presented the character of acute mania,
attended, in six cases, with violent raving. In addition to his own
eleven cases, the author gives one similar case, communicated by
Mr. Jolly, also acute mania. Eight or nine patients, received under
similar circumstances in 1830?1832, were all affected with acute
mania. We may conclude, therefore, that mania is the form of
insanity most commonly developed under circumstances of strong
sudden excitement. Of the eleven cases, six were clearly produced
by fright, three by the contagion of popular tumult, and two by
political exaltation. The cases caused by fright were the most
violent; indeed, fright seems almost invariably to produce the
maniacal form of the disease. Esquirol mentions that thirty-six
out of thirty-eight cases of madness produced by fright were instances
of mania. Theoretically, one might fancy that insanity following
fright would assume the form of " cleomania," or fear-madness, but
such is not the case. And this agrees with the observation of Pinel,
who says?
" To believe that the different species of insanity depend on the
particular nature of its causes, and that it becomes periodical,
continued or melancholic, according as it may have originated from
unfortunate love, domestic distress, fanaticism, superstition, or inte-
resting revolutions in the state of public affairs, would be to fall into
a very great error. My experience authorizes me to affirm that
there is no necessary connexion between the specific character of
insanity, and the nature of its exciting cause."
That so large a proportion as six out of eleven cases of mania
should have been produced by fear, is certainly a remarkable fact,
which we are inclined to ascribe in some extent to the terrorizing
character of the recent periodical literature in France.
During the last ten years of the reign of Louis Philippe, the leading
French romancers appeared to have entered into a sccrct compact
to revile the character of their nation, and to render their beautiful
capital a plague spot, and an abomination in the eyes of Europe.
If their revelation was to be credited, Paris was a vast den of rapine,
lust, and murder; in which it was stark folly for any one who valued
existence to reside. De Balzac, Soulie, Eugene Sue, Alexandre
Dumas, Paul Feval, and even the old thief-catcher, Vidocq, in turn
unveiled some hideous feature in the mysteries of crime. They told
TOLITICS AND INSANITY.
39
their credulous fellow citizens tliat tliere were living within their walls,
many thousands of monsters, human only in shape, to whom blood
was as water, man's life a jest, and mortal agony a sport. Nor was
the mania of revilement confined to the romance writers; even grave
staticians caught the infection, and published a supposititious census
of the throat-cutting class of the community. The so-called historians
followed next, ransacking the barbarous chronicles of the middle ages
for instances of the horrible. Finally came the world-famous
" History of the Girondists,'" and set the seal on this terrible
catalogue.
When, therefore, after the brief conflicts on the 24tli of February, the
populace triumphed, and the mob was master of Paris?when law had
ceased to exist, and universal anarchy prevailed?many thousands of
the inhabitants expected an immediate renewal of the awful scenes
which had characterized the first revolution. Apprehension seized on
the minds even of men, but more especially on the minds of the women,
many of whom were left alone in their houses; their husbands,
brothers, or sons, being still in the streets. They had been daily
taught for years, by the public press, that their city was filled with
demons, whose evil disposition was with difficulty restrained by the
armed power of the law; and, consequently, the intelligence that all
restraint was removed, filled them with terror and dismay, and left
them a prey to the constant dread of massacre and pillage. Fright
was caused also in another way?by the indescribable alarm which
assails the breast when the rattle of musketry, and the roar of cannon,
announce that the bloody work of slaughter is going 011 in the midst
of a populous city. Such sounds, whose effect only those who have
heard can conceive, produce an emotion which, for a moment,
blanches the cheek, and stays the breath of the bravest. From such
events, and under such circumstances, we need not wonder that many
timid and excitable persons, of both sexes, lost their reason. The
result of the revolution showed how deeply the " Jeuilletonistes' had
calumniated the lower order of their fellow-citizens, for we do not
remember to have heard, and we were present, any one instance in
Paris, in which a private person was ill-used, or private property
attacked. But the truth was revealed too late, the mischief was
already done, and the register of Dr. Belhomme's establishment boio
witness to the calamitous influence exercised by the writings of the
sensation-mongers.
Our author's method of treatment is certainly more active than
that which we usually follow in this country, consisting in bleeding,
leeching, cupping, purging, prolonged bathing, cold effusions on the
40
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
Lead, and tlie administration of sedatives: however, it seems to have
been eminently successful.
In conclusion, we have to offer our best thanks to Dr. Belliomme,
for his interesting memoir; and trusting that his professional brethren,
connected with similar establishments, public and private, may be
induced to follow his example, Ave hope to have some additional
information on this interesting subject to communicate in a future
number.
