Mr. Dyce Sombre on the English Law of Lunacy
=============================================

[We have received .1 copy of a work consisting of 589 pages, printed
in Paris, and entitled, " Mr. JJyce Sombre s Refutation of the
Charges of Lunacy brought against him in the Court of Chancery."
It is impossible in the present number (the greater portion of the
journal being in type) to give our readers even an idea of the
contents of this volume. We shall therefore, 011 this occasion, merely
transfer to our pages, without comment, Mr. Dyce Sombre's " Views
of the English Law of Lunacy," with which he concludes his " Refu-
tation."]

" My own painful example must convince every impartial mind,
that personal liberty, so jealously guarded in England by the law, is
liable to be infringed with the greatest ease 011 the mere plea of
lunacy. By the English law, the Lord High Chancellor, upon
petition supported by affidavits, grants a commission to inquire into
the state of mind of the party. But can this seriously be considered
a sufficient guarantee against erroneous opinions, misrepresentations,
or conspiracies 1 In my case, for example, a physician, as already
stated, broke into my apartment, and put me in charge of three
keepers, without my having the power either to claim to be heard,
or to have recourse to the intervention of a magistrate. More than
sixteen weeks was I retained in captivity, before a commission sat in
my ease; I have already related Jioiv it sat. The mere word of a
physician, supported no doubt by petitions and affidavits, was
sufficient to restrain me from the exercise of my liberty?me, who
had committed no crime nor illegality, without so much as a question
being addressed to me by any responsible person in office, while a
thief, a pickpocket or a burglar, cannot be kept twenty-four hours in
custody, even when caught in the act, without being examined by a
magistrate !

While, in France, the greatest formalities are observed in laying
restraint 011 a man's liberty on the charge of lunacy, an act which
cannot be effected without an examination by the tribunal in the
presence of the Procureur du Roi (Code Civil, art. 49G) in England,
it is not even thought necessary to ascertain prima facie the patient's
state of mind by a public officer previously to his being placed under
control !

Let us suppose, for instance, that a wife, tired of her husband's
presence, and desirous of enjoying her liberty with the command of
an easy income, hits upon the plan of making out a case of lunacy
against him. She knows all his peculiarities and weaknesses; she
possesses the art of vexing him, putting him into a passion, and
inducing him to commit himself by some unguarded threat, which
she takes care shall be heard by the menials of the family. This
Avill give her an opportunity of instilling into their credulous minds
the discovery she has made, that her husband, poor dear creature, is
mad! He never was so cruel, so violent before; 0I1, 110 ! he is
mad.

The stroke takes effect. From this moment all the doomed man's
actions are spied and commented upon ; his most innocent and
plainest words distorted from their real meaning. An officious
doctor is drawn into the secret, he watches like the rest, he registers
the fables that are whispered to him about his patient's acts and
words; a well-authenticated threat can be sworn to ; perhaps the
lady's promises prompt his zeal. The victim's temper is carefully
soured and maliciously excited, his knowledge of family or other
affairs cunningly deceived by falsehoods of every shape, and each
deception thus imbibed is destined to count fearfully against him on
the day of judgment.

At last the day arrives. The petition and affidavits have had
their effect; the physician enters with three keepers, and the devoted
man is henceforward a lunatic. He is taken to an asylum, in which
the chief doctor, and a brother practitioner who has obsequiously
signed the certificate, have no interest, as the law directs. From that
moment he is as good as in his grave ; his papers are taken from
him, his money and property removed, his room is inaccessible to
the visits of a friend, save the benign household god of the place;
who is delighted at the capital prize his friend Dr. N. has procured
him. Meanwhile, care is taken to provide further evidence of the
patient's state of mind. Loss of liberty and anxiety arc excellent
prescriptions to make a man mad, if he is not; but they may not be
enough. New annoyances must therefore be invented; his sleep
must be often disturbed by the keepers ; if lie complain, it is clear
that he believes in ghosts. His food may be so regulated as to pro-
duce dyspepsia, a complaint likely enough to arise from mere con-
finement; ami 110 less likely to produce unfavourable effects on the
brain. Paper and writing materials are freely left in the power of
the victim ; for it is ten to one that ennui and seclusion will dictate
to him some nonsense which may be brought in evidence against
him. At last, however, after sixteen weeks' schooling in the art of
running mad, the commission-day draws near. Then comes the
triumph of the mad-doctor; for if he be not an arrant dunce, and if
he understand to turn an honest penny, he will just mix the slightest
possible dose of henbane or any other stupefying substance with the
food of the pretended lunatic during the last few days, a process
which will greatly contribute to make him unfit to defend his case
before the commission.

Meantime the lady will have taken the utmost pains to lament
her hard fate in every body's presence. The news flies from mouth
to mouth : Mr. Such-a-one is mad ! and by the time the case is to
come on, there is little necessity of using much ingenuity in packing
a jury, the public mind being sufficiently prejudiced already to render
that precaution unnecessary.

The victim is called in ; the mass of false or adulterated evidence
collected in all this time is laid before the commission, who see all
through the magnifying-glass of pre-conceived prejudices; and
should the patient attempt to defend himself, the foreman of the
commission perhaps will answer : " Oh, we want to hear no more,
we have heard enough !"

Though in drawing this picture, I have made allusion here and
there to circumstances that actually existed in my case, I may con-
fidently state that such proceedings are not unfrequent; nay, I
might quote an instance of an English lady of high descent, who, in
1843, attempted to rid herself in the manner here described, of
her husband, in a provincial town of Italy; which attempt was
fortunately averted by the bold interference of a gentleman who was
little better than a stranger to the family. This very distant allusion
would suffice to recal the fact to the memory of the parties in question.
The sentence of lunacy once pronounced, the doomed man becomes
the doctor's slave. He has no hopes of being freed from his meshes.
All he says or does, is dictated by lunacy; if a reasonable act is
admitted, it is attributed to a lucid interval; in short, unless the
patient succeed in making his escape, he runs a very good chance of
losing his reason in good earnest, to the 110 small triumph of the
honest practitioner.

But if he effects his escape, he will follow my example, and apply
his first moments of liberty to prove by the testimony of other
physicians how wronged he has been. But what are the most
eminent physicians of Paris, Petcrsburgh or Brussels, to Sir J. Clark,
Drs. Southey and Bright 1 Mere school-boys, of course ; for have
they not dared to question upon scientific grounds as well as matter
of fact, the validity of the sentence of those three great men, whose
opinion has been so logically set forth in the numerous lcpuits
already given, and which, for the sake of the reader's complete
edification, 1 will just examine a little more nearly.

It is a singular fact, that whereas generally the hallucinations of a
lunatic are clearly defined, my doctors have never been able to give
a well-defined name to mine. I am accused of excess of jealousy, of
suspicions against innocent persons, of violence, want of memory,
and what not. But even supposing all these accusations to be true,
can they possibly constitute lunacy ? A lunatic will think he sees,
or hears, or knows, or is, something that cannot be seen, or heard, or
known, or be, on account of some physical impossibility ; but if
suspicions of things physically jwssible are classed as hallucinations,
where, in the name of Heaven, can you draw a line between sanity
and insanity ? Again, if I were accused of admitting incompatible
things as compatible, or declaring the contrary, I might be guilty;
but are the imputations I formerly brought against Mrs. D. S. of
that nature 1 If I was mistaken in the facts, was that a reason for
declaring me mad? were those imputations impossible 1 Nay, more,
could the doctors, who are so positive in pronouncing my lunacy,
prove by substantial facts, that such imputations were really false f?
They might judge them false; but as to proofs, though I might be
at a loss to prove my allegations, I suspect they would be equally
puzzled to prove the contrary.

If jealousy be madness, if those who doubt a woman's virtue are
to be considered lunatics, then either England is the chastest country
in the world, or else I would recommend that the whole face of the
country be covered with madhouses
" Thick r-3 the leaves of Vallombrosa."

Drs. Southey and Bright, in their report of July 24, 1844, gravely
enumerate all the heinous offences I am accused of. The first and
principal one I have just disposed of. Next comes my threat that I
would cut off Mrs. Dyce Sombre's nose. The charitable doctors do
not attempt to suppose that such a threat might possibly have
escaped me in a moment of passion, caused by the superabundant
and probably sharp eloquence of my partner; they seem to forget
that such threats generally fall thick as hail-stones in matrimonial
squabbles, without the remotest intention on either side of ever
putting them into execution. Oh no, that does not strike them;
pronouncing me a lunatic is by far the easier course of the two.
-I) determination never to be re-united to my wife, though on a
ornier occasion I had proposed certain conditions on the performance
of which I would consent to receive her again, is considered a proof
of lunacy. None but a lunatic, according to Drs. Southey and
Bright, can change his mind. For then the proverb "Second
thoughts are best" is lunacy. My not thinking it a hasty step to
send a challenge to Sir F. B. upon mere suspicion, is lunacy. Were
Drs. Southey and Bright to read the papers, they would find,
however, that almost all duels fought on account of ladies are owing
to mere suspicions.

Though not mentioned in the present report, I may hero advert to
the strange accusation Sir J. Clark brought against me before the
commission of lunacy, namely?that I believed in ghosts. I have
already flatly denied this idle imputation. But what if it were true?
Would that prove my insanity? How many devout persons there
are?not to mention the peasantry of almost every country in the
world,?how many well-educated persons believe in visible spirits,
in visions of saints, in second sight, somnambulism, prophecies and
such like, while nobody in their senses would dream of calling them
mad ? The ghosts I did see, were of flesh and blood, none else but
the keepers, who out of extraordinary regard for my welfare, for
which I am profoundly grateful, used to come and startle me from
my sleep. So much for the veracity of the " reports."

Next comes the imputation that I imagined my food had been
drugged. Lunacy again! incorrigible lunacy! When a man who
generally feels himself well, one day feels, on rising from dinner,
certain unusual symptoms, unlike what he ever felt before, is it sur-
prising that he should believe that something he has eaten has
disagreed with him? And when he finds himself unjustly under
restraint on a pretext of lunacy, surrounded by persons whose
behaviour to him has been anything but prepossessing, is it strange
that he should suspect them of foul play? My surmises may have
been wrong; I may have been mistaken; but is a mistake a hallu-
cination? is it lunacy? Let the impartial public answer.

I now come to the report of September 2Gth, 1846. The doctors
are happy to find that my food was not drugged at Brussels, but to
their utter mortification they find that I will not live again with my
wife, that I still believe in her misconduct, and even name the
persons on whom my suspicions rest, and my reasons for them.
Now I humbly submit that the best course to cure me of my
inveterate lunacy on this ticklish subject, would have been to con-
vince me by some substantial proof or other, that my suspicions were
not borne out by appearances. The persons I accused might not
have been in the country at the time, or they might have avoided the
society of my wife, or my informants might have been maliciously
intent upon deceiving me? Nothing of the kind, however, the
sapient doctors attempted to prove or even to inquire about; they
did not fail however to notice "my peculiar look and manner" with
which I answered no to their question concerning the illicit inter-
course between Lord St. Vincent and his daughter, and to decide
that " my words were at some variance with my thoughts." ? What
penetration to be sure!?But on the following day they are surprised
to hear that I admit " that my notions of Mrs. Dycc Sombre's
infidelity were all delusions" and that " she is as virtuous and chaste
a woman as ever lived." With the same wonderful penetration they
are so conspicuous for, they find that I " seemed glad to have dis-
burdened myself of a disagreeable task." I am rather surprised
they did not in this instance express a suspicion that 1 had been in
the interval advised by somebody to take that course, or that I might
myself have thought it advisable to cut the matter short at once by
doing so. But they remark that I still continue " to talk of Mr,
C. F. and Gen. V. as persona who had deeply injured me." I have
already mentioned the facts relating to the latter, and shall not
therefore return to the subject. But as to what I said of the former,
what does that prove, except that I am a bad adept in dissimulation,
and that the suspicions I then entertained were sufficiently strong to
throw me off my guard, when the legitimate jealousy of a husband
was distorted by evil-intentioncd persons into a proof of lunacy?
Did the French physicians, did the Prefect of Paris consider jealousy,
even though unfounded, a sufficient reason for locking up a person
in a lunatic asylum, or even depriving him of the control of his
property?

The doctors, indeed, attribute my contradictory answers to an
attempt to " suppress the latent delusion;" but the question is: Can
it be called a delusion at all ? Can an unfounded suspicion be called
a delusion in the sense in which it is applied, to establish luiiacy?
If it can, then the number of lunatics must comprise the immense
majority of the nation!

But luckily for me, the doctors admit that I no longer believe in
ghosts, nor that my food is mixed with poison!

They conclude with a modest insinuation, that their opinion is at
variance with the " testimony of various medical men in this country
and also on the continent," owing to their being ill-furnished with
the facts and early history of the case; or in plain English, that Drs.
Southey and Bright are the only persons in the world able to judge
of the state of mind of Mr. Dyce Sombre. There is but one God,
and Drs. Southey and Bright are his prophets !

I shall refer the reader to the French report, where it will be seen
tliat Sir J. Clark had kindly volunteered every possible information
on the subject, including the East India Company, the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and all the vile trash concocted against me, not omit-
ting the very conclusive notes written in my own hand. The phy-
sicians of St. Petersburgh had the benefit of the same facts from the
French report.

The report of August 5th, 1847, begins with a rich specimen of
logic. The doctors set out with a statement that the difliculty of
making a satisfactory report of my case is " not diminished." Still,
in the next sentence, they admit that I have " acquired much more
self-control.' In that ease I humbly submit, there must have been
some diminution in the alleged difficulty.

But the reason why the difliculty still subsists, is probably that
" to some of the allegations contained in the affidavits I gave a posi-
tive denial, others I endeavoured to explain away."

A great proof of lunacy, certainly! here are affidavits regularly
signed and sworn, to which I give a Hat denial! Of course, being a
lunatic, I must he wrong; the doctors do not hesitate about whom
they have to believe; false, mistaken, or ungrounded affidavits are
quite an impossibility!

But "others I endeavoured to explain away !" Now, is not that
a proof of that peculiar cunning so frequently met with in such con-
firmed lunatics as 1 am ? But I dicl not succecd in my attempt; no,
the doctors tell you, I only " endeavoured." "Whether the grounds
upon which I " endeavoured" were good or bad, the doctors took no
trouble to ascertain ; for am I not a lunatic ?

I admitted, however, "substantially the whole of the statement
made by Signor Solaroli." The doctors do not think it worth while
to remark that that was a proof of memory. I further " asserted
positively" the illegitimacy of Madame Solaroli, quoting Lord Met-
calfe's and Mr. Prinsep's authorities. Now mark the doctors :
"We regret that we have no means of ascertaining this question
of fact, as, if unfounded, it would throw much light upon the ' state
of Mr. Dyee Sombre's mind.' "

How candid! If unfounded, I should still be a lunatic, of course;
? ah, but if founded 1 The doctors do not venture to contemplate
such a possibility as a lunatic being right in spite of the Faculty!
The reader has already seen, that if I had not positive direct proofs
on the subject of Madame Solaroli's illegitimacy, I have pretty sub-
stantially established that the matter was generally suspected, inde-
pendently of my personal knowledge of the matter, which is con-
sidered of no value, because " I am of unsound mind."

The doctors then proceed to state that "such groundless aspersions
(upon Messrs. Vizard, Leman, etc.) on the characters of gentlemen of
unquestionable integrity and honour, appear to us to be marks of
the same mental disorder which led him to suspect the fidelity of his
wife."

We have the doctors' word for it, that "such aspersions" arc
groundless ; of course they have minutely examined the persons in
question, or witnesses to the subject; else how could they know that
they arc groundless ? Have not we seen men of immense respecta-
bility hanged for forgery, nay, murder ? a bishop forced to fly from
Ireland under the conviction of an unnatural crime? members of
parliament convicted of bribery ? Do we not daily see in the papers
men of rank or property in every station of life called before the
justice of the country to purge themselves of accusations of seduction,
rape, embezzlement, breach of trust, crim. con., perjury, calumny,
and every item almost of the catalogue of crimes and misdemeanours,
?and do we not almost always see verdicts of " Guilty" recorded
against them ? And is it not generally felt and known that the
number of treacherous, dishonourable, and shameful acts which the
arm of the law is by far too short to reach or to punish, is infinitely
greater than those offences which come to light??And with such
facts staring you in the face, you, Drs. Southey and Bright, find it
in your consciences to declare a man a lunatic, because, betrayed,
cheated, swindled and persecuted as he has been for the last twelve
years, as proved by facts and documents, he has learnt to suspect the
motives and actions of those with whom he has to do, till he has
some direct proof of their honesty? And if, as you pretend, sus-
picion be a mental malady, who, 1 ask, has fomented mine more
than you, who have tasked* your ingenuity to the utmost, in order to
represent my simplest words or actions as symptoms of a diseased
intellect 1

The doctors then proceed to state, that having made a written
declaration to exonerate my wife from all suspicion, I had confirmed
it in their presence, but refused to live again with my wife, on account
of her temper. Upon which my wise examiners give birth to the
two following sentences, which I beg to put face to face :

" It is difficult to believe in tlie entire " It is very satisfactory to us that Mr.
removal of the delusion in question Dyce Sombre lias admitted that lie la-
whilst any feeling hostile to Mrs. Dyce boured under delusions up to the time
Sombre seems to subsist, etc." when we parted with him at Dover, thus
proving the correctness of the opinion
we formed, etc."

Now if, as the doctors insinuate, my admission that I was wrong
in my surmises concerning my wife's infidelity, was insinccrc, if it
was an cflbrt to deceive them, what on earth can that prove as to
the correctness of their opinion? How can a falsehood be adduced
in evidence of a truth ? But if, on the contrary, my admission was
sincere, and corroborates their former opinion, it is unwise in them
to invalidate such testimony by throwing a doubt on its sincerity;
while at the same time it is ungenerous to deprive me of the benefit
of it, as a proof that the capital charge against me, stupid as it is, is
removed.

Let me now comparc the three following passages :?
RKTOnT IIE PORT
Of September 1840. Of August '>th, 1847.

"We arc still convinc- " If on our last examina- " In conclusion we are
cd, that his mind con- tion of this gentleman we bound to admit, tliat we
tinucs to be impressed found it difficult to moke n were unable to elicit any
with the notion of his satisfactory report, on the positive delusion under
wife s infidelity, ?See." present occasion our difll- which Mr. Dyce Sombre
culties arc not diminished." labours."

After perusing the first passage, the reader must think that tho
delusion complaincd of in 181G, has been found equally strong in
1817, since the doctors' "difficulties are not diminished." Still the
third passage denies the latter assertion ; since it contains a reluctant
a\owal that they " were unable to elicit any positive delusion." Now
uhich of the two declarations arc we to believe 1 One thing is cer-
tain in my opinion ; that is, that neither Locke nor llurris presided
over the framing of the doctors' reports.

But the scrupulous practitioners add immediately after, that they
" no confidence that he is entirely free from such delusions."
Therefore, because I)rs. Southey ami Bright, although confessedly
upon no positive grounds whatever, " feel no confidence," a man is
to l>e kept from his property, an outlaw from his kingdom, deburred
from the redress the meanest subject of the British empire has a right
to demand! What would the public say if a jury in a ease of
burglary or murder, were to frame a verdict as follows :?" Wo can-
not find the prisoner guilty, although we have no confidence in his
innocence ?" Him the judge -would instantly acquit; but I, a pre-
sumed lunatic, am still an exile, with the prospect of a prisou, if
ever I set foot without permission within the jurisdiction of the Lord
High Chancellor, and merely because two doctors, in the teeth of
evidence, declare they have no proofs, but still can have " no con-
fidence."

The next passage is remarkable :?
" When we consider the length of time during which his malady
has continued, and the self-command by which he has been enabled
to deceive so many physicians both foreign and English, we cannot
but hesitate in giving credence to his own statements ; nor, because
he tells us that in September last he became satisfied of the injustice
of his notions respecting his wife, can we therefore conclude that he
is now perfectly sane."

This is rich : I will but call it self-conceit?the dictionary might
furnish me with a much more appropriate term. Here arc two men
calling themselves sane, who, after having but a moment before con-
fessed they had 110 proofs, swcepingly declare in the face of the world
that the most eminent physicians of the continent specially entrusted
with the cure of mental disorders, and many eminent men of their
own country, were all duped. And by Avhoni ? by a lunatic, whom
they alone, II. II. Southey and J. Bright, are competent to fathom!
Waiving all considerations of the futility of the symptoms on which
my lunacy is supposed to rest, surely my madness, if capable of
deceiving so many learned men of four countries, must be infinitely
preferable to the sanity of my doctors !

1 now come to the Report of November 18th, 1818, signed by
Drs. Southey, Bright, Clark, and Martin.

Here a mistake, concerning the date of my change of opinion
respecting my wife's virtue, is maliciously pointed out as a mark of
insanity, and my sincerity is again questioned. Next follows this
remarkable passage :?

" He mistakes the creations of his own fancy for facts, and reasons
upon them accordingly."

Here I will just ask the following question:?
Is a man who labours under a mistake a lunatic ? If so, I venture
to say there is not a man in the world who is not, or has not been, a
lunatic.

If not, then pray what does a man do when he labours under a
mistake 1 Docs not he take it for a fact, " and reason upon it
accordingly ?"

Nay, what have my doctors done 1 Have they not mistaken the
" creation of their own fancy," my lunacy namely, for " a fact," and
have they not " reasoned upon it accordingly 1"

As to whether what they call the " creations of my own fancy
arc facts or not, the doctors have not taken the trouble to inquire.
I have given sufficient explanations in former parts of this Refuta-
tion respecting the circumstances they adduce as proofs of my
insanity; but the manner in which they expose the aftair of Lord
Ward, notwithstanding the very clear explanation I gave them of
the matter, and which I have already given here, is a clear act of
downright malevolence. The matter is maliciously related, my
explanation completely suppressed, and a hint cleverly thrown in,
that perhaps "the whole transaction is a matter of imagination!'
The same may be said of the manner in which they give an
account of our conversation respecting Madame Solaroli's illegitimacy.
I have given so much evidence on the subjcct in this Kcfutation, in
the shape of argument, letters, and affidavits, that I need only revert
to the impudence with which my assertion respecting Mr. Glynn is
declared to be a delusion.

The rest of the report is of the same character as the preceding
ones, with this difference, that whereas the latter seem rather dictated
by conceited self-importance, spite and dishonesty appear to have
had a great share in this.

When we comparc the dignified, prceise, and scientific character
of the reports of Paris, St. Pctcrsburgh, and Brussels, with the shuf-
fling, uncertain, prejudiced, and malicious tone of the reports of
these English physicians, we cannot help entertaining the idea,
erroneous as it may be, that the latter have been prompted by some
secret motive, which however in the present state is not worth
inquiry.

The reports I have here examined may be condensed as follows:
I believe in flic unchastity of my wife; therefore I am a lunatic.
1 believe in the illegitimacy of Madame Solaroli; therefore I am a
lunatic.

I was, from ignorance of the worldly station of Lord Ward, led
into a mistake ; therefore I am more a lunatic than ever.

Thus it is, that by the combined efforts of intrigue, ignorance,
and misrepresentation, and by the defective state of the English law
as regards lunatics, I am debarred from personal liberty in my
mother-country; the management of my property is withheld from
me, while it is wasted through ncgligcncc or cupidity, and myself
cast out, as fnr as practicable, from the society of reasonable men, a
lunatic among the sane, by the mere dictum of a few men, who
openly profess to set their own wisdom against that of the rest of
the world.

And all this in a country which prides itself upon being the only
one in the world where personal liberty is fairly understood?where
a pickpocket or a murderer will meet with all the tenderness of the
law; but where, alas ! there is no law for a presumed lunatic, when
there are interested parties, whose wishes are that he should remain so.
\Vitb these I conclude, and leave the public to form their own
opinions on my case; and whether such persons as the Chancery
Doctors have proved themselves to be, are worthy of the trust the
Lord Chancellor reposes in them, and whether the Lord Chancellor
ought not at once to annul, and crush the Commission of Lunacy
under which I now labour.

I>. 0. Dvt'IJ &0MB11E.
J'aris, rue den I'yniniiJcK, 2,
August -.Ml), lbil>.
