Analysis of Crime
==================

(Srtgtnal GDommum'cattons.)
being an attempt to distinguish its chief causes, in answer to the
STATISTICAL DEDUCTIONS OF M. GUERRY, AND THE REV. WHIT WORTH
RUSSELL; THE FORMER FINDING THAT POPULAR EDUCATION DID NOT
PREVENT CRIME?THE LATTER TnAT IT WAS A CAUSE OF CRIME.
:Author: K. H. Hokne.

A full and scientific examination of the great and complicated
question of Crime requires that it should be considered from two
distinct points of view?viz., the abstract and the practical. The
reader, therefore, who would enter with us upon this important
study, is earnestly requested to bear this distinction in mind, so that
he may never confuse a philosophical extenuation with a moral
licence, nor imagine that a theory which accounts for an act, or even
grants it metaphysically a pardon, is by any means intended as an
argument for a legal or social pardon. It will by no means follow
from our analysis and development of the causes which lead to crime,
that society is to be " murdered in its bed" with impunity, or that
we should relax any one of those enactments which can be shown to
furnish to the community at large any really efficient protection
from the violence either of lawless depravity or of headlong passion.
This being well understood, a few preliminary remarks may be
offered on the standard by which we should measure crime.

There are, undoubtedly, a variety of crimes by which the com-
munity at large is either little injured, or only injured in that
indirect manner of which the laws cannot well be framed so as justly
to take cognizance and administer punishment. A rich man, for
some difference of religious persuasions, or for certain virtues in his
poor relations, which make his own moral obliquities look uglier,
dissipates and throws away his property, and leaves them to beggary
and starvation. This is a crime ; but the law cannot notice it. He
had a legal right to commit this moral wrong. It is a private
wickedness, not affecting society, but a few individuals, and must
therefore be measured as such by the standard. A vicious taste or
perversion may be indulged?whether of the senses or of the mind;
but how is the law to deal with private drunkenness, secret gambling,
or hidden cruelties of various kinds 1 They are crimes, but scarcely
tangible by any penal enactments, without trenching upon the liberty
of the subject by despotic authority. Naval and military floggings,
of an extreme kind, in their barbarous abuse of power, are amenable
to civil laws ; but how are bestial schoolmasters and their birches to
be dealt with 1 " Crimes," says Beccaria, " are only to be measured
by the injury done to society." There is much truth in this ; but it
is not the Avliole truth. For though the injury in the cases last
mentioned may affect numbers in their feeling and habits in after-
life, who may in turn carry a contaminating influence in their course,
how are such offences to be brought directly and positively within the
recognition of the law] So, we may say of the great corn-dealers,
who, foreseeing a coming famine, buy up large stores of corn, and
raise its price to the highest upon the groans of the multitudes who
surround their granaries. This has often been done, and is a mani-
fest crime against society?against which, however, there is no legal
remedy, and for which there can be, consequently, no punishment;
nor could one be devised without some arbitrary act of the legis-
lature. Whether this would not, in such cases, be the lesser evil, it
is not our present business to discuss. When, therefore, Beccaria
says that crimes are only to be measured by the injury done to
society, we must add, that such measurement being only the prac-
tical side of the question, is to be understood in the present paper
with reference to the power of the law to prevent or punish them.
Having thus cleared the ground before us by making it understood
tnat we are about to consider only (or with a few incidental excep-
tions) those crimes which are recognised as such by the laws, and
which are therefore amenable to a definite punishment, we now pro-
ceed to ail analysis of the causes of crime, and a development of its
fundamental principles, so as to bring the whole question before the
mind in a form partaking, as nearly as we can effect it, of the most
indisputable principles of mental science.

No doubt all crime (and everything else) is attributable to circum-
stances, in the large and loose sense in which that word is continually
employed. A far more definite series of causes must be developed.
The great Causes of Crime are divisible into the following classes,
which, we think, will be found to comprise all those which are
amenable to the laws. We will first enumerate them in succession,
and then deal with each specially :?

First, Ignorance.?Under this head we place the most dense and
clod-like conditions of mind, and also those conditions which are
regarded as the first steps in knowledge.

Secondly, Want.?Under this head we place the extremes of
poverty and destitution, and also the first stages of amelioration.
Thirdly, Filthiness.?Under this term we shall place filthiness
of person and abode.

Four tidy, The Passions.?Under this head we shall class vulgar
animal passion of the lowest kind; evil mental passions; and the
higher class of mental or noble passions, the excesses of which may
lead to crime.

Fifthly, Weakness.?This will comprise all those crimes which
occur through want of character and firmness, together with those
which are directly caused by vain or half-witted impulses.
Sixthly, Misdirected Strength.?Here Ave shall class the per-
versities of the will, and the ungovernable exaggerations of the
imagination.

Seventhly, Special Deficiency.?Under this head we shall class
those acts of crime and cruelty which are mainly attributable to
certain deficiencies in the structure of the individual mind and
nature.

Eighthly, Bad Penal Laws.?Under this head we shall place
the corruptions of prisons, and the callousness induced by public
executions.

Some causes of crime may exist which are a combination of
several of the foregoing; we have not thought it advisable, there-
fore, to give them a separate heading. They will, however, be suffi-
ciently noted in our progress.

In placing Ignorance as the first among the causes of Crime, and
in regarding it, as we do, to be the most extensive of all causes, we
have not arrived at such a conclusion without some misgivings and
much consideration of the question in all its bearings. It will pre-
sently be seen that a correct view of this difficult and complicated
question is of the highest importance, involving, of necessity, the
most extensive results as a basis for future legislation. Demon-
stration is, as yet, scarcely possible amidst all the entangled and
conflicting facts and statistical returns; we think, however, that a
near approach way be made to the truth, and we invite the reader
to examine with us tlie steps by which our present conclusions have
been attained.

As a great part of the fabric of the argument must rest on this
foundation, some space must be devoted to its primary consideration.
Regarding ignorance as the chief cause of crime, and believing
implicitly that education and knowledge directly tended to lessen its
amount, the writer, during the first period of his literary life, con-
sidered any investigation of the truth or fallacy of this impression as
J perfectly unnecessary. But as he advanced on his course, and
compared the current observations of real life with all he recol-
lected of the varied scenes of actual life he had witnessed, the
facts began to accumulate on the other side. He saw, for in-
stance, that it required something more than ignorance to make a
successful thief; while, at the same time, he discovered that the
numerical returns of crime increased with the increase of schools
and general instruction of children and the people. That crime
should be solely attributed to ignorance, seemed a paradox in the
face of all the tens of thousands of expert thieves, burglars, pro-
curesses, and other criminals whose offences absolutely required some
sort of knowledge and acute practical perceptions and decision,?to
say nothing of sharpers, swindlers, black-legs, (at cards, dice, billiards,
&c.,) forgers, coiners, &c., all of whose successes and existences de-
pended on a very great amount of special skill, or general knowledge
of life, adroitness, and that self-possession which is the result of a
consciousness of mastery.

But these acts of evil knowledge, it will be said, are the results of
early ignorance. _ True; but only of very early ignorance,?for after
the first steps in a vicious education have been taken, the young-
criminals have an acute perception of their own position, and the
relations they bear to society. The ignorance in which they com-
mence crime cannot be said to accompany them through those stages
which require very considerable knowledge and skill. The cadet
pickpocket may be designated as ignorant, but not when he has
risen to a lieutenancy in the footpad corps, or to be captain of a
burglar band. He may have little or no knowledge of reading and
writing, but he has knowledge of many realities which are not so
good. Ignorance has ceased to be the cause of his crime?in any
proximate and practical sense?and has given place to a very different
cause?viz., that of successful depravity. Let us look, by way of
demonstrative illustration, at the brief course of two accomplished
young thieves. The following account of their brief career, given by
one of them, we will give as nearly as possible in his own words,
abridged from the Constabulary Report (1839):?

He was the son of respectable parents, and might have gained an
honest living, but thought he could do better by thieving than
working; so he ran away. Another young man joined him with
similar views. On the first day of their expedition from Manchester,
they made about iI. by picking pockets at Chorley. They then went
to 1 reston, and in a fortnight " got a dccent sum?about 301,

Thence they went to Garstang, where they "took 12?. from a drunk
man." In the ensuing week, at Lancaster and Carlisle, they did
? very fair." In a short time they went to Hexham, where " in
about three minutes they flattened the nose of a flour-dealer, and
relieved him of 251." To Durham they next proceeded, " to look at
the Cathedral," but, unfortunately, " did nothing there;" and they
were equally unsuccessful at Darlington; but at Stocton, in the
following week, they " made about 121." for which they were appre-
hended, and " had a month of solitude" in Durham jail. On their
liberation, they went to Sunderland for a week, where the young
man making this confession could find no other book but the Bible,
in which he read a passage that troubled him for a week or two.
Nevertheless, on the road between Sunderland and Shields, they
made 81., " and determined to work back to Manchester." Before
they arrived at York, they " were low," and had only made 14/. 10s.
At Leeds they "got some little?about 10/.;" at Bradford, 31.) and
arrived at Manchester on the 25th of May, from whence they went to
Asliton and Huddersfield, and obtained 10/. by picking pockets, but
"had to fly very quick." Wakefield "stood" 25s.; and Selby and
Hull, " some few pounds." At Beverley and Scarboro', they " made
30/. at two hauls;" and at Hartlepool, "we lit on an old sailor just
landed, who had got 251., (his wages just received,) and picked his
pocket." On they drove to Edinburgh, where "we drawed" a
grocer's till, which yielded 30/. At Glasgow they were a fortnight;
"got about 20/. the day before we went out,.to help us on the road."
Thence to Greenock, which he described as " a pretty town, but we
did not choose to do much," things not looking safe. Ayr, however,
yielded a more liberal return, in 40/. which was taken from the pocket
of a female, but which roused the hue and cry after them; they
escaped, however. One left Scotland, and crossed to Ireland, where,
at various places enumerated, he made 77/. 10s., his companion
having parted from him at Ayr.

We would not by any means have it supposed that the kind of
knowledge displayed by these two young thieves should take any
other rank than that of a superior kind of animal instinct and ability,
(since dogs have often been taught to steal, with great success and
profit to their teachers;) but that this knowledge can be regarded as
a total ignorance of social and moral duties, we deny. The criminals
generally know very well the evil they are perpetrating, but are too
hardened to be troubled by the consciousness.

An enormous field of social crime still remains, which cannot be
attributed so much to ignorance, as to a variety of other causes.
What is to be said of the dark and turbid stream of prostitution
which flows down the main streets, and congregates in the remote
localities, of every city and large town1? It brings another element
into this question. In these considerations it is invariably assumed
that the guilt belongs exclusively to the victims, as though prostitu-
tion did not require two parties for its origin and its continuation !
It is not recognised that this other party is the male. A poor girl
is said to prostitute herself aa though the whole sin began and centred
in herself, and that her original seducer, as well as her subsequent
male acquaintances, really had only a very slight incidental, equivocal
share in the business ! We repeat, that this consideration is never
fairly, if at all, brought forward, but is concealed or evaded through
the whole discussion. Now, the obvious fact is, that the man is the
sharer in the crime and its continuation; and in most cases, (after
making all fair deductions for individual depravity, vanity, or tempta-
tion, on the part of the woman,) the man is the cause and origin
of the prostitution. It cannot, therefore, be assumed that this is
attributable to ignorance, except in a comparative proportion; while
so far as it rests with the female, it may be, and continually is, attri-
butable chiefly to innocence of all knowledge of men,?to utter sim-
plicity in respect of the dark ways of life,?to feelings which deserved
a far better fate,?and to the pressure of poverty.

It remained, then, to seek some other source of crime, and to
trace its causes to some more unequivocal and positive series of facts.
Reverting, therefore, to the same experiences and observations of life,
the writer thought he perceived a clear solution of the problem in the
poverty, destitution, and misery of great masses of the people. The
term ignorance seemed insufficient as the chief representative of
the fearful amount of crime which official returns annually displayed
before us, in the face of all our increased efforts at education. This
impression was subsequently strengthened by the duties devolving
on an appointment in the " Children's Employment Commission,"
which brought the writer into immediate contact with great numbers
of the working-classes of all ages and sexes in the iron works and
coal districts. Among the iron works, constant labour was con-
tinually associated with poverty and privation. Their ignorance
was great, but the want was far greater. The amount of crime
among them seemed, therefore, to be attributable beyond question
to the greater apparent cause. With the colliers there was no such
destitution, but more ignorance. Crimes with them were fewer, but
greater. The worst being committed under ground, the law could
seldom take cognizance of them, or obtain adequate evidence. When-
ever, however, a fall in wages occurred, and a period of privation
arrived, crime instantly rose among them in a far higher ratio than
its average, induced by the stationary degree of ignorance. We have
alluded to the iron works and coal districts of England, but among
those of Wales the result is yet more striking, inasmuch as the igno-
rance is far greater, and the amount of crime in proportion to the
population, far less. As for the great mass?some four or five
millions?of the Irish peasantry, if the usual tests of the ability or
utter inability to read and write are applied to them, what people
can be more ignorant ? But, with the exception of the various degrees
of political offences, there is a less amount of all other kinds of crime
in Ireland than will be found among the same numbers of people in
any other portion of the United Kingdom.

Setting aside the Government grants for national education
amounting to a less sum than is considered adequate to reward the
services of a single military hero?as not worthy to be regarded in
tlie light of sincere intentions to do anything really efficient, Ave can
but perceive that the middle classes, aided by the powerful and cease-
less efforts of literature and the public press, have made energetic
efforts in the cause of the education of the people during the last ten
or fifteen years. Meanwhile crime, as displayed by the returns of
commitments from 1836 to 1847, has been steadily on the increase.
Such were the grounds on which serious doubts, as to the results
of popular instruction in the prevention of crime, and a strong be-
lief that the chief cause to which it was attributable was " want," ap-
peared justifiable. These doubts and this belief might be founded on
erroneous principles and data; still the effort in this difficult ques-
tion fairly to think it out was at least our best course, and not to be
regretted even though we arrived at results which were by no means
gratifying, nor could be, in the absence of adequate statistical and
other evidence, regarded as conclusive.

In this stage of our opinion, a book suddenly appears from the
hand of a practised, acute, and indefatigable statist, which, if it has
not cleared up all the difficulties of this complicated question, has at
length set them all fairly in view?grappled with every one of them
in open fight, and furnished us with all the best means for arriving
at positive evidence on many of the most important points. The
work is entitled " Summary of the Moral Statistics of England and
Wales." It is by Mr. Joseph Fletcher, Honorary Secretary to the
Statistical Society of London, and one of Her Majesty's Inspectors
of Schools.

This book?the results of prolonged labour in the collection
and investigation of materials, contains some two hundred pages
of statistical tables of the returns of crime and ignorance?of
industry and poverty?of popular instruction and demoralization,?
with all those other numerous returns which bear upon them, either
as additional evidence, or for comparison or correction. It is also
enriched?we may say " illuminated," notwithstanding the blackness
of the shades?with a number of maps of England and Wales, in
which the different counties present lighter or darker tints, indicative
of the per-centage above or below the average in each moral or other
characteristic. Among these shaded maps will be found presented,
almost at a glance, the condition of each county in respect of its
population?real property?ignorance?crime?commitments for
special offences?improvident marriages?bastardy?pauperism?
deposits in saving's banks, etc. The conception and design of these
pie-bald, and not very cheering, maps is as original as their value
either for rapid or studious reference, is worthy of all praise.
From this work, which for extent and completeness stands alone
in the field of national statistics, either of England or of any other
country, we shall now make a few extracts.

The cause of the difficulties we have expressed, as to arriving at
fixed conclusions on the main cause of crime and the actual value of
popular instruction, will at once become apparent, It was no.
wonder that we could not get at tlie exact truth by any effort of
abstract thinking, seeing that the facts and figures themselves are so
troubled to accomplish it.

We commence with the chief columns of the most comprehensive
table, in which the figures indicate the excess or deficiency per cent,
above or below the average of all England and Wales, exhibited by
each county and district in each subject of the investigation :?
Extracts from Table XI., Pages 210, 211.

COUNTIES.
Bedford
Berks
Bucks
Cambridge
Cheshire
Cornwall
Cumberland.
Derby
Devon
Dorset
Durham
Essex
Gloucester
Hereford
Hertford
Huntingdon
Kent
Lancaster
Leicester
Lincoln
Middlesex
Monmouth
Norfolk
Northampton
Northumberland..
Nottingham
Oxford
Ignor-
ance.
Improvi-
dent
Mar-
riages,
1845.
ex. 53'0
? 28-0
? 30-2
i> 33*5
?4
? 11-8
def. 52-1
.. 13-6
? 11-0
ex. 101
def. 20-1
ex. 42-4:
def. 13-2
ex. 11-2
? 53-8
? 38-0
def. 17-1
ex. 22-1
def. 2-8
? 1
? 50-7
ex. 53-f
? 381
? 150
def. 51-3
ex. 1-9
? 5-0
Rutland  def. 38-4
Salop
Somerset
Southampton
Stafford
S uffolk
Surrey
Sussex
Warwick
Westmoreland
Wilts
Worcester
York,East Hiding
M North Ridin<
? West Ridin;
North Wales
South Wales
ex. 24 0
? 10'G
def. 11-1
ex. 3K
42-0
def. 53
Paupers
Relieved,
1844.
ex.
def. 36
ex. 20*5
? 37-3
def. 37-1
? 31-4
ex. 17-9
I ? 26-1
? 39-3
ex. 142-5
9-9
55-G
39-3
30-7
def. 25-4
ex. lOG
def. 10-3
54 3
19-8
def. 22-G
35-2
def. 2-5
G8-7
G9-G
122-2
def. 43-1
ex. 15-G
104-2
def. 0-9
51-9
39-2
ex. 21-2
84 7
def. 15-0
ex. 31-9
7-5
def. 14 0
01-6
ex. 12*2
def. 40-9
ex. 32-4
? 24-3
def. G4-7
?3
ex. 4-2
def. 43-8
ex. 40-7
? 34-5
def. 3G-8
,, 30-0
ex. 70 G
def. .32-3
.. 37-8
ex.
20-9
? 19-0
? 49-7
? 27-5
def. 30-0
? 29-2
? 3M
? 44-4
ex. -8
? 43-0
def. 11-9
ex. 50-0
def. 3-0
ex. 1.5
? 17-5
? 8-9
? 11
def. 14-5
ex. 18-1
def. 19-2
? 12-0
? 32-4
ex. 29-0
? 20-1
def. 1-0
? 2G-0
4G-9
3-5
Savings
in Banks,
1844.
Criminal
Commit-
ments,
1842-3-4.
ex.
def. 23-0
ex. 49-G
def. 43-0
? 44-5
j, 3 *0
,, 4-0
? 23-2
? 18-0
ex. 8G-4
,, DG'G
def. 59G
,, 13-5
ex. 25-4
? 230
def. 4G-2
? 32-7
ex. 14-5
def. 19-7
? 43-2
,, 8-4
ex. 18-8
def. 5G-7
? 14-8
? 14-5
. 18-7
12-8
20-9
Crim.
Commit-
ments,
1845-
46-47.
ex. 21-4
0-0
? 200
def. G-2
ex. 34-5
def. 54-1
? 08-2
? 32-7
? 24-5
? 19-2
? 49-0
ex. 17-5
? 54-0
? 19-3
14-2
def. 30-4
ex. 3-4
? 10-0
? 40-3
def. 19-G
ex. 28-4
def. 12-1
ex. 1G-2
def. 10-9
? 40-3
? 2-9
? 25-8
? 22-2
def. 25 8
ex. 36-2
def. 13 3
ex. 43-0
def. 23-9
ex. 18-9
? 07-7
def. 12-2
? 8*4
? 10-0
? 19-0
ex. 28-8
def. 0-5
ex.
GO-3
? 03
? 1-2
def. 30 5
? 23-6
15-2
7-7
22-1
70-9
G-2
? 12-9
? 83-G
? 10-5
def. 34-9
? 50-7
? G5-3
ex
? 12-5
ex. 12-9
? 1-9
? 12-7
? 37-0
def. 1-3
ex. 22-7
? 12-3
def. 13-3
,, 3-4
ex. 39-0
def. GO-3
ex. ll'G
? 54-7
def. 23-4
23-4
23-4
? Gl-2
? 55-7
ex. 15-1
? 14-8
? 44-2
? 31
? 12-9
def. 45-3
? 57-5
? 43-2
? 3-8
ex. 2-7
def. 57-6
ex. 16-9
? 45-8
? 12-5
? 17-5
def. 5-2
? 3-7
? 1-4
ex. 9-1
def. 2G-4
ex. 72-1
def. 18-2
ex. 19-2
def. 9-2
? 57-G
? 19-G
ex. 1G-0
?c
def. 32-2
ex. 20-4
190
def. 0-9
, 2-0
10-5
? 28-2
def. 3G-3
ex. 10-2
? 55-9
def. 39*9
? 39-9
? 39-9
? 57-4
? 53-2

In studying the above table, we cannot avoid being struck by
various remarkable discrepancies in wliat has hitherto been supposed
the natural relations of cause and effect in the matter of ignorance
and crime. Thus Bedford has an excess in ignorance (above the
average of all England and Wales) of 53'0 ; with an excess of 142-5
in improvident marriages ; a deficiency of bank savings of 23-0 ; and
an excess of criminal commitments (for the years 1842-3-4) of 21*4 ;
and of 15*1 (for the years 1845-6-7.) Let us next look at Cheshire.
The excess in ignorance is there only -4 above the average ; in im-
provident marriages it is 36-7 ; the bank savings are only 3'5 ; and
there is an excess in criminal commitments (in the years 1842-3-4)
of 34'5, while for the next three years the commitments only amount
to 12-9. In Leicester there is a deficiency in the amount of ignorance,
which is 2 -8 below the average; yet the improvident marriages amount
to an excess of 104-2 above the average; a deficiency in bank savings
of 43-2 below the average ; and an excess in the criminal commit-
ments of 403 (in the years 1842-3-4), but of. only 9'1 in the next
three years. The exceptions set all rules at defiance ! In North
Wales, and South Wales, the ignorance will be found at an excess of
26-l, and 39'3 above the average ; while there is the immense
deficiency in criminal commitments of between 50 and 60 per cent,
below the average amount during the six years in question.
But another element has now to be brought into the examination
of the foregoing figures, which will render them delightfully or pro-
vokingly unmanageable, according to the mind of the reader. The
criminal commitments of Bedford we have seen to present an excess
of 21'4 (in the years 1842-3-4), and a similar excess is presented for
the three following years. In the next column to each of these, Mr.
Fletcher gives the statistics of those who were unable to read and
write among the criminals committed during each of the three years,
when the large excess of 44'6 is presented by the first three, and of
29-0 for the second three, clearly shewing the result of ignorance so
far. You turn to Cheshire expecting to find the same result, instead
of which you discover that while the commitments were at an excess
of 34-5 for the first three years, the deficiency in ignorance (or of
those unable to read and write) was as low as 1-5 In Leicester the
criminal commitments (for 1845-6-7) were at an excess of 9-1,
whereas there was a deficiency in the ignorance amounting to 22-1.
Similar discrepancies will continually be found throughout these
tables.

" I have only to refer you," says the Rev. J. Dufton, in his recent
letter to Lord John Russell, "to the statistical returns of commit-
ments, from 1836 to 1843, and we shall there find that crime, in
spite of every effort, has made a regular and frightful advance. But
the most disquieting feature of the details, is the large amount of
criminality found in the ranks of juvenile offenders." While schools
of one kind and the other are multiplying yearly all over the country,
no proportionate reduction appears to take place in the number of
commitments of juvenile criminals, but only a considerable increase.
It is not to be denied, that tliese facts give a very strong colour
in support of the deductions of the Statistique Morale de la France,
of M. Guerry, which prove?or at least show?that the gross amount
of criminal returns constitute no sound basis for determining the
influence of instruction or crime, either favourably or unfavourably.
Mr. Fletcher admits that a similar result attends his own analysis of
the criminal returns for England and Wales, in the years 1842-7.
But what are we to say to the results of the statistical labours of the
Rev. Whitwortli Russell 1 At a meeting of the Statistical Society of
London, a paper was laid before the members for discussion (Decem-
ber 22nd, 1845), on the Criminal Statistics of England and Wales, in
which it was asserted, that " Crime teas merely a matter of age, or the
produce of irrepressible tendencies, developing themselves in an in-
variable course at certain periods of life."

To the foregoing conclusion, startling as it is, and full of grave
suggestions to the psychological, no less than to the physiological
student of nature, Mr. Fletcher objected that it was " a yielding of
far too serious moral weight to the mathematical accuracy with which
the relation of crime to age could be obtained, and had been elabo-
rated."

But the labours of the Rev. Whitwortli Russell did not stop here.
He was not satisfied with the negative results of Mr. Guerry, as to
the influence of instruction on crime. At a meeting of the British
Association for the Advancement of Science, held at Southampton
(Sept. loth, 1846, and printed in the Statistical Society's Journal,
Vol.ix. p. 223), he presented a paper on the Statistics of Crime, in
which, after making every allowance for age, he arrived at the con-
clusion, that " Crime was merely a matter of instruction." In other
words, that " while all the other combinations and arrangements made
to determine the active elements in the increase and decrease of crime
were unsuccessful, instruction manifested the powerful influence which
even the simple qualification of individuals being able to affix their
signatures, with or without marks, has on the amount of crime in the
various districts of the country." The conclusion being, that crime
was chiefly the result of instruction!

This conclusion, which is yet more startling than the previous one,
and appears at first sight to be an extravagance, or an eccentricity
put forward to display intellectual skill and promote discussion, may
yet contain a very important truth at the bottom of its seeming wild-
ness. For what does he mean by instruction1 Thieves are in-
structed, as well as artisans ; and although murderers do not attend
lectures, like medical students, to preserve life, they have a dreadful
schooling of their own, in destruction, and pass through courses which
qualify them for their work, as for their end.

But, it may be said, that the Rev. Whitwortli Russell meant by
instruction, simply that amount of reading and writing which is, in
its various wretched degrees, taught at the ordinary day and Sunday
schools of the poor; and that this amount, so far from deterring,
only opened the mind to the commission of crime. "Whether he
meant to argue thus, or not, brings us to the core of the difficulties
of this question, and we cannot do better than answer them by a re-
ference to the " conclusions " of Mr. Fletcher's elaborate labours.
" The" more serious offences against property," says Mr. Fletcher,
" although not against the person, are in excess in the most instructed
districts." It would hence appear, that while instruction had a direct
tendency to prevent violence, it at the same time opened the eyes of
the poor to the advantages of helping themselves ! But every fresh
move in this argument shows that we can do no good while we con-
fine ourselves to the examination of details. Let us come, then, to
our author's general conclusions.

" In comparing the gross commitments for criminal offences with
the proportion of instruction in each district, there is found to be a
small balance in favour of the most instructed districts in the years
of most industrial depression (1842-3-4), but a greater one against
them in the years of less industrial depression (1845-6-7) ; while in
comparing the more with the less instructed portions of each district,
the final result is against the former at both periods, though four-fold
at the latter what it is at the former."

It is difficult to feel sure that these very important statements
may not be misunderstood, through the somewhat perplexing use of
the words "latter" and "former," in the closing statement of this
complicated paragraph.

"No correction for the ages of the population in different districts,
to meet the excess of criminals at certain younger periods of life,
will change the character of this superficial evidence against instruc-
tion; every legitimate allowance of the kind having already been
made in arriving at these results.

" Down to this period, therefore, the comparison of the criminal
and educational returns of this, any more than of any other, country
of Europe, has afforded no sound statistical evidence in favour, and
as little against, the moral effect associated with instruction, as actu-
ally disseminated among the people."

Such, then, is the conclusion, honestly stated, of the labours of
this book. But more remains to be said :

" The intractable mass of gross commitments requiring, therefore,
some further correction, to make them declare decisively either in
favour of, or against, popular instruction, as actually conveyed, it has
been endeavoured to apply one for the migration of the dishonest
into the more wealthy, populous, and instructed localities, by draw-
ing a distinction between those classes of offences which arise from
general depravity, and those which will obviously be in excess in cer-
tain localities, because generally associated with the professional vice
or vagabondage which seeks its home in them; and, by proving sta-
tistically the existence of such a distinction, likewise the influence of
the denser populations rather to assemble the demoralized than to
breed an excess of demoralization.
" The great class of the more serious offences against the person
and malicious offences against property is obviously the least affected
by migrations of the depraved, and affords strong testimony, by its
universal excess wherever ignorance is in excess, that many of the
offences against property which are in such excess in the more in-
structed and populous localities, are committed by delinquents bred
in the places indicated by the excess of the former offences."
The "former," in this case refers, Ave presume, to the offences
against the person.

" It is this great class of offences, therefore, and not the gross com-
mitments, which should be regarded as the index crime to the relative
moral character of each district, not as a perfect test, but as one ap-
proximating to the truth much nearer than the latter ; being affected
in a smaller degree by the migration of the depraved towards the
more instructed centres of resort; a further correction for which, in
the case of the index crime itself, were it attainable, would render its
universal testimony in favour of the good influences associated with
instruction in England yet stronger."

From the table of contents we will extract a few of the more im-
portant heads, as a felicitous conclusion to this complicated exami-
nation.

" The proportion of the wholly uninstructed is less among those
committed, than among the population at large in the least educated
districts, and greater in the most educated."

" Progress of sound education in the better instructed districts is
evinced by the decline in the total numbers committed, and most of
all in the number who can read and write well.

" One general result is universally favourable to the influences of
Christian education as a detergent from criminal courses; hut not
the beggarly elements of instruction merely, conveyed in our poorest
day and Sunday schools."

In fine, Mr. Fletcher's whole work consists of a comparison of
cach part of the kingdom with the whole of it, in regard to its rela-
tive excess or deficiency of certain moral elements. The results,
which frequently appear anomalous, are the neio truths of statistical
science, for which it was worth while to encounter all this mass of
labour.

We now come to speak of that vast and fertile cause of crime
which we had for a long time regarded as its chief cause, and which
in any case must stand next after ignorance. But if resembling,
and only inferior to, ignorance in the lamentable extent of its
numerical amount, it is strikingly different in respect of the clear-
ness and precision with which it enables its effects to be traced and
distinguished. In the first we have seen how difficult and intricate
were the means by which results could be determined, ? as to
the degree and extent of their evil influence,?or, even detached
from influences of the best kind; but with respect to want, the
mischief it produces from the smallest crimes of theft from hunger,
up to suicide or murder induced by the prospect or fear of abject
destitution, if not starvation,?of these things no doubt can exist
for a moment, the miserable and heart-rending facts being of the
most obvious, and generally of the most simple character.

For this ocean of social degradation?often of social wrong?
physical privations and anguish, recklessness, or utter prostration
of the mind, how few words, in comparison with most other causes
of wretchedness and crime, are necessary ! The little squalid hungry
child of seven or eight years, is told to steal a loaf from the window
of a baker's shop, or a bunch of vegetables from a stall : perhaps
does it of its own accord, prompted by the natural instinct of extreme
hunger. Once successful, its hunger and that of its mother, or it
may be a large family, having been appeased, the repetition becomes
almost a matter of certainty. So, of the half-naked country lad, or
father of a family, out of work, who, under similar circumstances,
knocks down a rabbit or a hare that crosses his pathway in a wood.
The one meal thus furnished to the family with impunity, in all
probability makes him a poacher. The first step in evil may be
redeemed by a sudden change of circumstances ; the mind is by no
means blackened and ruined by such a first step, but in most
natures the mind may rather be said to be wounded and alarmed at
itself and the act just committed. Let the same circumstances,
however, of privation continue, and the act which constituted a
temporary relief will be repeated, till from habit the perpetrator
becomes callous, and advancing step by step with circumstances, the
petty and comparatively innocent thief of the stall, or poacher of
the wood, becomes the pickpocket of the public streets, the footpad
and the burglar, against whom no house, no property, and no life
can at all times be secure.

The public has recently seen a variety of extracts in the news-
papers of evidence taken from the mouths of poor slopworkers ; and
the wretched condition of the shirt-makers, young dressmakers?in
fact, of the poorer class of needle-women generally?was previously
well known, even from some of the government reports. From the
evidence of every one of these examinations it was clearly ascertained
that, owing to the miserable amount of remuneration, these poor girls
and young women received for their daily and nightly labours of
from twelve to eighteen hours in the twenty-four, many of them
were constantly driven to prostitution on the Saturday night, in
order to make up a sufficiency in addition to their pittance of
wages to enable them to pay for their lodgings, and otherwise
continue to support their slave-like existence. These statements,
coming before the public from time to time, show that the sufferings
and premature decay described in such pictures as Hood's " Song
of the Shirt," are no fictions of imagination, but every-day facts,
tending directly either to early death, or to the commission of some
crime or other, revolting at first perhaps to the unhappy perpe-
trators, but gradually becoming a habit with its comparative necessity,
and the regular advance of the individual in moral degradation and
callousness.

Wide as are the fields of crime induced by want, a marked ex-
ception must to a considerable extent be made in respect of a
certain class of people amounting to three or four millions : we
allude to the Irish peasantry. Among all the strange phenomena
and anomalies which are contained in, as well as beset, that country,
there is not one so strange as the fact of their honesty in the midst
of actual famine. Petty thefts, even of food, are of rare occurrence,
and the occasional seizures of crops or other means of existence are
invariably accompanied by a certain wild reasoning of a right and
sense of justice which renders the perpetration no crime in the
moral feelings of the perpetrators. That want, however, is the
latent cause of nearly all the political excitements, and consequently
of the numbers of the political or social crimes, is, we think, suffi-
ciently demonstrable. Of the share which ignorance has in Irish
crime, it will be sufficient to say, in this place, that a tenant-peasant's
consciousness of wrong and gross injustice from his landlord or
agent is certainly no sign of ignorance, but that the criminal means
he takes of righting himself, by shooting the landlord or agent,
certainly is.

The Third Cause of Crime has been stated to be Filtliiness.
Of the extent to which filthiness of person and of abode exists
among the poorest classes of England, (and of nearly every other
civilized country), the public has for some time been made suffi-
ciently aware by the inquiries, evidence collected, and elaborate
reports of several government commissioners; perhaps most fully
and minutely displayed in its matter-of-fact horrors and disgust by
the examinations and descriptions of several localities in the suburbs
of London by Dr. Soutliwood Smith.

Here we read of six or eight people of both sexes living together
in one room of about eight feet by ten, and scarcely nine feet high,
in which " the closeness and stench were intolerable." This is no
picked specimen. The numbers crowded in a small space, and
in every room of a small house, situated in a narrow court
without drainage, and where floods of filth poured down the open
gutters, or lay in stagnant pools before the doors and beneath the
windows,? these things are common sights in such localities.
What must be the moral condition of people living constantly,
and in crowds, in such circumstances 1 Must not their natures,
with scarce an exception, gradually, if not rapidly, become as
degraded as their circumstances 1?and out of this degradation, how
incalculable must be the amount of depravity and vice which are
engendered, and which tend, sooner or later, to the commission of
crime ! Their physical condition may be said to undergo a constant
process of slow poisoning ; their blood is always on the borders of
fever or disease.*

" Nature," says Dr. Southwood Smith, " with her burning sun,
* We are speaking of the worst localities in cities and towns. There is far less
comparative moral degradation and crime, originating in a filthy abode, among
Indians, and wild tribes generally. We include the Irish peasantry in this remark.
The air and open country have a great influence.

her stilled and pent-up wind, her stagnant and teeming marsh,
manufactures plague on a large and fearful scale ; poverty in her
hut, covered with her rags, surrounded Avith her filth, Striving with
all her might to keep out the pure air, and to increase the heat,
imitates nature but too successfully; the process and the product
are the same, the only difference is in the magnitude of the result."
Most truly said, in the sense here meant; hut in its moral results,
through their infinite ramifications, is it not very probable that the
magnitude of evil may be on the other side, and that poverty and
filth tend to vice and crime to a yet greater extent than the numbers
of those who are destroyed by a great plague 1 The latter, how-
ever numerous its victims, is occasional; the former is constant in
the exercise of its evil influences. Often, the criminality resulting
from a total degradation of moral habits, induced by filthiness of
person and abode, may be directly traced ; but the enormous extent
of the influences in their indirect actions on the mind, and on the
moral and physical systems, is quite incalculable.

When Lord Normanby, in the session of 1841, introduced his
Bill for the " Drainage of Buildings," the measure was supported by
the Bishop of London, (amongst others) in these words :?
" As presiding over the spiritual interests of the metropolis, he
felt deeply interested in a Bill which he was satisfied would so mate-
rially affect them : and being thoroughly convinced that the physical
condition of the poor ivas intimately connected with their moral and
religious state, and that the two exerted a mutual influence upon each
other, he thankfully hailed the present measure as the first step to-
wards an elevation of that class of the community in the scale of
social comfort and order."

Lord Ellenborougli followed in the same spirit:?
" It is idle," said he, " to build churches, to erect schoolhouses,
and to employ clergymen and schoolmasters, if we do no more. Our
first object should be to improve the physical condition of the poor
labourer?to place him in a position in which he can acquire self-
respect ; above all things, to give him a home."

Most justly, humanely, and nobly said ! For of what use can in-
struction be to minds Avhose bodies are placed in circumstances that
render instruction cither inadmissible, or that produce antagonistic
results, which afford real grounds for the statements of M. Guerry,
and the Rev. Whitworth Russell.

We now come to one of the great causes of crime?not equal nu-
merically, we think, to the preceding?but a great cause in respect
of the more terrible, immediate, and deadly character of its results :
we mean the passions.
To deal with the Passions philosophically, it is necessary to exa-
mine them under three heads.
1st. Passion in the vulgar and common acceptation of the word,
viz. rage, sudden violence of animal impulses, and brutal aggression.
To take recent instances?unfortunately but too numerous?there
are the cases of John Lee, and of James Robb.
ANALYSIS OF CRIME.
109
"Two men named John Jenkins and Thomas Foden, plumbers,
having to repair a pump, took the pump-rod, which was broken at the
middle, to the smithy of John Lee, in Barlow-street. Lee made pre-
parations to piece the rod for them, and had placed the end of each
piece in the smithy fire previous to welding them together. Whilst
lie was doing this a man named Thomas Richardson, who was in a
state of intoxication, and who, it appears, had annoyed the black-
smith previously, and had been repeatedly warned to keep away, en-
tered the smithy. At this time the pieces of the pump rod had
attained a white heat at the ends, and the blacksmith, seizing them
out of the fire, rushed upon Richardson with one in each hand, and
drove them into his body. A cry of agony was all that escaped the
wretched victim of this atrocious act, and he sank on the floor, while
his assailant returned to the anvil, and actually ivelded together the
two pieces of iron.

" When Lee was apprehended, he walked to the spot where he had
left the pump rod, and handed it to the police officer, saying, ' This is
what I stabbed him with ; I had put him out of the yard three times
before, and the fourth time he came in, I stabbed him.'"
The above is a marked specimen of the union in the same character
of a brutal impulse of rage, and of cool indifference as to its result.
Here is something different, but yet more atrocious:?
" On the night of the 9tli of April last, James Robb, an agricul-
tural labourer, entered the house of a female named Mary Smith, in
the parish of Aucliterlen, Aberdeenshire;?obtained admission to her
bed-room by descending the chimney?perpetrated with great vio-
lence the personal outrage described in the libel?and eventually
suffocated her."

2ndly. There may be continually very strong points of resemblance
between the class of evil passions under this head, and those just de-
scribed ; in fact, so far as the immediate act is concerned they may
be the same. Still, it seems evident that there is a marked mental
distinction between sudden impulses of gross animal passion and
brutal aggression, and the same amount of ferocity when preceded by
much thought and many subtle schemings.

Of this latter kind we regard the extraordinary character of the
murders committed by Rush. There was a mysterious connexion
between him and his male victims, the elder one especially, which to
this day is quite inexplicable. His crime was to all appearance at-
tributable to a feeling of revenge, and in order to hide or conceal
certain bonds by which he was bound to the proprietor of Stanfield
Hall. So we may say of the murder of Weare by Thurtell. It was
from revenge, chiefly, in consequence of a loss in gambling, and at the
same time with a view to the recovery of the loss. Under the same
head we must also place the recent murder committed by Mrs. Man-
ning and her husband. But here money was the chief cause, and
though there appeared to be some feelings of revenge in it, the asser-
tion looks rather like a fiction of the mind to excuse itself for a
^hocking act, by getting up the semblance of some justification, Ii}
the murder of Lord William Russell by Courvoisier, the robbery of
jewels and other property seems to have been the sole incentive. But
the murder committed by the Duke de Praslin was manifestly the
result of vindictive haughtiness, and a conflict of passions resulting
from licentious entanglements.

3rdly, In speaking of the Passions, we should at all times care-
fully distinguish and keep separate that class of passions which originate
in great and noble impulses?whether justifiable in the first instance,
and in themselves, or not. In this third division of the Passions, it is
our business to treat only of those, which, originating in high thoughts
and feelings, are carried beyond all self-government into the commis-
sion of crime. Nevertheless, the distinction must be strongly marked,
and we must not shrink from the task. Having treated this sub-
ject a few years since, and being unable to deal with it better, or in-
deed otherwise, at present, we must beg permission to refer to
the essay in question:?

" While the vast majority of authors and critics are treating of
tragic composition of the highest class, with the fame of ages to assist
and guarantee admiration, they speak of the passions as mighty ele-
ments and elevating influences. On nearly every other occasion tliey
speak of the passions as if they were all of the very worst class of
four-footed beasts. Now, the things remain the same, though
moralists may shift their seats. An integral difference can never
originate with a mere difference in the point of vision. But it would
appear as if this was thought. Except under the commanding truth
of the influence just mentioned, together with the speculations of a
few profound philosophers, the passions are regarded as gross vices,
to be denounced, and avoided, and suppressed by mankind, and
hidden from the sight of their Creator. When an author views
them with one eye to 1 the moral,' and the other to his own respect-
able position, he either denounces them outright, or shifts their ex-
istence to some other class of society. There are few things more
amusing than to watch these ' fast and loose' antics of perplexed
moral weakness ; these dancings between the red-hot bars of human
passions. With due admiration of Lord Kames for much Avell-in-
tentioned philosophy and close criticism, it is impossible to help
laughing at the closing sentence of his celebrated chapter on c Emo-
tions and Passions.' ' I shall only observe,' says lie, (that in a
polished society instances of irregular passions are rare, and that their
mischief doth not extend far.' So that we are first cast into a puzzle-
box full of escape-valves, as to the difference between regular and
irregular passions;?the former being, perhaps, permissible now-and-
then in a polished society, the latter not: after which, it is assumed
that their mischief doth not extend far, however extensive their in-
jury among all other classes ! What is the occasion of all this weak-
ness and vacillation 1 It is because men's minds are in a state of
utter confusion, oscillating between nature and convention; truth and
falsehood; the ideal and the real; between elevating passion and de-
basing passion (both abstract and practical); and also because they
have been taught, with great difficulty, to think that they become
reasonable in proportion as they confound various and opposite pas-
sions into one frightful heap, to be denounced and shunned accord-
ingly as the passions.

"Yet, when you think of Prometheus, Lear, Macbeth, Orestes,
Othello, Medea, or Hamlet, there is none of this disgust and degra-
dation !"*

We do not think we could close this part of our examination better
than by comparing the effect on the minds and feelings of an audi-
ence in witnessing the last scene of a great tragedy on the stage, and
those which are displayed in witnessing a public execution. The one
is solemn and refined?the other ribald, and grossly brutalizing.
Under the head of weakness, a variety of equally interesting and
painful phenomena presented themselves.

In the Report by William Logan, Commissioner of the Scottish
Temperance League, on the Moral Statistics of Glasgow, it is shown
how the weakness of intemperance leads to, and is indeed connected
with, pauperism, with vice, with crime, and Avitli insanity. The
writer might also have shown the melancholy influence it exerts in
preparing the mind, as well as prostrating the temperament, till the
victim terminates his morbid course in suicide.

Mr. Logan's statistics of drunkenness are by no means conclusive
as to the real extent of this vice neither can we attach much value
to the assertion of Mr. Sheriff Alison, that intoxicating drink is the
cause of two-thirds of the crime in his county, because that is an ex-
treme statement unsupported by evidence?and if true in a given
locality, would still be inapplicable to other places. That drunken-
ness is, however, at the root of an immense quantity of crime, no
doubt whatever can be entertained. One of its worst features, more-
over, is the enslaved moral and physical condition it induces. " If
you were an angel from heaven," said a drunkard, in answer to the
prayers of his young wife, that he would refrain for her sake?" if
you were an angel from heaven, I could not help it."

But though drunkenness may be the vice of the most prominent
and numerous of the class ranged under the head of Weakness, a
great variety of other victims of the want of character, of firmness,
or of forbearance, will come under the same denomination. The
crime of theft has often been committed out of fear, or from extreme
timidity of character. Some slight error having been committed,
some accident or emergency having occurred which would be repri-
manded or punished, forgery has been committed, and money has
been stolen in order to use as a bribe, or by some means shield the
trembler. Of the extent to which a sensual indulgence of any kind
may grow into a confirmed habit, till the individual is no more
* Essay on Tragic Influence, prefixed to tlie tragedy of " Gregory VII."
+ Report of Mr. William Logan, Commissioner of tlie Scottish Temperance
League, on the Moral Statistics of Glasgow.

master of himself in that respect than of any of the involuntary
claims of nature, there can be no need to speak, as the facts are suffi-
ciently known to all who have considered these subjects, or studied
the elementary principles of psychology ; and, in truth, the grasp
and fascination never obtain their empire over the physical tempera-
ment till they have first possessed the imagination.

Cruelty, and the inability to forbear, is also sometimes caused by
Weakness. The innumerable wounds given to the Duchess de Praslin
by her murderer was an instance of this inability.

? Imitation will likewise form a marked feature under this head ,
especially as it will include the besotted vanity of seeking notoriety,
originating for the most part in the popular influence of the trial
scenes and descriptions of murder-heroes and other famous criminals.
Of this kind was the regicide-mania which has been developed at
times?a mania which seldom involved a serious intention of murder
in France, and never in England?but was caused by a diseased
craving for notoriety. This base mania, spurious passion, half-witted
excitement, or whatever term will best designate it, attained its
height and perfection in the crime committed by Hocker?an usher
or teacher in a Sunday school, who, partly in imitation of Eugene
Aram, but in any case being resolved to become a " hero" of some
kind, committed a murder?and solely, as it appeared, from this
cause. He was most anxious about his dress and appearance before
execution, as he wished to make an interesting appearance on the
scaffold, and even begged that his heap of hair, in which he had
always been conspicuous, might not be cut too short, " as they would
not know him when he came out
Of misdirected stuengtii, and the criminal actions which
result from it, how deeply interesting a field opens to the student of
moral and mental philosophy, as of physiology and jurisprudence.
Many of the actions which fall under this denomination are, 110
doubt, rife with horror, and excite emotions of angry reprehension
in impulsive characters, and sometimes of a sort of ridicule in shallow
minds, neither of which are becoming to the occasion. But, 011 the
other hand, how often must the profoundest pity be inspired by the
contemplation of actions, which, however erroneous, and beyond the
pale of an entire sympathy, do yet display elements of perverted
greatness, and of inherent powers wasted and cast away.

Of this latter kind?but different natures will undoubtedly regard
it in a correspondingly different light?we may class the public self-
crucifixion of Mattco Lovat, of Soldo, in the territory of Belluno.
This man?according to our interpretation?seems to have had
an irrepressible passion to be a martyr, and one of the most exalted.
With this feeling, and influenced no doubt by fanaticism, his
imagination being constantly fed by the various images and pictures
in the Roman-catholic churches, chapels, and streets, I10 conceived
the idea of imitating, in his own person, the last mortal scene of the
Saviour. Totally overlooking the grand fact of self-devotion for
a mighty and disinterested object, and that the most distant
resemblance would still demand a great cause and purpose, lie saw
the resemblance only in the external form?such as his imagination
was familiar with?and accordingly he conceived and executed, with
infinite ingenuity and insurpassable resolution, the apparently im-
possible feat of crucifying himself. By inverting one of the nails,
lie contrived that both hands should finally be fastened up?a nail
went through both feet, he had a wound in his side, and wore a
crown of thorns !*

Perhaps the most remarkable suicide that has occurred in England,
was that of the young woman who threw herself from the top of the
Monument. Nothing is so dreadful but it may iuduce imitation;
and, by a strange fascination, even this act was imitated by others.
Elizabeth Moyes was the daughter of a baker?handsome?of a fine
person, and about five-and-twenty. The cause of her suicide seems to
have been the passion of pride, not in the ordinary sense of the word,
but the pride of a high spirit and of self-esteem. The family were in
great difficulties, with distress, or, at least, ruin at hand, and it became
necessary that the daughters should seek situations as servants. She
therefore resolved to destroy herself by means which appear to have
been in accordance with her misdirected spirit; and she executed
her intention with the most calm resolution. During the long,
progressive, and necessarily slow ascent up those many winding
stairs, what thoughts and emotions must have transpired?what
openings for a change of mind, a faltering of indecision! But what
she had willed to do, she did.

From a similar feeling of pride, perhaps, but associated with
apprehensions of distress, and probably the certainty of it, involving
his family, a German, named Steinberg, who resided in the neighbour-
hood of London, perpetrated one of the most terrible series of
murders upon record.

Steinberg followed some business with integrity and good repute,
and was esteemed by his neighbours as a man of steady habits, and
devoted to his family, lie was proud of his integrity and unimpeach-
able character. Difficulties accumulated upon him; he saw no hope
of extricating himself; poverty and distress advanced; he could not
pay his debts, nor support his family. He therefore determined to
die, and not to leave them to penury. A most appalling tragedy
was the result. Without a complaint having been uttered to the
neighbours, or visible change in his behaviour, the whole of his
family.?his wife, and four or live children?were all murdered by his
hand. They were discovered?some in bed, others 011 the floor; the
beds, the floors, all swimming in blood. His body was not among
them. The wretched man appears to have felt that he must not,
and could not die beside them after such horrors and struggles. His
body was at length found at the bottom of the house, lying alone in
the back kitchen, 011 the stones. His head was nearly severed from
* 
For the historical nccount of this, the most extraordinary suicidc that e^r
was committed, see " The Anatomy of Suicide," chap. xv. fftjc 3'29-f>l.
his body, his hands were clenched together, his teeth clenched, and
in death every feature of his face expressing the fixed will which
had enabled him to complete all these frightful murders, and showing
the convulsive effort it had cost him.

From a very different kind of impulse were the child-murders of
Rebecca Smith committed. Steinberg's crime resulted from a mis-
directed strength of pride; those of Rebecca Smith from a misdirected
strength of reason. Perhaps it would be more correct not to term
it reason,?but reasoning, which may be very strong, and yet on very
mistaken or imperfect premisses. In any case, a more profoundly
pathetic termination of an erroneous life?set at variance with nature
by the constant force of wretched circumstances?was never recorded.
" The execution of Rebecca Smith, for murdering her infant child,
took place on Thursday, in front of the New Prison, Devizes. A
countless multitude assembled on the occasion. From nine until
eleven o'clock, people poured into the town in shoals; and by the
latter hour, the prison yard, the banks of the canal, every tree, hedge,
and field, that could command a view of the drop, appeared crammed.
They were chiefly of the labouring classes, and there were thousands
more of women than of men.

" From the period the miserable woman entered the prison, to the
moment of her execution, her conduct was most becoming. Mild
and contented in her deportment, it might be thought that she was
quite incapable of the unnatural crime of which she was convicted.
She had unhesitatingly confessed everything ? acknowledged the
justice of the punishment that awaited her?and frequently expressed
a hope that others would take a warning by her fate.

" As the time approached for her execution, she appeared to feel
deeply her dreadful situation, and passed a restless night. Shortly
before twelve, the solemn tolling of the prison bell announced the
approach of the appointed hour, and she was ushered from her cell.
Accompanied by the proper authorities, she was at once conducted
to the gallows, the rev. chaplain impressively reading portions of the
burial service as the procession proceeded. During this time she
did not utter a word, nor did a sigh escape her; but her countenance
appeared quite composed, and her step firm. Arrived on the drop,
the rope was in a moment round her neck; she clasped and raised
her hands together, as if in fervent prayer; and after a slight
struggle, she was launched into eternity.

" The criminal {victim we may call her) was about forty-four years
of age; had been married eighteen years, and had eleven children
the eldest only, a daughter, is now alive. All the rest, with the
exception of two, the unhappy woman acknowledged that she poi-
soned a day or two after their birth. She implicated no other
person in the crimes. From the first week of her marriage, her
husband had been given to drunkenness, and scarcely ever brought
home a shilling of his wages. She toiled hard in the field during the
day, and at night she came home and washed, and did all the house-
hold work. With nothing to maintain her family but what she
herself earned, which was 4s. a week, and that only when she could
procure work in the fields, the fear that the children would come to
want operated so powerfully upon her, that she destroyed them in
the way stated."

Who shall estimate the weight and suffering of these eighteen
years of married life 1 Constant toil in the fields by day?washing
and household work by night?with child-bearing eleven times?
with a drunken husband, at all times?and child-murder on her mind,
at all times, as the only means she saw of saving them from what
she endured ! Whoever could think of these things, and duly feel
them, might e'en have whispered in the ear of this poor criminal, as
she stood pale and resigned upon the scaffold?" Criminal, of false
reasoning, who hath taken God's laws of life and death into thine own
hands?but victim of society and its imperfect laws?Man casts thee
out, in his ignorance and vengeance; but God, in his knowledge and
mercy, receives thee."

Perhaps the regular course of strong yet perverted reasoning may
be regarded in the light of delusion, hallucination, or monomania ;
be this as it may, delusion in its various forms is certainly the cause
of many crimes. Fanaticism is among the worst forms of delusion.
It is the only one redeeming point?if anything can redeem the
crime of remorseless cruelty?in the atrocious character of the Holy
Office. It is to be regretted that the spirit of the Inquisition is not
yet extinct, especially as we have lately seen a display of it in our
own country. In what other view can we regard the rccent conduct
of the gaol chaplain, who, being determined to extort confession from
a condemned woman, held her hand over the flame of a candle, burn-
ing and blistering it, in order as he said, (by way of excuse I) " to give
her some idea of what the torments of hell would be to her whole body."
Special Deficiency, or a defect in the original construction of
the mind and nature of an individual, presents a cause of crime of
the most hopeless character, and one, moreover, in which we can find
no point for human sympathy, or even pity, to dwell upon. Indi-
viduals of this class, have no sense of the relations between man and
man. Their minds are so constituted as to be deficient in the
kind and degree of imagination requisite to enable them to picture to
themselves the feelings and general human condition of others. This
deficiency, if attended, as it commonly is, by an equal deficiency of
sensibility, disqualifies them from having any human sympathies,
such as characterize the great majority of mankind.

With this class of men and women?we must call them such,
because of their external form, though they are in no good sense our
fellow-creatures?those who associate are on no equal terms. You
have no fair chance with them. There are no natural ties between
you. Such a man regards you with no more consideration than one
dog regards another ; nay, in many cases, with less. Some of the
expressions of Mrs. Manning show that she was one of these defi-
cient natures, and set the question in a clear light. " There would
be no more harm in shooting him," (O'Connor) said she, " than in
shooting a dog." This was her husband's statement; but he also
seems to liave been one of this class. After O'Connor had been
shot, and lay moaning on the edge of the grave they had dug for
him, Manning said, in his confession,?" He moaned a good deal,
and as I never lilced 1dm," (simple, easy reason for the act !) "/
battered in his skull with a ripping-chisel! " What a result and
sequence to not liking a man very well! After the murder, so
little emotion, so little sense had Mrs. Manning of what she had done
?of the pangs of a violent death which her victim had just suffered
?that she said, " I think no more of what I have done, than if I
had shot the cat on the wall!" (Her husband's statement again; but
if false, it was "all in the family.") These deficient natures are "all
of a piece." For who that had any right condition of feeling would
not experience some sort of "compunctious visitings," if he had
just witnessed the writhings and moans of a cat, or any other
creature, who had been shot 1 But of those who feel nothing in
hanging dogs, shooting cats, drowning kittens and puppies?let all
other people beware.

The frequent appeals of Mrs. Manning, as of many other mur-
derers, to the Deity, in declaration of their innocence, are also marked
and wonderful signs of a special deficiency in the amount of ima-
gination requisite to any mental conception and presentment of a
Supreme Being, or a world of Spirits. It is difficult to analyse
their state of mind without an apparent irreverence; but we believe
that in reality these criminals, in their appeals to the Deity, have a
sort of hard conviction that no eye saw them do the deed. He was
not there?He could not know it; and they only use the name of
the Deity as a form of words, the strongest and most likely to serve
them on the occasion.*

We have read of a clergyman in some of the " Annals of Crime,"
who, being under some delusion, (but not insane) murdered his wile
one Sunday morning, after the servants had gone on before them to
church. He then locked all the doors?leaped over the garden-wall
?crossed a field or two?reached the church in good time?read
prayers with an unruffled countenance?and afterwards ascendcd the
pulpit, and preached an excellent sermon.

It seems probable that the murders committed by Greenacre
Corder, Tawell, and Jordan, were all, in a considearble degree, owing
to the innate deficiency of which we have been speaking. Each of
them had either seduced, or at any rate had gained an entire as-
cendancy over the feelings of his female victim; he grew tired of it;
wished to put an end to the connexion, and at the same time to
escape exposure, and continue his apparently " proper" life in the
eyes of the world. Being deficient in human sympathy, it readily
occurred to him that the best way of doing this was to kill and bury
the woman. That was all!

This deficiency in nature is often hereditary; but in all cases it is
quite independent of external circumstances and position in life. It
* Or it may be, as a friend (C. D.) has p-ofoundly suggested, (lint tlierc is n
f;crt of compact made in the mind, that no one else shall Jiuow.
may be observed equally in tbe acts of a Roman emperor, a savage
of the woods, a great nobleman, a low burglar, a respectable citizen,
or a spoilt child. An indifference (perhaps a love of destruction) in
destroying, or an utter insensibility to the feelings of others, is the
secret of this anomaly in the family of mankind.

Much may be done by education to repress the evil habits of evil
natures, and those who will equally do evil from a deficiency in their
natures. How often do we see the worst things growing unchecked
amidst all manner of educational processes?a system of what may
be called /^coeducation, or the education of only one-half of the
child. We point directly to that system, which studiously educates
the head to the exclusion of the heart; constantly fills and works
the intellectual faculties, but does nothing to educate the imagination
by storing it with forms of beauty and moral sentiments, and nothing
whatever for the affections by constantly teaching children that "they
should love one another." From thewant of this, we see little botanists
turn from the examination of a classified flower, to picking flies to
pieces, or sticking pins into beetles; little geologists furiously throwing
stones at their elder brother's head; or little chemists squibbing their
sister's arms and shoulders. To these habits of petty criminalities
may continually be traced subsequent family quarrels and utter
estrangements, and perhaps crimes which end in public punishment
or disgrace.

We now come to the concluding section of our analysis of the
causes of crime?viz., Bad Penal Laws.

"Our least punishment," said the king of one of the savage islands
to a European navigator, in explaining the penal laws of the island,
" our least punishment here, is that of Death." The various grada-
tions of torment quietly suggested in this grave piece of information
are sufficiently characteristic of the national barbarism of their origin.
There are many good things in the recent Letters to Lord John
Russell by the Rev. J. Dufton ; and we should have yet more
admired his earnest and judicious compilation if the reverend gen-
tleman had acknowledged his wholesale obligations to Mr. Joseph
Fletcher. On the errors and evils of our penal laws, and especially
with reference to our death punishment, Mr. Dufton says well and
truly?

" If indeed either the suffering or the beholding of physical punish-
ment could have accomplished the end for which all legal pains and
penalties are said to be inflicted, the world would have been forced
and frightened into virtue long ere now; the gibbet, the whipping-
post, and the pillory, would have been recognised as unquestionably
the most powerful auxiliaries of virtue. But it is hopeless to expect
that our endeavours to ameliorate the social and intellectual condi-
tion of the people will or can be successful, so long as by our public
actions we sanction and apply principles the very opposite of those
which we profess to inculcate. Our criminal jurisprudence, as prac-
tically developed in the course of almost any of our judicial proceed-
ings, exhibits far too many traces of that spirit of malice and revenge
which dictated tlie sanguinary penal legislation of dark and bar
barous ages."

In tlie parliamentary report of 1785?one of the first ever pub-
blislied in England on the state of Crime?the committee distinctly
stated its opinion that public executions accomplished no more than
the removal of the criminal. It has since been gradually found that
they have effected very much more?not of good service, but of mis-
chief. It is an old battle on old ground; but it must be fought over
and over again, till the battle be finally won. Here are the words
of some of the early champions of a reformed system of penal laws.
" Robberies on the highway were grown common in some coun-
tries. In order to remedy this evil, they invented the punishment of
breaking upon the wheel, the terror of which put a stop for awhile
to this mischievous practice; but soon after, robberies on the high-
ways became as common as ever." * * *

" There are two sorts of corruption?one when the people do not
observe the laws ; the other when they are corrupted by the laws :
an incurable evil, because it is in the very remedy itself."?
Montesquieu.

" The frequency of executions is always a sign of the weakness or
indolence of government. There is no malefactor who might not
be found good for something ; nor ought any person to be put
to death, even by way of example, unless such as could not be pre-
served without endangering the community."?llousseau.
" The intent of punishments is not to torment a sensible being,
nor to undo a crime already committed. - * * The end of
punishments, therefore, is no other than to prevent the criminal
from doing further injury to society, and to prevent others from
committing the like offence. Such punishments, therefore, and such
a mode of inflicting them, ought to be chosen, as will make the
strongest and most lasting impressions on the minds of others, with
the least torment to the body of the criminal."

" Crimes are more effectually prevented by the certainty than
the severity of punishment. The certainty of a small punishment
will make a stronger impression than the fear of one more severe,
if attended with the hopes of escaping."?Beccciria.

Since these men wrote, we believe there has been little or nothing
done on the subject, which for depth of insight and energy of
purpose have been comparable to the efforts of Mr. Charles Dickens.
That portion of his labours in this cause which is most original, is
displayed in his penetration into the recesses of the criminal's mind,
and drawing from what he finds there, arguments which we consider
to be equally sound and subtle in proof, not merely of the nullity
of public executions in the prevention of crime, but that in cases of
murder the haunting spectre of the gallows actually becomes a
disease of the imagination, and a provocative to some natures to
commit it.

" There are witnesses to old scenes of reproach and recrimination,
(between a man and woman of depraved habits), in which they were
the actors ; and tlie murderer lias been heard to say, in this or that
coarse phrase, f that he wouldn't mind killing her, though he should
be hanged for it'?in these cases, the commonest avowal.

" It seems to me, that in this well-known scrap of evidence, there
is a deeper meaning than is usually attached to it. I do not know
but it may be?I have a strong suspicion that it is?a clue to the slow
growth of the crime, and its gradual development in the mind.
More than this,?a clue to the mental connexion of the deed,
with the punishment to which the doer of that deed is liable, until
the two conjoined give birth to monstrous and misshapen murder.
" The idea of murder, in such a case, like that of self-destruction in
the great majority of instances, is not a new one. It may have pre-
sented itself to the disturbed mind in a dim shape and afar off; but
it has been there. After a quarrel, or with some strong sense upon
him of irritation or discomfort arising out of the continuance of this
life in his path, the man has brooded over the unformed desire to
take it,?' Though he should be hanged for it.' With the entrance
of the punishment into his thoughts, the shadow of the fatal beam
begins to attend?not on himself, but on the object of his hate. At
every new temptation, it is there, stronger and blacker yet, trying to
terrify him. When she defies or threatens him, the scaffold seems to
be her strength and vantage-ground. Let her not be too sure of
that, ' though he should be hanged for it.'

" Thus, he begins to raise up, in the contemplation of this death by
hanging, a new and violent enemy to brave. The prospect of a slow
and solitary expiation would have no congeniality with his wicked
thoughts, but this throttling and strangling has. There is always
before him an ugly, bloody, scarecrow phantom that champions her,
as it were, and yet shows him, in a ghostly way, the example of
murder. Is she very weak, or very trustful in him, or infirm, or old 1
It gives a hideous courage to what would be mere slaughter other-
wise ; for there it is, a presence always about her, darkly menacing
him Avith that penalty whose murky secret has a fascination for all
secret and unwholesome thoughts. And when he struggles with his
victim at the last, 'though he should be hanged for it,' it is a merci-
less wrestle, not with one weak life only, but with that ever-liaunting,
ever-beckoning shadow of the gallows, too : and with a fierce defiance
to it after their long survey of each other, to come and do its worst."
" Present this black idea of violence to a bad mind contemplating
violence ? hold up before a man remotely contemplating the death of
another person, the spectacle of his own ghastly and untimely death
by man's hands ? and out of the depths of his own nature you shall
assuredly raise up that which lures and tempts him on. The laws
which regulate those mysteries have not been studied or cared for by
the maintainers of this laiv ; but they are paramount and will always
assert their 'power.

" Out of one hundred and sixty-seven persons under sentence o
death in England, questioned at different times, in the course o
years, by an English clergyman in the performance of his duty, there
were only three wlio had not been spectators of executions."?Letters
on Social Questions, March 9th, 1846.

Nothing more profound in penetration than the above extract,
more powerful in style, or more important as matter of argument
against the brutalizing gallows, has been written since the time of
Beccaria. With the Letters of Mr. Dickens on the same subject,
which have recently appeared in The Times, everybody is acquainted.
With respect to the abominable system of herding prisoners
together?the convicted, with the untried,?the probably or possibly
innocent, with the certainly guilty,?the small offenders under
extenuating circumstances, with those hardened individuals who have
committed unredeemed atrocities?the old with the young?no system
could be more ignorant and perverse. The evil consequences to
nearly every juvenile offender, and to those previously innocent, or
comparatively so, may be as certainly calculated as the crop which
will result from the seed that a gardener casts into the ground, or
deposits in a liot-bed.

It is, we think, a great question whether the brutalizing efFects
of public executions are not among the most extensive causes of the
Avorst sort of crimes?i. e., of those which are amenable to the heaviest
punishment, to say nothing of the savage results produced in those
who may commit crimes, domestic or otherwise, of a kind, or in a
Avay to escape punishment. The curse and poison of those scencs do
their evil work upon nature, whether it ever come to light or not.
The effect does not end with the " show," we may be sure. It is
carried off by innumerable branches, and reproduced to the imagina
tion by innumerable circumstances and devices. The bodies of the
Mannings were scarcely cold before a placard was paraded in front
of Madame Tussaud's exhibition, on which was inscribed in ink, still
wet?" The masks arc arrived/"

" The effect of public executions on those who witness them,
requires no better illustration, and can have none, than the scene
which any execution in itself presents, and the general police-office
knowledge of the offences arising out of them. I have stated my
belief that the study of such scenes leads to the disregard of human
life, and to murder. Referring since that expression of opinion to
the very last trial for murder in London, I have made inquiry,
and am assured that the youth now under sentence of death in
Newgate, for the murder of his master in Drury-lane, was a vigilant
spectator of the three last public executions in this city. What
effects a daily increasing familiarity with the scaffold, and with death
upon it, wrought in France in the great Revolution, everybody
knows. In reference to this very question of capital punishment,
Robespierre himself, before he was ' in blood stept in so far,' warned
the National Assembly that, in taking human life, and in displaying
before the eyes of the people scenes of cruelty and the bodies of
murdered men, the law awakened ferocious prejudices, which gave
birth to a long and growing train of their own kind. With how
much reason this was said, let his own detestable name bear witness!

If we would know liow callous and hardened society, even in a
peaceful and settled state, becomes to public executions when they are
frequent, let us recollect how feAV they were who made the least
attempt to stay the dreadful Monday-morning spectacles of men and
ivomen strung up in a row for crimes as different in their degree as
our whole social scheme is different in its component parts, which,
within some fifteen years or so, made human shambles of the Old
Bailey.

" There is no better way of testing the effect of public executions
on those who do not actually behold them, but who read of them,
and know of them, than by inquiring into their efficiency in
preventing crime. In this respect, they have always, and in all
countries, failed. According to all facts and figures, failed. In
Ilussia, in Spain, in France, in Italy, in Belgium, in Sweden, in
England, there has been one result. In Bombay, during the
Ilecordership of Sir James Mackintosh, there were fewer crimes in
seven years ivithout one execution, than in the preceding seven years
with forty-seven executions, notwithstanding that, in the seven years
without capital punishment, the population had greatly increased,
and there had been a large accession to the numbers of the ignorant
and licentious soldiery with whom the more violent offences
originated."?Letters on Social Questions, by Charles Dickens, March
IGth, 184G.

Fully coinciding with all the foregoing allusions to the effects of
daily scenes of bloodshed, during the old French Revolution, let us
not therefore imagine that the average statistics of crime are in
our favour when compared with France.

The following results on the comparative statistics of crime in the
United Kingdom of Great Britain, and in France, were communicated
to the Academy of Sciences, at Paris, some years since, by M. Moreau
de Jounes:?

"M. Moreau states, that if the ratio of crimes to the mean
amount of the population in the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and in France, during the five years from 1831 to 1835 inclusive,
be compared, the following conclusions will be obtained :?
" Murder is, at least, four times more frequent in the United
Kingdom of Great Britain than in France, even when the latter
country was in the state of revolution.

" The frequency of assassination is greater in the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland in the ratio of three to two.
" The frequency of rape is greater in the ratio of six or seven to
one.

" Arson is a little more rare.
" Bobberies proved at the assizes, and before the police, are four
times greater in absolute number, but are five times greater compared
to the whole population.

"Notwithstanding these ratios of crime, it appears by official
documents, that the number of individuals condemned per annum,
during tlie above period, was nine times greater in the United
Kingdom, than in France, in proportion to the population.
" The number of convicts sentenced to death in the United King-
dom, was twenty-two times greater than in France, and the number
of executions was more than three times greater."
From these facts, M. Moreau deduces the two following con-
clusions :?

" 1. The inutility of punishment by hanging.
" 2. Error of those who allege that the revolution has produced
increased depravity in France."

If it be said that some deductions may be made in the foregoing
estimates which are in favour of France, from the circumstance of the
statist being a Frenchman, we will only reply that this abstract was
made under the auspices of three eminent Englishmen?viz., Sir David
Brewster, Dr. Lardner, and Sir E. Bulwer Lytton, who had just
started the Monthly Chronicle, from the first number of which
this abstract is copied. We are also accustomed to regard Ireland
as a field of crime, far more fertile than our own; and while such
murders as those by Rush, and the Mannings, are fresh in the co-
lumns of our newspapers, every opportunity is seized of heading a
paragraph with " Barbarous murder in Ireland." No doubt it is
but too true ; but, then, the thing is not peculiar to Ireland, we
should remember. In No. II. of the magazine just quoted, there
appeared an elaborate article on the " Statistics of Crime in Ireland,"
the results of which show, that in comparing the amount of crime in
England, Ireland, and Scotland, the average is pre-eminently in fa-
vour of Scotland?Ireland standing next, the convictions being only
in the ratio of one half those of England, in proportion to the popu-
lation. Making due allowance for the greater difficulty, in Ireland,
of obtaining evidence, and other matters requisite to capital convic-
tions, the above statistical result is still worthy of note.

Crimes decrease as punishments are made less barbarous, and more
certain. The decrease of capital crimes with the decrease of capital
punishment, is an ascertained fact. Here is the return (No. 165),
relating to London and Middlesex only.

London and Middlesex?
Three Periods.
3 years ending Dec. 31, 1830
3 ... ... 1833
3 ... ... 183G
Executed.
52
12
None
Number of Commitments for
the same Crimes, all being
capital, in 1830.
9G0
89G
823

" During the same three periods in London and Middlesex the
committals for minor offences increased, being resnectivelv
10,049, and 10,006." 1 y

Once every session does Mr. Ewart prove to the House of
Commons that capital crimes become less and less in number with
the abatement of the brutalizing nuisance of strangling-shows'? and
bentley's miscellany and mad doctors. 123

as often do a certain number of " fine old English gentlemen " stand
up for the gallows, and make speeches on its immemorial honours;
while others shake their indecisive heads, and say, that though the
gallows appears to have some disadvantages, yet they cannot consent
to have it put down. Under these circumstances, several of our
newspapers fight with hut few sure allies at their side ; others do
not know what to say about it, but wait for " more publicothers
take part with the fine old English Tree : and thus from year to year
the Crime of the Strangling Show continues.

Such are the practical views we deduce from an analysis of the
causes of crime. Regarding it, in conclusion, synthetically, we
must perceive that crime is inseparable from our present condition
of society ; but by wise enactments,?such as an amelioration of
punishments?the abolition or reduction of those taxes which press
upon industry, and especially those which nearly crush the poor?
and a sound national system of real education,?the amount of crime
may be diminished to a proportionate extent.

But to look at crime in the abstract; to consider how human
nature is constituted in its organization and temperament?in its
circumstances of climate?in its passions?the kind and degree of
education?the circumstances of position?the influences of society
in general, and of personal associates in particular?the influence of
original structure and character, or of hereditary and inevitable
tendencies?these, and countless other considerations, would lead us
to sum up and contemplate all the reasonable excuses and extenuations
inducing pity and a Christian humility, till eventually we were led
to the question of how far a certain amount of crime may not be a
necessary condition of humanity in its probation on earth,?one of
the fiery ordeals we have to pass through in our upward journey ;
and whether, in fine, as occasional discords are needed in the
grandest music, crime may not be necessary to those grand chords of
the march of time towards eternity, comprising a system of harmony
too profound for mortal ears to comprehend.
