Notices
=========

Jttt'scdlnncous Notices.
inf ?n
tit /li
BOOKS, &c., RECEIVED FOR REVIEW.
A Selection of the Papers and Prize Essays on Subjects connected with Insanity,
read before the Society for Improving the Condition of the Insane. London: 1850.
This work Las disappointed us. We have gone carcfully through the prize essays,
mid, with a few exceptions, we regret to say that we see hut little to commend. The
?volume opens with an essay " On Kestraint and Coercion," by Dr. Haslam, said to he
read April 3, 1833. How is this ? The Society, we are informed in the preface, was
566 MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES.
not constituted until 1843. Surely Dr. Haslam's essay is quite out of place. With
every respect for the name of that eminent physician, we cannot but observe that
these are not the times for a Society, professing to have for its object the improvement
of the condition of the insane, to put so prominently forward a defence of restraint and
coercion. If Dr. Haslam's paper was not a prize essay, it has no right to be printed at
all in the volume. If the Society was instituted in 1843, how, we ask, could the essay
of Dr. Haslam be read before its members in 1833, ten years previously to its organiza-
tion ? The volume contains, also, essays on " Crime and Insanity," on the " Increase
of Insanity," a case by Sir A. Morison, M.D., two essays on " Puerperal Insanity," on
the " Pathology of the Brain," on " Lucid Intervals," on the " Medical Treatment of
Mental Diseases," and on the " Moral Management of the Insane." The three last
essays are those most deserving of our commendation. Dr. L. Robertson enters fully
both into the medical and moral treatment of insanity. The former essay must have
entailed upon him great research, and shows extensive knowledge of the literature of
the subject.
On Corpulence, or Excess of Fat in the Human Body, &c. By T. K. Chambers, M.D.,
Fell. Roy. Coll. Phys., and Gulstonian Lecturer for 1850. 1 vol. Longman, &c.
As it is our wish to confine our reviews to works which relate specially to the subject
of psychological medicine, we very much regret that it is not in our power to give a
full analysis of Dr. Chambers' able and very interesting treatise on corpulence. The
substance of the work was contained in a course of lectures delivered by the author at
the College of Physicians, as Gulstonian lecturer. This is, we believe, the first attempt
to treat the subject of corpulence in the spirit of modern science. Dr. Chambers' work
ought to be read and studied both in and out of the profession. The work does him
great credit. He has quite exhausted the subject.
A Lecture introductory to the Course of Surgery, delivered at the Massachusetts
College, Boston. By H. J. Bigelow, M.D. Boston : 1850.
This is an excellent introductory lecture, and speaks well for the ability, knowledge,
and zeal of its author.
The Law Magazine, for August,
Contains an article on the plea of lunacy, at variance with the views propounded in
the observations in the present number on Pate's trial. We received the Number after
our article was in type.
Konesipathy; or, the Cure of Diseases by Specific Active and Passive Movements.
By Augustus Geobgii. 1850.
In this treatise, the author considers the subject of medical gymnastics in all its
important details. We agree with the writer that the advantages of a regular, scientific,
and systematic code of gymnastics are not sufficiently appreciated by the public ancl
profession. The work before us enters very fully into the subject, and deserves
perusal. The author is disposed to overrate the curative efficacy of muscular exercise;
nevertheless his observations (which are free from all empiricism) are entitled to careful
consideration. The work is well written, and embodies the literature of the subject.
The Medical Guide. By Richard Reece, M.D. 16th edition. Edited^by his Son,
Henry Reece. 1850. Longman.
This volume contains a vast fund of useful information. The instructions for the
cure and prevention of disease are conveyed in intelligible language. Mr. Henry
Reece has carefully edited his father's work, and has embodied in it the most recent
improved views of the treatment of disease.
The Accommodation of the Eye to Distance. By W. C. Wallace, M.D. New York,
1850.
A Scientific Essay on Optics, with appropriate engravings, illustrative of the author's
visionary views. The wood-cuts are not equal to the letter-press of the work. How-
ever, the remarks of the author are clear; and acting upon the principle which he
enunciates, and accommodating our own editorial eyes to a distance, and glancing across
MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES. 567
the Atlantic, we should say that Dr. Wallace was a good anatomist, and sound physio-
logist. We trust the worthy Doctor will excuse a little psychological pleasantry.
Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Meeting of the Association of Medical
Superintendents of American Institutions for the Insane.
We have to thank Dr. S. Kirkbride of Philadelphia for an early copy of this pamphlet.
We can truly say that the Americans are really "going a-head" in psychological
matters. The society promises great things. We shall watch its proceedings witli
interest, and give our readers a faithful record of its progress.
The London Medical Examiner. (The Series.)
The Editor of this Journal handles his pen with ability. There is always something
of interest and value in this periodical.
The London Journal of Medicine (regularly).
This is one of the most able and scientific of our monthly journals. It is conducted
with great judgment, and the articles are always upon points of practical importance.
Some of the most able physicians and surgeons in the metropolis rank among its
contributors.
A Plea of Humanity in Behalf of Medical Education; an Annual Address, delivered
before the New York State Medical Society. By Alexander H. Stevens, M.D.,
LL.D. Fourth Edition. New York. 1850.
A valuable contribution to American medical literature. We are much pleased with
the high moral tone of this essay. Its general perusal would tend to elevate the cha-
racter of the profession in the estimation of the public.
On Diseases of Menstruation and Ovarian Inflammation. By Edward J. Tilt, M.D.
London. Churchill.
In this able treatise, the author discusses the question " Should marriage be sanctioned,
and when ?" This is a subject of deep interest to the psychologist, and as he has
often to deal with cases of insanity, complicated with uterine derangement and ovarian
disease, every work which throws light on these subjects should be carefully studied.
The derangements of the mind are so often complicated with disordered uterine function,
that it becomes absolutely necessary for the physician to fully acquaint himself with
the best works on this subject. We can recommend Dr. lilts treatise to the notice
of our readers.
On Juvenile Crime : a Letter to the Town Council, &c., of Liverpool. By Edward
Kushton, Esq., Stipendiary Magistrate.
In our next Number this pamphlet will be noticed at some length.
Observations on Chronic Hydrocephalus, Acquired, Sanguineous, and Congenital;
with an account of three cases in which the head was punctured, and an examina-
tion of the effects of that operation. By Francis Battersbt, M.B., F.R.C.S.I.,
&c. Edinburgh. 1850.
We have seldom read a more able and erudite treatise on any given medical subject
than the one before us. Dr. Battersby has, in addition to his own original views, made
himself master of every work, pamphlet, and essay, on the subject of hydrocephalus, and
has embodied the product of his immense labours in his own treatise. We very much
regret that our limited space will not admit of our giving a full analysis of this very
excellent and learned production.
On a much less Painful and more Scientific Method of Extracting the Teeth.
By Henry Gilbert, Esq., M.R.C.S. L. & L.A.S. Second Edition.
This little volume has received the commendation of the principal portion of the
medical press of the country, and it deserves the praise bestowed upon it. Every
attempt to apply the principles of science to dentistry is entitled to warm commendation.
