Confessions of A Patient After Recovering From an Attack of Lunacy
===================================================================

Tiie narrative which wc propose submitting to our readers, is from
the person herself, who lmd been the subject of insanity.
The individual in question is a lady who had received a highly
accomplished education. Her imagination was lively, her character
was most marked in its disposition to conceive projects, and abandon
them as soon as formed. She has been perfectly restored to health
for several years. One day she was asked, if she had any recol-
* AqqaIcs ll* Ilygiiuc.
CONFESSIONS OF A PATIENT. 389
lection of her illness; if she knew how she had been affected by
external objects, and what idea she had fonned of the circumstances
going 011 around her? Taking her personal experience as the grounds
of her belief, she assured us, that, despite of the mental derangement,
the insane remember the objects and the individuals who surround
them during their most ungovernable excitement, even when they arc
incapable of distinguishing, from their rhapsodies, real objects and
events, and that these recollections do not disappear after the cure.
This fact led her to the belief that there were unknown reservoirs in
the brain, where the impressions conveyed through the medium of
the optic and auditory nerve are received and retained. She was
convinced, she added, that, returning to the country where first her
mind had wandered, not only did she recognise all the individuals
who had been in communication with her at that period, but that she
could even repeat the conversations carried 011 with those persons.
For example, she had the most precise recollection of the order of
the things in the room where she was confined, of the furniture of
the apartment, and of the pictures and engravings which adorned
the walls. On which, she remarked, in the treatment of lunatics,
sufficient attention could not be paid to matters of that kind, as they
frequently suggest to the patients the most distressing and painful
thoughts.
This lady, possessed of a highly irritable temperament, and a most
exalted imagination, conceivcd a misunderstanding at a moment
when she was already the victim of disappointed hopes. The con-
junction of these circumstances became the exciting cause of her
mental affliction. She had in Holland claims to a large sum of
money, but the date of her right was at a remote period, while
another family, and with all appearance of justice, had made good
their titles to the same possession. Advantageous offers, and the
expectation of succeeding, by being present 011 the ground, urged
licr to proceed to Holland. After many useless plans, and after
having seen all her efforts fail, she returned one day home with her
feet very damp. The succeeding day she felt out of order, suffering
much from cold feet, and pains of the head and throat. Instead of
reposing in her bed, and promoting perspiration to recover her
health, she sat at her desk to arrange a very long paper on her
business, to which she devoted all her mind and means, so as to
prove the justice of her claims. But notwithstanding the paper was
written with great power, and she had presented the subject under
every variety of aspect, it had 110 better success than the preceding
memoirs. No answer was made to it; and when she called on the
people to whom it had been transmitted, they always contrived to
cscape seeing her. Impatient, soured, And irritated at this cruel
treatment, she had determined to return home, and had proposed
leaving her lodgings, when she received a letter from her family,
which induced her to protract her stay some time longer iu Holland.
The memorial which we have mentioned was the chief subject which
engaged the disordered mind of this lady during the illness she had
300 CONFESSIONS OF A PATIENT
at that period. Wc now append the written detail which she gave
of her feelings during her attack. Sonic few points in her history
have been suppressed.
" During these transactions, I hired more retired apartments, and
less dear. My landlord, a shoemaker, and all his family were worthy
people, and obliging. I took them for Christians, though they were
Portuguese Jews. When I was informed of that circumstance, I
become painfully affected. I began to be under constant apprehen-
sion that they would rob me of my money. This fear increased to
such an extent, as to deprive me of my rest. At last, I fancied that
my host might some day make me swallow a narcotic draught, and
assassinate me, along with my daughter, during the night, to get
possession of my money. My suspicions received additional con-
tinuation from the circumstance that these persons had prevailed on
me to inscribe my name at the police-office as Madame II. A., and
not Madame II. Ji. Tortured by fear, for the period of eight clays,
I scarce slept for a few instants. My food was composed of eggs,
fruits, and tea; and one day after having partaken of some bread
which my landlady brought me, I was immediately attacked by a
severe diarrhoea, and I had no more rest.
" My hostess explained the accident by a statement that the
police, in order to prevent an epidemic with which the country was
threatened, had directed the bakers to introduce into the bread de-
signed for the lower orders, medicines which would act as a general
purge.
" My body and my head broke down, weakened by the low diet,
and by the continual watching. Fear carried them away. I felt my
judgment going apace along with the power of reflection; and at
last I was unable to draw from any given fact conclusions in accord-
ance with the relations of that fact. The persons around ino became
still more fully suspcctcd by me; and the end was, the loss of my
reason.
" Two dreams, one of my daughter, the other about myself,
occurring in the same night, brought my disease fully out. My
?laughter told me, that she had witnessed me throwing myself into
the street from the third Hat of a house in the town, and that 1 re-
mained stretched on the pavement broken in pieces, and dead. Wo
went to try and discover the house which she had seen in her dream;
it was the Court of Judicature. As for my dream, it was that a
man, l>earing a purse, had entered the house of the Portuguese Jew,
and had cut iny throat. The day after 1 was busy washing some
clothes, when raising my eyes I saw (and I was wide awake) a long
knife passing over the ceiling of my room. Struck with alarm, 1
bade my daughter to be silent. In great haste I placed all my money
iu my work-bag, I closed my trunk, and hurried my daughter into tho
street, taking with me all my most important papers. 1 cannot say,
whether some ]>ersou had not, by way of joke, passed a knife through
a slit in the ceiling, or whether it was not altogether a vision, tlie
creation of my cxcitcd imagination. This, however, is undoubted;
AFTER RECOVERING FROM AN ATTACK OF LUNACY. 301
that I was quite awake, and in full possession of all my wits, when
I saw the instrument of death. I had met shortly before, in descend-
ing the staircase, a man with a large purse under his arm, probably
a barber. The appearance of that man deprived me of my self-
possession; and once out of the Jew's house, reason completely de-
serted me. I then went to one of the body-gnard. I addressed a
young ofHcer, and begged him with fervour to carry immediately to
the king the packet of letters on me; but as he hesitated, and left
me under the pretext of calling a superior officer, I hastened away
from him, and went to the German Chancery, where I compelled the
worthy keeper of the records, M. Z., to take my packet and preserve it
for me. I also told him of my causes for alarm, and made him ac-
quainted with the danger I dreaded. He took leave of me after
having offered some common-place consolations, and I fonnd myself
again in the street. Here, however, everything was changed as far
as regarded me. The city, so tranquil but a moment ago, was in the
height of an insurrection. The regiment quartered in the garrison was
Jewish. The prince royal and the king had been made prisoners and
condemned to death. The enemy had broken ground at Schevelingen.
The Asiatic hordes commanded by the Jews. Of what use could the
gold be to me? I said to myself, and I returned to my landlord's
door. I called his wife. I threw my money down on the work-
table, advising her to begin a petty trade with it; and I concluded
by a humble request for one louis, that I might return to Germany.
" The face of the poor Jewess must have actually been seen at the
instant, when she received so unexpectedly a large gift, to conceive
the astonishing effect it had on her countenance?it actually became
purple. She could not divine how to explain the matter; but she
concluded in offering me a piece of gold, and would have allowed me
to go away without any further remark, had not her husband come
in. He took a handful of the louis, and slipped them, almost without
my consciousness, into my bag. The louis, however, were restored
too late, from which cause I was led to believe the family highly ho-
nourable. Having in this manner, as I supposed, got rid of my
money, my dread of being assassinated vanished, and I reasoned with
tolerable precision for an insane person. I said to myself, the people
would have killed you on account of your money; let them have it;
they will countermand the assassin, and you may return home without
any fear. I made this all clear to my daughter, and I took the road
to Delft. I wished to pass the night in that town, and travel by the
boat to llottcrdam, whence I would have proceeded to Munster by
Arnheim and Emcrich. I was desirous to sec Madame II , at
Munster, and explain to her that it was a sacred duty she owed to
her husband to recall him immediately from Holland, as he ran the
hazard of being branded, as one individual had already experienced,
who had put in his claims for a property.
" 1 had changed my louis at the banker L , and I was already
close by the gate of the city, when I saw a young Jewess following me;
and though 1 had made diff'ereut turns to avoid her, she nevertheless}
,392 CONFESSION'S OF A PATIENT
hung closc on my footsteps. I then went up to her, and ex-
claimed, in a menacing tone, t Accursed pagans! you have already
crucified Christ, and this day you would vent your wrath on the
Prince Royal!' The Jewess saved herself from this dreadful apo-
strophe, and from that moment I was fully satisfied that the prince,
who Avas universally beloved, was in imminent danger. I then
came in contact with an enclosed palisade. I asked what was the
purpose of it ? Being answered that it belonged to a Jew, I per-
suaded myself that it was the prison of the royal family. The
absurd thought excited so much pain and sympathy in my heart,
that I deserted my daughter, arid desired with my nails, using all
my forcc, to make an aperture in the enclosure, that I might save
the prince, and bring him out along with me. Nothing could with-
draw that fixed idea from my mind, which led me to the belief of
war.
" This idea was further substantiated by two new visions, which
existed nowhere but in my disordered brain. I saw then on the
canal a little boat, with black sails and colours. My eldest daughter,
whom I had left at C , had taken refuge there, and was miserably
clad. The boat, however, could not move, as the King of the Jews,
under the penalty of death, had forbid any of the boatmen weighing
anchor. That I might not betray her and let her understand that
she was my daughter, I returned silently; and soon after I recognised
the face of a young lady of H , in full dress, coming out of a beau-
tiful coach, and proceeding to an adjoining house. I followed this
lady, to address her, but those whom I spoke to said that they had
seen no one. In all haste, I then took the road to Delft, where I
arrived at eight o'clock in the evening. I looked out for a respect-
able house for lodgings, but they would receive me nowhere. Finally,
I was received into the house of Captain B , whoso lady was
sick and confined to bed. Nevertheless, the people of the houso
showed a great interest for me, and treated me with great kindness
and humanity. A new accession of fever came on, and a host of
visions, more or less fantastical, all relating to the imprisonment of the
prince royal, excited a furious delirium of the most extravagant
nature, in consequence of which the persons with whom I resided
carried me, in the course of the night, to another house. On the
subsequent day a letter was despatched to the keeper of the records,
M. lie came to me in a closed carriage, and took me to an esta-
blishment at a distance from the street, where T was put under the
care of an old servant of M. II. A physician was called in, and at
the expiration of three weeks I was so far recovered, that my guar-
dians 110 longer could trace my thoughts, though my ideas still
clung to the same subject.
"After having left the house of M. B , at Delft, I fell into a
state of profound melancholy. I fancied myself to be in positions
which only the extreme of madness can conceive. My recollections
are by no means very clcar of what occurred when wo were at the
hotel, where we had to pass three days; still, I have a floating idea
AFTER RECOVERING FROM AN ATTACK OF LUNACY. 393
of having conversed with different people, and that I answered
different questions. I think, also, that when I went to bed, a great
many people came to observe me, and they talked together about
my condition, but all the rest was as a dream.
" The condition, however, in which I spent the first night seems
worthy of attention. I thought myself abed, perfectly conscious,
but totally unable to make any movement, in an immense abyss, in
which I believed I had been buried alive, and had now awakened
in the tomb, in the condition I was to live for all eternity, with the
perfect consciousness of my condition, to reflect on myself. My
mind, which, when awake a few hours previously, had been carried
away by the most extravagant plirenzy, still enjoyed all its percep-
tions clear. I discussed with myself whether I deserved so stern a
fate, and as I was unconscious of any crime done with premeditation,
I concluded by supposing that this severity of punishment had been
awarded to me because, though I had fulfilled my duties as much as
lay in my power, I had yet neglected to do any good beyond my
line of duty, &c. In other respects, I was in the same condition as
a person affected with tetanus.
" I recovered myself, however, though I was in a state of extreme
debility, not having sufficient strength almost to support the weight
of my body. Scarcely was I awake ere I relapsed into my illusions.
I began to scrutinize my room, that I might discover whether I had
not fallen into the house of a merchant of souls (' Query, Armi').
The burlesque motions with which I prosecuted this search would
undoubtedly have provoked a smile in the most serious person, and
at last I went into the chimney, reasoning thus with myself, that as
it was made of stones, it could not be thrown down when the house
was demolished. My fears were further augmented by the pictures
which ornamented the walls. In that posture I awaited in trepida-
tion the approach of the inmates of the house. A young girl
appeared, who gave me some confidence, but when I saw my old
landlady enter, my emotion could not be concealed; and lastly, when
two keepers were brought into the room, who were not to leave me,
my wrath was fired anew, and I broke a window that I might
escape.
" After some time I was permitted to go to the garden; the open
air soothed me, and yet everything around me was a source of
illusion to me. The houses around the garden seemed to me to be
prisons filled with prisoners. I fancied the kitchen of my landlady,
in which a large pot was boiling, the place where the prisoners were
put to the torture. The water of the pot in which they were going
to throw me, I thought was boiling oil. Full of that notion, I tore
the sleeve off my daughter's robe, desirous to retain it that she might
not incur the hazard of being boiled alive.
'? All this receives its explanation in the condition of a phrenetic
lunatic, all whose actions are influenced by so many dreadful fancies;
so it is always with me, that it is impossible to alleviate, even a
little, those agonies, except I am completely enlarged from them.
30 4 CONFESSION'S OF A PATIENT
For if I had been shut up 011 that day, or even bound down by chains,
either fright would have stopped the flow of the blood in my veins, or it
would have circulated with such intense rapidity, that, with undoubted
certainty, all the arteries would have burst in my bruin. Most
luckily I was left in the garden, though 11 violent storm was approach-
ing. I felt myself very well when my keepers were forced to retire
by the rain under the protection of the alley of the house, leaving me
at full liberty to contemplate the rising storm. lint how different
was that storm from that I had seen before, and those I have wit-
nessed since. The clouds which rolled up from the horizon appeared
to me to be the billows of the deep, rising o'er the banks of the
Schevelingen to the skies, fighting in the air together over my head;
while a flotilla of the enemy, on the margin of the river, carried on
a deadly combat against the inhabitants. The last hour had struck for
the prosperity of Holland. I did not hear any thunder; I did not
witness any lightning; but I perceived the explosion of u hundred
blazes of fire, the cannonade, ceaseless, reverberated in my cars : from
which we may infer, with all certainty, that the car and the eye of
the insane amplify and enlarge whatever is heard or seen.
" The same remark occurred to me afterwards. As my symptoms
appeared better, my linen and my property were restored to me. I
took them out of my trunk and arranged them 011 my table. I was
struck with their great number, and even with the appearance of a
cloth and towels, which, however, I had left behind at C . Iiut
this joy did not continue long; and when the following day I again
examined my linen, a great many objects seemed a-wanting, which
I had fancied to have had in my hands the previous evening; so
much so, that I supposed I had been robbed. 1 did not, however,
communicate my suspicions to any one.
" These two circumstances justify me in aBiruling that the lunatic
fancies he sees and hears objects which have 110 real existence, lint
what I am now going to mention proves the important influence of
an individual, opportunely seen, in giving a proper degree of assur-
ance to the sick person, for the earliest symptoms of my recovery
take their date from the day when I saw, amongst a great many
others, n form that particularly caught my attention.
" I cannot well say whether it was the second or third day several
persons came to talk with me in the garden, but 1 was extremely
insolent to every one, even to Captain IJ , to whom I owe my
life. At the end two men opened the gate, and looked 011 my side
of the garden; one was dressed iu a deep blue overcoat, and lie
almost immediately withdrew; the other was dressed in very beautiful
uniform; he also retired. After that a young man of a very good
expression entered, having all the outward fippearanecs of perfect
health; lie spoke to me in French, and I answered him in the same
language. 1 took this person for the Prince Koynl, ami the bandage
felt from my eyes. I felt myself all of a sudden iu great confusion
for appearing before the prince iu a conlunw. so uusuited for tin'
occasion. I was surprised that he wa< still alive, and as he appeared
AFTER RECOVERING FROM AN ATTACK OF LUNACY. 39;")
in perfect health, the anxieties I had experienced on his account, con-
ceiving that the enemy, which had beleagured the country, had made
him suffer great torment, all vanished in a moment. I felt myself
as if inspired with a new life, and from that hour the visions of horror
were no more.
" It will he easily understood that this young person was not the
prince, though he was a little like him. What an infinity of good
would be conferred on the lunatic could his thoughts be anticipated,
and scenes of a nature to affect him favourably be brought before
him. Had permission been given me to leave that day, I assuredly
would have committed nothing either that was ridiculous or attended
with injury to any one. But there were still more cruel trials in
reserve for me, from which I was not to escape until I had gone
through the ordeal of three additional days' illness.
"A coach was ordered, in which M. Z., the keeper of the records,
conveyed me to La Hayc, where I was placed in a house near the
castle. I then had a difference with M. Z., as we did not leave
the town by the same gate we had entered. I attempted to show
him that he had mistaken the road, and I felt much offended in
perceiving that lie, with a smile on his lips, continued the same route,
without paying any attention to my observations. When we stopped,
this irritation was further increased on perceiving a child looking at
us. I said to it that it deserved the rod, which caused it to run
away. As I ascended the stairs I counted the steps; and I was again
thrown into distress on getting to my room, when I saw that the
door could not be locked from within.
" My alarm, however, became extreme, when I firmly believed
that I thought I recognised in the person of my nurse an individual
whom I had seen hanged some time before at La Haye, along with
another criminal, and whom accordingly I took for a spirit. In the
solitude of night, I perceive myself alone in company with this person,
full of the most agonizing apprehensions. I would not allow the
shutters to be closed at nightfall; and as, when I thought I had seen
the prince, I had no longer any dread of war, I was fully persuaded
that our soldiers had been victorious, so this idea stirred up in my
breast the fears of being assassinated. When the pump was worked
in the yard I fancied that they were going to throw the water up
into my room, and I looked every moment to see it rushing in.
Noticing three nails in my room, I supposed that they intended to
hang us on them, myself, my daughter, and my nurse, because the
latter had been condemned to death.
" Resting on my couch one evening, but quite awake, I watched
every step of the nurse with my eyes, as I thought her a spirit; the
candle ran, but I did not observe the tallow flow from tliat candle,
but irom a hole in the wall, whence it was discharged in an enormous
quantity, resembling a furious torrent which has burst through its
banks, so that I screamed aloud, and pretended that they were going
to suttbeate me. The incident made me suspect that they had the
intention to poison the atmosphere, and ever from that moment I
NO. XI. J) I)
39G CONFESSIONS OF A PATIENT
constantly experienced a disagreeable though sweet smell. All the
viands offered to me had that taste. I thought that the meat they
brought was human flesh, and insisted on the idea that they desired
to poison me. Since my complete restoration to health I have dis-
covered, in one of my walks, a poisonous plant, which had the dis-
agreeable odour I allude to.
" The circumstance I have referred to, of the tallow running down
the wall, is a convincing proof to me that persons labouring under
disorder of the mental faculties, perceive objects which have no real
existence, and that the sight of particular matters produces, spon-
taneously, images in the eye of the diseased person.
" Even at a later period, when I was improving, I still saw Dr.
T ; then my brother-in-law; I heard the voice of my sister, as
also another voice, which, speaking to me by my name, bade me
' lay down the petition.'
" I often requested of my keepers to have my clothes, my papers,
and my money; but they answered me that they were to be kept till
my husband appeared, who ought to come and inquire for inc. On
several occasions I objected to this arrangement (pleading the expense
it would be attended with) to interest the persons who detained me
to permit me to travel alone; this, however, they would not accede
to, though I had become much more calm. Several dreadful dreams
broke in on this state of tranquillity, tallying, however, very appo-
sitely with my condition. There I was, in the realms of Pluto
below, which I examined with a remarkable degree of firmness and
self-possession. I saw, moreover, the aqiui tolena prepared. \ had
read an account of this horrible torture, the frightful details of which
were all reproduced in the dream, and my children were the unhappy
victims of this barbarity of the Italiani. I would rather suffer in
reality every kind of imaginable torture, than again experience that
horrible dream. On being awakened I found that I had been
dreaming, but still one uneasy idea succeeded another, and the last of
the kind was on my return, after having been in a ' diligence.'
" e might be almost persuaded to conclude from these facts, that
even- visible object should be withdrawn from tin; eye of the lunatic;
but if what 1 witnessed gave rise to misinterpretation on my part,
those things which were concealed from me excited still more ex-
traordinary conjectures.
I converted the office in the house into a chamber where the
torture was performed; every time I heard a packet sealed 1 thought
it was the coup-de-grace of some unfortunate wretch. An old apart-
ment, always closed, containing old records, and full of armories, was
the charnel-house, and the armorer represented the coffins. I firmly
believed tiiat the story above me was a conservatory for the remains
of those who had been assassinated, until one day, finding the door
open, and all being still in the house, I went up quietly myself t<>
ascertain how far my painful suspicions were well founded. * Great,
then, was my happiness, wlten, instead of bones, skeletons, and
carcases, I saw nothing but torn old waste paper. My curiosity was
AFTER RECOVERING FROM AN ATTACK OF LUNACY. 397
wound up to the highest pitch, and yet I had not courage to touch
one of the leaves. 1 opened a window which looked into the royal
garden; the windows of the apartment of the king also commanded
a view of the garden. I noticed at one of the windows a tall lady
in white robes; the moment I saw her she rose from her chair some-
what hastily, and I supposed she was the princess. From that
moment all my fantastical notions were centered in that princess, as
I thought she was detained as a prisoner in that room.
" I looked then by the windows in the front of the house, where
I was, and I noticed a range of buildings which surrounded the
castle in the form of a circle. It would be interesting to ascertain
whether, from the windows of that roof, the view which I describe
here can be enjoyed in perfection, to determine whether my senses
were not under the sway of an illusion, when I saw a crowd of
magnificent mansions all around in that quarter. The front build-
ings could be perceived from my bed-room. I saw distinctly a small
earthen pipe, which passed by the chimney of the house nearest the
court of the castle; and it was not a long mental operation for me
to conclude that the tube of that pipe was the only mode of the air
having access to the house. So I likewise inferred that all the in-
dividuals who entered the house would be suffocated.
" On the day of my husband arriving, and in his presence, my
whole system underwent u special change. Instead of feeling a satis-
faction that I had in him a protector, I was harassed by the idea of
being considered insane by him, and being placed under the control
of a persqn whom I distrusted. Under the influence of that fear, I
exercised all my self-control, that he might not suspect my insanity,
though I was still far from being in full possession of my wits. I
also adopted the precaution to procure secretly a strong dose of
rhubarb. I swallowed it all at once, and felt myself much better
after. I had done so formerly with benefit.
" Some days after the arrival of my husband, we began our
arrangements to return home. We secured places in the diligence,
though we would have done better by hiring a carriage, as we had to
pay for three seats. We were then fairly on our road, and the shocks
and jolts of the wretched vehicle in which we travelled were of no
small service in restoring my addled brain. I soon found that my
reason was restored.
" We arrived for the night at a town beyond A , where we
were to stay till the morning. We had a bedroom, but there was no
lock to it. When my husband had undressed and gone to bed, I
noticed that he had left his pantaloons near the door, which was ajar,
and I was afraid lest he had left money in his pockets. I searched
them, and found, to my great delight, thirty-two double Louis, of
those which I had taken with me; and, in addition, the sum of two
hundred reicknt/iulvr, in single Louis's. I immediately concealed the
thirty-two double Louis's in my clothes, intending, if my husband did
not adopt better arrangements for our jonrnev, to start alone on foot,
and manage the gold coins myself. This money, which I had worked
*1) d 2
398 CONFESSIONS OF A PATIENT
hard for in my early life, and which I had recovered, imparted to me
a new spirit, so that, from that instant, I felt that I had entered 011
11 new life. My fears all vanished, and everything about me appeared
under a new light. Desirous to give my husband some little annoy-
ance, as a punishment for his want of prudence, I placed in his bed
the money which belonged to him, retaining my own. The follow-
ing morning his alarm was great when he found his pockets empty,
though his pantaloons were 011 the chair he had put them on the
previous evening. I comforted him, restoring to him the money,
and told him that his manner of travelling, though it was highly
extravagant, was not the more pleasant 011 that account; that 1.
would not contribute any more to the general expenses, but pay only
for those of myself and my daughter. Notwithstanding my remon-
strance, as he persisted in travelling by diligence, I left him in a
village, and proceeded alone as far as the gates of Westphalia. I
should undoubtedly have lost my way, had it not been for an
incident which has much the appearance of the marvellous.
"Arriving at a place where three roads cross, I was going to
follow that which would have brought me back to the point whence
I had started, when I noticed the tracks of a man who had probably
conveyed corn to the town of Minden : a sack had burst, and a con-
siderable amount of the corn had escaped. My head was still feeble,
and I had an explanation ready for this adventure: I conjectured
then, and very luckily this time, that this corn had been spread on
the road to enable me to escape from the labyrinth in which I was
involved. I followed the marks with perfect confidence, atu| treading
steadily 011 the corn, I passed over roads almost impracticable, and
through several villages, getting finally into the high road, where I
met the diligence, which, taking that route, had made a long circuit:
there I joined my husband and my daughter.
"At .Minden, I took the arrangements for the continuance of our
journey into my own hands, and hired a private carriage for our-
selves. Notwithstanding this, the most trivial circumstance sug-
gested erroneous fancies; but as 1 was in a state of perfect liberty,
I examined very attentively the subjects which had awakened sur-
prise in my breast, and I gradually became conscious of my errors.
I still recollect several of these very singular visions.
" At the period of which I now speak, 1 was in 110 way uneasy
as to my own fate, or that of my family, but 1 was distressed by a
feeling of sympathy for the .Jews, discomfited, as 1 thought, in
Holland, ami scattered in the woods in the neighbourhood of (! ?,
where they were perishing of hunger and cold, along with their
wives and children. I daily resorted to the woods and deposited
bread and money, particularly near the cross-roads.
" Two regiments passing through the city at the same time, had
a coffin in their escort: this circumstance affected me with alarm,
for I thought that their king was in the cofiin. To convince myself
of the truth of the circumstance, 1 ran across the garden to meet the
precession; but the body had disappeared, and afterward* 1 under-
AFTER RECOVERING FROM AN ATTACK OF LUNACY. 399
stood that the coffin was tcnantless. I called a young soldier, who
was following the regiment at a distance; I made several questions
to him 011 the subject, but he did not answer me, but went away
without saying one word, to a hillock covered with verdure and
thorns; lie there made a hole in the midst of the thorns with his
cane. He still declined answering me, when I asked him whether a
king had not been buried on one of the banks of the Rhine I I was
soon, however, satisfied that the silent soldier was a spirit, which
idea made 111c exceedingly uncomfortable.
" Fear, probably, and the stormy season to which I had been con-
stantly exposed, again disturbed the harmony of my intellectual
powers. From that day, as soon as I arrived in the country, I
observed 011 the summit of all the mountains which circumscribe the
horizon, machines which appeared to me to be telegraphs, and I
fancied, at the conclusion, that the enemy, after having cut a canal,
had beat back the Prussian army as far as the Rhine, driving it into
the deep, and that they were anxious to preserve the vessels and the
corpses of the parties so destroyed, as trophies of their victory. This
idea excited in my mind u determined hatred against the barbarous
men capable of so atrocious a deed; and to show that I could not
be blamed for being a party to its execution, the strange notion
came into my head to send some loaves and a bottle of brandy to
several detachments of recruits 011 their route through the town
they took the brandy, and handed the loaves over to the poor.
(Since this lady returned to her native city, her visions, though
not exhibited by outward signs, as ehc has now acquired sufficient
self-control to conceal them from the world, are still frequently
renewed. She retained the notion for a long time, that the Jews
had resolved to destroy the Christians. She also saluted with much
courtesy and humility all the Jewesses; if they were clothed in rags,
idie addressed them in terms of extreme politeness, offered them her
kind offices, and endeavoured to comfort them. She sometimes
gave the poor Jews a piece of money, in which she conceived there
was some particular virtue.
At last, she gave up this notion, as she becamc daily convinced
that her apprehensions were altogether chimerical; but she adopted
a notion exactly the reverse. This contrast is often noticed in the
dreams of the insane. She fancied that a great number of Jews were
encamped in an immense forest behind a mountain in the vicinity of
the town where she lived?that the government kept them prisoners
there, and watched them, and that they were condemned to perish
a wretched death by hunger. Actuated by sympathy for those
unfortunate beings, and indignant at the cruel measures enforced
against them, she ventured several times out near the forest, and
placed at different parts by the way-side, all kinds of food, such as
loaves, fruits, eggs, &c., so that these unhappy creatures might pick
them up, and that some of them at least might escape from the
dreadful death to which they had been doomed.
(To be continued.')
