Moral State of Society
======================

Art. III.

The editor of the " Morning Chronicle" lias done incalculable ser-
vice by awakening public attention, in a series of articles on " Labour
and the Poor," to the physical and moral condition of the labouriug
population of this country. It is impossible to estimate the benefit
which will result from this expose, harrowing and painful as it is
to the best feelings of human nature. The consummate ability
which the editor of the " Morning Chronicle" has displayed in
originating in a daily paper?which, as a general rule, purposes only
to give the ordinary news of the day, with comments 011 passing
events?an investigation into the actual state of the working people
of this country; and the indomitable spirit, untiring zeal, and extra-
ordinary talent with which the gentlemen selected have carried out
this most important conception, are entitled to the warmest com-
mendation of all who wish well to the human species. There is a
telling and, we may add, a touching truthfulness about the scenes
described, which our best and most graphic writers of fictitious nar-
{ Letters on "Labour and the Poor," published in the Morning Chronicle
newspaper, by the Special Correspondent of that journal.

rative could not imitate with anything approaching to success. The
immense hotly of valuable facts thus recorded in the columns of the
Morning Chronicle will, avc trust, form the elements or data for
some most important legislative enactments, having for tlicir object the
amelioration of the sad and melancholy state of very large sections of
the population of onr principal agricultural and manufacturing towns.
The subjoined remarks on the moral condition of society have been
suggested to our mind by a perusal of the letters in question. Wo
purpose dealing with-principles : the facts arc already 011 record.

A wretched woman died of cold and hunger in a garret, when,
upon searching her corpse, there were found 300/. conccalcd among
the folds of her night-cap. In yonder room is squatted an old man,
with a few grey hairs straggling over his wrinkled brows, counting
the pebbles given him by his keeper for the sake of peace, as lie is
never content unless he is telling them over and over again, and
laying by twenty out of every thirty of these few worthless grains
of dirt in a crack of the wainscoting, where he has a large store of
them, which he gloats upon with as much despicable satisfaction as
if tlicy were so many ingots of bullion, or stock receipts for so
many thousands of pounds sterling funded in the national securities.
In another apartment is, sitting helpless 011 a chair, a man iu the
middle of life, paralysed in his lower limbs. He is haggard and
pale?his eye glazed?his look languid. See?he is not merely
paralysed in half his body, but his mind is also gone?he is a fool !
Thai boy is the victim of an earlier vice?a maniac ; and that girl,
too, blanched to her.very gums, is the same as lie. Names might
be adduced to verify more appalling cases, and many more instances
might be brought forward to fill up the catalogue of similar guilt,
folly, or madness; but, if the multitudes who play their parts 011 the
active stage of the world, be wilful strangers to such facts as these,
.until their turn comes to exemplify the truth of the statement, it is,
nevertheless, a theme only too familiar to the physician, whose bcnc-
volcnce towards the feelings of others will not allow him to draw
aside a veil that conceals the weakness as well as the miseries, of
his fellow-creatures.

The cause of this depravity is not exclusively to be sought for in
the individuals themselves. We all of us live in an atmosphere, not
altogether of our own creation, from which we derive our characters,
habits, and thoughts, just as we draw the breath that vivifies our
blood from the air about us. It begins with our birth. No sooner
do we open our eyes upon the light, than we are made subject to
ideas which rule our lot imperiously for the rest of our days. From
hence our conduct springs, and leads to consequences involving the
immediate fate or welfare of ourselves or others; and, at last, issues in
a chain of events concatenating the destiny of generations for ages yet
to come. Our influence survives our lives, as our minds survive our
bodies. We live as much for others as for ourselves: and we are, in the
main, woe-worth the day?woe-worth the deed !?the manufacturers
of our own futurity. Select any one set of ideas, and work it out
to its last results. Suppose a state of society, in which chastity is
decried as a vice, and avarice extolled as a virtue, what will he the
result? Every private family, and every public asylum, will be
charged with its respective quota of avaricious maniacs and profligate
fools.

There is not, and there never was, a legislator who did not labour
to extirpate both the one and the other of these two tremendous
vices as totally subversive of the well-being of the community he
was appointed to govern. From the blasphemous saturnalia of
Belshazzar, on the night when Babylon fell beneath the arms of
Darius the Mode, down to the palmy days of Venice, that island-city,
with her merchant-princes, and argosies, aud licentious grandees, and
sapient doges, aud marble palaces, and solitary dungeons, pozzi, or
wells, whose dismal apertures -opened just above the level of the
sullen water, nearing as it flowed beneath the Bridge of Sighs
towards the green and sparkling Adriatic,?the history has been but
one and the same?namely, an individualism of licentiousness and
avarice, a general blaze of national splendour, folloAved by exhaustion
and decay. Venice has passed away, and the vestiges of Babylon
are scattered like broken tiles on her desert plains ; but the passion
that extinguished them both is alive and still upon the wing.
Athens, with its Thessalian banquets and notorious courtesans
(such as the audax Pythias of the Latin lyrist,) receiving the homage
of heroes, sages, orators, and parasites, is now a dusty skeleton on
her bare Acropolis; and Bome, too, with its impious repasts, and
throngs of slaves, whose bodies and souls were at their master's beck
O '

and call, lies with her proud Corinthian columns prostrate along the
ground ; while the fiend who infested them both is upright and alert
in the modern world, mocking at his crowd of dupes as he goads
them to the brink of ruin, where he abandons them to their head-
long fate.

It is an opinion common to mankind in all places, all ages, and
all religions, that there is something in continence allied to the
divinity. There is no code of legislation which has not taken pains
to protect it, not as a personal virtue or accomplishment, but upon
the broad ground of national prosperity and order. Among the
Hebrews, a priest could not marry a repudiated woman, and the
high priest could not marry a widow. The Talmud adds, that he
could not possess two wives at the same time, although polygamy
was winked at, if not allowed, in others ; and all who entered the
sanctuary were bound to be pure. Among the Egyptians, the priest
had only one wife. The chief priest among the Greeks was bound
to observe a rigorous cclibacy. Origen shows what means the pagan
priest used in order to keep his vow; for antiquity everywhere
acknowledged, whenever it could act in direct opposition to the
loose passions of the populace, the paramount importance of chastity
in the persons of its highest functionaries. The priests of Ethiopia
were celibates and recluscs. Virgil, in the sixth yEneid, places his
chaste priests in the Elysian fields?quique scicerdotes ccisti dum vita
manebat. And the priestesses at Athens, where the laws gave them
the highest rank, were selected by the people, supported at the
public expense, consecrated to the worship of the goddess, and
bound over to absolute chastity. Pass forwards as time rolls 011?
look at Peru?the same idea prevails. A universal acclamation
gives every honour to chastity. Although marriage is the natural
condition, and a holy one too, yet 011 all sides virginity is valued at
a higher price than the bonds of matrimony. The jnwfessed virgin
is a superior being; let her but lose this qualification, legitimately
though it be, and she degrades herself in a certain sense in the
estimation of every one. In every period, there have been virgins
consecrated to the divinity ; and it was a proverb, that Home rose
with Vesta, and with Vesta it fell. In the temple of Minerva, at
Athens, the sacred fire was kept alight by virgins. In Peru, their
misconduct was punishable with death, as at Rome. The law of
Menu prescribes rules upon this article; the voluptuous author of
the Koran exalts it as the peculiar boon of obedience j and Numa
pronounced it to be holy and venerable. Tacitus mentions Occia,
who presided over the College of Vestals for more than half a
century, as a personage of eminent sanctity (summa sanctimonia),
it is the language of monastic eulogy. It was a byword in Rome
that the permitted marriage of vestals never turned out well. The
same idea may be traced from Peru and Mexico, across the Pacific to
China, and from China to India, and thence to the Cape of Good
Hope.

The nations who favour population are those who have honoured
this virtue the most; and it is a medical fact, almost too well known
for repetition, that dissipated youths seldom bccomc the fathers of a
numerous offspring, and tliat a promiscuous indulgence of tlie passion
leads to tlie extinction of the species. Barrenness is tlie blight of
depravity. Terrible death-bed scenes are common among the de-
bauched?and idiocy, or mental paralysis, is most frequent among
worn-out profligates and rakes. "We need not travel to oriental climes
to witness scenes like these?they are at our doors; although the
biting remark must needs be appended, that the oriental morals of
this country are in this particular precisely those of pagan antiquity,
indeed, of every country nut swayed by the purely Christian idea.

Open any classic author you please, and see what enormities passed
current, and to what a low ebb the tide of morality had fallen among
them. You cannot but blush?nay, you dare not translate aloud half-
a-dozen pages from Herodotus, or some hundred lines in succession
from Virgil, Juvenal, or Ovid. And yet these are the authors we
place in the hands of the young, and bid them, in the words of
Horace, vos exemplaria Grieca nocturna versatc manu, versate
diurna?study them day and night, until, for the sake of the
Latinity, they have got them by heart; as if with the purity of
Latin diction, the impurity of morals was not imbibed at the same
time.

In reviewing society psychologically, it is impossible not to con-
sider it in a moral point of view. It is our duty to do so. For the
regulation of the mind, which we have adopted as our peculiar office
or calling in life, depends upon the moral well-being of the indivi-
dual ; and as the state of the various organs, more especially that of
the sensorium, affccts our ideas, so, in their turn, do our ideas affect
the different subordinate viscera, and modify, lessen, exalt, or disturb
their several functions, thereby rendering the individual more or less
sound in mind or body, as the case may be. Accordingly, the im-
portance of giving right ideas can scarcely be estimated at too high
a cost?a cost, in fact, not to be appreciated until we enter the pre-
cincts of the mad-house, and there behold the terrible results of a
single, solitary, exaggerated, unbridled idea. Once alter, direct, or
suppress the erroneous idea, and the patient is instantly changed for
the better; because, invisible as an idea may be in itself, it is in its
effects tremendously agonistic on the animal economy. Speak a
certain word to a child?it looks at you, the blood rushes to its
face, the eyes sparkle, and the countenance glows with animation.
It was only a word?a little word,?but that little word conveyed an
idea which operated instantaneously and powerfully 011 the entire
circulation of the body. You quit the child, but the idea remains,
and its subsequent behaviour is the result of that single word. It is the
same, on a greater scale, with masses of the population, with nations,
with all the world. There is not a law, however cogent, that was
ever enacted by the strongest government on earth, that could pos-
sibly withstand the slow and steady progress of a distinct idea
universally prevalent. Put into array a complete army of a hundred
thousand men to enforce an existing authority in opposition to a
positive idea in active prevalence;?it is useless;?lances fall, artillery
are powerless, the sabre is blunt, and the pointed bayonet is foiled?
the serried ranks give way, and the idea passes on. Rome fell before
the Christian idea, and modern socicty deliberately exposes itself to
the risk of falling before the pagan idea so carefully indoctrinated in
the education of its youth, whereby avarice is represented as a virtue,
and chastity as a weakness or a vice. There is not at this moment a
question pressing upon every government in Europe with such
intense interest as that of wealth and morals?political economy and
public education?individualism and communism?frugality and
self-control.

It is a remark worthy of notice, that, whereas legislators and
popular prejudices have, in all ages, deified chastity, so the public
morals have, in the same proportion, been miserably low, if we ex-
cept the Jewish and the Christian dispensations. This strange
inconsistency is to be accounted for by showing that antiquity was,
with the power of enacting wholesome laws, powerless in imparting
an idea in exact correspondence with the laws it enacted; that the
masses of the population were slaves whom it dared not franchise;
and that there subsisted no teaclicrs of philosophy, no sacerdotal
sect, no public censor of morals (so much esteemed by Montesquieu
in his Esprit des Lois), who could control the popular mind by
means of a single energetic idea, except such as Uattercd the pas-
sions. Consequently, all classes were plunged into the most gross
and infamous sensual indulgences. Tacitus, in speaking of the Ger-
mans, says, Nemo enim illic vitia ridet, ncc corrumpcre cl corrnvipi
sceculum vocatur,?a sarcasm insinuating that if virtue was the habit
of the Germans, vice was the reigning fashion at Rome. Some rich
dowagers counted their years, not by the succession of consuls, but
by the number of husbands whom it had been their good fortune to
enjoy; and even Cicero, one of the first of statesmen, philosophers,
and moralists, repudiated his wife Terentia after having been united
to her for more than thirty years, and took to himself his ward,
Publilia, a rich and handsome young woman, instead. The conven-
tional manners of the ancients were unspeakably atrocious; and if
we reflect 011 the awful amount of customary vice,?the absolute
want of all consecration of purpose,?in the midst of which the great
writers of antiquity flourished, the superb moral axioms that in-
flame the pages of a Horace, a Juvenal, a Catullus, a Cicero, a
Seneca, &c., are more than enough to strike us dumb with astonish-
ment. For it is according to our motive-ideas that we act well or
ill; and so true is this, that every parent, as well as every politician,
dreads the introduction of novel ideas tending to upset the established
order of things, or likely to derange the social fabric of a kingdom.
Thus, ancient Rome whetted the executioner's hatchet against the
Christian idea throughout the empire, and England, for several cen-
turies, felt herself under the necessity of putting in force the most
stringent penal code ever framed against the idea of foreign religion.
The chief art of diplomacy is the management of ideas. It was once
proposed in the Roman Senate to give the slaves a particular cos-
tume, but the bill was withdrawn, simply upon the intimation that
should the slaves by this means be enabled to count their numbers,
they would unite, rise up in a body, and overthrow the empire.
Slavery would have continued to the present hour, had not Chris-
tianity stepped forward and bestowed the manumission upon that
ignominious class of men; not, indeed, by an anti-slaveiy agitation,
but by imparting to the slaves themselves the idea of personal freedom
while yet in bonds. No sooner was this idea of freedom conceived
by the slave, than the shackles fell from his wrists without the effort
of his striking a blow to break them asunder. Christianity, by a
word, effected what Spartacus, in revolt, had failed in accomplishing
against the legions of the commonwealth, commanded by Pompey.
For of what use was the master's coercion over a fellow-creature,
conscious of the freedom or independence of his own dignity, as a
man, equally as much as his master himself"? The day was won,
and slavery ceased to exist of its own accord.

The passion for wealth is more generally diffused, and much less
discountenanced than that of sensuality. For avarice is, as Lord
Byron ironically styles it, a " respectable, gentlemanly vice," while
sensuality is always loathsome, except to those immediately engaged
in the pursuit of its bootless chase. Consequently, the lust for gold
has prevailed, unchecked, in all ages, but more especially in those
preceding the epoch of the Christian revelation. At no time, how-
ever, has the rich man ever been looked upon as a contemptible
member of society; for money is power; and whether we consider its
display in the gardens and saloons of an Atticus, or its excessive
accumulation in the coffers of a Croesus, we cannot but conclude that
such a person is in possession of a force which he may any day bring
into operation, for or against us, with irresistible cogency and success.
But, like all otlier insatiable desires that pretend to superhuman
agency, a satiety of wealth is much less formidable than at the first
sight it appears to be. It is often an engine too vast for the grasp
of intellect, to whose management it has been entrusted?it is either
hoarded or squandered; in the one case, it is calamitous; and in the
other, when the necessities, together with some of the refinements of
life have been supplied, nothing else remains except the vacant occu-
pation of reckoning up the surplus of an overflowing exchequer, and
striking the satisfactory balance lodged in our treasurer's hands.
Life is short, and so are the means of living.* We cannot live two
days in one, nor repose in two rooms at the same time; we cannot
read more than one book with profit to our minds, nor cat more
than one dinner a-day with benefit to our health. One hour follows
another, and minute drops away after minute, just as the hour-glass
distils its sand grain by grain. To possess more than is enough
for the day and the evils thereof, is only an idea, and, sooth to say,
it is the eccentric idea of a madman. For who knows what shall be
on the morrow ? and who can tell whether we shall not be numbered
with the dead 1 or whether our money bags may not find themselves
wings, and be fled ? And then, in this case, the idea of our money
has flown away also, and nought remains but our naked carcass,
without an idea, except the idea of money, which we 110 longer pos-
sess. Such is the maniac whose possessions and losses have equally
turned his head. Few, indeed, have merited the rare commendation
of the poet?Dli tibi divitias dederant, artemque fruendi.

The enormous possession of wealth never fails to lead to evils
both public and private. The monarch who aggrandizes territory,
or stores up money for his successor, has always bequeathed to his
kingdom revolutions, wars, and corruption of morals. Henry VII.
of England was a royal miser, and his son was a spendthrift and a
libertine. Alexander the Great left extensive dominions, gained by
conquest, which were, upon his decease, split up among several
competitors, and divided to the four winds of heaven. Rich men's
sons seldom prosper, and affluent families abound in a greater number
* Among some of the Dialogues of the Dead, of which Lucinn's and Fenelon's
arc the chief, there is a story told of a ghost, who had been a long time dead, nieoting
a ghost recently defunct, ,.nd inquiring whether any mom people were left alive ill
the world above ? " What do you mean ?" replies the second ghost. " Whv " says
the first, " such numbers have arrived among us lately, tl.at there is a common
report in these netlier regions that the world is at last depopulated." " Depopu
lated !" exclaims the ghost just arrived ; " I was alive yesterday, and the world never
was so full; all tliey want is plague, pestilence, and famino, buttle and murder and
sudden death, to carry oil' the excess of population."

of scrofulous and maniacal members than those of the poorer classes?
whether we account for it by the better provision for the sickly, or
the degenerating influence of a superabundance of means. The old
world was swept away by a flood on account of its gross corruption
of morals, and it would seem that the brute beasts that entered the
ark with Noah were preferred to the preservation of the same number
of human beings, cankered to the core by lust and avarice, and their
constant attendant, incorrigible infidelity; for, among tho great men
of those days, one was a distinguished huntsman, another a metallur-
gist, another a musician, implying a very advanced stage of civiliza-
tion and wealth. And yet, notwithstanding, within five hundred
years after the deluge, two licentious cities were purposely destroyed
by fire, and the first of the patriarchs, for the sake of rescuing his
relative, cut off the rear-guard of the five kings banded together in
a marauding party to plunder the cities of the plain, whose luxury
and opulence were already sufficient to excite their cupidity. He-
rodotus is full of the wealth of the kings of Egypt and the monarchs
of Persia. Everybody knows of Tadmor and Palmyra in the desert,
?the wealth of Carthage, Tyre, and Antioch,?that of Rome during
the Empire, and of Constantinople down to the close of the middle
ages, when it was, after repeated attempts, at length successfully
stormed and sacked by the Turks. There are the more recent examples
of Spain with Mexico and Peru; Portugal with the Brazils; and
maritime Genoa, whose arms shook the throne of Cantacuzene, and
betrayed the debility of the eastern Ccesars. All these luxurious
cities have passed away, as it were, like the dissolving-views of a
dream; but the idea which animated them all still survives, and con-
tinues to do its work among the sons of men with unerring precision
and effect. Along the frieze of the entablature of its temple, glitters
the monosyllable Gold, and in the inter-columnar spaces, where the
ancients imprinted the word Salve in mosaic, is inscribed in much
more attractive characters, The Golden Way.*

* Poor Hood lias left us an incomparable lampoon on the rich fool, in his story
of " Miss Kilmansegg."
" Moreover, he had a golden ass,
Sometimes at stall, and sometimes at grass,
Tbat was worth its own weight in money?
And a golden hive on a golden bank,
Where golden bees, by alchemical prank,
Gather'd gold instead of honey.
" Gold ! and gold! and gold without end!
He had gold to lay by, and gold to spend,
Gold to hive, and gold to lend,
And reversions of gold in futura?

One of tlie immediate effects of avarice, as well as of lust, is the
extinction of tlie sentiment of friendship. This is a very remarkable
feature; and if it has been already noticed by others, it has, at least,
not been prominently brought forward as the psychological symptom
of a maniacal tendency. Madmen have no friends?it is utterly
impossible they should have any. They congregate, indeed, together,
or even mix with others of a sound mind in the world; but they
cannot form a friendship, nor feel within their breasts so delightful
an emotion. The reason is, that, with all their madness, they are
conscious of possessing a terrible secret, which they dare not impart,
or which, if imparted, would instantly excite a horrid antipathy in
the person to whom it was confided. Madness is essentially selfish;
and so is avarice, and so is lust; and these two passions once let
loose, begin in a latent germ of madness, and, if indulged in to
excess, terminate in absolute mania. For madness docs, for the
most part, subsist in a latent form, and so do the worst of vices.
The profligate, expert at debauching innocence, can tell no one of his
dastardly designs?his better friends would be obliged to shun him,
while his comrades in guilt would only become competitors, or
partners, in the dreadful trade. And so, likewise, the miser is a
solitary man. To share his means with others is to diminish his pelf;
every generous feeling goes far towards creating an extraordinary
call upon his purse; and the parable of the good Samaritan must
sound in his ears as a dilemma, out of which it would be his instinctive
interest to extricate himself as soon as lie eonld, at the least possible
cost. Do you not see the maniacal taint in avarice and lust? Ought
not St. Luke's or Bedlam to be the proper hiding-placc of each 1
Another symptom pathognomonic of these two mortal sins is apathy
of mind and body?a condition which is likewise highly descriptive
of confirmed madness. But this want of sympathy with external
things comes on by degrees, and is manifested only in proportion as
the nerves are exhausted by the intense operation of one long-con-
tinued idea upon the sensonum. At their accession, they are
irritants, producing a paroxysm of arterial and nervous excitement,
which may continue an indefinite period; but, at the last, the grey-
In wealth tlie family revell'd ami roll'd,

Himself, his wife, and liis son no bold;?
And his daughters sang to their harps of gold,
' O bella eti deH'oro.'
" Gold ! and gold! and nothing but gold !
The same auriferous shrine behold
Wherever the eye could settle!
On n ulls?the side hoard?ceiling," &c. &c.

headed miser and the jaded rake are both of them men with wasted
forms and sallow visages, dry features, and lack-lustre eyes. You
may see them any day in a mad-house, if not frequently enough as
you pass along the crowded thoroughfares of the great city.
At their best estate, neither the one nor the other of these wretched
creatures is ever exhilarated, for a time however transient, with a
glow of chivalry. It is a word without a meaning in their voca-
bulary. The follies of knight-errantry are a fable at the present
day. There is no one to throw down, none to take up, the gauntlet
in defiance or defence of those virtues which own no arbiter except
the point of the lance and the breast-plate of honour. It is absurd to
allude to a bygone sentiment; for all is reduced to the frigid rules of
good breeding, or the legal benevolence of a poor-law rate ; and even
the permitted viccs of society are, like the stones upon the highway,
macadamized to one and the self-same size, and carefully scattered
over the surface, without leaving an individual prominence in any
one of them to attract our notice or impede our way. There is a
want of freedom in all they do, especially in their thoughts, fettered
to one idea, and terminating at length in unequivocal monomania.
Fatuity and death are the unavoidable extremity of this state of things;
for recovery is hopeless, since the nervous structure has undergone
such deleterious cliangcs in the course of prolonged disease, that, to
undertake to renew its vigour in the settled form of the malady,
would be little else than to pretend to create the moral and intellec-
tual faculties, together with their exquisite organizations, once more
anew.

The object of the preceding imperfect observations is to point out
the necessity of generating and circulating distinct ideas, especially
in regard to morals, as a social and physical benefit in the education
of youth. Ideology is not a novelty : it is a Platonism which cap-
tivated or incensed the sophists of Athens before Christ?agitated,
six centuries later, the fickle and astute schools of the Alexandrine
Platonicians ; and, in conjunction with the Aristotelian philosophy,
provoked the verbal hostilities that arose to disturb the tranquillity
of the learned, forced into inky array along the opposite ranks of the
Nominalists and Realists of the thirteenth century. One of the
immediate fruits of this subtle controversy was the Sumrhum
Thcologicum of St. Thomas Aquinas, the angel of the schools, which,
with his other works, was publicly burnt at the time of the lleforma-
tion. This composition is a masterpiece of the human understanding,
expressed in language so logically exact that it defies criticism, out-
vies competition, and remains to this hour a pyramid of erudition
pointing upwards to heaven in spirit, and resting below on its own
broad and all-enduring basis of solid reasoning and incontrovertible
conclusions. It solidifies thought, explodes doubt, demonstrates
truth. Its tone and tendency arc essentially moral or ethical;
and the reader rises up from the patient perusal of it completely
satisfied and permanently convinced. Well-developed ideas are
sure to rivet the attention. We admire the productions of the
great masters of art produced by Italy, Florence, Spain, &c., and
wonder how they contrived to represent the sublime and beautiful
on canvas in the consummate manner they do. Take, for instance,
the Spanish painter Velasquez?look at his charming picture, La
Couronnement cle la Vierge?there are only three figures in it (hcec
decies repetita placebit), and yet the artist was not aware of any ex-
traordinary merit in tracing the subject, since he was only represent-
ing ideas common to himself and those for whom ho painted. To
these ideas we are strangers. Indeed, the abundance as well as the
excellence of the ideas with which some minds are enriched is most
marvellous.

Any one of the numerous airs out of Zauberjlote would be almost
enough to establish the reputation of any ordinary composer, and
yet, throughout the opera, Mozart continues to lavish a succession of
melodies, replete with a profusion of the sweetest notes, amounting
to prodigality. It is nearly the same with Bellini?whether we
listen to La Sonnambula, the popular favourite?Norma in Hats, or
II Pirata in sharps.

Consider, on the other hand, an instance of no ideas. A police-
man was assaulted?the supposed assailants were placed at the bar
of the Mansion House; and George Ruby's testimony was thought
likely to cast some light on the affray. He seemed about fourteen
years of age. From his answers to the questions of Alderman
Humphrey, it appeared that he could not read, never said his prayers,
understood nothing of the nature of prayer, knew nothing of God,
and, as he expressed it, had heard of the devil, but did not know
him. He sums up very briefly his small stock of information, " I
knows how to sweep a crossing; that's all." He seems to have lived
somewhere near Bisliopsgate-strcet; where the "crossing" is on
which all his intellect centres, we know not. Any of our readers
may have given him a halfpenny, and not observed that lie was
more dirty, more ragged, more stamped with the marks of ignorance
and degradation than half his young brethren of the broom. (The
Times, January, 1850.)

Consider another instance of mean ideas, arising from the worst
of circumstances. There are boys who roam about the sides of the
river Thames at low tide to pick up coals, bits of iron, rope, bones,
and copper nails, that fall while a ship is being repaired. They are
at work sometimes early in the morning, and sometimes late in the
afternoon, according to the tide. They usually work from six to
seven hours a day. My informant, a quick, intelligent little fellow,
who has been at the business three years, tells me the reason they
take to mudlarking is, that they arc nearly all fatherless, and their
mothers are too poor to keep them, so they take to it because they
have nothing else to do. This boy works with about twenty or
thirty mudlarks every day; and they may be seen, he tells me, at day-
break very often, with their trousers tucked up, groping about and
picking out pieces of coal from the mud. They go into the river up
to their knees, and in searching the mud, they very often run pieces of
glass and long nails into their feet; when this is the case, they go
home and dress the wounds, and return directly; for should the tide
come up without their finding anything, they must starve that day.
At first, it is a difficult matter to stand in the mud, and he has known
many young beginners to fall in. Their average earnings are three-
pence a day. After they leave the river, they go home, and scrape
their trousers, and make themselves as tidy as possible; they then
go into the streets, and make a little by holding gentlemen's horses,
or opening cab-doors. In the evening they mostly go to the ragged
schools.?{Correspondent of the Morning Chronicle. 1849.)
But enough of scenes like these. Let us turn from the indicative
past to the potential future:

" As when a trav'ller o'er the heath'ry waste,
Treads darkliug, wearisome his nightly way,
The dawn begins, the glorious sun ascends,
While he, forgetful of liis drear sojourn,
Pauses and feels the magic beam of morn."

The parallel attempted to be drawn between the fall of Rome and
that of some prosperous kingdoms of the present day, is a schoolboyism
unworthy of notice. Events never repeat themselves, centuries never
retracc their steps; and the overthrow of modern Europe, after the
similitude of ancient Rome, is a political, a moral, a religious impos-
sibility. It is incontestable that religion has for a long time past
been gaining a decided ascendancy over men's minds and hearts?
this fact is conveyed with electric despatch in every line of daily
intelligence. Ordinary modern society is, with all its faults, a model
of perfection, when compared with the elite of pagan society at its
fairest epochs. The constant complaints which we are now so fond
of making, respecting our defective civilization, and shameful igno-
rance, are a proof that these evils are rapidly advancing in the way of
correction and amendment. Words mean thoughts in active opera-
tion. Justice, humanity, morality, the continual theme of all classes,
signify that these virtues arc practically on the increase throughout
the world; for a principle, once proclaimed, must gradually acquire
influence, and, if it he true, will, in the end, rule over all around it.
We appeal to students who have had the leisure to read (occiditquc
legendo) the delightful pages of Flcury, Voltaire (Ilistoire Generate),
Gibbon, Balmez, &c., whether the evidence is not conclusive in
favour of the progressive amelioration of mankind. It is the duty
of the patriot, says the dignified and far-sighted historian of the
"Decline and Fall," to prefer and promote the exclusive interest and
glory of his own country; but a philosopher may be permitted to
enlarge his views, and to consider Europe as one great republic,
whose various inhabitants have obtained almost the same level of
politeness and cultivation. The balance of power will continue to
fluctuate, and the prosperity of our own, or the neighbouring
kingdoms, may be alternately exalted or depressed; but these
partial events cannot essentially injure our general state of happiness,
the system of arts, and laws, and manners, which so advantageously
distinguish, above the rest of mankind, the Europeans and their
colonies. Private genius and public industry may, for a short
interval, be, in some places, suspended or extirpated; but the more
necessary arts of civil life, like hardy plants, survive the tempest, and
strike an everlasting root into the most unfavourable soil. The
splendid days of Augustus and Trajan were cclipscd by a cloud of
ignorancc; and the barbarians subverted the laws and palaces of
Rome. Cut the scythe, the invention or emblem of Saturn, still
continued annually to mow the harvests of Italy; and the human
feasts of the Lcstrigons have never been renewed 011 the coasts of
Campania. Since the first discovery of the arts, war, commerce, and
religious zeal have diffused among the savages of the Old and New
Worlds their inestimable gifts?they have been successively pro-
pagated?they can never be lost. We may therefore acquiesce in
the pleasing conclusion, that every age of the world has increased,
and still increases, the real wealth, the happiness, the knowledge, and
perhaps the virtue, of the human race.
