Colney Hatch Asylum
====================

[We lmd proposed entering at some length into the important
question connected with the organization of the medical stafl' of our
great national establishments for the care and treatment of the
insane. This is a subject which loudly calls for discussion; at pre-
sent, however, we decline, for reasons which will be obvious to our
readers, saying anything on the subject. The following observations
are published for private circulation by Dr. Thomas Stone, in the
form of a letter addressed to the Committee of Visitors. Wc ap-
pend a copy of this able production for the perusal of thoso who
may not have seen it in its original form.*]
* A Letter to the Committee of Visitors of tlio Additional Lunatic A?ylum,
Colncy Ilntcli, in reference to the Contcinplnted Constitution of the Medical Stuff,
Thomas Stone, M.L)., Fell, of the Med. Chi. Soc. kc.
COLNEY HATCH ASYLUM. 385
A public announcement having appeared in the daily newspapers
in l-eference to the constitution of the Medical Staff' of the New
Lunatic Asylum for Middlesex, Colney Hatch, we trust we may,
without incurring the imputation of officiously interfering with the
functions of the County Magistracy, venture to offer a few obser-
vations in refcrencc to the proposed arrangements.
A very heavy responsibility is now resting upon the Magistracy?
in whose hands are entrusted the general and medical organization
of one of the largest County Lunatic Asylums ever erected in this
country. It remains with them to decide whether the many
thousand helpless and insane poor who, in all probability, will, in a
few years, be crowded into this Asylum, shall be efficiently treated
or not; whether they shall enjoy the advantages which may be
derived from the present advanced state of this branch of medical
science, or be left to pine away their miserable existence in a state
of hopeless and incurable insanity.
The architectural arrangements for Colney Hatch, it would
appear, have been made for the rcccption of not less than a thousand
patients; and the general impression on the public mind, and that
of the profession, is, that the Magistrates, actuated by a highly
liberal and philanthropic .spirit, are anxious to render the present
Asylum not merely a receptacle or house of detention for the insane,
but a curativc establishment, which shall, while it ministers to the relief
of suffering humanity, do something to advance the interests of
sciencc. It is a fact?which is well known to the profession?that the
progress of pathology has thrown light upon the nature and treat-
ment of the most obscure diseases of the chest and abdomen, because
the public hospitals have provided for general diseases a clinical
school in connexion with them; but our County Lunatic Asylums?
which arc, in point of fact, hospitals for mental disease?are left
with so inefficient a medical staff, as to render any analogous patho-
logical researches in connexion with cerebral disease almost imprac-
ticable. When we look to the constitution of the Salpetriere, the
Bicetre, Charenton, and other Lunatic Asylums on the Continent,
we find a full complement not only of resident medical officers, but
extra domiciled consulting Physicians; and surely the Metropo-
litan County ought not to lag so miserably behind the spirit of pro-
gression as to provide only for the safe custody of insane poor,
overlooking entirely the means so palpably within rcach of advancing
medical knowledge, and thus conducing to improvement in the
treatment and the permanent cure of the disease.
With these views, the question for the consideration of the
Magistrates is, whether the medical arrangements as developed in the
subjoined advertisement* are such as will carry out the original
* MIDDLESEX ADDITIONAL COUNTY ASYLUM, Colney Hatch. ?
WANTED, TWO RESIDENT MEDICAL OFFICERS for the above Asylum,
which it is expected will be ready for the reception of Patients by the end of the
present year or the beginning of 1851. They must be Doctors of Medicine,
i ellows or Licentiates of the Royal College of i'hysicians of London, Edinburgh,
380 COLNEY HATCH ASYLUM.
intention of the Committee, and at the same time give satisfaction
to the profession and the public? We arc apprehensive that neither
of these objects will be attained. In the first place, as to the
qualifications of the candidates. It is not to be cxpectcd that many
members of the profession possessing the amount of qualification
specified, who have enjoyed that enlarged degree of practical ex-
perience in the management and treatment of the insane which can
alone fit them for the efficient discharge of the responsible duties that
will devolve upon them, will come forward as candidates for such a
post. It is the duty of the Magistracy to look principally to the
professional knowledge and moral character of the candidates. The
mere possession of diplomas indicative of the holder being a member
of this or that medical corporation, of his possessing this or that
degree in surgery or medicine, ought to be esteemed as only minor
elements in the great question at issue. AVe do not maintain that
the degrees or honours of the medical candidates are not to be well
weighed in the scale, but they ought to be held secondary to other
and more vitally important considerations. High moral character,
firmness, and energy of mind, suavity of manner, solidity of judg-
ment, a heart ever alive to the sufferings of our fellow-men, combined
with a practical knowledge of the treatment of insanity and the
requirements of the insane, are qualifications so indispensable,
that the possession of all degrees, and fellowships, and academical
honours, in medicine, surgery, and pharmacy, which it may be in
the power of our first universities to confer, ought not for one
moment to be placed in competition with them.
A\ e do not wish our view upon this matter to be misunderstood.
Qualifications are necessary. The magistrates have a right to demand
that those offering themselves for so important a trust should produce
evidence of having enjoyed the advantages of a regular education;
but practical experience in the treatment and management of the
insane can alone indicate the general fitness of any candidate to
discharge the duties of such an officc. The public advertisement, we
regret to say, conveys a different idea of the intentions of the
magistracy. In the present state of the profession, medical and
Surgical degrees are not the safest and best guarantees of professional
or I)ul>lin, or Members or Fellows of tho Itoyal College of Surgeons, and in
either case .Member* or Licentiates of the Apothecaries' Company. The salary
of each will Ihj 200/. per annum, with hoard and allowance of coals and candles.
Candidates are requested to send in their Testimonials, addressed to the " Com-
mittee of Visitors of the Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum," before tho 'Jnd of July
next, under cover to me at the Sessions House, Clerkenwell, and to attend tho
Committee at that place on Wednesday, the 8rd day of .July next, al Two
o'clock precisely*
?101IN S. SKAIFK, Clerk to the Committee,
Sessions House, Clerkenwell, May 7th, 1850.
This advertisement renders it imperative that candidates shall he Licentiates
of the Apothecaries' Company, yet Physicians, whether graduates of Oxford,
Cambridge, Edinburgh, Dublin, are by the very oourso of their education pre-
cluded from belonging to the Apothecaries' Company,
COLNEY HATCH ASYLUM. 387
status or qualification. For tlie last six or seven years we have
been on the eve of great changes in the medical and surgical corporate
bodies; and as nearly all the public colleges have applied to the
Government for new charters of incorporation, medical men, anxious
to possess the highest degree?medical and surgical?have held back,
not for want of the nccessary knowledge, but until the question of
medical reform shall be settled by the government.
But to the point at issue. Supposing the Committee of Visitors arc
able to find two fully qualified men to fill the vacant posts, will they
be sufficient to discharge the duties devolving upon them? Remember,
there will be 500 patients, at least, intrusted to the care of each -
medical officer. Is it possible that these poor insane persons can
rcccivc a tithe of the attendance due to them? If cure be 110
object?if the medical superintendent be required simply to walk
through the wards mechanically every day, to enter the names ot
the patients as they present themselves at the establishment, then
it is possible all may go on smoothly and satisfactorily; but surely
there arc other, and more sacred duties, which will devolve upon
the Resident Medical Officers of the Colney- Hatch Institution.
If patients arc to be treated according to the most improved
method, it "will be impossible for the medical officer to examine with
that degree of minuteness each individual case, for the purpose of
applying resources of remedial art to the number of patients he will
have constantly under his care. Those unfortunate persons, therefore,
must of necessity be cursorily looked to, however anxious the
medical officer may be to adopt a curative process of treatment.
Independently of his purely professional, let us look at his collateral
duties?what will they be? He will be required, by the provisions
of the Act of Parliament, to attend to all certificates of admissions
and discharges, sending in copies of each to the Commissioners in
Lunacy; he will be required to enter these in the registers pre-
scribed, and also keep up his weekly reports; he will, furthermore,
be required to enter into a case-book a minute history of each case,
detailing its origin, early symptoms, progress, treatment, Arc.; and if
the medical officers arc to discharge their duties efficiently, it will be
imperative upon them to institute, with carc, a post-mortem exami-
nation of all who die in the Asylum. These autopsies, if conducted
in the spirit of modern science, will occupy a considerable portion of
the Resident Medical Officer's time; for, in order to appreciate cor-
rectly the pathological changes effected in the brain and nervous
system, lie must make a patient microscopical examination of the
delicate nervous structure, in order to detect those minute patholo-
gical appearances which are ^inappreciable to the naked eye, in which
way only can any satisfactory results be obtained. In addition to all
this, the candidate will be required to attend the meetings of Ma-
gistrates 011 Roard days; and furthermore, if the establishment is to
be rendered useful in a scientific and educational point of view, he
will be called upon to preside over a school of Mental Pathology, and
communicate to his cluss the results of his observations. How, in
388 COLNEY HATCH ASYLUM.
common sense, can the two medical men, having, clay and night,
charge of a thousand patients, accomplish such multifarious duties
conscientiously to themselves, satisfactorily to the patients, and bene-
ficially to the poor unfortunate inmates?
Again: In addition to these two llesident Physicians, is it not con-
templated to appoint any Consulting or Visiting Physicians to so largo
an Asylum ? Is the Medical Staff to be restricted to only two medical
officers ? Surely the magistrates cannot suppose the county at large
will be satisfied with this arrangement. There is not a Hospital or
Dispensary in the metropolis, or in any town in the United Kingdom,
that has not its Consulting Physicians in addition to the ordinary
Medical Staff; and we can well conceive the practical advantages
consequent upon this principle, which has been acted upon in the
organization of all such public Institutions, both at home and abroad.
Independently of the great relief which such an appointment would
afford to the llesident Mcdical Officers, from the fact of their having
at command, in all cases of difficulty and emergency, a physician of
eminence and experience to confcr with, there are other reasons which
entitle this question to serious consideration. There always will be, in
the capital of every country, and in the leading provincial towns, men
who have devoted, at a great personal sacrifice, their time and ability
to the study of special diseases. These men are entitled to some
public recognition of their status, and the only reward which they
can look forward to, is being appointed, as an honorary distinction,
to the public Medical Charities and other Institutions of the
country. If this legitimate object of their ambition be taken from
them, a manifest injustice will be inflicted upon many of the most
accomplished and meritorious members of the profession. In con-
clusion, we would observe, that in so influential and afllucnt a
county as that of Middlesex, it is to be hoped that the Magistrates
will not be influenced by mistaken notions of economy, but organize
such an Asylum as Colney-IIatch promises, and ought to be, upon
such a liberal scale as will render it a model establishment, deserving
of imitation in this and other countries.
