Dr Davey's Mental Pathology
=============================

Art. III.

The general application of the non-restraint system to the treatment
of insanity is of so recent date in England, that wc were not surprised
to learn from the work before us, that the older and less humane
method was practised in the distant colony of Ceylon until u lew
years since.

However, it has pleased the beneficent Ruler ol the Universe to
* Contributions to Mental Pathology, with Introductory Observations, contain-
ing the past and present State of the Insane in Ceylon, &c., by Juiucs George
Davey, Licentiate of the Iloyal College of Physicians, London.
give kind and generous ideas a world-wide currency, so that, in
these days, the sweet voice of kindness, speaking all languages, and
spreading through all lands, sooner or later obtains a hearing, and
teaches all mankind pity and .sympathy for the sufferings to which
the whole race is subject. Thus it happened that the humane ideas
of Finel and others, accepted by Mr. Elliot, a worthy member of
the medical profession, and carried by him to " Lauka's perfumed
isle," prompted him, in 1843, to publish in the "Ceylon Observer"
some justly indignant remarks 011 the treatment and condition of
lunatics in the Leper Hospital and Jail at Colombo.

The shocking and cruel neglect to which these poor creatures were
subjected will be shown by the following extracts from a Report
published at the time:?

" In the centre of the brick iloor of each cell there is a small
grating, which once opened into a sewer for the receptacle of the tilth;
but the sewer being now choked, the offence whicji the eye and nose
experience is better conceived than expressed. Approaching a closed
door, a keeper called to the inmate, who was immediately heard
scrambling up the back of the door to a little barred window over it,
out of which he looked, whilst lie held himself by the bars. On
inquiry, Ave learnt that he was generally well conducted, but that,
having lately struck a woman, he was eonlined as a jmnishmerit.
" What language can give any idea of his cell ? He certainly had
his stone cot and his mat, and needed not, therefore, to lie on the
damp floor; but such a tloor! covered with the dirt of bats, myriads
of which were Hying and hanging about the roof; whilst the choked
sewer in the centre of the apartment, and the entire want of ventila-
tion, rendered the stench intolerable.

" In another cell almost the same scene was presented, only that
the poor old timid man who occupied it appeared to have been for-
gotten. The filth from his person was allowed to collect, for several
days, in the corners of his cell; and the only reason assigned for his
being shut up was, that if the lunatic last spoken of were out (which
he was not, be it remembered), lie would drive this old man into his
cell, and shut the door.

" The last case we shall mention is that of a poor old paralytic
woman, who could move only her hands, which she feebly raised in a
supplicating manner, whilst the tears ran down her shrivelled cheeks.
This also is an individual to whom a cot is denied, so that she is
obliged to lie on the bricks, without, we believe, being able to turn
from one side to the other."

Mr. Elliot's strictures 011 the preceding cases having roused the
attention ot the local authorities, the subject was discussed in the
Legislative Council in October, 1843, and a Committee of Inquiry
appointed. This committee subsequently published a Report, con-
firmatory of Mr. Elliot's account in every particular.

" In the Leper Hospital," says this Report, " there are nine cells ;
.... and in one, the occupant, Cassim, afflicted Avith paralysis of the
lower limbs, sleeps on the floor, which is damp, and has, in many
places, deposits of his own evacuations. The smell in this, as well
as in the other cells in which the lunatics arc confined, is very oflcn-
sive. The floor in each slopes towards a grated aperture in the centre
of the room, beneath which is a drain, extending along the middle of
the cells in one range. Every drain is chokcd up to the surfacc ot
the grating, and in one instance the floor appeared not to have been
cleansed, and the offensive deposits removed, for five or six days.
The smell of the urine, which can no longer pass oft* by the sewer,
and is absorbed by the bricks, is most offensive.

" The cells arc ill-ventilated, and nearly dark when the door is
closed. Numbers of bats continually fly about, and their excrement
adds considerably to the stench; some of the patients have their fixed
abode in their cells."

The Report in question concludes as follows:?
" But the point on which your committee would lay most stress, is
the appointment of a person trained in one of the well-conducted
asylums of the United Kingdom, such as Ilanwell, who could classify
the lunatics; vary the treatment according to circumstances, and not
only render the condition of these unfortunate beings a comparatively
happy one, but even restore many of them to reason. Perhaps the
condition of lunatics in this island is not worse than it was in many
of the pauper asylums of the United Kingdom twenty-five years ago;
but, looking to the improvements of the system now pursued at home,
and to the happy effects resulting from these improvements, your
committee feel imperatively called upon to advocatc a like ameliora-
tion here."

"W hen the matter was thus forcibly brought before it, the Council
of Ceylon did all in its power to remedy so disgraceful a state of
management: it adopted the Report unanimously, and, acting on the
suggestion therein contained, applied at once to Lord Stanley (at
that time Secretary of State for the Colonies) for a fit and proper
person to act as superintendent of the insane. It seems, however,
that the council did not require, nor indeed cxpcct, tho appointment
of a medical man as superintendent, the colony being already pro-
vided with a sufficient mcdical staff, but wished for an active and
intelligent person, well versed in the internal management and
domestic economy of a large lunatic asylum?in fact, an experienced
clerk or steward.
The council at the same time took into consideration the project
of erecting a suitable building for the reception of the insane.
Lord Stanley, 011 the receipt of the above application, in the spring
of 1844, sent an agent to Hanwell Asylum to offer one of the
resident medical officers the appointment of superintendent of the
insane in Ceylon, with a salary of 500/. a-year, board and lodging being
provided. Refused by Dr Begley, it was accepted by Dr Davey, who
left England in July, and arrived in Ceylon in the following
December; accompanied by one or two male and two female assistants,
whom the Colonial Office had permitted him to take out with him
from Hanwell Asylum.

Thus the Council of Ceylon saw, with some astonishment, the
arrival of four or five persons instead of one?a medical officer for
whom they had not asked, accompanied by a staff* for whom there
was 110 employment. " It never rains but it pours," is a proverb
and a truth in the East?it was so in this instance: however, the
Ceylon government showed itself anything but grateful for the
Colonial Secretary's generosity.

We entirely coincide in the propriety of Dr Davey's appointment
?the resident superintendent of a lunatic asylum ought always to be
.1 medical man?and we feel sure that Dr Davey performed the
arduous duties of his office zealously and well; but we question the
wisdom of sending out with him a staff of subordinates, unused to
the climate, and unacquainted with the language and manners of the
natives; for we think that suitable acclimated European attendants,
male and female (discharged soldiers and their wives), could readily
have been obtained out of our large Indian armies.
Many circumstances conspired to render Dr Davey's position at
Colombo extremely irksome and disagreeable.

He says : " I found that the appointment of a medical man was
not only not anticipated, but that it was regarded in a very unpopular
light, as an infringement of the rights and privileges of both the
military and colonial medical services. It was said I was not the
person wanted nor required by the legislative council; that the
secretary of state had done wrong in sending such a person out;
that a " manager" only was needed, to classify the lunatics, and sec
to their various domestic wants and accommodation."?(p. 16.)
On presenting his credentials to the secretary for the colony, Dr.
Davey was directed to report himself to the deputy inspector-general
of hospitals, and to conform with the instructions of that officer :
his name was omitted in the list of civil servants: the male
attendants were useless, the female an encumbrance, left dependant
32G Dll. davey's mental pathology.

011 him for their support, and made a " subject of wit and satire" by
the colonists. He was badly quartered and ill kept, and exposed to
numberless petty annoyances.

Yet, in spite of all these discouraging circumstances, Dr Davey
maintained bis position with great firmness, vigorously contesting
every obstacle, and doing all in bis power to accomplish the great
object of his mission. Notwithstanding the opposition of his
enemies, the lukewarmness of his friends, the desertion of bis stall,
and tlie supineness of the local authorities, lie succecdcd in amelio-
rating the condition of the unfortunate lunatics in Ceylon in a most
satisfactory manner. We give the pleasing results of bis labours in
his own words:?

" I found the insane in Ceylon, in 1814, in neglect and wrctchcd-
ness, the companions of debtors and criminals, and of the leprous,
blind, and maimed.
" I found them in a lazar-house, where filth and corruption,
dilapidation and ruin, were alone visible, in some one or more of their
protean shapes.
" I found them, I may truly say, in chains and manacles, and
made subject to a variety of personal restraints and to solitary con-
finement?almost perpetual seclusion.
" I leave them (the insane), in 1819, the occupants of a well-built,
airy, and commodious building, wherein every available care, atten-
tion, and forethought, are employed for their relief and cure.
" I leave them, in 1819, in an establishment set apart for their
exclusive reception, where they are not now, as formerly, subjcct to
the presence of the leprous, blind, and maimed.
"1 leave them, in 1819, in peace, and in the enjoyment of the
various bodily powers which belong to their nature, and free to
move hither and thither at their pleasure."
To have gained so good a cause, and to bavc accomplished so
righteous a work, was an ample compensation for all the annoyances
to which Dr Davey had been subjected, and ought, wc think, to
have soothed and pacified bis wounded feelings. But it was far
otherwise, llis ultimate success seems to have made him only the
more bitter against all who had opposed him.

During the present session, a learned member of the House of
Commons described a British colony to be a place " where every-
body knows everybody, and everybody bates everybody;" and cer-
tainly Ceylon seems to be obnoxious to this disagreeable psycho-
logical peculiarity. During the entire period of Dr Davey's stay in
the island, from December, 1811, to January, 1819, lie was engaged
in one continued squabble with Doctors Roe and St. John, the
principal civil medical officers. The quarrel originated in Dr.
Davey's false and ill-defined position, was continued with pertinacious
hostility by the disputants, and carried on in an intemperate manner,
highly discreditable to all concerned. As we have heard only one
of the parties at issue, we cannot decide who was the most at fault
in Ceylon, but we can decide on the propriety of Dr Davey's pub-
lication in England of this detailed history of the dispute. It
appears that Drs. Roe and St. John are gentlemen advanced in life,
likely, after many years of active service, to leave their bones in that
distant land which has been the scene of their labours; who, although
their local reputation may be deservedly high, are but little known
here at home; and it was, therefore, unseemly and unnecessary for
Dr Davey to print so many pages of elaborate abuse of them.
We are administering strong reproof, but we do it firmly and
conscientiously, from a deep sense of the injury inflicted on the
dignity and standing of our profession by such a flagrant disregard,
on the part of one of its members, of the common courtesies of life.
The absurd pretensions of our medical forefathers, their jealous
emulation, their quarrels and vituperative disputes, are immortalized
in the satire of Moliere; but the "spirit of the age" has happily
changed,?suavity, gentleness and forbearance, ought now to mark
all the social relations of the members of a profession whose vocation
is eminently one of patience and brotherly love.

Having laid before our readers the foregoing condensed account
of Dr Davey's mission, and of the success and misfortunes which
attended it,?the relation of which occupies more than half his book,
?we will now proceed to notice that part of it to which we suppose
the title, " Mental Pathology," is applied.

Dr Davey is an uncompromising phrenologist, and also a believer
in, and practiscr of, mesmerism.* The extent to which he carries
liis belief in phrenology may be estimated by a penisal of the fol-
lowing extracts from his first Report:?

"In this report it is seen that we have employed the words
'mania,' 'melancholia,' 'monomania,' &c. Arc.; we have done so,
not because we consider their use in the least degree calculated to
elucidate the various abnormal phenomena of the mind?but for this
reason, the want of a correct and classical nomenclature of mental
diseases. In no department of pathology do we stand in greater
need of sound physiological views to direct us than in that one
* See iu note (p. 09) tlie ense of n boy cured by mesmerism of epilepsy, but
killed pooa nfter by apoplexy.

which treats of cerebral diseases. No person, unless he be a phreno-
logist, that is, unless he is well acquainted with the functions of the
brain in a state of health, can possibly bo a good judge of the indi-
cations of an unsound mind. To every phrenologist at all accus-
tomed to the insane, the use of such terras as the above must be
held to be little else than prejudicial to the advance of science. The
location of the various primitive faculties, sentiments, and pro-
pensities, by Gall and Spurzheim, and their dependence for a healthy
manifestation or otherwise upon distinct portions of cerebral matter,
convince us how sadly deficient must our notions of insanity be,
when unaided by the facts of this new scicncc (phrenology), or left
without the brilliant discoveries of these great men."?pp. 90-1.
" If disease of the brain, like that of the lungs or stomach, or of
any other portion of the animal organism, may be, and is more fre-
quently than otherwise, partial?that is, confined to a portion only
of the viscus affected, it must follow that the phenomena indicating
it must preserve an identity of character, and hence is it, if, for
example, the organ of 1 self-esteem'' were to take on an abnormal
action; its functions would necessarily become impaired in some
way. If that portion of the cerebral mass were affectcd with an
exaltation of power, whether dependent on inflammation or not, the
fact would become manifest in the increased pride and lofty bearing
of the individual so attacked, and conversely; and similarly of tho
other parts or 'organs' (to write phrenologically) of the brain; of
' acquisitiveness,' ' destructiveness,' ' veneration,' ' benevolence,' etc.
?kc. Tho existence of moral insanity, then, as first described, we
believe, by Dr Pricliard, is not only confirmed by the light of
phrenology, but, what is more, bccoraes, with its aid, really a matter
of demonstration."?p. 92.

" For my own part, I must confcss that all my notions of insanity
were of the most crude and unsatisfactory nature until I learned
phrenology, or the physiology of tho brain, as taught by Gall and
Spurzheim, and Mr. George Combe; and when I had done so, the
abnormal phenomena afforded by my patients at the Hanwell Lunatic
Hospital became not only very easily understood, but much more
certainly and effectually treated. The mysteries of tho mind and of
lunacy fade alike into insignificance before the light of phrenological
science; with its aid, the brain comes to be regarded as a part and
parcel of the human organism, and as subject, in common with the
liver and lungs, &c., to similar organic laws and sympathies; the
several parts of the brain, like the several parts of the eye and car,
arc thus seen to be linked together in one harmonious whole; and
just as, in the latter instances, vision and lieariny result from a well-
adjusted balance of the several parts of the eye and ear, and tho duo
performance of their individual and specific functions in either organ,
so does cerebration (En'glkdue) result from or depend upon a well-
organized brain, with its several parts duly balanced and adjusted
the one to the other. The application of the jmncipk herein
involved, is sufficient for the complete elucidation of all cases of
insanity, of mental disease, or my own unaided reflections could
never have harmonized so satisfactorily as I have found them to do
with the experience of Spurzlieim and Combe."?pp. llo-lG.

The foregoing passages contain doctrines of some novelty, one of
the most positive being, that " no person, unless he be a phrenologist,
can possibly be a good judge of the indications of an unsound mind!"
Although we are almost afraid to question the correctness of a pro-
position so boldly stated, we will venture to inquire in what manner
phrenology can assist the diagnosis of insanity. Firstly, what is the
usual method of "judging of the indications of an unsound mind]"
or rather, what are those indications 1 The first cognizable indica-
tion is the external manifestation of such a difference or peculiarity
in the language, behaviour, habits, or acts of a person, as show tlmt
his mind is not governed by the laws which govern the minds of
other men, and which the consentient voice of society decides are
the common laws of human nature. The first indication may some-
times coincide with the origin of the disease?the insane state may
at once manifest itself in the insane act?as in many eases of im-
pulsive insanity.

But more commonly, the first cognizable indication of insanity is
an obvious change or variation in the language, behaviour, habits, or
acts of an individual, causing him to differ in conduct, not only from
other persons, but also from himself during the former period of his
life. Now, whether we judge of a person's insanity, either by simply
comparing his state of mind with that of others, or by comparing the
'present state of his mind with its previous condition, we are equally
compelled to look for some external manifestation of the disease. No
scienco can enable us to trace those secret workings of the soul which
pass and " give 110 sign;"?one mind cannot penetrate the mysterious
operations of another mind, except by the aid of some exterior
evidence. The first process, then, in judging of the indications of
an unsound mind, is the perception of those outward visible signs
which indicate the unsoundness; the next step, is the comparison of
those manifestations with the characteristics of sanity; and upon this
comparison the judgment is founded. We cannot clearly see how
phrenology alone can aid us here. Phrenology professes to teach that
the various primitive faculties, sentiments, and propensities, are located
in distinct portions of cerebral matter, and that they are strong or
weak in proportion to the greater or less structural development of
those portions,?in other words, that there are special organs in the
brain for spccial purposes (as wc know there is an optic centre for
330 DR. davey's mental pathology.

the sense of sight, and an olfactory for the sense of smell,) and that
the functional power of such organs is proportionate to their positive
and comparative development.

There are many physiologists, not belonging to the medical pro-
fession, who are perfectly acquainted with the healthy structure and
functions of the lungs, their positions in the body, their anatomical
and vital relations to other parts, who, notwithstanding, are incapable
of making an accurate diagnosis of their morbid states; and it seems
to us that the phrenologist is in the same position. For phrenology,
of itself, can teach merely the relative position and functions of certain
parts of the brain?it cannot elucidate their morbid conditions. In
the same manner that disease of the lungs is commonly attended by
general symptoms?dyspnoea, cough, pain, expectoration, &c.?cog-
nizable to all observers, so is insanity generally indicated by well-
marked exterior manifestations, which can be accurately recognised
and appreciated without the aid of phrenology. But perhaps Dr.
Davey means that, although general indications may suffice to
demonstrate the mere existence of insanity, yet phrenology only can
enable us to diagnose the precise form and character of the disorder.
We suppose that he holds this opinion, not from any explicit expo-
sition of his views, but from his objection to the terms "mania,"
"melancholia," Arc., which he evidently considers to be "words with-
out knowledge." Unfortunately, Dr Davey, like many other re-
formers, is satisfied with sweeping away abuses, without providing an
efficient substitute in their place; and we have searched through his
book in vain for the "correct and classical nomenclature," which he
says is so much needed. "We, therefore, remain ignorant whether his
nosology would be based on the craniological designation of the
cerebral organs, or upon the character of the disease affecting
them.

Nearly all mental pathologists agree that disorder of the mind may
arise from many distinct and opposite conditions of the brain,?from
inflammation, from excessive or deficient vascularity, from irritation,
cither idiopathic or sympathetic, and perhaps from functional impair-
ment. No phrenologist will assert that by its aid we can discover the
precise morbid condition of the cerebral substance on which the
derangement of its function depends? Can it inform us whether the
affected organ is in a state of inflammation, hyperemia, or antemia
of idiopathic, sympathetic, or functional irritation? Can it indicate
the structure diseased, whether it be fibrous or vesicular nervous
matter? Can it determine to which hemisphere of the brain the
affected part belongs? To the best of our knowledge and belief it
cannot; and Dr Davey's own observations show the inability of his
favourite science to assist us on these points. He says,?
"All those cases, which owe their origin to a physical cause, are
certainly inflammatory in their nature, and depend mainly on an
increased vascularity of a particular portion or portions of the brain,
but it is far otherwise with those cases of insanity induced by moral
causes, so to speak.

" If symptoms of insanity occur in the course of acute febrile
diseases or rheumatism, or succeed to a blow on the head, or, in fact,
attend on any case either of spontaneous or acquired, that is, of idio-
pathic or symptomatic inflammation of the brain or its membranes,
there is then good reason to infer the diseased cerebration or mental
disorder to be the direct effect of such inflammatory condition of
the parts within the cranium; whereas if the disease (insanity)
succeed to a severe and overpowering moral impression, to any great
disappointment or alarm, or to outraged feeling of any kind, involv-
ing a sudden, unexpected, and violent shock of the nervous system,
through the medium of any portion of cerebral matter, then are we
disposed to attribute the phenomena observed, not to inflammation,
but to nervous irritation of the ultimate structure of the brain, in-
cluding the sensory fibres of the cerebrum,?the afferent and efferent
fibres of Foville."?pp. 222, 223.

This, perhaps, is the best method of diagnosis, but it is obviously
based on the history and general symptoms of the case; and may be,
nay is, serviceably employed, without any knowledge of phrenology.
It has been seen in the last extract, that Dr Davey considers
" nervous irritation of the ultimate structure of the brain" the most
frequent cause of insanity, but admits that in a certain class of cases
it arises from inflammation of the organ. And he seems to regard
" exaltation of power" * as a symptom of inflammatory action. This
is a doctrine which we cannot allow to puss unquestioned. To assert
that inflammation of a cerebral organ?a pathological condition in-
variably?augments its physiological function, is to contradict the ex-
perience of the effects of inflammation on all other organs of the body.
We are aware that the incipient stage of inflammatory action,?viz.
that of " cerebral determination" followed by a state of " active con-
gestion," is sometimes attended by a seeming exaltation of the func-
tions of the part; but that condition is always temporary, of short
duration, and rapidly passes into the destructive stage. When in-
flammation attacks the eye, it first impairs, and then, if sufficiently
violent, destroys vision; so, also, with inflammation of the ear, or
of any internal organ. At present, then, it seems to us very ini-
? Loc. cit., p. 02.

probable that the effects of inflammation on the cerebral substance
should be quite different from its effects on all the other tissues; and
until some evidence in support of the doctrine has been adduced, we
shall retain the opinion that inflammation always impairs, and, when
long continued, destroys the function of the brain.

If inflammation of a particular defined portion of the brain really
produced an exaltation of the function of the part?or if, in the
language of a distinguished phrenologist, " morbid excitement of
the cerebral organs of combativeness and destructivcness may pro-
duce raying, violence, and fury, and morbid excitement of the organ
of caution produce fear, apprehension, despondency, and melancholy,
not from any difference in the kind of excitement, but simply from
the function of the one being to manifest the propensities first named,
and from the function of the other being to manifest the feeling of
caution" {Combe), it is obvious that phrenology would be of the
highest value in the diagnosis of insanity, and we can only regret
that so satisfactory a theory should rest on no better foundation.
The objection we have raised to Dr Davey's views of the cffccts
of inflammation on the brain, apply equally well to his views on
irritation of that organ. For Dr Davey regards "exaltation of
power," or increased functional activity, as the special symptom
common to both affections, distinguishing the one from the other by
reference to the history and general symptoms of the case. Con-
cerning the effects of irritation on the structure of the brain, our
author makes the following judicious remark:?

" If such an abnormal state of the cerebral mass remain unre-
lieved, nothing is more likely than the occurrence of inflammation
of the brain and its membranes: a state of things which takes placc
generally in the progress of lunacy in the most stealthy and insidious
manner, and which, therefore, continuing unchecked, almost neces-
sarily induces those palpable disorganizations of structure, effusions,
&c., we have above noticed. Such, we repeat, arc, more frequently
than otherwise, the effects of insanity, and not its first cause."?
pp. 223, 224.

Here Dr Davey is consistent and logical; for if it be true
that irritation of a cerebral organ augments its functional activity,
it ought, according to Gall, also to increase its structural develop-
ment. The sequence of the morbid phenomena would be as follows:
?irritation of a cerebral organ exalts its functional power, which in
its turn excites its structural development; the augmentation of struc-
ture demands an augmented nutrition, hence an increased vascularity,
which, in an organ already disordered, readily passes into injlamma-
tion. It is therefore probable that irritation of the brain cannot
long obtain without congestion or inflammation supervening; and
we believe that congestion or inflammation of the cerebral organ
cannot long continue without causing an impairment or destruction
of its functions.

.Returning to the question of the practical utility of phrenology
in the diagnosis of insanity, we cannot altogether confirm Dr Davey's
commendation. We think Ave have shown that by its unaided efforts
we cannot correctly judge of the indications of an unsound mind, and
that it cannot afford the least assistance in ascertaining the precise
nature of the morbid condition from which the unsoundness results.
And as the efficacy of treatment immediately depends on the pre-
cision of diagnosis, it follows that an exclusively phrenological view
cannot help us much in the treatment of insanity. The moral treat-
ment must be mainly conducted on psychological principles deduced
from experience?the physical must vary in accordance with the
patient's general condition, and the presumed state of the diseased
organ. We conclude this part of our notice in the words of Esquirol,
aptly quoted by Dr Davey; " What then shall we think of the rash
pretensions of those who assume that they can fix upon the diseased
portion of brain, judging merely from the character of the disease?"
?(p. 228.) But we have not yet quite done with Dr Davey's
phrenology. By its aid, lie thinks to have reduced psychology to
the condition of a simple science. He says, " the mysteries of mind
and of lunacy fade alike into insignificance before the light of phreno-
logical science /" This enthusiastic language is calculated to make
all psychologists sigh for a few stray beams of the wondrous lamp or
illuminator. Dr Davey himself has long luxuriated in the full efful-
gence of its rays, and yet, strange to say, the perusal of his book has
not made "the mysteries of mind and of lunacy" any clearer to us
than they were before. However, that may be owing to our dulness,
want of capacity, or faith; or, possibly, the light is not transmis-
sible. In our darkness, we should have been thankful for a few plain,
well-reported cases, exemplifying the use and value of the phreno-
logical psychoscopc in the diagnosis and treatment of insanity. After
so great a cry, we have a right to demand a sample of the wares.
We will now turn to our author's observations on the jurispru-
dence of insanity. Here, at the outset, we arc startled by the fol-
lowing declaration:?

" Lunacy may, and does, generally exist without any impairment
of the intellectual faculties, and therefore the bare idea even of mea-
suring the responsibility of an individual, reputed of unsound mind,
by his understanding, or, in other words, by his capacity to distin-
guish between right and wrong, is both philosophically and morally
incorrect."

If, by the foregoing, Dr Davey means to proclaim that the
majority of insane persons?say G5 in 100?exhibit no impairment
of intellect, we beg to state most distinctly that onr experience
differs from his. We do not say that insanity impairs the
intellect immediately in every case; but, according to our
observations, the disorder rarely, if ever, exists for any length of
time without the intellectual faculties being disordered in a greater or
less degree. Such, too, is the opinion of Dr Conolly, who says:?
" Insanity never exists without such an impairment of one or more
of the faculties of the understanding as induces, or is accompanied
by, some loss of the power of comparison "?in other words, an
insane person does not correctly realize his own position and his
relation to persons and things about him?which is undeniably a
very serious defect of intellect. Dr Davey disregards?nay, almost
denies, the intellectual origin of insanity. His favourite maxim,
two or three times repeated in the course of his work, is this,?
" The speech and actions of the lunatic must be regarded only in the
light of symptoms of the abnormal condition of the affections and
propensities; which, under circumstances of health as well as disease,
impart the character to man"?that is, insanity arises from disordered
emotions and propensities, the intellectual faculties themselves
remaining unaffectcd. The following extract will more fully explain
Dr Davey's views :?

"The intellectual capabilities of a very large number of even the
most decidedly insane, and those found most troublesome to manage
at Hanwcll, are in every way sufficient to the ordinary purposes of
life?are in fact, so far as their understanding alone is concerned, in
no way altered from that they originally were. Under circum-
stances of excitement, of violence, whether or not attended with
incoherence or temporary delusive notions, they retain as complete a
consciousness of everything, and of their speech and actions, as the
attendants about them."?p. 121.

It appears from this, that Dr Davey considers the possession of
consciousness the proof that the intellect is not impaired, In illus-
tration of his opinion, he refers to the condition of one suffering
from hydrophobia, " who, though impelled to the most extraordinary
and rabid conduct, still retains a perfect consciousness of all he may
do or say." (We did not know before that hydrophobia is a cerebral
disease.) Now consciousness is a fundamental principle of the mind,
common alike to the intellect, sentiments, and propensities?it is
the alpha and the omega of all mental operations, and cannot be
?wholly lost except by the total destruction of the entire mind. The
imagination is unable to form an idea of a living being permanently
deprived of consciousness. " If we are in any way sentient," says
Mr. Mill?"that is, have any of the feelings whatsoever of a living
creature, the word ' conscious' is applicable to the feeler, and con-
sciousness to the feeling." Wc may rest assured that consciousness
exists so long as the least indication of mind is present. The most
miserable idiot is conscious?the new born infant is conscious.
Consciousness may be temporarily suspended, but it returns with the
first manifestation of restored animation after syncope, or a fit of
apoplexy, epilepsy, or hysteria. We are conscious of the physical
properties of matter?of the truth of a mathematical demonstra-
tion?of the harmony of music?of the proportions of a statue?of
the beauty of a landscape?of the scent of a flower. Wc are con-
scious of joy or pleasure at certain events, of grief or vexation at
other events. We are conscious of antipathy against some persons,
of affection for others. Wc arc conscious of pain, of hunger,
of thirst, of fatigue, of the want of sleep, and of the sexual im-
pulse. It is, therefore, evident that consciousness is not exclusively
an intellectual principle.

But perhaps Dr Davey does not employ the word conscious-
ness in its strict psychological signification; and when he says that
insane persons are always conscious, means that "they knowwhat they
are about." In this sense we partly agree with him; for we are con-
vinced that many of the insane are perfectly conscious of all they do.
Whatever may be the motives of their acts, they are fully sensible of
the nature; tendency, and probable effect of those acts. When Daniel
M'Naughtcn fired a pistol at Mr. Drummond, he knew the nature
of the act he was committing: he was conscious of the " intent to
kill," and was aware of its legal consequences; but that does not
prove that his intellect was unimpaired, nor invalidate the positive
evidence that he was labouring under a delusion, which he had not
sufficient intellectual power to correct. Dr Davey makes the in-
tellect the slave "of the aft'ections and propensities" (p. 125); we,
on the contrary, consider it their master: were it not so, how
trifling would be man's psychal superiority over other animals, lo
deny the controlling power of the intellect over human actions
would be to renounce the special privilege of our race. Moreover,
Dr Davey s separation of the operations of the emotions from those
of the intellect, and his theory of tlicir independent actions, is
speculative and artificial, and contrary to true psychology. In the
words of that distinguished physiologist, Dr Todd?

" If a certain part of the brain he associated with emotion, it is
plain that that part must be in intimate connexion with the seat of
change in the operations of the intellect, in order that each may
aflect the other; that the former may prompt the latter, or the
latter excite or hold in check the former."*

Respecting the question of the moral or legal responsibility of a
lunatic, Ave have to remark that the law virtually acts upon the
assumption, that the intellect is impaired in every ease of insanity.
The fifteen judges decided, in 1843, that " before a plea of insanity
should be allowed, undoubted evidence ought to be adduced that the
accused was of diseased mind, and that at the time lie committed the
act he was not conscious of right or wrong"?thus requiring proof
of two conditions: lstly, that the accused was insane; and 2ndly,
that he was unconscious of right or wrong. And although the theory
of the law unquestionably makes the latter the turning point of the
verdict, still the common practice of the law rests the decision 011
the former point, and is ever willing to take the second for granted,
when the first is clearly proved. Indeed we cannot call to mind a
single instance in which the court has proceeded to try the responsi-
bility of an accused person, after sufficient evidence had been adduced
to show that lie was of diseased mind. For some years past there
has been a growing inclination among lawyers to evade the question
of an alleged lunatic's responsibility, and to confine the issue to the
simple question of his sanity; and we confidently anticipate that this
will soon become the sole recognised practice. In the meantime, let
us not condemn our laws as inhuman, nor attack a procedure of
criminal justice more impartial and more favourable to the accused
than any other yet constructed and perfected by the wisdom and
ingenuity of man. And let Dr Davey beware of injuring the cause
of humanity whilst thinking to serve it, for such seems to us to be
the tendency of his opinions. So that, even supposing it true " that
lunacy may, and does generally, exist without any impairment of
the intellectual faculties" (p. 91), we should be afraid to develop
the doctrine on account of its inevitable result. To teach a jury
that insanity does not destroy man's capacity to distinguish between
right and wrong, is to take away the special plea for the criminal
lunatic's acquittal: for it is upon this principle?the consciousness
of right and wrong?that every scheme of retributive justice, both
Divine and human, is based.

? Todil And IJowmnn's Physiology. Vol. i. p. 850.
Not satisfied with promulgating his own views, Dr Davey falls
foul of those who have had the misfortune to differ from him in less
enlightened days. He says, " The bar and the bench alike continue
to grovel in the mire and obscurity which characterized the public
acts of such men as Mansfield, Erskine, Denman, Abinger, and
Follctt"?a superfluity of abuse, both undignified and uncalled-for,
and peculiarly misapplied to Lord Erskine, whose great sagacity
enabled him, even without the aid of phrenology, to point out the
true criterion of the reponsibility of the insane?namely, the insanity
itself. "We also notice that Dr Davey speaks flippantly of " one Lord
Hale," an affectation, applied to so great a jurist, philosopher, and citi-
zen?who, in times of violence and anarchy, most nobly represented
" The bodied miijesty of England's law;"

and who is not the least worthy in that long roll of learned,
upright, and virtuous judges, which is justly regarded as one of the
chief glories of our country.

Passing over our author's assault on the originality of Dr Wigan's
theory of the " Duality of the Mind," we turn to the following
passage, which shows that Dr Davey does not confine the peculiarity
of his views to one subject alone.

" The delusions of the lunatic arc always in harmony with the
predominant feeling; and do but enable the patient the more clearly
to express his seductive (?) and abnormal state of mind. I may add,
the delusions of the insane arc never believed by them, tlicy are but
the morbid colouring to intense and deranged feelings; a delusion is
bid a voluntary and tangible ideal of an innate involuntary and
morbid impression?p. 95.

How our friends in Westminster Hall would stagger under this
definition of the word " delusion."

The author's meaning, if we rightly understand it, is this: the
delusions of the insane are voluntary hallucinations, proceeding from
involuntary subjective ideas, and consequently are never believed by
them. Again Ave find ourselves at variance with Dr Davey?firstly,
Ave do not believe that the hallucinations of the insane are voluntary,
any more than dreams, or the illusions of delirium; and, secondly,
Ave have learnt, from experience, that the insane have almost always
the strongest and most obstinate conviction of the truth and reality
of their delusions, during nearly the Avhole period of their continu-
ance. Every physician, in the least degree acquainted Avith the in-
sane, is aAvarc of the hopelessness of attempting to eradicate their
delusive ideas by any proccss of reasoning?a proof of the fixity of
their belief, and also of the impairment of their intellectual faculties.
338 DR. davey's mental pathology.

which renders them incapable of understanding the arguments em-
ployed to convince them.

We admit that these delusions most commonly indicate the pre-
dominant feeling, in the same way that the note of a musical chord
indicates its quality and state of tension; but the delusion cannot be
said to be in harmony with the feeling, any more than that the note
is in harmony with the chord which produces it. Let us take, for
instance, a case of Erotomania, a disordered condition of the faculty of
amativeness, in which the affections arc bestowed 011 some real or ideal
object: in such a case, the disorder cannot be said to be in harmony
with the predominant feeling, being in fact the manifestation of the
exaggerated feeling itself. Erotomania is not the harmony of
amativeness?the harmonious exorcise of that faculty is a rational
love for some chosen person of the opposite sex; erotomania is, in
the majority of cases, a delusive passion for some ideal or unattain-
able object?and it is the longing for
" The uurcnclicd phantasy of their despair,"

which characterizes the mental malady of this class of sufferers.
We think it possible that the belief of lunatics in their delusions
may alter, according to inappreciable variations in their state of mind;
that the conviction is not so entire at one period as at another;
that they may at times even doubt the truth and reality of their
delusions; but observation shows, that in such cases it is the doubts
which are fugitive?the delusion which is permanent.

Thus, the author of the well-known 11 Narrative of the Treatment
experienced by a Gentleman during a state of Mental Derangement
speaking of his delusions, observes:?" I had a species of doubts, but
no 011c who has not been deranged can understand how dreadfully
true a lunatic's insane imagination appears to him?how slight his
sane doubtsand again, " An insane person is not always aware of
anything but his delusions, and his delusions contending with his
feelings for the mastery over him make him a madman." Wc con-
clude with a quotation from the valuable work of the Baron Ernst
von Feuchtcrsleben.*

" it is equally unessential what idea governs the patient, whether
it concerns body or mind; whether it be religious, political, or
scientific, <fcc.; the disease consists in this: that some one idea is
able to govern him. The idea may be as varied as there arc different
objects and subjects. It may have reference to the past, the present
or the future; to phantoms of the brain, or to realities; it may be
abhorred or cherished. The patient who is seized with fixed
* The Principles of Medical Psychology. Translated for the Sydenham bociety.
delusion no longer pays attention to the world beyond Lis own
idea; hence he is glad to flee society in order to indulge, in undis-
turbed solitude, the congenial, irresistible impulse of his delusion.
Every thought and desire of the patient revolve around this fixed
delusion, which seizes upon, and, as it were, hurries them along with
it."?p. 277.

We have now completed an ungrateful task. It would have been
much more agreeable to us to have spoken of Dr Davey's book in
more favourable terms. It came before us with more than an
ordinary claim upon our attention. Its author had held an important
appointment in this country, and had been preferred to fill an official
situation abroad. Consequently, we have given his work our entire
attention, and the result is, a firm conviction that it would have been
better for Dr Davey's professional reputation if it had never been
published.
