Supposed Demoniacal Possession
================================

To the Editor of the "Journal of-Psychological Medicine
Sin,?I take the liberty of forwarding to you a continuation and
more minute detail of the dreadful sufferings experienced by me
during many years, and which in your able quarterly publica-
tion you have classed under the title of " Supposed Demoniacal
Possession:"?notwithstanding all your kind considerate reasoning, I
still remain a most unwilling, yet strong advocate fortlie?in these en-
lightened times?generally unbelieved, unacknowledged notion of the
occasional possession of mortals by evil spirits. My own unfortunate
case has led me to this belief?to this acknowledgment?to this con-
viction. Happy should I have felt had I the power of supporting, as
I had some ycai-s ago, a contrary argument and position : but with
my own personally recognised affliction of demoniac possession, I
cannot, with the slightest regard for veracity, otherwise than endea-
vour to maintain what, in the nineteenth century, may not perhaps
inaptly be termed, newly-revived ancient opinions and doctrines.
And here, sir, will you allow me to express my great obligations
to you, for having with generous urbanity listened to my narration,
and notwithstanding your own were not in accordance with my
views, yet permitting me the privilege of publication under your high
authority. Be assured, sir, that such liberality of sentiment must
inevitably tend to the promotion of the true interests and develop-
ment of knowledge.
In returning to my subject, I must premise that I shall have to
tax largely the faith, or, as others may say, the credulity of many :
but confident of the truth of that which I write, it is without hesita-
tion that I boldly enter into the arena of the press, prepared to
maintain the present existence of evil spirits, and to set forth their
influence on the sons of men.
It was, as I observed in my last essay, as I was taking a quiet
walk one evening about six years ago, in the outskirts of the metro-
polis, that I suddenly experienced the sensations of the sound of
apparently human voices. There was no human being on the spot,
but as the sounds were those of conversation between one person
and another or others, I endeavoured to trace their origin: such
attempt was ineffectual. A boy came within sight, amusing himself
in some ruinous buildings at a distance,?the sounds appeared to pro-
ceed from him. I called and ran to him, but being alarmed lie
speedily made his exit. The language then appeared to emanate
from some fowls ; I knew these birds incapable of producing such
SUPPOSED DEMONIACAL POSSESSION. 2G3
sounds, and entertained myself by thinking on the marvellous stories
in the " Arabian Nights," and in our Indian transmigratory tales,
and then reasoned that persons in a cottage not far from the fowls
might possibly, by ventriloquism, have deceived me. I approached
the cottage, and watched it a considerable time ; the voices then
seemed to be those of persons in the interior of it, but no one
appeared at the windows, and some labourers passing by I walked
away. The voices then evidently came from these men, gradually
becoming more and more indistinct, until I lost them momentarily.
The words used were, " Who is he 1?What is he 1?Do you know
who he is ?" The responses were, " He is the Devil's own?He is
Satan's own." Shouts of laughter and derision and questions of
doubt afterwards succeeded, and then as I walked with rapid pace
through London and its environs, observations were made that I was
walking for a wager?that I was the man condemned to live hun-
dreds of years, and to walk the earth?that I must be Satan him-
self?that no human being could possibly walk so fast, without rest
and refreshment and so great a distance?that I had boots on which
110 doubt concealed my cloven feet?as for my tail that was hid
under my frock coat. Alternately I felt annoyed and amused, proud
of my exploits, and then grieved at them?smiling occasionally on
recalling to recollection the verses of " The Devil's Walk," and com-
forting myself that with daylight I should be recognised, and be
once more myself again. But I was unfortunately doomed to dis-
appointment ; the voices still pursuing me apparently from the
various passers by. At last the uproar, din, expressions of revenge
and maledictions became so vehement, that I determined on going
to an hotel where I was well known; the moment I thought of
which the voices exclaimed, they would soon find out who I was,
and would not leave me until they did ; and a boy who kept pace
with me in the road or on the path, I now imagine for amusement,
appeared to denounce me as a criminal to every one. He then pre-
ceded me, and I missed him near the hotel, and thought lie had slipped
in there; but as I was afraid of nothing that I had done, I walked
in, and asked the waiters if a boy had just been there to inquire
about me, and whether he had said anything and what against me ?
but they assured me they had not seen him; and I desired if he
came that lie should be shown in to me, that the proprietor might
satisfy him as to who I was, and that I was incapable of acting as
lie, and the others who had commissioned him, had said or thought.
No boy, however, made his appcarance ; and after a short stay, and
partaking of some refreshment, I ventured out, as I hoped quite re-
leased from the tortures of the previous twelve or fourteen hours.
I crossed aterloo Bridge, intending to visit a friend who was then
wu*iC -?ouse) and whose liberation I was anxious to effect.
V\ hilst on the bridge a voice sounded as if from the water, exclaim-
mg, There lie is again !?there he is !?that is the man !?he shall
not escape ! ?I looked to the water and perccived several boats,
and thought that possibly the boy was crossing by the ferry, but I
204 SUPPOSED DEMONIACAL POSSESSION.
could not discover him. On arriving on the Surrey side of the
river, many were the voices uproused against me, clamorously in-
sisting 011 my punishment; that of hanging was suggested; far and
near they pealed on my ear, until when near the gates of the Bench,
I actually was fearful that I should not be allowed to enter, in con-
sequence of the multitude, which I could not see, but whose clashing
of weapons of every description and cries and threats of revenge I
could distinctly hear. At first I thought, from not seeing tlieni,
that my accusers had obtained acccss within the walls ; but, when I
entered, not observing any extraordinary number of persons, I
considered they were behind me, and congratulated myself on
having arrived in a place of safety when I got into my
friend's sitting-room. Communicating the circumstances to my
friend, he only stared with surprise at me, and said I need not
be under the least apprehension of anything whilst with him. The
noise and din and clashing of arms and martial music appeared then
to increase, and calls were made for the governor to give me up to
the infuriated mob, when I offered to prove to his and their satisfac-
tion, that my conduct through life had not been so bad as they
represented, to which proposal they assented; and the voices of some
of my accusers then appeared to sound within the walls, and the
governor seemed to be appointed judge. Several voices then made
accusations against me ; the window of my friend's apartment was
open, and I stood at it, admitting some of the charges and palliating
or denying others; the voices, very singularly, resembled the
sounds of those with whom I had had transactions ; and I heard
distinctly the assumed voices of my relatives and friends. I was
evidently put on a regular trial, and witnesses on both sides spoke
against and for me. The voice of one was clearly that of a being
of authority. I thought at first it was the voice of the governor,
but I have since known differently, as it has ever since remained
with me. It is a strong powerful voice, such as, to speak at once
intelligibly; Satan himself, or one of his chief emissaries, might be
the possessor of. For some time, however, I was inclined to believe
it to be the voice of the Angel Gabriel, or that of some high angelic
spirit; but when I subsequently heard it associated with the dread-
ful imprecations and language used by other voices, my opinion
altered. My heart and brain seemed at the trial to be open to the
view of every one; and I replied to the charges by my thoughts,
without utterance. The evidence was directed to be written down,
and the following day I went again at the time appointed, prepared
for another examination; in the interim the voiccs continued with
me, and I wandered about the entire night in much the same manner
as I had the previous night. The next day I stood at the window of
my friend's room as before, and the proceedings of the trial were
commenced; but little however occurred, as the parties appeared
satisfied with my mental proposition of compensating, to the fullest
extent in my power, all persons that I had injured in thought, word
or deed. Some of the voiccs which seemed to belong to a band of
SUITOSKD DEMONIACAL POSSESSION. 2G5
musicians, who had performed martial airs both on that and on the
previous day, which had sounded as if played outside the walls, de-
manded money, and said, I think, they were twelve in number, and
wanted ?3, ultimately agreed to take ?2, which I told my friend,
and that I must get rid of them at any sum; and begged him to
send for a messenger to whom I could give the money for them?
which to appease me he did?and I handed the man the ?2 to take
to the band waiting outside the walls or at the gates. These ?2,
however, my friend very wisely got from the messenger immediately
a<rain, under the pretence of shutting the door after him, and after-
wards the same day transferred to my mother. I had asked my
friend previously, both days, if he had heard the voices and noises,
but he declared he had not. In fact, to say the truth, I did once
or twice think that probably my friend might have mesmerised me,
for I could not account for the sounds in any natural manner; but I
soon divested myself of this impression, when the thought arose
that I heard the voices before I called on him on the previous day.
I could not, even during the trial, although it was so solemnly con-
ducted, and the consequences impending were serious to me, fre-
quently avoid smiling at the ridiculous impossibility of the affair, as
I was in a room, could not see my accusers, knew that I ought to be
tried in the customary way, by a judge and jury, if I had done any
criminal act, and in a law court, and yet I could not distrust the
evidence of my own ears. I tried to pray, and then laid down to
compose myself. My friend had very kindly on the previous day
written to my mother, describing my excited state, and she arrived,
and I returned with her home; but even in the cabriolet " The
Devil's own" resounded from some voice that kept pace with us ;
and I could not help imagining that some one had placarded the
back of the vehicle with that dreadful name, and I made the driver
alight to see if anything or any one was at the back of the cabriolet;
and when we got out, I myself went to be satisfied. At my instance
we did not return to my domicile until late in the evening, as I
thought the writing would not then be legible, and the reiteration
of the words would cease. No such good fortune attended me; and,
as I mentioned in my last essay, I afterwards experienced the sounds
of about seven different voices?two those of females, which number
continued with me many months; afterwards four remained with
me ncail) two jcars; and sincc then two, a male and female, have
been my constant companions. Last September they nearly left
me, and occasionally they are very quiet, so that the voices nearly
resemble a humming noise, as though at a distance; but at other
times I hear them as distinctly as ever, and sometimes, if I
listen attentively, I can hear their discourse ; and the voice of the
male is, as I before named, that of the spirit in authority. I
tnist to be excused for entering thus explicitly and fully into details
of the commencement of my affliction, which has now been of six
years and four months' duration; but I thought such might be in-
teresting to the philosophic and contemplative mind.
2GG supposed demoniacal possession.
Whilst at liome I was incessantly tormented by the evil spirits
by (lay?the idea can be but inadequately conceived, of seven persons
continually talking to each other, or to me, or of me, on all kinds
of subjects, making observations, satiric or pleasing, on what I
thought, or did, or said, or intended; carrying my attention from
the subject on which I might have been engaged, into other extra-
neous channels, thereby preventing my reading or writing, thinking,
acting, or speaking, without confusion or forgetfulness; incapa-
citating me for the exercise of my profession, which I had increased
to a very large extent, and which I have, chiefly 011 this account,
been obliged to relinquish; and by night causing me, by the most
horrible proposals, threats, and artifices, to keep awake for five or
six, or more hours, every night, in the most dreadful state of agony
that it is possible for the human mind to portray. Several of the
spirits seemed more violent than the others,?they proposed all
kinds of indignities to God, and to our Saviour, and to the Holy
Spirit; they uttered the most horrible language, curses, oaths, and
imprecations, and I have experienced the utmost difficulty in pre-
venting myself using the same, having been in the hourly habit of
hearing these fiendish sounds for so many years; but thanks be to
God ! I have never made use of an oath or an improper word in my
life. The two or three or four hours' rest that I had in the morning,
barely sufficed to eke out my wretched existence for the day.
Amongst the proposals made by the evil spirits to me, were
primarily, that I should worship Satan, or acknowledge him as my
superior, or give myself up to him, or trample on the cross of Christ,
or disown the supremacy of God. On doing, or thinking any such
things, unbounded power and wealth should be mine; I should gain
whatever I required, and do whatever I wished; I should be able
to communicate with all persons, however distant they might be;
I should have power to influence them as I pleased, and to see
what they were doing, and where they were, and avIio were with
them, and to dive into their thoughts and actions, and to know and
see generally both present and future whatever I chose; and lastly,
all favours I desired should be granted me by the fair sex.
And here I may mention, that 011 mentally addressing any one,
if I wished to arouse his attention, his name was to be repeated,
mentally, three times; if he belonged to the fraternity lie would
reply, " well," or " what do you want," or " Oh, you are one of us,
are you V' and if I had not before addressed him he would appeal to
another, or superior spirit, who would reply in the affirmative, and
mention my name, and in a moment an answer would be given to
any question propounded.
The evil spirits pointed out the various incalculable advantages
of all these powers, and directed me how to exercise them ; but by
the grace of God, through the merits of my Saviour, I have been
enabled to withstand the temptations of wealth and power by never
once in thought or deed acknowledging the influence of Satan. In
some respects, however, I hftvo unintentionally fallen; and now I
SUPPOSED DEMONIACAL POSSESSION. 207
must, as I before said, tax the faith or the credulity of many in
asserting that one of the female spirits, who iisually took my part,
and behaved with greater kindness to me than the rest, having in-
formed me that she was a female whom I had seen about three or four
times, and admired when I was about fifteen years old, I gradually
fell under her influence, and as, after the clear exposition of my
heart and brain at the trial, I had nothing to disguise, I repeatedly
allowed her hand apparently to pass, as I seemed to feel it, through
the various divisions of my brain, and also through my heart.
Blessed with a contented disposition, although very humble is my
lot now, Satan, with his power and wealth, I have been enabled to
resist; as regards the other powers, it has happened that I could,
and have, sometimes exercised them, but I have placed them to the
account of sympathetic feeling; and it is singular that if at any
time I wished particularly to meet or see a person not living at a
distance, I have almost invariably met or seen him. For some
length of time I have had a difficulty in divesting myself of the
notion that I could communicate with any one at a distance, and
see and know anything I pleased anywhere, both present and future,
which may really be termed clairvoyance. The last power, before
mentioned, I almost thought I had, but this might be classed with
sympathy of feeling, or animal magnetism. On all these subjects I
am, however, still sceptical, although I have certainly occasionally
met with rather startling and surprising incidents. It ought to be
noticed that frequently, in thinking, writing, reading, or shaving,
I am apt to become lethargic, or in a comatose state. My sense of
touch is peculiarly delicate, and all my other senses are particu-
larly fine. It is one of the regrets that I entertain, that I did not
keep a diary of some of the various conversations that occurred
between the evil spirits themselves and those with me; but had I
done so, a large folio volume would hardly have sufficed for the long
period of upwards of six years to which my sufferings have been
extended. I am not addicted to falsehood, and I can pledge myself
that all that I have written on this subject is perfect truth.
I feel, and am fully aware, of the difficulty in which I am
placed in detailing feelings that to the general world will appear,
and perhaps be pronounced, to be hallucinations; but we have yet
to learn that there are not evil spirits still existing and allowed
to roam at large on the face of the globe. Our Saviour, as every
one is acquainted, did not eradicate them during his sojourn upon
earth, nor is there any account of their total extinction during the
time of the Apostles; indeed, as they continued after our blessed
Saviour's ascension, it is far from anything like probability that the
subordinate power of the Apostles should drive them away,?then,
doubtless, evil spirits still are permitted to speak to and influence
mortals. I have always enjoyed the entire possession of my senses;
I have never seen any of the spirits; I did not believe in them
until this visitation,?but voices occurring in this manner cannot be
those of the human race. I can readily imagine the recurrence of
208 SUPPOSED DEMONIACAL POSSESSION.
the brain to vocal or instrumental music contrary to one's own wishes,
.?this would be a species of reverberation of the sound of that which
one had previously heard; again, the recurrence of a murderer to
the scene of his guilty catastrophe, is attributable to his thoughts
constantly dwelling on the subject of his crime; but voices speaking
distinctly to one on topics unthought of at the time, using expressions
to which one has been unaccustomed, pointing out what one has
wholly forgotten or omitted, or done or thought wrongly or amiss,
cannot be caused by reverberation of sound or recollection of
ideas. They are not the reiteration of sounds, the refraction on
the mind of bye-gone objects; here the brain, it must be borne in
memory, is not approached through any other but one sense, and
that is the faculty of hearing. Whence can sounds, then, so dis-
similar, so dissonant, to one's innate nature originate 1 How can
one shudder and shrink, on the utterance of hellish sounds as from
a by-stander, if such were not independent of oneself?had no
corresponding relation in one's heart or brain,?nothing sympathetic,
to induce or to allure them 1 No concurrent thought or wish has
been lurking there, to produce such dreadful impiety. It is, it has
been, only through the ear that such voices have reached my brain,
?by the aid of Divine Providence they have never affected my heart.
On reflection and re-reflection, with my little stock of information, I
cannot in any other manner account for these voices, than that they
emanate from Satan. I have been highly favoured in having been
naturally of a religious frame of disposition, and for some years, singu-
larly, kept a written daily journal of all my sins of thought, word, deed,
and omission ; and I was in the daily habit of reading the Scrip-
tures and religious works. I remember having been much pleased
to discover, as I thought, the meaning of the passage relating
to the apple of Adam and Eve ; the apple I merely considered
allegorical, and that the concupiscence, or exccss of passions of our
first parents, when not confined within the bounds of reason, really
formed the groundwork of their fall. Since my affliction, however,
I have thought that Satan, allegorically under the type of the serpent,
did actually speak to them, and did also in like manner speak to
our Saviour; indeed, on reference to the various passages through-
out the Holy Bible, it will be found that the version of sound that I
now entertain and support is the true and chief mode by which, inde-
pendently of our own personal evil thoughts and desires, Satan is per-
mitted to hold intercourse with man. And, I have no doubt, the
more this matter is reasoned on and considered, the firmer will be
the conviction at which I strive.
With this knowledge, that our adversary the Devil is going about
like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, whom we should
resist, steadfast in the faith; let us turn our thoughts from things
below to things above, and by pcnitence, faith, and prayer, avert or ren-
der harmless so dire a calamity as that of demoniacal possession, and
which we shall be enabled to effect only by the grace of God, through
the mediation and merits of our Saviour, and the influence of the
Holy Spirit.?I beg to remain, &c. R. F.
