Insanity From Chloroform Employed In Parturition
=================================================

209

During a discussion in the early part of the present session, at the
Westminster Medical Society, when a paper was read by Professor
Murphy, advocating the use of chloroform in midwifery, Dr.
Webster, according to the reports published in the medical journals,
mentioned three cases of insanity supervening after the employment
of the above powerful agent during childbirth; to which he after-
wards added a fourth case of the same description. Considering
these examples of mental disease are interesting to the profession,
and well worth recording, they are therefore transferred to the pages
of The Psychological Journal.
Case I.?In this instance the patient, who had been delivered
under the influence of chloroform, was, for three days subsequently,
constantly incoherent and rambling. She soon afterwards became
perfectly maniacal, and so furious as to require confinement in a
lunatic asylum, where she remained for twelve months, when the
lady was discharged cured.
Case II.?This patient never recovered from the effects of the
chloroform exhibited during her confinement; and soon afterwards
became quite maniacal, and continued so for many months, but she
recovered ultimately.
Case III.?As this example might perhaps be considered by some
psychologists not a true instance of insanity, Dr. Webster related the
chief symptoms manifested by the patient, in order to remove all
doubts on the subject. In the case reported, the cerebral disturbance
following the exhibition of chloroform during delivery, never ceased
entirely; the patient coidd not sleep at night for a long time, and
often said she felt as if in the presence of a madman who was going
to murder her. Three weeks afterwards she became almost maniacal
?exhibited much mental excitement, laughing frequently; had a
strong desire to sing, with other extraordinary feelings; conducted
herself like an infant, and lost her memory; in which state the
patient continued during five months, when recovery took place.
Case IY.?This additional illustration of the bad cffects of chloro-
form, employed during parturition, Dr. Webster related at a subse-
quent meeting of the Westminster Medical Society, it having been
communicated to that gentleman by a professional friend, in conse-
quence of perusing the reports published of the three previous cases.
Being a farther corroboration of the former statements respecting the
powerful impressions sometimes produced by chloroform, employed
during parturition, this case, like the previous, also deserves perusal.
In the individual affected, only one drachm of chloroform, sprinkled
upon a handkerchief, was used; but the cffects it produced were so
sudden and violent, that the patient, after making a deep inspiration,
NO. X. t
270 INSANITY FROM CHLOROFORM.
remained quite insensible, which greatly alarmed the attendants.
With the insensibility there was likewise deadly paleness of the
countenance; however, the patient slowly rallied, but had a painful
and protracted labour. During several days subsequently, the lady
continued in a very nervous condition, although not then actually
incoherent; but she soon became so furiously maniacal, as to require
coercion by a strait-waistcoat. After being insane for many months,
the patient gradually recovered her reason, and ultimately got con-
valescent.
Considering it Avas only from accumulated facts and extensive
experience, that sound practical knowledge respecting the employ-
ment of chloroform in midwifery could be acquired, Dr. Webster
afterwards said, he related the present, as likewise the three pre-
viously narrated examples of insanity following its use, in order to
contribute data towards that important object; and he availed him-
self of the present opportunity also to remark, that lie should
esteem it a favour, if other practitioners would communicate to him
any well-marked case of the same kind, stating particulars which
they may have met with during their practice, as he (Dr. Webster)
was very desirous of collecting additional evidence upon this im-
portant subject; of course, on the express understanding, that neither
the patient's name should be divulged, nor the correspondent in any
way compromised; as all such communications will be considered
strictly confidential in regard to individuals.
In addition to these illustrations, showing the effects of chloroform,
an instance of loss of memory, after employing that remedy, has
recently occurred, which appears worth mentioning in this notice;
the subject being a lady who bad previously enjoyed good health, and
was delivered when under the influence of chloroform. For six
months afterwards, the patient could not sleep at night, and her brain
never seemed sound; whilst the memory continued so much im-
paired, that, if disturbed in the slightest degree, she coidd remember
nothing.
Besides instantaneous death, which occasionally supervenes from
the administration of chloroform, the examples just related show, that
one of the consequences now ascertained to follow its use, under certain
circumstances, is mental alienation; and although some practitioners
may consider such attacks simply as cases of puerperal insanity, the
effect is still so very serious, as to require the most attentive con-
sideration of physicians. Stupefaction during labour, or deadly
intoxication, seems the chief benefit derived from the use of chloro-
form in midwifery; and however desirable it may be, at first sight,
considered by patients or friends to alleviate suffering, during so
painful a period, nevertheless, even temporary relief from pain may
be obtained at too great a sacrifice, if consequences like those now
detailed should result from the employment of this powerful anaes-
thetic agent, which appears at present to have many proselytes, as
well amongst surgeons as with some accoucheurs,
