lEftttor's portfolio
======================

[Since the establishment of this Journal, we have been in the habit of
receiving numerous communications, bearing principally upon the sub-
jects selected for elucidation in the pages of this periodical; wo have
hitherto answered privately the many interrogatories submitted to ns.
It has been suggested that as the replies exacted from us in our editorial
capacity necessarily entail considerable research on our part, and con-
tain information on some of the most important truths in the science of
medico-psychology, that their publication in extenso would form a new
and desirable feature in the Journal. In obedience to this kind and
flattering wish, it is our intention to publish occasionally a separate
article, headed as above. The knowledge thus conveyed may not, to
many of our readers, have novelty to recommend it; however, the facts
referred to are generally on points of interest, and will be of value, we
trust, to those who have done us the honour of soliciting the informa-
tion.]

the editor's portfolio. 275
Classification of Mental Disorders.
D. A.?The classification to wliicli he refers is that of Dr. Bingham.
It is as follows :?
1. Moral Insanity.
2. Partial Insanity?Monomania.
3. General Insanity?Mania.
4. Mania without Delirium.
5. Intermitting Mania.
(S. Dementia?Incoherent Insauity.
7. Fatuity?Organic Idiotisra.
8. Paralytic Insanity.
9. Epileptic Insanity.
10. Puerperal Insanity.
11. Melancholy without Delirium.
12. Natural Idiotism.
Although, there is much to commend in the above classification, it is
far from perfect.
Delirium Tremens.

A Surgeon.?We believe that Dr. B. Pearson was the first physician
who described this peculiar disease. He published a paper on the sub-
ject in the ninth volume of the Edinburgh Medical Journal. Subse-
quently, Dr. Armstrong and Dr. Sutton wrote on the subject. An excel-
lent article on the disease "was published at an early period in the second
volume of the Acta Societatis Med. Moscuce. Drunken delirium is a
frequent disease among the Russians of Moscow.
Capital Punishments.

M. A.?We thinlc the strictures a little unfair. If he will read the
paper carefully he may, we trust, be disposed to modify, if not alto-
fether change, his opinions. Our correspondent is informed that the
Iindoos as well as Mussulmans are subject to the Mahomedan code.
Murder is regarded as a crime solely against the individual, and the
punishment of the murderer is awarded on the basis of retaliation. A
man is not punished for murdering his own slave; for, in that case, he
would be guilty of the solecism of retaliating on himself. No man is
punished for murdering his child, grandchild, or other descendant. The
Mussulman's idea of murder is somewhat peculiar. If a person is killed
by means of the iron edge of a hoe or spade, it is reputed murder; but
it is not murder when inflicted by means of a wooden handle. It is not
murder to destroy a man by severe flagellation, or_ by keeping him in
cold water during the winter season, or by exposing him bound hand
and foot in the summer sun, or by throwing him off from the roof of a
house, or into a well. A wretch cruelly held the head of a female child
under water until she was suffocated, in order to make prize of her
clothes and ornaments. This murderer was only condemned before one
of the native courts to pay a fine.

A Student.?The passage he refers to is?
" Quern Deus vtilt perdere, prius dementat."
Cause of Insanity.

We have no doubt of insanity occasionally arising from an attempt
to suppress the natural healthy emotions. Dr. lie id observes, when
speaking of Howard, that "hacl he not been a philanthropist, he would
probably have been a madman."

PuNISIIMENT OF DEATH.
A Jurist.?We have had some difficulty in finding the original passage
to which our legal friend refers. We have examined the works of
Beccaria, and we think the following is the paragraph alluded to :?
276 THE editor's portfolio.

"Qual puo essere il diritto, clie si attribuiscono gli uomiui di trucidare i loro
simili? Non certameiite' quello, da cni resultauo la sovranita e le leggi. Esse
noii sono clie una soirmia di minime porzioni della privata liberta di ciascuno. Clii
c mai colui, clie abbia voluto laseiare ad nltri uomini l'arbitrio di acciderlo ? Coinme
mai liel miniuio sagrificio dclla liberta di ciascuno \i puo essere ijuello del mnssimo
fra tutt' i beui, la vita ?

Beccaria, Voltaire, and tlic Empress Catlierine arc generally referred
to as tlie foreign authorities against tlic infliction of capital punisli-
ments. Voltaire said tliat it was high time to tell the world that a
man who is hanged is good for nothing; and that punishments which
were intended for the good of society, should be useful to society. " It
is plain," he continues, " that twenty stout rohhers condemned to the
public works, serve the state by their punishment, whereas when they
are put to death, they benefit nobody but the executioner." The
Empress Catherine formed a bloodless code of laws. Many of the sen-
timents of Beccaria were embodied in her Imperial Homilies.
On Suicide.

A Hypochondriac. ? The arguments used in defence of suicide are
specious, but illogical. Our correspondent's error lies in conceiving
that to be a mere gift which has a further idea annexed to it. The life
of man is to be considered as a state of moral and physical discipline,
in which he is placed, without his own consent, by a power which he is
unable to resist, and by a wisdom whose designs and systems he cannot
penetrate. It is to be considered as a life of preparation for one which
is to succeed to it. In respect of the present enjoyment which it affords,
it is indeed a gift, and calls for gratitude. Virtue may be more effec-
tually tested when life becomes a burden than in any other condition of
man's existence. Our life is not our own, to do with it as we please.
We are in the position of trustees, and will have to give an account of
our stewardship. "We have no means of answering satisfactorily the
other portion of our correspondent's letter.

Braixs of Criminals after Deatii.

Morbid Anatomist.?The phenomenon referred to is not always per-
ceived after death. Dr. Monro, in his celebrated work 011 the " Morbid
Anatomy of the Brain, "alludes to the appearance of the brain of criminals
after tlic infliction of capital punishment. He says?" The brain, when in
a very recent state, is of a purplish-brown colour, and somewhat elastic;
it is firm to the touch, and may be divided into thin slices without any
part adhering to the knife, and may be stretched to a certain degree
without tearing. But when the brain has been exposed to the air for
half an hour, or an hour and a half, or when examined after the lapse
of twenty-four or thirty hours after death, even although death has not
been occasioned by disorders which affect the nervous system, the brain
is soft, readily torn, and a portion of it adheres to the knife, unless the
knife has been previously dipped in oil or water, and it falls to pieces
on being slightly stretched."

Causes of Crime.

W. Newton.?The following is a careful analysis of the licport for
1849 of the Kcv. J. Clay, Chaplain of the Preston House of Correction,
having reference to ignorance and intemperance as two of the most
frequent causes of crime:?

" It appears that, of 1049 persons committed to the House of Correction during
the past year, 9:30 persons were unable to read ; 533 could read only; 441 could
read, but wrote very imperfectly; 20 could read and write well; and 13, or under
1 per cent., were of ' superior education !' With regard to religious knowledge,
781 were ignorant of the Saviour's name, and unable to repeat the Lord's Prayer;
950 had heard of the Saviour's name, and could repeat the Lord's Prayer imperfectly;
204 were acquainted with the elementary truths of religion ; only two persons, much
under 1 per cent., were ' familiar with the scriptures and well instructed.' An idea
of the density of the mass of ignorance which exists among our criminals may be
formed from the following facts:?Of the total number, 1312 persons, or about 07
per cent., were unable to name the months ; 1198 were ignorant of the words
'virtue,' 'vice,' &c.; 1173 were ignorant of the name of the reigning sovereign;
and 307 were tillable to count a hundred. 707 of the prisoners had read, or heard
read, books about 'Jack Sheppard' and 'Dick Turpin.' Mr. Clay gives the follow-
ing as the predominant features in ' character and condition' of the prisoners:?
protligacy, 803 ; ignorance, 905; distress, 39 ; comparative respectability, 82; un-
certain, 20. Mr. Clay gives the following as the proximate or direct causes of
offence :?drunkenness of the offending or the injured party, 722; temptation, 259;
profligacy, 790; other causes, 300. The rev. gentleman states that drunkenness,
which as a direct cause of olfenee had considerably diminished last year, has again
become very predominant, and states his belief that four-fifths of the recorded
offences spring from habitual drinking. These painful facts suggest the urgent
necessity of an immediate application of the only antidote applicable?an effective
system of general education."

Fascination as a Cause of Chime.

A Chaplain.?We liave no doubt as to the influence of the agent
referred to. A distinguished writer in the Edinburgh Review observes,
when speaking of the subject, " Gibbets, which have now become very
uncommon, may, we think, have produced equivocal effects in tins way
(power of fascination). They belong to a class of what are called
interesting objects. They excite a feeling of horror, not altogether
without its attraction in the ordinary spectator, and startle while tliey
rivet the eye. Who shall say how often, in gloomy and sullen disposi-
tions, this equivocal appeal to the imagination may not have become an
ingredient to pamper murderous thoughts, and to give a superstitious
bias to the last act of the will? To see this ghastly appearance rearing
its spectral form in some solitary place at nightfall, by a wood-side, or
barren heath,?to note the wretclied scarc-crow figure dangling upon
it, black and wasted, parched in the sun, drenched in all the dews of
heaven that fall cool and silent upon it, while this object of the dread and
gaze of man feels nothing, knows nothing, fears nothing, and swings
creaking in the gale unconscious of all that it has suffered, or that others
suffer,?there is something in all these circumstances that may lead the
mind to tempt the same fate, and place itself beyond the reach of mortal
consequences. It is a disagreeable contemplation in all respects. The
broken slumbers that precede it?the half-waking out of them to hideous'
dreams of what is to come?the feverish agony, or the more frightful dead-
ness to all feeling?the weight of eyes that overwhelm the criminal's?the
faint,,useless hope of a mockery of sympathy?the hangman, like a spectre
crawling near him?the short helpless struggle?the last sickly pang :?
all combine to render this punishment as disgusting as possible."
Silt Isaac Newton.

AT. J), and F.R.S. ? You arc quite mistaken as to the fact of Sir
Isaac Newton's insanity. None of his biographers make mention of
such a calamity. In consequence of excessive fatigue and over anxiety,
278 the editor's portfolio.

this distinguished philosopher suffered for a short period from the
effects of a trifling disturbance in the action of the mental faculties, but
he was never considered insane. Professor Whewell, in his " History
of the Inductive Sciences," alludes to the circumstance. He says, " The
stories which are told of Sir Isaac Newton's extreme absence of mind
probably refer to the two years during which he was composing his
' Principia,' and thus following out a train of reasoning, the most fertile,
the most complex, and the most important which any philosopher had
ever to deal with. The magnificent and striking questions which during
this period he must have had daily arising before him, the perpetual
succession of difficult problems, of which the solution was necessary to
his great object, may well have entirely occupied and possessed him.
He existed only to calculate and to think; often lost in meditation, he
knew not what he did, and his mind appeared to have quite forgotten
its connexion with his body. His servant reported that on rising in tlio
morning lie frequently sat a long portion of the day lialf-dressed on the
side of the bed, and that his meals waited on the table for hours
before lie came to take them. Even with his transcendant powers, to
do what he did was almost irreconcileable with the common conditions
of human life, and required the utmost devotion of thought, energy of
effort, and steadiness of will?the strongest character, as well as the
highest endowments which belong to man."

Dreaming.

Dr. S?n.?The passage he refers to is from Lockc " On the Human
Understanding." This distinguished philosopher maintains that nature
never made excellent things for mean or no uses; that he could hardly
conceive that our infinitely wise Creator should make so admirable a
faculty as the power of thinking, that faculty which comes nearest the
excellency of his own incomprehensible Being, to be idle, or uselessly
employed, at least a fourth part of its time here, as to think constantly,
without remembering any of these thoughts, without doing any good to
itself or others, or being any way useful to any other part of the creation.
If we well examine, wo shall not find, lie supposes, the motion of dull
and senseless matter, anywhere in the universe, made so little use of, or
so wholly thrown away.

Dn. Haslam's Definitions.

Scrutator.?Dr. Haslam was undoubtedly very lucid in his definitions
by the grammatical and metaphysical opinions of Home Tooke. Mr.
Tookc's system was involved in a fundamental error; he confounded
the etymological part of grammar with the exegetical.

Ideas of the Insane.

Our correspondent is not quite correct in describing Dr. Haslam's
ideas on the subject. This physician observes that there is seldom
reason to suppose that sensations wholly new are introduced into the
minds of the insane by disease, or that tne immediate operations of the
senses arc perverted; all the illusions being false combinations of
former ideas, with the additional persuasion of their actual existence. A
madman declares that he sees the devil, and 011 being asked to describe
him, he does so by saying that he is in form of a black man, with a
long tail: thus the ideas which previously existed in his mind are
morbidly converted into perceptions. We think Ave have sfated'Dr.
Haslam's view correctly. We quote from memory, not being able to
find the exact passage 111 his writings.

The Suicide of Dr. Sayer.

Query.?Dr. Sayer certainly destroyed himself; his biographer (Mr.
Taylor) says that the latter years of the poet's life were grievously afflicted
?with hypochondriasis: the form which this disease assumed in him was
an excessive anxiety about the future condition of his soul. He
destroyed himself on the 16th of August, 1817. The following verses
were discovered in his pocket after his death; they plainly indicate the
cause of his unhappiness:?

"With toilsome steps I pass through life's dull road,
No pack-horse half so weary of his load;
And when tbis dirty journey shall conclude,
In what new realms is then my way pursued ?
Say, does the pure embodied spirit fly
To happier climes, and to a better sky ?
Or, sinking, does it mix with kindred clay,
And sleep a whole eternity away ?
Or shall this form become again renewed,
With all its frailties and its hopes endued;
Acting once more, on this detested stage,
Passions of youth, infirmities of age ?
I've read in Tully what the ancients thought,
And judged unprejudiced what moderns taught;
But no conviction * * *
In chains of darkness wherefore should I stay,
And mourn in prison whilst I keep the key ?"
Capabilities of tiie Insane.

A Lawyer.?In answer to the question of our correspondent, we must
confess that we have occasionally known persons decidcdly insane on
one point, mix in the world, and take their part in its affairs, with credit
to themselves and advantage to others. A judge in the West Indies
imagined that he was a turtle; but this ridiculous impression did not
prevent him from sitting on the bench and fulfilling his judicial func-
tions as regularly as his learned colleagues.

Prussian Idea of Insanity.
-------------------------

A. J5.?"We quite agree with our correspondent. According to the
Prussian code, the " furious" and " demented" arc defined to be persons
completely deprived of their reason. The imbecile are defined to be
"those who are unable to estimate the consequences of their actions."
Comprehensive definition this!

Mr. Critden's Insanity.
----------------------

M.E.C.S.L.?The Crudenyou refer to was the author of the "Con-
cordance." He was confined in an asylum. He wras once asked whether
he was ever mad? He replied, "I am as mad now as I was formerly)
and as mad then as I am now; that is, not mad at anytime!"
Logical Acumen of the Insane.

In reply to the same correspondent, wo will cite the following fact*
in illustration of the power which some lunatics are capable of mamfest-
ing- _ A Jesuit, Squambari by name, believed himself to be a cardinal,
and insisted that he should be addressed by the title of " Eminence.
His physician endeavoured to reason him out of his false idea, upon
which the madman spoke as follows: "You either believe me rational,
or take me to be insane. In supposing the first, jour remonstrances
are an insult to me; and in admitting the second, I cannot tell which
of us is the more insane of the two, myself or you, who pretend to cure
a madman by such a show of 'logic.'
"
Cowpeb's Insanity.

" A Constant Reader, but not a Medical Man" has favoured us with an
elaborate and clever disquisition 011 Cowper's insanity. We should
have been happy to give insertion to the paper in question, had the
view taken by the writer at all accorded with the published facts of the
poet's life. He will at once perceive that his view of Cowper's mental
infirmity is an erroneous one. In referring to Southey's Life of the poet,
it appears that his first attack of mental depression occurred about his
twenty-first year, and not in his thirtieth, as our correspondent sup-
poses. This attack was manifested by strong feelings of religious horror.
Southey affirms that love had nothing to do with the origin of the
melancholia. In referring to this fact, Soutlicy makes the following
observations:?"Melancholy madness, which in women so often
originates in love, or takes its type from it, is seldom found to proceed
from that passion, or assume its character in men. Cowper's morbid
feelings, wlicn lie began to brood over them, were of a totally different
kind; and there is not the slightest allusion to any love disappointment in
his account of his own mental sufferings." In 1703, Covvper had a
second and more severe attack of hypochondria. Dr. Mackintosh in
his Memoir of the poet, attributes much of his malady to a morbid wish
to retire from active life. The learned philosopher justly remarks that
this feeling ought never to be indulged. He says, " Our happiness
depends not upon torpor, not upon sentimentality, but upon (lie due
exercise of our various faculties; it is not acquired by sighing for
wretchedness, and shunning the wretched, but by vigorously discharging
our duty to society." llcmember what Bacon says, " that in this theatre
of man's life, God and angels only should be lookers on." Dr. Mack-
intosh concludes by observing, " If Cowper had attended to Bacon's
admonition, 'that torpid minds cannot engage too soon in active life, but
that sensibility should stand back until it has passed the meridian of
years,' instead of being one of the most wretched, ho might have been
one of the most happy of men." (Vol. i. p. 157.) We will forward the
MS. according to the direction given.

Socbates.
----------

Metaphysics.?Socrates, in the first Aleibiadcs, maintains that the
contemplation of God is the proper means of knowing and understand-
ing our own soul. As the eye, says this philosopher, looking steadfastly
at the visive part or pupil of another eye, beholds itself, even so the soul
beholds and understands herself, while she contemplates the Deity,
which is both wisdom and virtue. In the Pliaxlon, Socrates speaks of
God as being r <\yu6w and to Otov-, Platinus represents God as Order;
Aristotle, as Law.

Habitual Intemperance.
------------------------

AVe quite agree with a correspondent, who writes from Huddersfield,
and who dwells upon the necessity of establishing separate asylums for
the cure of that form of unsound mind manifesting itself in habits of
intemperance. Some years back, Dr. W oodwaid, of America, published
?a pamphlet, in wliicli he points out the advantages that would accrue
from the organization of such institutions. He maintains that, 1, in-
temperance is a physical disease. 2. It is curable in the great majority
of cases, if not always. 3. The greatest existing difficulty in effecting
this end commonly arises from the extent of the temptation to which
the patient is uniformly exposed. 4. The best remedy for this state of
things is to confine the individual, with a view to an avoidance of the
temptation, and to the adoption of whatever other measures are neces-
sary for the cure,?till he is cured,?in an institution expressly adapted
for the purpose.

Genebal Paealysis of tiie Insane.
----------------------------------

A Student.?He will obtain his information from Carpenter's "Phy-
siology." This physiologist satisfactorily establishes that in nearly all
the eases of insanity accompanied with general paralysis, there exists
an injected and indurated condition of the white portion of the brain.
Foville conceives that the fibres become adherent to each other.
Calmeil maintains that the paralysis of the insane is associated with
alterations in the ceneritious portion of the brain; on the other hand,
Foville observes that he and his colleagues have investigated several
hundred cases in which there was detected obvious and palpable disease
of the cortical substance, without any other manifestation during life
than disorder of the intellect. Bouillaud supports this view of the case.
Morbid alterations in the medullary portion arc generally considered
connected with disorder in the transmission of motor impulses to the
muscles.

Idiocy?Paealysis.
-----------------

A Physician, New York.?The corpus callosum is not always absent
in cases of congenital idiocy. It is occasionally. Speaking generally,
sudden paralysis will be found to be dependent upon a slight effusion of
blood in the substance or neighbourhood of the corpora striata. If the
paralysis be accompanied by convulsions, the corpora quadrigemina, or
the parts below, are often involved in the injury.

Capital Punishments.
--------------------

A Psychological Student.?Mr. Basil Montague has written largely
on this subject, and his writings may be referred to. lie maintains
that crime is prevented, not solely by legal enactments, but by thc joint
operation of three powers?the legal power, or the fear of punishment
awarded by law?the moral power, or the fear of the censure of the
community?aud the power of religion, or the fear of Divine vengeance.
Upon duly poising these, he conceives the efficacy of all laws to depend.
"When these powers unite, their effect is the greatest possible; when
they oppose each other, their separate efficacy is proportionally
diminished. " Crimes," says the same authority, " proceed not from
reason, but from passion, and by passion they must be prevented; that
is, by keeping up in the community a sentiment of disapprobation of
the act; in the person disposed to commit it, a tendency immediately
to recoil from the thought, without any calculation at all." Sir II.
Phillips says, the dread of death has no greater effect on thieves, than
the fatal consequences of vicious gratification, or than the usual results
of an indulgence of vicious habits, have on mankind in general.
