The Pennsylvania Hospital of the Insane
=======================================

Akt. IY.-

In one of the early numbers of this Journal, we entered at some
length into a history of the Jiloomingdale Asylum, j\Tew York. We
now propose (having the data before us) giving the history and selec-
tions from the llejtorts of another large American asylum, and we feel
more pleasure in doing so, having heard very favourable accounts of
the institution from all those who have had opportunities of per-
sonally inspecting it. The Reports of this asylum, from the first
year of its being opened until 1850, have been kindly forwarded to
us by Dr. Kirkbride, the resident physician, and from them Ave glean
the following facts. It appears that the Pennsylvania Hospital is the
oldest institution in America in which regular provision was made for
the treatment of insanity, and it is said that within its walls were first
promulgated many of the enlightened views from which so many
important results have followed. Again : It appears that the fame
of its early and eminent physicians and surgeons attracted crowds of
students to its wards, and the influence of the practical instruction
there obtained, has been felt in nearly every section of the Union.
" The first patient was admitted into the Pennsylvania Hospital
on the lltli of the Second month, 1752, and between that time and
the 20th of the Third month, 1811?when persons afflicted with
mental derangement ceascd to be received into the hospital in the
city?thirty-eight thousand four hundred patients had received the
benefits of its care. Of these, four thousand three hundred and
sixty-six were insane, one thousand four hundred and ninety-three of
whom were restored to their families perfectly cured?nine hundred
and thirteen were discharged improved?nine hundred and ninety-
five were removed by their friends without material improvement?
two hundred and forty-six eloped*?six hundred and ten died?
ninety-three were transferred to the new hospital, and sixteen were
. retained in the city, waiting the completion of the detached buildings.
Of the 38,400 patients mentioned above, no less than twenty thou-
sand eight hundred and five were received and supported without
charge of any kind."?First lieport, pp. G, 7.

" All classes of insane persons, without regard to the duration ot
the disease, or of its curability, arc admitted into this institution,
upon securing the payment of a reasonable rate of board, by the
obligation of some responsible resident of the city or county of
Philadelphia."?p. 19.

A certain number of patients are admitted gratuitously. There
arc generally in the hospital from 100 to 130 free patients. There
is no distinction made in the accommodation of the two classcs of
patients. The asylum is under the direction of a board of twelve
managers, who are elected by the subscribers. To this board is
intrusted the regulation of the funds, the clcction of the physicians:
they arc also required to visit the asylum once a week. The ofliccrs
of the hospital consist of?

" A physician, who resides upon the premises, and to whom is
confided the general superintendence of the establishment; the sole
direction of the medical, moral, and dietetic treatment of the patients,
and the selection or approval of all persons employed in their care.
" A n assistant physician, living in the hospital, who prepares and
dispenses all medicines prescribed for the patients, devotes himself
to their care, sees that all directions respecting them arc faithfully
carried out, and that the attendants and others employed in the
wards fail not in the performance of their duties.

" A steward, who takes care that the buildings and grounds arc
kept in good order, makes all the purchases for the house, receives
all monies due to the institution for board, tfce.; makes engngciucnts
with those employed, pays them for their services, and settles all
accounts against the hospital.

" A matron, who has the general charge of the domestic economy
of the house, the cooking and distribution of the food, and of the
female domestics, and attends specially to the comfort of the female
patients.
" In the wings, we have the assistance of the following persons,
" Supervisors, one for each sex, whose duty it is to pass their time
* Mostly in the early Jays of the hospital, before the square was permanently
closed.

among the patients in the different wards and pleasure-grounds, to
endeavour to interest, employ, and amuse them in every way in their
power, and to sec that all the rules for the attendants in their inter-
course with the patients arc rigorously observed. Before retiring
at night, the supervisors furnish the physician with a written report
of whatever has come under their observation during the day.
"Attendants, who have the immediate care of the patients, sleep
in the same divisions of the house, attend them in the dining-rooms,
accompany them in their walks, rides, or amusements; assist them
when engaged in manual labour, and take the entire charge of the
halls, chambers, and clothing of the patients, as may be directed by
the physician.

" At present, we have rather less than one attendant for every six
patients.

" To these situations we endeavour to appoint none but those who
arc strictly temperate, moral, and of good intelligence. To perform
'perfectly the duties of attendant, requires such a variety of qualifica-
tions?such peculiar mental and physical endowments, as are not
often combined in the same individual?that in all our engagements,
it is understood that no one is expected to remain in the station who
is found deficient in the qualities we deem essential to its proper
performance."?First Report, pp. 21, 22.

In the Second Report we find the following observations :?
" On the Importance of Early Treatment.?Not a month elapses
that we do not have to regret, that some individual is placed under
our care after the best period for restorative treatment has passed.
The general proposition, that truly recent eases of insanity arc com-
monly very curable, and that chronic ones arc only occasionally so,
may be considered as fully established, and ought at this day to be
everywhere understood.

"The feeling which prompts to retaining a friend under the care
of kindred or acquaintances, is of the most natural and commendable
kind,?but insanity derives one of its painful characteristics from the
fact, now well ascertained, that in a large majority of cases, it can be
managed with succcss only among strangers, and generally in insti-
tutions where extensive provision has been made for a liberal and
enlightened treatment of this class of diseases.

" In private families, too, the care of recent eases of violent mania,
to say nothing of the expense, is of the most painful character, and
harrowing to the feelings of relatives in the highest degree. In the
alarm attendant upon such attacks, with few persons capable of ren-
dering assistance, and they ignorant of the proper mcans^ to be
resorted to, restraint of the most violent and improper kind is often
imposed, engendering feelings in the patients towards their friends,
that last long after they have ccascd to be insane. Even during the
last year, we have received four patients who had been chained at
their own homes, and who were capable of feeling, and did not fail
to express their sense of the degradation. No one of these ever
required restraining apparatus of any kind after entering this hospital.
These facts are not mentioned to censure those who employed this
form of restraint; situated as they were, it was difficult to do other-
wise, but it is certainly a strong argument for placing the insane
where such means are never used.

" Another difficulty, frequently arising from patients not being
placed under treatment soon after the accession of the disease, is, that
in chronic cases, their friends become disappointed if improvement is
not promptly visible, and remove them in the midst of a course of
treatment, before it is possible to predict whether it will be successful
or not.

" Although some few recent cases of insanity do recover in a very
few weeks, in the majority, even of these, a much longer time is
required; and in the chronic, several months, often a whole year, is
necessary to give trial to the means that may be employed. Less
than the period last named should never be thought sufficient to
destroy hopes of a recovery; and after a much longer time, we occa-
sionally have the satisfaction of seeing patients perfectly restored.
There are really some cases, in which it would be better for all parties
to avoid the excitement and expense of removing them from home,
unless there was a determination to persevere for a reasonable time
in a trial of remedies. The board of managers require payment to
be made for thirteen weeks' board of every uncured patient removed
before that period, and contrary to the advice and consent of the
superintending physician,?not with the wish to indicate this as
sufficient for a trial of remedies, but only because, whenever a patient
is removed without adequate reason, the payment of board for a less
period docs not compensate the institution lor the inconvenience and
disadvantage attending such a course, and for the expense to which
it has been subjected.

"Although the importance of these views is now generally con-
ceded by professional men, it is proper they should be believed by
the friends of patients. No one should ever be placed in any insane
hospital, until his friends arc thoroughly satisfied of the importance
and necessity of the measure; and then, only in an institution in
whose organization and management they have entire confidence,
and to the discretion and judgment of whose officers they arc willing
to submit the direction of the case.

" This kind of confidence, and the influence of friends springing
from it, is often of great importance, in enabling the officers of an
institution to carry out many details in both medical and moral
treatment, and in preventing premature removals. Although in a
few instances the want of it has disappointed our hopes, I am happy
to be able to say, that, generally, we have been most faithfully
seconded in our endeavours by the friends of patients.

"A strictly charitable institution like the Pennsylvania Hospital,
depending for its principal support upon the contributions of the
benevolent?its only object to relieve suffering humanity, and its
income all expended for this purpose, and for this alone,?has the
strongest reason for believing this confidence possessed by all who
ask it to receive a patient within its walls. We have occasionally
found this trait in the charactcr of the institution highly gratifying
to patients, and have seen the entire removal of fears of arbitrary or
interested detention, by the discovery that no one connected with its
management or direction had a pecuniary interest in the detention of
patients; and that, however large the sum paid for their accommoda-
tions, the surplus over actual cost only went to impart some of the
same comforts and advantages to those with whom poverty was
added to disease.

" The economy of subjecting cases of mental derangement to proper
treatment, immediately upon the occurrence of an attack, has not
been generally understood, or no State would have neglected to make
adequate provision for the early care of all who were thus afflicted.
There can be no question but that every community, not having
within itself the proper means, would save largely by sending their
recent cases to some well-conducted insane hospital, and retaining
them there as long as there was a prospect for their restoration. If
this was done, a large proportion of them would, in a few months,
be restored to society, instead of continuing, as is now too apt to be
the case, a charge to their friends or the public during the remainder
of their lives."?Second Report, pp. 22-5.

The following judicious observations are made relative to the visits
of friends and others to patients in confinement:?

" When it has been decided that it is proper to place a patient in
an insane hospital, the propriety of visits from acquaintances must
always be left to the judgment of those to whom the management of
the case has been entrusted. The welfare of the patient often demands
that they should be completely interdicted, and a neglect of this pre-
caution occasionally produces mortification and disappointment, and
causes a renewal of excitement which it may require weeks to subdue.
In other states of a case, the visits of friends may not only be unob-
jectionable, but useful, and to those by whom this is regulated it
must always be more pleasant to solicit than to decline them.
" The visits of strangers among the patients are often much less
objectionable than those of friends and relatives, but even these, if
not properly regulated, may produce bad effects. A larger company
than usual passing through the wards at one time, rarely fails to
produce among the insane a degree of excitement not generally ob-
served; and if to this happen to be added anything like frivolity of
behaviour, or thoughtlessness of conversation, the effect is noticed for
some hours afterwards."?Second Report, pp. 2G, 27.

Deception should never he practised on the insane. It is almost
invariably followed by bad results. Vulgar, illiterate, and inex-
perienced persons are disposed to invest the insane with a feeling ot
superstition and horror. More than half of these horrors will be
destroyed, and the chances of recovery increased, whenever the whole
community can look upon the insane as upon other invalids, suffering
under a disease as curablc in the early stages as many others;?and
can believe that, when restored, an individual who has been thus
afflicted is as worthy of confidence and respect, and as capable of
resuming his position in the world, as though he had recovered from
a fever or other affection, in which the manifestations of his mind had
been temporarily deranged. Patients can then be made to under-
stand, that a hospital is only a place prepared by enlightened bene-
volence for the treatment of these affections, requiring, as they do,
a greater diversity of means, and more varied and expensive arrange-
ments, than are available in the ordinary hospitals, or at their own
homes.

Under these circumstances, some patients, if told candidly why
they were removed from home, and where they were going, would
acquicsce in the arrangement with cheerfulness; and if persuasion
should fail, it would still, in nearly every case, be better to use
sufficient force to effect the object, than to lose the respect and con-
fidence of the patient by employing deception.
Many sensitive individuals find it exceedingly difficult to forgive
the deception by which they have been brought from home; tliey
brood over it for months,?consider it a proof that their friends are
not capable of appreciating the true state of their minds, and in
some very intelligent cases, it has really appeared to be a source of
greater grief than all the privations attending their residence in a
hospital.

We aro glad to hear the medical writer of the Report observe, that?
"The free and systematic exercise of the muscles of the body, in
the open air, is unquestionably one of the most powerful means of
overcoming that nervous irritability which we constantly find among
our patients,?of breaking up a train of morbid thought, or prevent-
ing the indulgence of vicious habits; all of which aro often to be
traced directly to sedentary pursuits in impuro air, and an oxcrcise of
the mind totally disproportioncd to that of the body. By these, a
state of the system is often engendered, that no course of medication,
without a total change of habits, can remove."

After detailing at some length the system of moral treatment pur-
sued in the asylum, which appears to be based upon the most en-
larged, liberal, and humane views of the disorders of the mind, the
following observations arc made on the subject of?

Restraint and Seclusion in the Treatment of the Insane: "It
is not to be concealed, that we always have in our family some
with that unfortunate temperament that blackens the fairest scenes,
?distorts the purest motives, and misconstrues the kindest actions ;
and that many require some more decided restraint, until the violence
of their attack has subsided.

"No hospital for the insane can ever be without restraint;?the
very charactcr of the building?the laws for its government, and the
supervision and discipline that are required, impose a wholesome
restraint upon all who enter its walls. Fortunately, the discipline
and restraint which the necessity of the case demands, can hardly
prove injurious. The same cannot be said of the means formerly
believed necessary, the evils of which were of so terrible and lasting
a character, that too much pains cannot be taken to diffuse more
correct and enlightened views in regard to it.

" Seclusion to guarded chambers, for a limited period, is of vast
importance in the treatment of insanity, but, to prevent abuse, its
duration must be under the immediate direction of a superior officer
of the house. To no other persons can it be safely intrusted.
" Every year brings us cases to prove the danger of seclusion being
improperly continued; and the bad habits which we have found most
difficulty in subduing, have been traced directly to this cause; often
combined, it is true, with the constant employment of some kind of
apparatus, which effectually prevented the patient from taking proper
care of his person, had he been so disposed.

" Patients steadily confined to their rooms arc generally more
addicted to the destruction of clothing and furniture?to filthy
habits?and often offer greater violence to those about them, than
when they have more freedom in their movements.

" Seclusion, for very short periods, I have found sufficient restraint
for nearly every case under care during the past year, and with an
average population of one hundred and fourteen, there have rarely
been more than four or five confined to their chambers. On more
than one occasion, for two or three weeks together, not a single male
was thus restrained. At the time of writing this report, and during
several previous weeks, there has been but one of each sex in this
situation. If proper provision is made for seclusion, classification,
and attendance, all the common kinds of restraining apparatus may
be dispensed with in the treatment of insanity; but of the propriety
of doing so, under all circumstances, I still entertain doubts.
? The error of dispensing with all apparatus in every case,?if error
it is,?is, fortunately, one that will cure itself, and one not likely to
be adopted by any person who is not actuated by pure motives and
genuine philanthropy.

" Our invariable rule is to remove all restraint from the person of
every patient upon his entering the hospital, and it is with extreme
reluctance that it is ever re-applied.

" The completion of the lodges has contributed to diminish the
already very small amount of restraining apparatus used in this
institution. They were constructed with the express view of prevent-
ing even seclusion, by a strict classification of the patients iu the
halls; and on that account the rooms arc only intended for night, or
for the temporary confinement of very violent patients by day.
The effects of these arrangements have been very striking. By
proper association and strict supervision, very little glass has been
broken, (although much is exposed,) and many patients have been
prevented from tearing their clothes, until the habit seemed to have
been entirely forgotten.

"It may be assumed, as the result of experience, that a diminution
of restraint, with proper attendance, promotes cleanly habits and
lessens noise, breakage, and tearing.

" Among the patients received directly into these lodges, were
several persons whose hands had been constantly in muffs, or
analogous kinds of restraint, for years before they entered this
hospital. Immediately on their reception all restraint was removed,
and in no one instance has it been re-applied.

" In each of these buildings are generally sixteen or seventeen
patients. During the year, no apparatus for restraint has been
applied, except in two cases, and it is rare that more than one patient
of each sex are confined to their rooms. In the lodge occupied by
the females no restraining apparatus has been employed.

" Had I felt anxious to make such a declaration, it would have
been in my power to have stated, that during the past year, no
restraining apparatus of any kind had been upon the person of a
single patient of this hospital;?but believing, as I do, that its occa-
sional employment may be conferring a favour on the patient, it has
always been resorted to where there existed a proper indication for
its use. The only indication for its use that is recognised in this
hospital, is the positive benefit or safety of the patient,?never the
trouble of those to whose care he is intrusted,?and the direct order
of the physician or his assistant, the only authority under which it
can be applied. The use of restraining apparatus ought rarely to bo
intrusted to other hands. Until attendants have learned by ex-
perience that ultimately they gain by avoiding its use?they rarely
fail to suggest its employment, under improper circumstances?upon
every occasion, indeed, when difficulty or danger is apprehended;
instead of showing their own tact, by a resort to other expedients
for controlling the patient.
" It has been truly said, that 1 any contrivance which diminishes
the necessity for vigilance, must prove hurtful to the discipline1 of an
hospital for the insane; and this is a strong argument against the
ingenious contrivances that have been devised for this very purpose.
" Since my last report, one female patient was kept upon her bed
for a few nights, by a very efficient and comfortable apparatus of
leather. Wristbands, secured by a belt around the body, were used
with four males, and mittens (all of leather) were kept upon the
hands of throe other men during a few days. A few hours were
generally sufficient for all purposes. These were used when the dis-
position to injure themselves or others was particularly striking,
or to prevent the indulgence of vicious habits."?Second Report,

One of the most difficult features in connexion with the manage-
ment of asylums, is that relating to the character of attendants upon
the insane. It is certainly most desirable that they should be pos-
sessed of a high moral character, a good education, strict temperance,
kind and respectful manners, a cheerful and forbearing temper, with
calmness under every irritation; industry, zeal, and watchfulness in
the discharge of duty; and, above all, that sympathy with those under
their care which springs from the heart, are among the qualities which -
are desirable, and as many as possible of which should be combined
in those who are placed in this station.

When all these are found in one individual, and he has been in-
structed in the proper mode of performing his duties, his sers'iccs to
any institution and to the sick are truly invaluable. Such an at-
tendant is really a benefactor to his species.

With a view of relieving the attendants from the wear and tear of
body and mind, almost inseparable from their anxious and responsible
vocation, Dr. Ivirkbride, the physician to this asylum says he
has been in the habit of giving as much variety as possible to the
occupation, by combining out-door exercise with ward-duties, and
affording a certain amount of time for entire relaxation, or for inno-
cent recreation. This effectually produces good health, and the
cheerfulness and equanimity of temper springing from it, which are
so important in their intercourse with the insane. The patients are
as much benefited by this course as the attendants themselves.
The subjoined observations arc so replete with good sense, and
calculated to dispel so large an amount of error, that we do not
hesitate in transcribing them (without abridgment) to our pages.
They refer to the subject of?

" Popular Errors respecting Insanity.?The condition of the
insane is not influenced alone by the treatment they receive at home
and in hospitals; their comfort and happiness is also, in many cases,
deeply dependent upon a correct public opinion, and a proper appre-
ciation by the community of the true nature of their malady.
" The insane complain, with cause, that their disease is not
regarded as others are; that its character is misunderstood; and
that, although the ridiculous ideas prevalent half-a-century ago are
mostly exploded, some hardly less rational are still entertained by
many persons of character and standing in the community.

" Insanity should be classed with other diseases. Many persons
of fine feelings arc extremely sensitive on this subject; they suffer
deeply, and have their convalescence protracted, by a belief that
there are numbers yet to be found who regard their disease^ as a
reproach, and something to be remembered in all their future inter-
course with them.

"It should never bo forgotten, that every individual who has a brain
is liable to insanity, precisely as every one who has lungs is liable to
pneumonia, or, as every one with a stomach runs the risk at some
period of being a martyr to dyspepsia. Prudence and a good con-
stitution will often ward oft* complaints through a long life, but how
often, even with the most careful, does disease commit fearful
ravages. It is with insanity as with other affections. Our records,
and those of other institutions, establish the fact, that scarce any
age is positively exempt; that there is no profession, trade, or call-
ing, but has representatives among its victims; that it is constantly
met with where no hereditary taint can be discovered, and that in a
great number of cases, no satisfactory cause for the disease can be
assigned.

" As tending, in some measure, to give insanity its proper position
among diseases, and confirming the impression, which it is always
important to l^ep prominent before a patient, that it is curable, I
have always preferred the name of Hospital, for institutions for its
treatment, to all others that have been suggested; and it is very
doubtful, if advantage has ever been derived from calling insanity
by any other than its proper name.
" It has been too much the custom to say, without any qualifica-
tion, that 'insanity is the greatest aflliction that can befal humanity;'
and many patients have had their wretchedness vastly increased by
this common assertion. When neglected or aggravated by brutal
treatment, it unquestionably becomes so. The proposition just
referred to has originated from taking, as a type of the disease,
some incurable case, labouring under the most violent and repulsive
symptoms, and made hopeless, perhaps, by want of proper care, or
by a course of management tending only to prevent recovery.
" Such cases do ultimately reach nearly every Hospital, but do not
present a fair specimen of the disease, nor is it just that what may
be perfectly true of them should be applied to all. Although it
must ever be painful to look upon the wreck of a strong mind, it
may be doubted whether, even among the incurable, there arc not
numbers who are comparatively happy, and have many enjoyments,
if the proper feeling actuates those under whose care they live.
" The melancholy state to which these incurable eases arc often
reduced, and the striking contrast between them and those who have
been restored, offer strong reasons for the general diffusion of correct
views on this whole subject, for strenuous efforts for the establish-
ment and liberal endowment of Hospitals enough to enable all in
the early stages of the malady to partake of their advantages, and
for leaving nothing undone, to have in and about those already in
operation everything that can contribute in any way to promote the
objects for which they have been erected.

" In a comparison of insanity with other diseases, it must be borne
in mind that it presents the greatest diversity of aspect, and that
the symptoms are in almost endless variety; that many cases are
attended with very little suffering, require but little restraint of any

kind, arc not disabled from appreciating books or the society around
them, or from enjoying many intellectual and physical comforts.
" It is to be remembered, too, that the result of experience is,
that at least eighty per cent, of all cases, promptly and judiciously
treated, recover, in periods varying from less than three months to
one year, and upwards; that most of these continue in the enjoy-
ment of perfect mental health, and are as competent to fulfil all their
social and public duties as they were before the accession of the
disease.

" It is not necessary to refer to distinguished names, whose history
is familiar to most readers, and whose writings and labours after
recovery have shown no impairment of their mental powers; for
every physician who has had charge of many patients of this descrip-
tion will recal to mind examples of individuals occupying prominent
public stations, members of all the learned professions, merchants,
and indeed persons in every station of life, who, aftqj their restora-
tion, have returned to their former pursuits, and have shown, by
their successful prosecution of them, that neither their mental
powers nor their usefulness to society had been abridged by the
malady under which they had been labouring.

" It may well be asked, whether other maladies may not some-
times 1)0 as much to be dreaded a3 this; whether certain forms of
consumption, whether some varieties of cancer and various other
malignant diseases, which, through continued suffering, lead on to
certain death,?whether even blindness, total and irremediable, pro-
tracted during a whole life, may not be as terrible as the sorrows of
insanity can be, when existing only for a limited period.
" Like other diseases, insanity has its peculiarities, of which one
of the most trying to attached relatives and friends is, that generally
the patient must" leave home, and the management of the case be
intrusted to strangers, and that the resources of a hospital are often
required to give the best chance for a restoration.
" Many persons in the interior know nothing of Hospitals, and
descriptions drawn solely from the imagination have often distressed
patients and their friends, and have deprived them of advantages
which they might have enjoyed. A removal from home may be
necessary for other diseases; for the benefit of climate, it is a com-
mon prescription; and if in these cases health was to be obtained by
entering a hospital, few would be found to object to such a course.
Nor would the insane or their friends object, did they know that a
hospital was only an establishment for the cure of disease; prepared
and endowed by enlightened benevolence, provided with all the con-
veniences and fixtures likely to contribute to the restoration and
comfort of its patients,?many of which arc of too expensive a
character to be attainable by individual means, ? where, by the
architectural arrangements of the building, and the regulations of
the wards, nearly all restraint is avoided; where the law of kindness
is the governing one; where the sick have practised persons con-
stantly about them?are carefully nursed and guarded from harm?
shielded from the gaze and remarks of idle curiosity?and where all
their peculiarities, and all the ramblings of a disordered intellect,
are, as far as possible, known only to those whose duty and wish it
is to prevent all exposure.

" The association of insane persons in a hospital is occasionally
objected to. The perfection of treating the disease would un-
doubtedly be, to surround each patient with a sufficient number of
intelligent and well-educated sane persons, familiar with the whole
subject. This, of course, is totally impracticable; and after careful
observation on this point, I do not recollect ever having seen a
patient, where there was a proper classification, materially injured
by coming in contact with his fellow-sufferers. In many cases, the
effect is negative, and sometimes disagreeable to a patient, without
being at all injurious. With the mass of our patients it has been
advantageous; in a few, very strikingly so.

" The mor<^ intelligent and sensitive class of insane patients
frequently complain that they are annoyed, in various ways, both
before and after recovery, by many well-meaning but indiscreet
persons, in their intercourse with them, forgetting the scriptural
injunction, 'That all things whatsoever ye would that men should
do to you, do ye even so to them;'?and they ask that their natural
peculiarities should not be more critically noticed by the community
than are those of other men;?while, in common justice, they
believe that they should be considered sane, and possessing the same
rights and feelings as others, until they exhibit symptoms that
would indicate mental derangement in those who had never been
suspected of having the disease.

" We can all call to mind cases of peculiarity of conduct, obliquity
of views on certain subjects, and various eccentricities, that in our
intercourse with the world scarce excite a passing remark, but
which, in a hospital, are liable to be considered as the remains of
the disease. So statements of facts, not known or not understood
by those who hear them, when made by patients, arc often reported
as a proof of continued insanity;?and it is a matter of common
remark, that individuals are often seen to walk and converse with
patients, without a suspicion of their being so, but who, when
informed of it, immediately suppose they detect indications of some-
thing^ wrong, even when none can be discovered by those whose
duty it is to watch for every symptom of the disease.

" Those who have themselves been insane may do much towards
correcting all these popular errors, by their own conduct after
recovery, and by conversing calmly upon the subject; avoiding alike
that frivolity which makes a jest of what is serious, and that morbid
sensitiveness which is shocked by the slightest allusion to it. Those
who are interested in the management of institutions for the insane,
? the members of the medical profession, and all humane persons
familiar with the subject, can do still more, by allowing no suitable
occasion to pass without controverting the wrong views which they
will constantly hear advanced in their intercourse with society."?
Third Jieport,Dr. Kirkbride, in his Fourth Annual Report for 1844, again reverts
to the important subject of restraint. He maintains it as his opinion,
that from information collected from nearly all the regularly organized
institutions for the insane in his country, he has 110 doubt but that
less real restraint is employed in them, at this time, than in the same
number of similar establishments in any part of the world.
In America, cruclty, immoderate restraint, and ingenious but
barbarous contrivances to control the insane, are rarely, if ever,
found in properly-organized hospitals. When they do exist, it is in
the almshouses, and jails, and in the private dwellings of the inha-
bitants.

The disuse of restraint, or the non-restraint system, ns it has been
called, means the disuse of mechanical means, for which, of course,
other less objectionable forms must be substituted. A properly-
constructed building, an efficient organization,?a more numerous
body of more active and intelligent attendants,?all the means to
prevent excitement,?all the power which sympathizing kindness
and tiict can bring to control it when produced, and temporary
seclusion, when other means fail, are only a part of the varied modes
by which mechanical means of restraint arc rendered unnecessary.
Few intelligent men, familiar with insanity, could now be found
to assert that restraining apparatus was frequently required, or that
many patients could be benefited by its use. The question in con-
troversy appears to be, whether its use is ever justifiable under any
circumstances, or whether it can ever be employed without injury to
the patient 1

Believing firmly that the improper use of restraining apparatus,
combined with long-continued seclusion, has been, and ever will be,
productive of the worst effects, and go far to render intractable,
curable cases of disease, Dr. Kirkbride is still of opinion, that a few
of the simpler forms of mechanical means may occasionally be
employed, with advantage to a patient. Judging from his experience,
the per-ccntage in any hospital for whom these means arc indicated
is exceedingly small, and for considerable intervals none will be
required. The rule should be that no restraint is to be employed,
excepting under special circumstances; while at the same time it
should be understood, that long periods of seclusion are not to take
its place, as the effects of the latter might be still more injurious
than the former.

There is one advantage resulting from the nearly entire disuse of
restraining apparatus that should never be overlooked,?it brings
into activity a constant supervision,?a genuine watchfulness,
352 RATIONAL TREATMENT OF THE INSANE IN ASYLUMS.
develops tlie capabilities of the attendants,?shows the great power
of kindness and firmness, and brings out a species ot tact, which
would have been dormant, had mechanical means and seclusion been
resorted to, to overcome violenco, remove cxcitcment, or cure bad
habits.
After a careful review of the 592 cases, which have been under
care since the opening of this hospital, Dr. Kirkbridc says lie has
110 hesitation in saying, that all might have been treated without the
use of any mechanical means of restraint, had they started with such a
determination, or had they felt any pride in making such a declaration.
He feels ecpially confident, however, that in the few cases in which
the mild means already referred to have been employed, the effect
in some has been to prolong, if not preserve life,?in others, to
diminish serious danger, and to shorten extreme violence, and in
scarce a single one to have been productive of the slightest injury of
any kind.

In the Pennsylvania Hospital the restraining apparatus is kept in
the office of the physician, and, like medicine, is never prescribed,
unless there is believed to be a decided indication for its use. It
is never applied but by the express direction of the physician, and,
when applied, never kept on longer than he believes it likely to
obviate a great danger, or to promote the comfort and benefit of the
patient.

We are glad to perceive, by the ltcports of the Asylum, that the
education and instruction of the patients reccivo a proper degree of
attention. The opinion is too prevalent, that the insane require for their
comforts?their enjoyments?their reading?their accommodation
of nearly every kind, something radically different from what would
have been their choice when sane. Differences at times arc really
necessary, and discrimination is to be used; but it will ultimately be
found, that the nearer the circumstances of each case will permit an
approximation to what is required by, and due to, the sane, the more
rational and successful will be our treatment of the insane. We are
too apt to believe that what has not been done in the treatment of
insanity cannot be done, and rest satisfied with things as they now
exist. What appears right and proper should be tried,?if tried
with care and prudence, little injury can result from the experiment:
a short time will satisfy a careful and intelligent observer whether
good is likely to come from it; and even if it proves a failure, sonic
new views or facts can hardly fail to have been derived from the
trial.

Many persons, forgetting tho great variety there is in mental
diseases, and that a mind deranged on one subject may be sound on
all others, seem astonished at some of the means of treatment, and
some of the forms of occupation and amusement, now to be found
about most well-conducted hospitals. The questions constantly
asked?whether the insane do really enjoy any of these means,
whether they really understand what is being done, or whether they
are able to appreciate anything of the higher order of physical or
intellectual enjoyment?is a proof that the true condition of a
majority of this class is not so well understood, as to give to those
thus afflicted that thoroughly liberal and enlightened treatment
which is due to such a malady, and necessary for its early and cer-
tain removal. Our experience proves that, during some period of
their disease, a majority of patients arc able to appreciate all the
courtesies and comforts of life, and to participate in most of its en-
joyments, occupations, and amusements, in a restricted way, with
quite as much zest as a majority of the community of which they
were recently members.

In the following observations relative to the attendants tqwn the
insane wc cordially agree:?
" Of the value and necessity for a numerous corps of good
attendants in every hospital, there ought not at this day to be any
difference of opinion; and every superintendent must feel it an im-
portant part of his duties to see that the best within his reach are
regularly employed. No man could have too many good qualifica-
tions for such a station, and every day and hour would give him
opportunities of using all his gifts, to the great benefit of those
around him. It is a station in which natural feelings and human
temper arc often sorely tried. To have in each ward an individual
thoroughly and practically familiar with the whole subject?cour-
teous and refined in manner?Christianly patient and benevolent in
character?able to act as the guide, and counsellor, and friend of all
the patients in their varying conditions?to direct with judgment,
and act with tact in every emergency, would be making a great
stride towards perfection in our institutions. The nearer we
approach this, the nearer right wc shall be.

" Most individuals when they first engage in these stations are
perfect novices, and we should expect too much to suppose that
their previous pursuits would qualify them to perform at once all
their duties in a very perfect manner. When we know how utterly
erroneous arc the views of many, otherwise well-informed men?how
injudicious their treatment of the insane?can we be surprised that
new attendants arc often at a loss, and generally require considerable
training before their services are very valuable 1
" To remedy in some measure these difficulties, and to elevate the
character of the attendants, I propose to give to those employed in
this institution, as my other engagements will permit, a regular
course of instruction on the nature of their duties, embracing some
general views of the character and peculiarities of the diseases which
affect our patients?the principles which should regulate their inter-
course with them, and with each other?the proper mode of pro-
ceeding in difficult cases, and such other matters as would be likely
to give them a just sense of the importance and responsibility ot
their calling. Some such knowledge ought really to be possessed
by every one before he becomes an attendant; and, when all these
things arc properly appreciated, every applicant should be regularly
examined 011 these subjects before lie is employed.
" No duty is more pleasant than to be able to acknowledge, as I
am, the value of the labours of supervisors and attendants in this
institution. They always have the power of earning the confidence
of the officers and the respcct and gratitude of the patients, and in
numerous instances have been most successful in doing so."?Fifth
Report, pp. 38, 39.

From an examination of the records of almost any institution, it
will be found that a large proportion of its permanent population,
from the long duration of their diseases, present but a feeble prospect
for their perfect restoration; and 011 this account it has frequently
been suggested, that hospitals for incurable patients, more cheaply
organized and less perfect in their character than those for curing
insanity, should be provided in every community.
These propositions, there is reason to believe, have generally been
made without sufficient reflection, and our own observations would
lead to a directly opposite conclusion.
In the first place, it is not possible to say with accuracy who arc
curablc. There is not a year passes but that we have the satisfaction
of seeing some restored to all their wonted mental vigour, who had
been locked upon as without hope; while others of the same class
have experienced an improvement in their condition which enabled
them to return to society, and occasionally to cngnge in useful occu-
pation and to indulge in many rational sources of amusement. Even
it there was 110 risk ol destroying in these every chance of returning
reason, by condemning them to the exclusive society of incurables,
and to the limited means of comfort which would most likely be
appropriated to them, there arc still reasons enough, in reference to
those who arc never to be restored, to prevent, in my estimation, a
division of hospitals into curable and incurable.

It is 110 small matter, if a disease of the mind cannot be com-
pletely removed, that the mind is kept as far as possible from the
lowest forms of dementia. The moral means which are to aid in
the restoration of the curablc arc often efficient in sustaining tho
mental powers of those who arc really incurable. Every intelligent
person knows the effect of associatio 1 upon his own mental powers
and activity; he feels in himself, and sees in others, that the society
of the moral, the educated and refined, has a steadily elevating and
improving influence, while the companionship of the profligate, the
ignorant and the degraded, is equally sure to gradually bring down
the brightest intellect and to obscure the finest talents. So when
the mind is primarily diseased, and the symptoms are of the slighter
kind, the steady, untiring and judicious sympathy and kindness of
friends will often dissipate the cloud that was gathering, and which,
under other circumstances, would ere long have left the unmis-
takable imprint of its fearful ravages. At a later period, when the
sufferer has passed through the early stages of his malady, and
become, perhaps, the permanent resident of a hospital for the
insane, kindness and sympathy are still efficient, respectful and
courteous treatment arc still appreciated, exercise and labour still
bring their best reward, judicious conversation, reading, or even
hearing the reading, of good books, the attendance of lectures,
riding and walking, visits to objects of interest, variety in daily
pursuits, good food, well cooked and properly served, neatness of
person and dress, everything, indeed, that keeps the mind as well as
the body steadily and pleasantly employed, is still productive of
beneficial results.

To witness a mind that seemed lost completely restored to health
and usefulness, is no ordinary gratification; but to the philanthropist
it is only less than this, to sec minds that cannot be restored kept
from losing all their powers, and the possessors of them from
becoming the wretched objects, mentally and physically, to which
long continued ncglcct and ill treatment can then so easily reduce
them.

It has been objected, too, that the curable must be injured by the
presence of those who arc incurable. A judicious classification will
take all force from this objection, and those who argue thus must
forget, that among the incurables of a large hospital arc frequently
ladies and gentlemen, whose good qualities of head and heart, whose
kind feelings and courteous manners, would make their presence
desirable in almost any company; whose few delusions injure no one,
and the loss of whose society would be removing much of the attrac-
tions of a ward for even the most rccent and curablc cases. There
arc others who, although they have no decidedly good qualities to
recommend them, still seem to add to the variety which most arc
partial to; and even the Ycry worst of the chronic cases are rarely tor
a long time in a condition that is so melancholy and revolting, as
are some of the most recent and curable for short periods.
While life lasts, every case should be considered under treatment?
if not to cure, at least to keep it from becoming worse. Those who
are likely to spend their lives in these institutions have, perhaps, the
strongest claim on their friends, and those intrusted with their care,
for everything that can tend to promote their comfort and happiness,
and to preserve their mental and physical health.

Every year presents us with cases that should teach lis never to
despair?at least to treat all as though there was still hope ol
returning health?to surround our oldest and worst cases with as
many as possible of the influences that would be likely to impress
favourably the most recent and hopeful patients, and as few as can
be of those which might tend to retard their restoration. We shall
then be sure that our treatment of all is of the soundest and most
enlightened kind, and for our efforts we shall often have to reward
us, not only partial amendment where least looked for, but the
cheering spectacle of minds gradually emerging from the chaos in
which they had been involved, perhaps for long years, and slowly but
steadily regaining their original powers, their sympathies with their
fellow beings, and enabling their possessors to resume the placc long
vacant in the family circle, and again to become useful members of
society.

The experience of our hospitals, in reference to chronic as well as
recent cases, is important to the friends of patients; they are more
deeply interested than any other class, and without their co-operation
little can be done by the officers of our institutions. A steady perse-
verance in efforts for the cure of a patient, even for very long periods,
is often most unexpectedly rewarded, and can rarely give any cause
for ultimate regret.

We beg to direct the attention of our readers to the following
observations, in reference to a?
" Provision for the Habitually Intemperate. ? This subject is
one of deep interest to the philanthropist, and is constantly
brought to the notice of those who have charge of hospitals for the
insane, by the frequent applications for the admission of improper
cases of this description, by the difficulty which frequently exists
in determining whether the individual should be admitted or not,
and the earnest appeals for advice in reference to this unfortunate
class of persons.

"Although the frequency of intemperance as a direct cause of
insanity, may occasionally have been over-rated, still the records of
this and of most other institutions of a similar character, show con-
clusively that even in this way it is a prominent and fearful one, the
diseases of no less than 66 out of 663 men -who have been received
here being clearly attributable to this cause alone. If we could
record all the cases which were produced by it indirectly, by the ill
health which it engenders, by the loss of property and of character,
the family difficulties which it excites, the activity given by it to
the worst passions and vices, the silent grief over long-cherished
hopes, and the deep mortification of sensitive and refined minds
which result from it; its effects on others besides the victim of the
habit,?on parents, wives, children, and friends, the number to whom
intemperance is assigned as a direct cause in our tables, would but
feebly portray the proportion of those who indirectly, but not less
certainly, owe to it their insanity, as well as their other sources of
permanent sorrow and domestic wretchedness.

" Where real insanity is the result of intemperance, a hospital for
the insane is unquestionably the proper place for the victim of this
wide-spread vice, and when mania-a-potu?which ought never to be
received into an institution for the insane,?terminates in insanity,
as it occasionally docs, the same distinction is then proper for the
wretched sufferer, whose case is likely to be of long standing, and
the recovery always doubtful.

" An uncontrollable fondness for, and indulgence in, ardent spirits
or other stimulants, with the usual results of such a course, are
occasionally only symptoms of insanity, coming on in the progress of
the case, often in individuals of the most correct habits, who had
never before manifested such a propensity, and disappearing as the
other symptoms of insanity are removed. In these individuals, of
course, this peculiarity offers no reason for interfering with the
ordinary disposition of such cases.

" There are, however, other and quite numerous classes of habitual
drinkers, who are not suitable subjects for a hospital for the insane,
but for whom some special provision should be made on their own
account, and still more for the sake of their families and friends, and
for the peace and quiet of the community.

"One of these classes is composed of individuals whose intemperance
leads to acts of outrage against society, and brings grief and terror
into quiet families, with ruin to their worldly prospects, but who
seem to care little for reformation, and for whose acts insanity
cannot be pleaded as an excuse. The seclusion of these persons
brings temporary improvement, but nothing more, and if allowed
they would, for limited periods, be frequently found in our hospitals
for the insane, for admission into which they clearly can have no
just claim.

" The moral effect produced on other patients in the wards, by the
presence of such individuals, is almost always unhappy; they cannot
legally .be detained but for a short period; they arc commonly
indignant at the restraints which arc necessarily imposed on them,
and when discharged, they return to their homes only to renew the
same scenes of debauchery and outrage. Insane patients object
most strongly and reasonably to such associates, and with great
justice protest against disease being placed on a par with vice, and
misfortune with wilful debasement; claiming, with truth, that
although insanity is a heavy affliction, it brings with it no reproach,
and its acts sully no one with dishonour.

" There is another class, however?much more numerous, too, than
is generally supposed?for whom advice is frequently solicited, and
whose cases, on many accounts, arc possessed of great interest.
They differ in nearly every respect from those previously referred
to, except an uncontrollable fondness for stimulants, and a moral
weakness, which prevents their resisting the slightest temptation.
"When not under the influence of the habit, they are fully sensible
of its enormity, and of the results sure to follow from its conti-
nuance, arc anxious to reform, and willing to submit to almost any
privation to effect the objcct. These arc frequently persons of
high standing in the community, possessed of wealth and every
worldly comfort that could be desired. No business or profession
is exempt, not even ministers of the Gospel. From the histories
given by patients or their friends, it is common to learn that the
sufferer is a man of liberal education, ample wealth, surrounded by an
affectionate and devoted family, happy in all his domestic relations,
and respected in the community; himself a truly benevolent man,
active in works of charity, and ever ready to assist the suffering, yet,
with all this, an uncontrollable fondness for stimulation is destroying
everything; domestic happiness is gone, worldly ruin is impending,
impaired health begins to foreshadow the coining destruction of a
good constitution, and the future is even darker than the present.
" Such eases do occasionally enter a hospital for the insane, and
their good qualities of head and heart render their presence quite
unobjectionable; but there is much in the discipline of such insti-
tutions not pleasant to them, and the society they there meet is apt
to become tiresome, so that they arc likely to leave before their
reformation is complete.

" When the pecuniary means of patients are ample, detached
cottages, or apartments, disconnected with the regular wards, may be
advantageously used; but only a limited number could thus be pro-
vided for, and then not under all the circumstances most favourable
for a thorough reform.

" A certificate that the applicant for admission 4 is insane,' signed
by a respectable graduate of medicine, is required here, and, it seems
to me, should be everywhere, preparatory to the admission of a
patient into a hospital for the insane. This one regulation, of itself,
will exclude most of the 4 habitually intemperate,' and although a
few do enter as monomaniacs, the number is comparatively small.
Commonly, the stay of these cannot be insisted on for a sufficiently
long period, and reformation is rarely the result of the attempt.
44 For all these different cases some provision should be made, a
retreat provided, where those who are anxious to reform should bo
surrounded by every influence likely to second their good intentions,
anil where society would be protected from those, who, with little
care for the result, are not only ruining themselves, but destroying
every good prospect of their families. The detention should be
legalized, and not terminated but upon a proper medical or judicial
investigation, and not regulated in any respect by the wishes of the
patient or his friends.

" Such an institution should be under the direction of a well-
educated and judicious physician, who should treat his patients as
labouring under disease; and with kindness and firmness, a combi-
nation of medical and moral means, there is little doubt but that
many good citizens would be annually restored to society; and where
permanent reformation was found to be impracticable, individuals
would be kept from habitual debasement, their families saved from
ruin, and society protected from violence and disorder. It is a field
for labour worthy of the active benevolence of the age."

We should like to see this important subject taken up by judicious
persons, and much of the fallacy, error, and prejudice in association
with it dispelled. Alas ! how many hundreds are annually sacrificed
at the shrine of intemperance, whose lives might have been spared
had efficient means been resorted to at an early period, before the
habit became fixed and confirmed. That there is a disease of the
mind manifested solely in an uncontrollable desire for stimulating
drinks, we have not a doubt; the more we see of the insane, the
stronger is this conviction fastened on our minds. There is ordinary
intoxication, and this may, to a certain extent, become a habit; but
there is, apart from this, a form of insanity, exhibiting itself almost
exclusively in a morbid yearning for intoxicating drinks. We have
often seen cases of the kind, and as often have lamented our inability
seriously to grapple with them until the disease has extended into
positive delirium, and it is only at this stage that the law allows us
to interpose !
It appears, from the last Report of this asylum, that during the
past year the total number of patients in the establishment was 408.
The following is an account of the number of patients discharged
during the year 1849:?
Cured 104 ? 2-r> per cent.
Much improved <i ) _ 10 perceut.
Improved . . ? ? ? ? .333
Stutiounry ....... 25
Died ' . ' ? .10
Total .... 187
The subjoined tubles will be read with interest:?
300 THE PENNSYLVANIA HOSPITAL FOR THE INSANE.
Table I.?Showing the number antl sex of the admissions and discharges, since
the opening of the Hospital, and of those remaining at the end of 184.!).
Admissions
Discharges or deaths
Remain
Males.
880
771
118
Females.
710
(507
103
Total.
1590
1378
221
Table II.?Showing the ages o/1500 patients at the time of their
admission.
Under 10 years
Between 10 and 15
? 15 and 20
? 20 and 25
? 25 and 30
? 30 and 35
? 35 and 40
? 40 and 45
? 15 and 50
M. F.
?!l
45 40
153 103
104 114
131 70
110 82
81 100
09 i 00
T.
1
3
01
250
278
207
201
187
138
Between 50 and 55
? 55 and 00
? 00 and 05
? 05 and 70
? 70 and 75
? 75 und 80
? 80 and 85
M.
880
F. T.
710 1500
Table III.?Showing the number of single, married, widows, and widowers,
in 1500 patients.
Single
Married
Widows
Widowers .
Males.
507
311
Female*.
283
327
100
Totul.
700
008
100
THE PENNSYLVANIA HOSPITAL FOR THE INSANE. 361
Table IV.?Showing the supposed cause of insanity in 1599 patients.
Ill health of various
kinds
Iutemperance . .
Loss of property . .
Dread of poverty . .
Disappointed affec-
tions
Intense study . . .
Domestic difficulties .
Fright
Grief, loss of friends,
&c
Intense application to
business . . . .
Religious excitement.
Political excitement .
Metaphysical specu-
lations . . . .
Want of exercise . .
Engagement in a duel
Disappointed expecta-
tions
130
88
51
117
7
21
253
95
72
24
19
48
23
77
13
01
3
Nostalgia . . .
Stock speculations
Want of employment
Mortified pride . .
Celibacy ....
Anxiety for wealth
Use of opium . .
Use of tobacco. .
Puerperal state
Lactation, too long
continued
Uncontrolled passion
Tight lacing . .
Injuries of the head
Masturbation . .
Mental anxiety
Exposure to cold .
Exposure to direct
rays of the sun
Exposure to intens
heat . . .
Unascertained .
1
1
5
3 ?
53
3
0
1
11 3
11
30 41
2
15 ?
307 !297
24
3
1
1
7
3
53
3
10
1
14
11
77
15
1
004
Table V.?Showing the ages at which insanity first appeared
in 1599 patients.
Under 10 years
Between 10 and 15
? 15 and 20
? 20 and 25
? 25 and 30
? 30 and 35
? 35 and 40
? 40 and 45
? 45 and 50
14
87
193
109
125
102
82
40
9
75
134
140
80
00
87
51
23
102
327
309
211
108
109
97
Between 50 and 55
? 55 and 00
? 00 and 05
? 05 and 70
? 70 and 75
? 75 and 80
889 710
1599
3G2 TIIE PENNSYLVANIA IIOSriTAL TOR THE INSANE,
Table VI.?Showing the forms of disease for which 1509 patients were admitted.
Mania
Melancholia
Monomania
Dementia .
Delirium .
Males.
420
1S1
140
133
Females.
:j?:)
1 HI
88
05
3
Total.
802
302
228
107
10
We cannot conclude onr desultory review of these Reports, without
expressingtoDr. Kirkbride,and to the other medical and general officers
associated with him, the gratification we have derived from a perusal
of this interesting history of their great national and benevolent
institution for the care and cure of the insane. It gladdens our
hearts to perceive how much our American brethren, connected
with this department of medicine, are influenced by the highest,
the purest, most benevolent and humane views of the treatment
of those afflicted with this form of disease. May they go on and
prosper, is our hearty and sincere benediction.
