The Human Mind Considered in Some of Its Medical Aspects
==========================================================

:Author: J. Bower Harrison, M.R.C.S.L.
There is nothing which is more common than to hear people
speak of possessing a knowledge of human nature. It is usual
to signify by this a mere acquaintance with the vices of mankind,
which does, indeed, form one part of this knowledge, but it is
not all. What is called a knowledge of human nature is said to
be acquired only by mixing with the world, which implies that
a real intimacy with the workings, tendencies, and capabilities of
the human mind is industriously kept back in our literature, and
that by the general consent of mankind it is deemed better that a
great part of the world should be ignorant of the true position of
their fellow beings. Many of those who arc teachers of religion and
morality, have certainly derived their ideas 011 this subject from
sources which show, in point of fact, a complete ignorance of human
nature, or, at least, the studious disguisement of such knowledge.
The reserve, which is common and proper in society, may scrccn
from the unreflecting, and those little conversant with life, much of
the real nature of the human mind.

The prescribed forms of living, of speaking and writing, and the
conventional usages of mankind, have given an artificial hue to our
actions and language, and thus the words of the great dramatist
have become literally true, that " all the world is a stage, and all the
men and women merely players." The true character of the human
mind in its more intimate workings, is little confessed in our
literature, and little acknowledged in our laws. Unfortunately, the
real appreciation of the human mind (with regard to its actual state,
and not its abstract consideration) has scarcely appeared to fall
within the province either of the moralist or metaphysician, and has
remained a kind of neutral ground, uncultivated because unclaimed.
It does not seem the part either of the metaphysician or the
psychologist to follow out all the fine workings of the human mind,
and disclose its hidden secrets. That knowledge which is sometimes
designated a knowledge of the world, approaches, perhaps, nearest to
the subject in question, but is seldom possessed by those who arc
either desirous or capable of systematizing their information, and
thus, much of what is really known of our common nature is lost
both to the philosopher and philanthropist. In the writings of some
of our novelists, it is true, we find a considerable amount of this
species of information, but it is for the most part rendered sub-
Read at a Conversazione of the Boyal Manchester Institution.

servient only to tlie entertainment of the reader, and not in every
case calculated for his edification. The writings of Fielding, Smollett,
Cervantes, and Le Sage, with many others of more modern date,
amongst which I may mention Mr. Charles Dickens, abound in
judicious reflections on men and manners, and discover no little
penetration into character and mind. After all, however, there is
an evident deficiency in published or recognised information of un-
sophisticated humanity; and hence the surprise or affected surprise
with which it is common to view what are called the inconsistencies
of human nature. That certain infirmities of mind are not incom-
patible with genius it may be common to admit, but when we
approach the subject closer, Ave shall find the poetic temperament
more frequently than not clouded with insanity, or touched with
perversity. The same bright spirit which rejoices in the sunshine of
nature is not less sensitive of the gloom. There is often a foreboding
of evil, and often the imagination will heighten the calamities which
are really present, until a thousand heartrending associations grow
up in the fertility of the mind.

The consideration of the human mind, then, in what may be
called its medical aspects, seems to me one which has not yet suffi-
ciently engaged the general attention of mankind, and I wish on the
present occasion to bring it before your notice, as a subject which is
neither devoid of interest nor advantage.

The effect of temperament may first claim our attention. I shall
not, however, confine myself to the divisions which strictly medical
writers have formed on this subject, reserving to myself the freedom
of the popular acceptation of the word.

Physical Constitution.?The constitution of the body as to its
bulk and general aspect, as well seen in the countenance as in the
conformation of other parts, is known to be connected with accom-
panying peculiarities of mind which are of every-day observation.
There is an asperity in the countenance and figure of some people
which immediately strikes us, and we feel a sort of intuitive dislike.
There are others whose open countenance and portly bearing tell at
once of generous feelings and easy dispositions. Every one remem-
bers the passage in the play of Julius Cresar ;?

" Would lie were fatter; but I fear him not,?
Yet if my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I should avoid
So soon as that spare Cassius."

The Sanguine Temperament, as the very name implies, is charac-
terised by a constitution in which the blood-vessels are predominant;
the face is red, and easily flushed; the complexion often light; the
temper hasty; the actions quick. Those who have this temperament
in a marked form often act by impulse ; they are restless, and have
difficulty in waiting for the result of their undertakings. The mind
is often too easily excited to allow of a proper operation of its
workings ; the ideas flow too quickly, and in a little while become
confused. Such persons, when called upon in exciting circum-
stances, become embarrassed, are what they call nervous, and lose
self-possession or act to disadvantage.

The character of Peter in the sacred writings gives us a good
example of this sanguine temper ; we find him saying to his Lord,
" Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet I will never
be offended ; I will lay down my life for thy sake and again,
" though I die with thee, yet will I not deny thee." But as in many
other sanguine people the feeling wanted the support of a steady equa-
nimity. When Jesus was betrayed, and Peter found himself accused
of being in his company, he denied any knowledge of him, and when
he found that lie was known by his accent, (" surely thou also art
one of them, for thy speech bctrayeth thee"), " lie began to curse
and to swear, saying, I know not the man." Such is often the fate
of the warm protestations of sanguine people. The emotion which
attends the expression of their sentiments gives the complexion
to them whilst it exists, but it is not enduring, and is succeeded by
other emotions, which for the time often overcome the better feelings
of the heart. This sanguine temperament gives what we call the
generous character ; the warmth of temper which, in moderation,
we rather admire as heightening the affections, and giving joy and
gladness : but it has also its sorrows and its errors. There is the
quick resentment and the passionate grief, and these arc the dark
aspects, which arc full of tears and lamentation. Hamlet, you know,
says to Horatio :?

" Give me the man tlint is not passion's slave,
And I will wear him in my heart's core ;
Aye, in my heart of hearts as 1 do tliee."

In sanguine people, the train of thoughts appears to be much
quickcr than in others. This is attended with certain advantages,
but corresponding disadvantages. Such minds arc imaginative?
what is called ingenious. The associations are not too strong to
forbid erratic thoughts; relations arc often readily perceived, but
there is less exactness. The memory is, perhaps, less retentive, and
the speed of the thoughts leads often to confusion. They crowd on
one another until indistinctness arises. This indistinctness is some-
times painful.

'I his kind of mind is what is called passionate ; hence the term
luisty, which may be well used as indicative of a too rapid proces-
sion of thoughts. The mind cannot well operate in this hurried
state. The ideas flash across, but they light up too fiercely a train
of associations to admit the suggestions of other minds.

.The brain is, perhaps, over sensitive, and its powers too readily
exhausted, and too intense whilst in operation.

The Lymphatic Temperament is quite the reverse of the sanguine.
Those who have this temperament are not easily moved, or excited;
the skin is pale. Such persons are better calculated' to undergo
anxieties, or meet the exigencies of sudden emergencies. The mind
has not those quick sympathies, or brilliant imaginings, which dis-
tinguish a warmer temperament.

There is a steady, cool calculation, which is more adapted to
worldly prosperity ; feelings less readily wounded, and less apt to
betray themselves in the excitement of life. Some possess this in a
surprising degree, and many assume it. Many cover a natural
sensibility by the forms and usages which polite life has invented,
and studiously avoid showing the natural burst of affection, or the
bitter outpourings of grief.

It is well, in some degree, that this should be done ; but let not
nature be altogether destroyed, and all the fine sensibilities crushed,
under an artful and sophisticated mannerism.

I think Mr. Dawson tells a story of a cockney, who visited the
beautiful and romantic scenery of the Alps, and being asked his im-
pression of a sublime prospect, which suddenly burst on his view,
said, that he must confess "it was a well got up thing." This is the
school of fashion, which gives us two fingers to touch as a welcome
after the absence of as many years.

In some, the operations of the mind are so slow that they seem
to stagnate, and pass into reverie. The extreme of this condition
lapses into a state of imbecility and fatuity ; but a certain degree of
apathy has its advantages. The mind has time to act; there is no
over-crowding of ideas?no hurry of thought. There is more con-
tinuance of application?less impatience of consideration. The
affections do not trouble the operations of the mind. There are not
those quick sympathies which have relations with everything that
passes.

There are some people, again, in whose constitution the nervous
system seems to have an unnatural preponderance; the mind seems
to be constantly in a restless state, and to wear out the body in a
ceaseless activity, or in the struggles of overweening ambition.
Such characters are ever pressing on in the competition of social life;
often a prey to cares and anxieties, which follow each other in a
never-ending succession. " After life's fitful fever," they indeed
" sleep well."

Hypochondriacal feelings are, no doubt, in a great measure con-
nected with constitution or temperament. Melancholy is much
more common than is generally conceived, and may be, as I have
already hinted, perhaps in some degree inseparable from a mind
which highly appreciates the beautiful, has quick sympathies with
all around, and a thoughtful regard to the possibilities, and even
probabilities of a changing world. On this account it 'has always
been considered by the poets as a poetic feeling, and though this
view may have attracted the sneers of some, or the ridicule of others,
there is a certain truth in the opinion. Ben Jonson alludes to
this notion, with respect to melancholy, as an accompanimcnt of
sensibility, in his " Every Man in his Humour
" Stephen. Ay, truly, sir, I am mightily given to melancholy.
" Matthew. Oh! it's your only fine humour, sir; your true melancholy breeds
your perfect fine wit, sir. I am melancholy myself divers times, sir; and then do
I no more but take pen and paper presently, and overflow your half a score or a
dozen of sonnets at a sitting."?Act III., Scene 1.

Again:?
" Ed. Knowall What think you of this, coz ?
" Stephen. Why, I do think of it; and I will be more proud and melancholy and
gentlemanlike than I have been, I'll insure you."?Act I., Scene 2.
In Scott's "Diary" (May, 1827,) lie saya :?"Imagination renders
us tlie victim of occasional low spirits. All belonging to this gifted,
as it is called, but often unhappy class, must have felt, but for the
dictates of religion, or the natural recoil of the mind from the idea
of dissolution, there have been times when they would have been
willing to throw away life, as a child does a broken toy. I am sure
I know one who has often felt so."

A disposition to melancholy is by no means, as might at first be
imagined, necessarily indicated by a grave and staid deportment.
In a large proportion of instances, it is even coupled with an ex-
uberance of spirits, which would seem to promise a perpetual sun-
shine of cheerfulness.

The mind, however, which is alive to joy, is also, and perhaps
equally, alive to sorrow; and often passes by quick transitions from
the one to the other.

Our great dramatist, in mingling the ludicrous with the tragic, has
evidently shown his acquaintance with this tendency of the human
mind. Byron has happily blended in some of his most successful
passages the sublime and the ridiculous, thereby greatly heightening
the effect of both. In his "Corsair," however, he has directly
touched upon this peculiarity of the mind, where lie says?
" Strange though it seem, yet with cxtremest grief
Is linked a mirth,?it doth not bring relief.
That playfulness of sorrow ne'er beguiles,
And smiles in bitterness,?but still it smiles."

In Dr. Currie's Life of Burns, allusion is made to the combination
of melancholy and gaiety in the character of that extraordinary poet.
Notwithstanding the gaiety of Burns' writings, he was constitu-
tionally a melancholy man, and was subject "to those depressions of
mind, which are perhaps not wholly separable from the sensibility of
genius, but which, in him, arose to an uncommon degree." ....

"Such a disposition is far from being at variance with social enjoy-
ments. Those who have studied the affinities of mind, know that a
melancholy of this description after a while seeks relief in the endear-
ments of society, and that it has no distant connexion with the ilow
of cheerfulness, or even the extravagance of mirth.""'
In a letter from Sir Walter Scott to his daughter in-law, the fol-
lowing mention is made of Mathews, the comedian. " I am glad
you like my old acquaintance, Mathews. Some day I will make
him show his talent for your amusement in private?for I know
him well. It is very odd?he is often subject to fits of deep melan-
choly,"+

From these cursory remarks on melancholy, I may proceed to
speak of some particular states of mind, which attend the same pccu-
* P. 105. + Vol. iv. p. 10, Lockhart's Lifo.

liarity of temperament, and though not incompatible with mental
sanity, are yet to be considered as bordering upon derangement.
Some of the illustrations I shall bring forward are from works of
poetry, but may be considered, nevertheless, as expressive of actual
facts, because I have scrupulously avoided making use of them where
the subject had need of graver support; so that in effect they are
rather introduced to relieve and exemplify the matter, than to sub-
stantiate it. The curious feelings to which I allude, exist in various
degrees of intensity in different people. They cannot be considered
as common to everybody, and are far more frequent or powerful in
the imaginative and eccentric, than in others. Yet I should conceive
that they prevail to a greater extent than is commonly supposed.
Amongst this class of feelings may be placed the disposi-
tion which is sometimes manifested by those who stand on pre-
cipitous cliffs to cast themselves down. This seems suggested by a
kind of insane impulse, which is dreaded by the very person who
indulges it.

Scott beautifully alludes to such a feeling in " The Lady of the
Lake."

" There are, wlio have at midnight hour,
In slumber scaled a dizzy tower,
And on the verge that beetled o'er
The ocean tides incessant roar,
Dreamed calmly out their dangerous dream,
Till wakened by the morning beam ;
When dazzled by the eastern glow,
Such startler cast his glance below,
And saw unmeasured depths around,
And heard unintermitted sound,
Aud thought the battled fence so frail,
It waved like cob-web in the gale;
Amid his senses giddy wheel
Did he not desperate impulse feel
Headlong to plunge himself below,
And meet the worst his fears foreshow ?"?Canto II., 22.
The same is alluded to by Shakspere in his " ITamlet," when he
is cautioned by Horatio not to follow the Ghost,?
" What, if it tempt you towards the flood, my lord,
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o'er his base into the sea;
And there assume some other horrible form,
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason,
And draw you into madness ? Think of it,?
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain,
That looks so many fathoms to the sea,
And hears it roar beneath."

This, though fiction, is of course true to nature. We know how
many have jumped from monuments, and given way to an impulse
to suicide created by circumstances. Many instances of the same
kind might be brought together, not merely from our classical
writers, but from the pages of our journals and newspapers. The
cases of suicide which seem to have been suggested by the contcm-
plation of frightful precipices?deadly poisons, or dangerous weapons,
may be considered under this head. Hence the importance of
avoiding evil thoughts and tampering with dangerous ideas. The
same kind of feeling sometimes urges people to contemplate scenes
of suffering and distress, which arc painful to be witnessed, or
pushes them on to acts which they at the same time dread. This
tendency is also well alluded to by the great poet of nature in the
scene in " Romeo and Juliet," where the latter contemplates her
anticipated position on the tomb of all the Capulets:?
" How if, when I'm luid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that llomeo
Comes to redeem me ?

Alack ! alack! shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears ?
And madly piny with my forefathers' joints,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud ?
And in this rage with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains ?"
This insane feeling is here well portrayed, where the very
speaker has been previously expressing her horror of that dreadful
place, where?

" Bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud."

There are feelings sometimes which are contradictory in their
nature and objects. The mind is strangely perplexed in a war of
emotions?emotions which arc cherished whilst they are painful.
Actions are not always dictated by the simple feelings which seem to
have given them birth. How many persecuting spirits have wept for
those they have persecuted. There are those whose feelings of
mercy and forgiveness have struggled hard and yet yielded to pride
and an ignoble revenge. Such contradictory feelings do indeed
partake of an insane character, and there is a fine significance in the
words of the poet,?

" That to be wroth with those we love,
Doth work like madness on the brain."

I bring forward these remarks on such states of mind, because I
think it of great importance (as they really do exist) that they
should be at once deprecated as unhealthy and insane feelings; and
in order if possible to make it appear that the proper control of the
nund, which constitutes virtue, is in reality the most conducive to a
sound tmderstanding. Let it not be considered, however, that I. mean
. to assert that mental derangement is necessarily the result of vice?
it is more often the cause. To resume, however. In the auto-
biography of the celebrated Goiithe, he makes reference to this most
unfortunate contention of feeling.

Goethe says,?
" I accordingly fell into that evil disposition of mind which often
misleads us so far as to make us find a pleasure in tormenting those
whom we lo\e, and I abused the fondness of a young female by
tyrannical and arbitrary caprices. Secure of the affection of Annette,
and of lier anxiety to please me, I vented on her all the ill-humour
that the failure of my poetical essays, the apparent impossibility of
doing myself honour by them, and everything else that occurred to
vex me. I poisoned our best days by groundless and unworthy
jealousies. She long endured all these follies with angelic patience;
but I had the cruelty to tire it out."*

Hazlitt observes, that men often " take a perverse delight in
acting, not only contrary to reason, but in opposition to their own
inclinations."+

Again and again I may say that the contemplation of these
curious workings of the mind should lead us to see the importance
of attending to its due regulation, and lead us to regard improper
feelings as insane impulses which are to be dreaded as disease.
The peculiar notions which some eminent men entertain, probably
against their better judgments, may be also just alluded to. Scott
speaks of a feeling of pre-existence in his Diary (Feb. 17):?
" A hard day of working, being I think eight pages before
dinner. I cannot, I am sure, tell if it is worth marking down, that
yesterday, at dinner time, I was strongly haunted by what I would
call the sense of pre-existence?viz., a confused idea that nothing
that passed was said for the first time; that the same topics had
been discussed, and that the same persons had stated the same
opinions on them There was a vile sense of want of reality
in all I said and did Something of this insane feeling
remains to-day, but a trifle only.

This feeling of pre-existence is a sort of poetical feeling; I mean
most frequently met with in persons of highly imaginative moods, or
engaged in metaphysical pursuits. Dickens mentions in his Pictures
from Italy his first sight of Ferrara in the following terms:?
" On the foreground was a group of silent peasant girls leaning
over the parapet of a little bridge, looking now up at the sky, now
down into the water; in the distance a deep bell; the shadow of
approaching night on everything. If I had been murdered there
on some former life I could not have seemed to remember the place
more thoroughly, or with more emphatic chilling of the blood ; and
the real remembrance of it acquired in that minute is so strengthened
by the imaginary recollection, that I hardly think I could forget
it."?

Shelley states " that whilst walking with a friend in the neigh-
bourhood of Oxford, a scene presented itself which he remembered
long ago to have seen in a dream."\\ Mrs. Shelley remarks on this,
" I remember well his coming to me pale and agitated to seek refuge
in conversation from the fearful emotions it excited."
Many of us may have a sort of feeling of reminiscence of things
which we in reality see for the first time, probably because they
? P. 218, vol. i. + Characteristics, p. 82. t P- 114, vol. vii.
? P. 102. || Shelley's Memoirs, p. 135.
NO. X. S
awaken a train of thought similar to what other objects may have
previously excited.

From these desultory remarks on the characters of mind which
accompany the more highly, and may he unduly, developed powers
of the imagination, I may proceed to speak of the connexion of
bodily disease with mental peculiarity.

Disease.?Every one knows the effect of disease on the human
mind in rendering it a prey to uneasy feelings and capricious
changes. Happy, indeed, is he who has no rcminiscenccs of weary
hours spent in midnight vigils, or long days of unrest, in which the
mind refused to take its wonted pleasure in occupation or literature.
We are, perhaps, too apt to regard our minds as above the influence
of circumstances, and altogether dependent on self-control and
voluntary effort. Disease may teach us that the mind itself is the
gift of a superior power, and its very complexion dependent 011
causes which we cannot command.

Shaksperc, as you all well know, makes a happy allusion to the
effect of disease in enervating the mind, in Cassius's speech in
contempt of Csesar :?

" He had a fever when he was in Spain,
And when the fit was on him, I did mark
How he did shake. 'Tis true, this god did shake :
His coward lips did from their colour fly;
And that same eye, whose bend doth awe the world,
Did lose his lustre! I did hear him groan ;
Ay! and that tongue of his, that bade the Romans
Mark him, and write his speeches in their books,
Alas ! it cried, Give me some drink, Titinius,
As a sick girl."

Apoplexy and palsy bring the finest minds to imbecility The sufferer
yields to fits of passion, and readily " dissolves in tears," in alternate
succession, and thus remains an object for pity and the tolerance of
friendship, until another attack completes the ruin, and leaves him
a miserable wreck?the shadow of his former self. " By this dis-
temper," Sir Henry Halford tells us, "the talents of the great Marl-
borough were confounded." The most serene and powerful minds
are troubled by disorders of this nature,?curious aversions, fits of
irritation, and whining imbecility, take the place of easy and kindly
dispositions ; so that our very virtues are dependent on the suffer-
ance of a superior power.

lhe languor and lassitude which accompany biliary derangements
are well known and of common remark. The peculiar perverse
states of mind which attend various forms of hysteria, furnish us
with some of the most curious instances of human weakness which
can possibly engage the attention. The effects of indigestion in
creating frightful dreams,# have been experienced by us all. How
rejoiced we are, after suffering from the most terrible nocturnal alarm,
to awake, and " find it all a dream." Perchance a bull pursues us, and
our limbs refuse to move,?a wild and disgusting animal fastens its
teeth on us, and escape is in vain,?an immense load bears 011 us,
and instant suffocation is impending. Sterne, in liis Sentimental
Journey, illustrates the effects of disease on the mind in his usual
striking manner :?

" The learned Smelfungus travelled from Boulogne to Paris, from
Paris to Rome, and so on. But he set out with the spleen and
jaundice, and every object he passed by was discoloured or
distorted. He wrote an account of them, but 'twas nothing but
the account of his miserable feelings. I met Smelfungus in
the grand portico of the Pantheon,?'Tis nothing but a huge
cock-pit, said he. * * * I popped upon Smelfungus again
at Turin in his return home, and a sad tale of sorrowful adventures
had he to tell. * * * He had been flayed alive, and bedeviled,
and used worse than St. Bartholomew, at every stage he had come
to. ' Pll tell it,' cried Smelfungus, 'to the world.' 'You had
better tell it,' said I, ' to your physician.' "

It is well known that age induces great mental changes. We are
all willing to suppose that we grow wiser as we grow older, and
it is to be hoped that this is really the case; but so far as our
morality is concerned, we should bear in mind that we forsake
many of our vices only because the temptation no longer exists.
We "put away childish things" when we cease to have the desires
of childhood ; and the vices of youth would often come back in
advanced life if Ave could bring back the fresh feelings of youth,
and all the impulses which first took possession of our souls. How
much such considerations should make us humble, charitable, and
forgiving; should render us distrustful of our own virtue, and com-
passionate for the feelings of others, and make us thankful to Him
from whom all goodness proceeds.

Delicate states of health often induce, or are connected with,
states of mind which seem too refined for the common intercourse
of life. There is often a precocity of mind in delicate children
which far surpasses in nicety of feeling the ideas of those more
advanced in age. They who have reminiscences of their early sick
beds will know how little their own ideal creations were understood,
and how little known were the deep recesses of their infant minds.
The practical in after life takes the place of the poetical, and the fine
sensibility shrinks and withers in the rude competition of actual life,
and in reality " concealment, like a worm i'th* bud, feeds on the
damask cheek."

Debility of body is often, in fact, generally, productive of great
mental susceptibility, and sometimes irritability of mind. Shakspere
says?" Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works." People who
have robust health, and have always enjoyed such, can enter little
into the sentiments of others, nor appreciate the feelings which
accompany feeble and imperfect states of health, or constitutions of
greater delicacy and refinement. Shelley says, " I know not the
internal constitution of other men, I see that in some external attri-
butes they resemble me; but when, misled by that appearance I
have thought to appeal to something in common, and unburden rav
s 2 }
0.5G THE HUMAN MIND CONSIDERED
inmost soul, I have found my language misunderstood, like one in a
desert and savage land."*

Insanity.?In considering the human mind, in its medical
aspects, it might naturally enough be supposed, that the subject of
insanity would form a principal part. I shall not, however, lor
many reasons enter upon it in this place, further than to touch upon
those lighter, or more partial derangements, which are less com-
monly made matter of observation or remark.

It has often appeared to me, that much good might arise from the
consideration of mental sanity, on a finer scale than has hitherto been
afforded. The condition of the mind may not be properly healthy,
without being betrayed into those complete aberrations which shock
the observer, or call for the interference of friendly restraint. The
subject has its relations, both to morals and jurisprudence; but there
is, perhaps, no education which so fits the mind to enter 011 its consi-
deration, as that which is prescribed by the study of medicine.
When we contemplate our species in the workings of great and
good minds, we cannot fail to feel proud of a humanity which is
capable of achieving vast designs, and compassing mighty under-
takings. The names of Newton and Locke inspire us with a kind
of reverence for the capabilities of our nature. We then, indeed,
perceive, that there is "a divinity which stirs within us, and indi-
cates eternity to man." How high and godlike is the mind which
can scan its own operations, sit in judgment 011 itself, review the
events of past ages, and anticipate the future progress of societies
and nations. It would be a pleasing task to dwell on the greatness
of the human mind. We see it in the honest and sturdy Franklin?
the humble and philosophic Dalton?the persevering and indefati-
gable Priestly?the bold and imaginative Davy?the philanthropic
Howard?the laborious and highly-gifted Hunter. If we turn from
this picturc of the more lofty style of man, and look to those aberra-
tions of the intellect which we find in the receptacles for the insane,
we must feel a humiliation at least equal to our previous gratifica-
tion. Here we have the drivelling idiot?the raving madman?the
moping melancholic?the incoherent dreamer?and the timid and
suspicious hypochondriac. Nor is it a correct opinion, that the divi-
sion between the intellectual and insane portion of mankind is so
broad as it appears 011 a cursory consideration. That there are
minor aberrations of mind which do not come within the limits of
actual madness, there can be 110 doubt; nor is real insanity so far
dissevered froin the more healthy operations of the mind, as to
be altogether incompatible with intermissions of extraordinary
brightness.

It is well know 11 that many ol our eminent writers, especially those
of an imaginative kind, w:re hypochondriacs. The unfortunate
Cowper and Collins were of this class ; and Chattcrton and Haydon,
it will be remembered, destroyed themselves under its influence. The
* Mcnioiis, p. 18!),

Rev. Robert Hall had periods of actual insanity, and the elegant
Charles Lamb probably escaped from his sister's fate, only by the
necessities of his own position. Whitbread, Romilly, Londonderry,
and Calcraft, put an end to their own existences ; but the list is too
great to particularize, and it is enough to know, that learning and
genius are not removed from the worst of human calamities.
The fate of the unfortunate Swift is too well known to need
comment; but even before the period at which his mind gave way,
it is too probable that he inwardly laboured under a mental infirmity
which, in itself, might be nearly allied to his genius.
The last document which we possess of Swift, as a rational and
reflecting being, is given by Sir W. Scott, in his Life of the Dean; and,
as Sir Walter says, awfully foretels the catastrophe which shortly
after took place.

" I have been very miserable all night, and to-day extremely deaf,
and full of pain. I am so stupid and confounded, that I cannot ex-
press the mortification I am under, both in body and in mind. All I
say is, that I am not in torture; but I daily and hourly expect it.
Pray let me know how your health is, and your family. 1 hardly
understand one word I write. I am sure my days will be very few
?few and miserable they must be.
" I am for those few days, yours entirely,
"J. Swift."

" If I do not blunder, it is Saturday."

From these glimpses of the misfortunes and imperfections of great
men Ave may see that genius is not unalloyed. Carlyle, in his esti-
mate of Scott, has much sense in the following remark :?" The truth
is, our best definition of Scott were perhaps even this, that he was,
if no great man, then something much pleasanter to be, a robust,
thoroughly healthy, and withal very prosperous and victorious man."
What we call genius has often a degree of eccentricity connected
with it, and, as Dr. Ferriar has hinted, may even have an alliance
with insanity. "No doubt," says he, "the same causes which in a
strong degree produce madness, may, in a lower, increase the natural
powers of the mind. High cultivation and extraordinary talents
are not in themselves the certain means of goodness nor of happi-
ness. The mind, rendered more subtle and more oppressed with
thought and ambition, looks back even to its primitive simplicity
with a feeling little short of regret. Byron says?
" I feel ftlmost nt times as I have felt
In happy childhood ; trees, and flowers, and brooks,
Which do remember me of where I dwelt
Ere my young mind was sacrificed to books,
Come as of yore upon me, and can melt
My heart with recognition of their looks."*
On the other hand, the mental powers which are the farthest removed
from insanity, are not perhaps the most ingenious, fertile, or ima-
* Poetical epistle Written to bis sister.

ginative. Tlie more brilliant mind which sees relations not percep-
tible to others?the associations of which are not too strong and
constant to forbid erratic flights, may be, on this very account, the
more capricious, unsettled, and uncertain in its operations?possibly,
the more easily pushed from its own balance, and lost from its very
want of anchorage to slow and settled, albeit erroneous, doctrines.
They who have undergone great changes of opinion can alone know
what it is to abandon the landmarks of thought, and go out into a
sea of meditation, without any well-known beacon to guide them, or
familiar appearance to mark their course. Errors may be dear, even
sacred to the mind, and to abandon the errors which ages have nursed,
may indeed be difficult to those who have cherished them from their
earliest infancy.

Moral Insanity.?As minds differ greatly in respect to the
intellectual powers, so they differ also in regard to the affections and
instinctive impulses, and these latter appear to be subject to aberra-
tions independently of the former. The late Dr. Prichard, in a very
?able work on "Insanity in its Relations to Jurisprudence," has treated
of the subject under the head of "Moral Insanity," and were I to
state all that I think important, I should not content myself without
transcribing the greater part of what he has written. It may seem
rather startling to look upon moral aberrations as resulting from
mental infirmities. I am far from wishing to appear as an apologist
for vice, but a close attention to the subject obliges me in fairness to
admit, that the propensities and impulses of the mind may want a
just balance as well as the intellectual powers. I feel that I have
not here room to do justice to the subject, but I may say that those
who have given most attention to the various phases of insanity arc
coming to this opinion. Such views cannot perhaps alter materially
our social relations nor penal institutions, but they will at least make
our charity more broad and lasting, and our compassion for the
erring more enlightened. Undoubtedly the protection of socicty
requires that the morally insane be arrested in the career of crime;
for if it " needs be that offences come, it must also needs be that there
be ivoe to him through whom they come."

The facts upon which the evidence of moral insanity rests, arc too
striking and numerous to admit of doubt, and the subject would
probably have long ago been more fully investigated, had it not been
for the privacy attached to instances of this kind, and the reluctance
which is naturally felt to admit a plea which appears, at least on
first consideration, to have dangerous consequences.

Hie existence of moral insanity is recognised by Esquirol and
Georget, on the continent, as well as by Prichard, Dr. Hitch, and
others, in England, indeed, by the best authorities we have on the
subject. Insanity is far from showing itself merely in hallucina-
tions and illusions, as is commonly supposed. Often the first overt
act of insanity is one of moral delinquency or extravagance, and
however delicate the question may appear in a moral consideration, it
is impossible to shut our eyes to the truth. In many of these
instances it seems that the absence of moral control constitutes the
essence of the disorder; and persons are known to conduct them-
selves well in asylums who, immediately on being released, give way
to excesses of maniacal excitement, or betray the most ridiculous
eccentricities and absurdities. I may probably, on some future
occasion, return to this subject; here, I can only hint at it.
Instincts and Piiopensities. ? Independently of this moral
insanity, there are also grades of difference in the passions and pro-
pensities of the mind, less excessive, but still worthy of study in
connexion with such considerations as these.

That attachments are to some extent instinctive would appear
from the maternal fondness even of the brute creation; and it is
beautiful to witness the tender offices to which it leads. There can
be no doubt but that feelings of personal attachment are much
stronger in some people than in others, and may even exist to a
morbid degree. Sheridan, in his play called the Rivals, apostrophises
love as the tormentor and fiend, " whose influence acting 011 men
of dull souls makes idiots of them, but meeting subtler spirits betrays
their course, and urges sensibility to madness." Dramatists and
novelists have in all ages amused mankind with the tragical crea-
tions of fiction, but such stories interest only because the annals of
real life have also their broken hearts.

Perhaps one of the most beautiful delineations of human attach-
ment in comparatively modern literature, is that of Goethe's Mar-
garet, in his celebrated Faust. The clinging of affection in the last
hour of horror and of crime rises to a sublimity which is only
heightened by the confiding simplicity of the character. The mysti-
cal and unholy career of Faust contrasts with the beautiful love of
Margaret, nor can there be imagined in the downward career of de-
struction any reproach which can speak so eloquently as the voice of
unaltered love :?
" Where I have him not, For him alone look I
Is the grave to me, Out at the window.
The whole world For him alone go I
Is embittered to me. Out of the house.
My peace is gone,
My heart is heavy,
I shall find it never,
And never more."*
Attachment to place may exist with more or less strength. Some
persons have strong preferences for particular places, and feel, when
removed, as if transplanted to an uncongenial soil, and pine for the
scenes they have left.

Amongst the Swiss, love of country sometimes rises to a degree
which actually impairs the health. I think Sir Walter Scott in his
last illness felt in the spirit of his own poetry a strange yearning for
the scenes of his native country after literally " wandering on a foreign
strand.'

Hatred may be mentioned, as well as attachment, as a feeling
* From a Prose translation of Faust.

liable to morbid excess. Very strong and enduring hatreds are
sometimes indicative of insanity itself, especially where tlicy are
cherished without a sufficient cause. Happiness is compatible alone
with a healthy balance of the mind, and the indulgence of proud
hatred and uncharitable hostility is only a small remove from the
ravings of the madman, and the sound and fury which signify nothing.
In connexion with the subject of hatred, I may mention a law
of the human mind which has always appeared to me of the greatest
importance?I mean, that the passions are greatly augmented by
the manifestation or expression of them. I have sometimes over-
heard an animated conversation, passing by transitions of bitterness
into the most violent quarrel, each party rather fanning his own
feelings by the expression of them than listening to the abuse of
his opponent.

A woman will sometimes set her arms a-kimbo in the street and
commence in a moderate tone of reproof, but after a time she will
acquire greater and greater warmth until she flies at the cap of her
antagonist. This law of the mind is very apparent in Lunatic
Asylums. I remember an old woman at the County Hospital at
Lancaster, who is always abusive, but the first few words she says, espe-
cially to a stranger, are tranquil enough?after a little time, however,
she waxes louder and louder, and more and more vehement, although
no remark or opposition may have been offered to what she has said.
A tendency to excess sometimes seems to take its origin in mental
peculiarity. Where the imagination strongly predominates there is
often a liability to intemperance or excess, which brings talent to con-
tempt, and is a matter of surprise to those of more obtuse but evenly re-
gulated minds. The fate of the unfortunate Savage has been rendered
familiar to all the lovers of literature by the able pen of Johnson.
Addison and Parnell arc said to have drunk to excess, and Burns is
well known to have given way to the same vice.

Anthony Wood says, speaking of John Milton, who, according to
Erasmus, was " the light and glory of English literature," " that he
was guilty of many crimes, as most poets are."*

Macnisli says, " Men of genius are unfortunately addicted to drink-
ing. Nature, as she has gifted them with greater powers than their
fellows, seems also to have mingled into their cup of life more bitter-
ness. There is a melancholy which is apt to come like a cloud over
the imaginations of such characters. Their minds possess a suscep-
tibility ot structure which unfits them for the gross atmosphere of
human nature; wherefore high talent has ever been distinguished
for sadness and gloom."

" His fame," says Carlyle, (in speaking of the literary man)
" rarely exerts a favourable influence on his dignity of character,
and never on his peace of mind; its glitter is external for the eyes
of others; within, it is but the aliment of unrest, the oil cast upon
the ever gnawing fire of ambition, quickening into fresh vchemence
* Quoted from the " Memorials of London," p. 028,
IN SOME OF ITS MEDICAL ASPECTS. 2GJ

the blaze which it stills for a moment The calamities of
these people are a fertile topic, and too often their faults and vices
have kept pace with their calamities. Nor is it difficult to see how
this has happened. Talent of .my sort is generally accompanied
with a peculisir fineness of sensibility. Of genius, this is the most
essential constituent, and life in any shape has sorrows enough for
hearts so formed."*

In conclusion, I may observe, that it is impossible, for many
obvious reasons, to enter fully, in this place, into the subject of
medical psychology, but it does seem to me that it is one which has
not yet found its due place in human consideration. It is a mistake,
and a great mistake, to suppose that it can lead only to metaphysical
subtleties and abstruse speculations. There are facts before us,
respecting the habitudes of the human mind, which are as much to
be relied on as any in physics, and as capable of being generalised
and rendered available for practical ends. Ignorance of these facts
is daily and hourly leading to cruel judgments, and to misery in all
its various forms. I am glad to say that Ave have now a "Journal of
Psychological Medicine" (one volume of which has already been
published), and which will, no doubt, greatly aid in bringing about
just views, and removing old and injurious notions. For my part,
I most solemnly believe, that, there are varieties of mental constitution
as great as any in outward form; and when I further consider the
difference which circumstances and education produce, it appears
most unfair and cruelly uncharitable to measure all by the same
standard, and expect like results from different minds. Yet this is
the practical effcct of common notions?the doctrine which is tacitly
implied in our literature, and in our law. There is an old adage that
what man has done, man may do, but it would be ridiculous logic to
interpret such a passage to signify that what one man has done, every
man may do.

The abstract mind?the general term of logicians?I grant, has 110
disorders, no grades of health, 110 varieties of power?but of this
abstraction there is nothing in nature. The mind is connected with
the body, and affected by the body, and there is still a lesson of
charity to be learnt from a knowledge of such an association.
There is a common cry against the doctrine of different grades of
mental and moral capacity, as though it impugned the goodness of
the Deity; but to me it seems only in accordance with the great
plan of Divine government, which commits different talents to the
care of his creatures. Some men are deformed, others good-looking
- some invalids from infancy, others robust?some idiots, epileptics,
insane?some rich from birth, others poor?some the descendants of
a long and, may be, an honourable line of ancestors, others the
children of beggars and of pickpockets. The brains of men differ in
s lape and in volume, and shall the mind be the same in all?
It seems to me on such a subject that not to think boldly, is to
* P. 54, Life of Scliillcr.

think unjustly, and to fear the truth on such a question, is to
imagine that the works of the eternal Creator have need to be veiled
by the flimsy apologies of his perishing creatures.
Higher Brougliton, Manchester.
