On Hypochondriasis
===================

THE JOURNALvOFvPSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY. JANUARY 1, 1850.
Slnalnttcnl sKcbtefos.
Art. I

Hypochondriasis, the poor man's scourge and tlie rich man's
plague, cowers beneath the cloak and cowl of self-loathing and
disgust of life. It is an egotism both mental and bodily, languish-
ing in a sphere of its own creation, apart from the busy bustle of
the crowd strolling along the pleasant plains of earth, and averse
to everything except the bitter consciousness of its own all-absorbing
sense of perpetual solitude and woe !

The melancholy that weighed upon the disgraced premier in Gil
Bias and wore away his spirits, presented itself in the shape of a
Irightful spectre that was never absent from his Grace's disordered
vision. It was the forerunner of his end ; and though, as Le Sage
somewhat maliciously insinuates, his death was inevitable from the
moment that the two celebrated physicians from Madrid (who had
the merit of curing their patients quelquefois), together with their
two obsequious executioners, the surgeon and apothecary, set foot
upon the threshold; yet the spectral illusion alone was sufficient
to signify the nature of his malady, and give warning of his
approaching dissolution. We were once acquainted with a Baronet
in a distant part of England afflicted in the same mournful way.
The village doctor was puzzled, and the ablest heads from the
* " Confessions of a Hypochondriac; or, The Adventures of a Hyp. in Search
of Health." By M. R. C. S. Saunders and Otley. London, 1849. Pp. fllO.
Small 8vo.

metropolis were baffled by these unwelcome visitors, wlio took
departure only upon the decease of tlieir helpless victim. In such
cases the nerves are unstrung, and their tone and harmony have
been disturbed by a long-continued abuse of the great business or
pleasures of the world ; for melancholy is one of the penalties paid
by " vaulting ambition" for the much envied liberty of being allowed
to scale the difficult itur ad astra. A friend of ours, of an habitually
melancholy mood, was once, in a fit of absence of mind, walking
up and down a room, at the bottom of which was a large plain
mirror. Suddenly raising his eyes, he beheld his own full-length
portrait, and, mistaking it for that of his brother, whom he strongly
resembled, reached forward in haste, and shivered the glass in the
thoughtless attempt at shaking hands with the image reflected
before him. He was roused from his trance by the blow, and
taught by a painful reality that there was no one present but
himself. Little children are sometimes melancholy, although
Heberden affirms the contrary; but they are scrofulous subjects,
and so are melancholy young ladies, the Rosa-Matilda's of Lord
Byron, himself a prey to the most inveterate sadness. Genius is
generally melancholy, but what if there is no genius without
scrofula 1 Johnson,.the philosopher of Fleet Street, was atrabilious,
Milton amaurotic, Grey gouty, and the interesting Cowper a coward
almost to madness. The inimitable Pope, the poet, had a crooked
spine, and Torquato Tasso, whose splendid vision of the Jerusa-
lemme Liberata ranks among the first of epics, was the sport of a
temper tinged with a sadness of the deepest die. It was the same
with Dante, and if Shakspeare was not melancholy himself, he at
least felt with delicacy the full meaning of the words that he has
so appropriately placed in the mouth of Jaques.

But what is genius 1?a supernatural gift; sublime because it is
perpetual, and enchanting because it embodies in music, verse,
bronze or marble, the everlasting beauties of nature. It is ethereal,
because it is ideal. The discovery of America, or the conception
of a Parthenon, the passage of a Mount St. Bernard, or the Agnns
Dei of a Mozart, are the creations of a single mind incapable of
propagation, and energetic only during the life, or it may be during
part of the life of a solitary individual. Homer, who addresses
himself to a universe, holds no commerce with any generation of
poets ; and a Rafaelle or a Carlo Maratti paint in an atmosphere
where meaner talents can scarcely draw their breath or handle
their brush with freedom and effect. The flame of genius burns
alone, the envy or admiration of others, if not an exhausting ecstasy
to its hapless possessor. Meteoric in its essence, it shines by fits
and starts, appearing on a sudden, flashing for a while, and then
expiring.'-

Modern sentimentalism, the mimic of genius, is a form of liypo-
chondriacism ; and much of the mawkish literature of the day,
surcharged with love-tales, melodramatic escapades, and the wild
carcer of ill-regulated passions, argues a condition of nerves in the
writers of such popular nonsense little short of softening of the
brain, or at least of some vicious degeneration of the nervous
tissues. It leads to the worst of consequences. For, physically
speaking, it is a symptom of national or personal decay; and,
morally speaking, it inflicts a judicial blindness in the exalted per-
ception of truth, virtue, and every kind of heroic action. To
benefit, not only the individual in particular, but society at large,
and to afford a substantial means for carrying forward every prac-
tical purpose in the regulation, the amelioration, the consolidation,
and, indeed, the absolute happiness of an entire community, requires
a vigorous and well-governed mind depending upon a temperate,
healthy, and strictly disciplined habit of the body.

Heberden, avIio has drawn a faithful picture of this malady, consi-
ders hypochondriasis and hysteria as different forms of the same dis-
ease. Few persons are so blessed as to be entirely ignorant of it, or
not to have sometimes felt languor and despondency without any
manifest cause. It may be of short continuance, and pass away
without being noticed by others. But in its severer forms, it is a
sort of dream, which, though a person be otherwise in sound health,
makes him feel symptoms of every disease ; and, though innocent,
yet fills his mind with the blackest horrors of guilt. These lacka-
daisical people are a sort of timid lambs with the propensities of a
bear?moutons enrages, according to the facetious expression of a
French writer.

The causes of hypochondriasis are as various as they are inexpli-
cable; while sometimes, in direct opposition to the rules of logic,
the disease seems to be an effect without a cause. Debility, or a
deeply-seated scrofulous taint, appears to reside in most instances at
the root of the evil. It precedes and accompanies gout, and is curcd
by podagra in the great toe. It is observable among the members
* The birth-place of mere scientific genius was Greece. Rome procured from
thence her physicians, architects, painters, musicians, &c., whom she paid and
despised. The Gauls, Germans, Spaniards, &c., were, like the Greeks, her subjects
also, but then those barbarians knew the use of the sword, and the Romans respected
them for it. Grccculus was the stinging word of contempt applied to the Athenians,
who, with all their wit, could not manage to retort a similar insult on their masters.
of the same family, who sometimes become maniacal instead of poda-
grous. It is a symptom of rachitis, and those who suffer from dis-
ease of the bones of the spine, are constantly more or less liytfd. A
person, whom we attended in his yonth for several obscure ailments,
was seldom otherwise than melancholy. To mend his fortune he
went to Australia, where he succeeded beyond his expectations; but
at length died paralysed and comatose. On the examination of the
body after death, a spicula of bone was discovered growing from the
inside of the calvarium, piercing the dura-mater, and penetrating the
brain. Stagnation in the functions of the liver is proverbial for
giving rise to the vapours, spleen, melancholy, or black bile. The
jaundiced eye is said to look at all things with a sour visage. Ex-
cessive fasting as well as eating to excess, like all extremes, produces
similar results; and you may starve your victim into sadness 011 a
bare board, as surely as you may over-nourish him with despondency
from the enticing viands of too fat a repast. Repletion and hunger
are equally the authors of crime, animosity, ill-temper, and an invin-
cible disgust of life.

The mucous membrane of the stomach alone will, when slightly
inflamed and acid, prove an obstinate source of hypochondriasis;
and, perhaps, sensitive people who can never look another in the face,
nor utter a word of their own without being covered with blushes,
are the subjects of habitual dyspepsia. A gentleman who lived
freely was advised to relinquish his wine and become a tee-totaller :
he did so, and went to Paris, where, in a fit of despair, he cut his
throat. O11 a jwst-mortem inspection, an ulcer was found in his stomach.
Deranged or abused generative function is another very frequent
cause which blanches the cheek, renders the eye wan, exhausts the
brain, fixes a sullen sadness on the brow, and tempts almost irresist-
ibly to suicide, or to the perpetration of some of those enormities
that every now and then harrow the feelings and shock the good
sense of the world. The abuse of mercury for the cure of specific
disease is another direful infliction that produces the very worst de-
scription of mental suffering, and has ere now instigated many a
mutilated reprobate to fill up the measure of perdition by cutting short
with his own hand the forlorn remainder of his days. Solitude does
the same ; and so docs an incessant round of dissipation, in company
with the giddy throng who waste the fleeting moments of their time
in the restless, vain, and insatiable pursuit of sensual enjoyment.
Pleasure begets remorse, remorse despair, and despair woe.
Among the many other very learned definitions so scholastically
explicated and charitably bestowed upon our fallen race, man is par
excellence said to be a social or gregarious animal. Few, if any,
have ever dared to live alone, any more than they have ever wished
to live continually with others without occasional loneliness. Parcut-
du-Chatelet says, that in the Maison du Bon Pasteur, the deaths
were 1 in 10, whereas the mortality in Paris was, at the same age, 1
in 75. Persons who, like these unfortunate inmates, had been accus-
tomed to a gay and unrestrained manner of living, sank beneath the
comparative solitude and monotonous regularity of a more virtuous
and religious regime. Habit is everything : and the sudden relin-
quishment of the worst of viccs is likely to bring about the worst of
consequences. The jmte-milieu?the via media?the golden mean
?where is it?

Actual vice apart, there is nothing in this world worthy of either
joy or grief; for, strictly speaking, success and failure are equivalent
terms ; and the last state of experience is to receive all that happens
without emotion, and to regard events with a cool, deliberate, and
dispassionate eye. Too serious a reflection on the transitory nature
of earthly goods, is more than enough to drive any one crazy, unless
he be blessed with a constitution congenitally apathetic, stoical, or
extremely religious. But religion itself is, when abused, a powerful
source of hypochondriacism. For either it is believed and disobeyed,
which gives rise to reproach of conscience; or else it is believed in a
wrong sense, whereby the terrors of Divine justice are made to super-
sede the promises of mercy and forgiveness; although, when received
in its true sense, according to the rule of faith, religion is a charm
that sweetens everything. 0 Potestas, quid non prevstas homini ?
The confessions of a hypochondriac, which Ave have placed at the
head of this article, is a humorous description of this unhappy and
ignoble class of personages. Fortunately, it has the merit of being
written in a pleasing style of narrative which renders the book so
enticing that you cannot lay it aside until you have finished it.
Light as it may appear at first sight, it is, however, deep enough ;
for if its surface be sparkling, you may at the same time see to the
bottom of it, simply because its depth is clear. The buffoonery is
indispensable to its success, since it would be impossible to treat the
subject in any other way than that of the burlesque?aiming a ran-
dom shot at folly as it flies.

The hypochondriac himself, the poor descendant of an affluent
family, is restored to wealth by the good luck of a will made in bis
favour. Without occupation, or rather without the necessary " bore"
of earning his daily bread, he quickly becomes tired of himself, of
everybody, and of everything. Collecting his bag and bag>age,
which consists of his own dear self and a very sinister waiting man,
or gentleman's gentleman, he resorts to Malvern to try its invi-
gorating air and celebrated waters. Driven from thence by an odd
but amusing accident, he undergoes the Hindoo shampooing, and
consults a prosperous homcepatli at Brighton. The fresh sea-breezes
and the fragrant downs are, in his morbid estimation, nothing to be
compared with the infinitesimal doses of the one and the scalding
manipulations of the other. Hydropathy next has its turn?wet
sheets, a crystal beverage, the cool diet, and the presumptive hopes
of a water-cure. From these delusive remedies he rushes away in
disgust, and recklessly flings himself into the arms of a mesmeriser
or mesmerism?for we believe that as yet the necessary gender is
not determined. This, perhaps, is the most piquante scene of the
whole, and it is told in a very animated and effective manner.
Wishing to be put au fait of the science or seance, he abandons him-
self without reserve to the truth or falsehood of this black or lucid
art. Allowing no scruple to hinder him, nor the intrusion of any
preconceived idea to bias his sentiments, he frankly delivers himself
up, bound hand and foot, to the magic demonstrations of the animal
magnetizer; and the penalty he pays for the thorough conviction of
his credulity is a public exhibition of himself, if not by name, at
least in propria persond, within the fashionable saloon of some cele-
brated person devoted exclusively to mere obscure, recondite, and
questionable experiments. Unluckily for the cause of mesmerism,
the hypochondriac being convinced of clairvoyance, departs full of
the gifts of this inward perception which dreams of truisms when fast
asleep, but is in fact asleep to the truth when wide awake. " I could
not," he says, "repeat the ceremony. The audience were both
pleased and astonished ; and as they filed off in a crowd, some one, I
fancy a duchess, with more money than sense, put a guinea in my
hand, and being taken by surprise, she slipped away before I dis-
covered her folly, consequently I was under the painful necessity of
putting this gratuity into my pocket. She had, probably, mistaken
me for a respectable adventurer?a beggar, exhibiting for the com-
pany's entertainment."

It being seldom that time is lost by such patients as these in the
pursuit of health, the hypocoiidriac found out a new magician for
the restoration of his jaded nerves. He arrived at an enchanted
mansion, where, after being introduced to its mysterious owner, sub-
mitted to sundry unintelligible operations, and swallowing a copious
draught, perhaps of hachish, he seemed to be conducted through
apartments of Eastern magnificence, until he reached its inmost re-
cesses. Vatlieck and the Halls of Eblis are summoned again from
-_? the realms beneath?Narkes and Cafour, with waving torches, and
Carathis pronouncing her barbarous incantations. Monsters, with
one accord, thrust forth their unsightly snouts, and, finding them-
selves constrained by the potency of charms, open their hideous
mouths, and say?"We are yours?what seek you?" " Fiends, "
answers the hypochondriac, " I conjure you, by your fiery forms?tell
me where is health 1" " Out yonder," replies the crew in full
chorus : "will this content you??if so, let us depart." "It will,"
returns the besotted patient, stretching forward to the corridor
through which they were pointing with their sinewy claws,?" it
will?begone !?I dismiss you?I cannot tarry, for I am bound in
the pursuit of health !" The scene changes, and he awakes and finds
himself quietly in bed at his hotel.

What has occupied in our pages a few short paragraphs, is in the
original drawn out in extenso, and charged Avith the details of a highly
entertaining description. The mask is stripped" off the mendacious
quack, while even the regularly educated physician is compelled to
lay aside his cap and gown, and appear in his real character of adu-
lation, pedantry, or tact. Be this as it may, the poor hypochondriac
candidly confesses everything he saw and suffered from a designing
valet, no small number of out-of-elbow M.D.'s and a host of unprin-
cipled impostors, quacks, and mountebanks.

The medical man's office is ministerial, not executive. He waits
upon death, alleviates pain, and assists in the recovery of health. As
soon as he pretends to do more than this, he compromises his
character for the sake of a little temporary advantage, or sacrifices
his patient's welfare to some views of private interest or ambition of
his own. The elements of medicine, when applied in practice,
according to the approved rules of experience, are sufficient for all
the purposes of life ? and if an impatient public be prone to transgress
the prescribed limits of reason, it is because they cannot brook the
notion of death being the ordinary termination of disease in the same
sense as old age is the inevitable result of youth and manhood.
Consequently, the professors of the healing art can never hope to
escape the shafts of satire, nor have charlatans ever been wanting to
lend their countenance to the vulgar prejudices prevailing against
them?from the recent days of St. John Long, back to those of Dr.
Sangrado, and from the era of the Sangrado of Gil Bias, as far back
as the time? of the Roman emperor, Lucius \erus, whose dying
words were Turba medicorum Ccesarem perdidit.

When the nervous system is healthy and highly organized, as it is
in some favoured individuals, it is scarcely possible for the disease
called hypochondriasis to ruffle its imperturbed placidity. Life is,
under such delightful circumstances, an enjoyment of itself. The
sensations conveyed from without, impinge upon the sensorium a
faithful and correct image of all that passes around it, while the
feelings from within are disturbed by the troubles of 110 deranged
viscus, nor jarred by the disorders of functions imperfectly discharged,
or by local vitality worn out, effete, and verging to decay. On the
contrary, the machinery of life moves on in smooth and equal pulsa-
tions, like the flowing melody of some eminent composer touched
by the hand of a master accomplished in his art. Such a refined
character, indeed, is but little understood by men of the world, still
less appreciated by the lovers of what is styled " the great and the
extraordinary," and, above all, absolutely disrelished by the vulgar,
whose tastes are gratified by nothing except by what is startling,
exaggerated, rapid, loud, and imposing. The nerves, in this their
highest state, are more remarkable for calmness and composure than
either for greatness of manner or productiveness of fancy. In youth
and maturity it evinces an almost childlike simplicity of behaviour,
terribly liable to fall an easy prey to the wicked and the designing,
while in old age its chief attribute is wisdom, in the true sense of
the word, whereby the world is weighed in the balance of its nothing-
ness, and the happiness of others is most nobly preferred to its own
ease and pleasure. Ethereal and unearthly as such beings are, their
occurrence is by no means unfrequent in the circles of domestic life,
and the moral grandeur of their comparatively perfect innocence,
which is the chief security for their own peace of mind, rises up as
an impregnable barrier against the aggressions or desires of depravity,
malice, and vice.

History, private and public, sacred and profane, teems with
instances of the joyless mood, from the faintest tinge of blue to the
darkest stain of inky blackness. It is not easy to account for
Domitian's petty passion for spiking flies with a needle, which gave
rise to the witticism of Yiberias Crispus, who, being asked if any one
was with the Emperor, replied, "No, not even a fly!"?any more
than we can account for the abominations of Heliogabalus, when a
buffoon was prefect of the prcetorium and signal vice was the grand
recommendation to honours and dignities. Perhaps, they are nothing
more than some of the trifling particulars set down in the reckoning
of human folly, the items of which are interminable. That Egyptian
king who built a pyramid procured by his daughter's infamy, could
scarcely have been otherwise than broken-hearted; neither could he
wlio sacrificed two children, as Herodotus tells us, to appease the
winds, have had a much easier conscience; for human nature is
always the same, and iniquity is sure to leave its sting behind.
Queen Elizabeth, it is recorded, never smiled after the execution of
Essex; and the Protector Cromwell, after having beheaded Charles I.,
wore a breastplate beneath his hauberk, in consequence, as every
one knows, of a pamphlet published at that time, entitled " Killing
no Murder." Cleomenes, that mauvais sujet of a Spartan, played so
many odd tricks in so very excited a manner, that his best friends
agreed to place him in the stocks; where, however, in defiance of
his discreditable position, he contrived to possess himself of a sword
from the hand of a helot, with which he hacked his flesh in pieces
till he died. His fate was attributed to various crimes that he had
committed, but chiefly to that of sacrilege. The rage of Croesus
upon the death of his son Atys from the wound of a spear prefigured
to him in a dream, implies a loss of self-control tantamount to a total
loss of reason; and so, likewise, the remorse of (Edipus in tearing
out his own eyes, and the infuriated agony of Orestes for matricide,
affecting as they may be when exhibited in a classic or tragic point
of view, are only excusable on the ground of pagan darkness and
unqualified infidelity. But even in the twilight of the world, such
punishments were imputed to their proper origin, for the ancients
beheld in the fate of these great actors nothing more than the reward
that was their due. Hence the poetic justice, so much extolled by
the learned, is only true in fiction because it is first of all true in
the critical affairs of life. The Greek Emperor, Constans, who from
motives of political jealousy put his brother to death, was incessantly
pursued, night and day, on land and at sea, by a phantom sprung
from remorse of conscience, presenting to his lips a cup of bloodj
saying, " Drink, brother?drink !"

The spiritual dryness so often mentioned by ascetic writers, and
experienced by religious enthusiasts themselves, is apparently a very
severe form of hypochondriasis. St. Theresa relates of herself in
the third person, that for forty years she had not passed a day
without anguish and various kinds of sufferings. St. Catharine of
Sienna confessed that she laboured under so heavy a darkness of
spirit, that no one could possibly imagine it?she saw herself a
hundred times on the brink of a beetling precipice which she was
prevented from toppling over by the agency of an unseen hand. In
the life of St. Benedict, there is an anecdote told of a certain monk
who was tempted to renounce his profession by the spectre of a little
black urchin continually beckoning him away from his duties. St.
Francis of Assise was always displeased at the sight of religious
sadness, as being the sign of a will much indisposed and a body ill
at ease. Drive away sadness, says the wise man, for it hath killed
many and there is no use in it.

Antonio Estanez, a physician at Pelonna in Spain, relates that in
1727, a furious delirium prevailed in that neighbourhood, of an epi-
demic character; and Dr Weithrecht, physician to the hospital at
Yesovia, makes mention of an epidemic madness that broke out in
17G7, and attacked no one but foreigners, or strangers to the loca-
lity. Epilepsy appeared as an epidemic in Carinthia, in 1717, in the
interval between a lunar and a solar eclipse; many sank under it,
and those who recovered owed their cure to antispasmodics, or a mi-
liary eruption. The lycantliropy of Avicenna, described by Ovid in
the Metamorphosis of Lycaon, king of Arcadia, reigned epidemically
at Alkmaest, in 1572. These maniacs ran about barking furiously
and aiming blows at every dog they met; and Silimachus (a.d. 100),
a follower of Hippocrates, recounts an epidemic nightmare that
attacked everybody, and seemed to be contagious. If not treated
antiphlogistically, it degenerated into epilepsy. The madness of
Nebuchadnezzar is supposed to have been a chronic lycanthropy.
Hippocrates, in the fifth book of his Epidemics, mentions a curious
nervous affection in a person named Nicanor, who was so terrified at
the sound of a flute, that he lost the power of deglutition, particu-
larly at festivals in the night, or evening parties ; and he also gives
another instance of a similar sort in one Democles, who dared not
venture near the edge of a precipice, nor pass over a bridge, nor in-
deed walk by a dike, lest he should come to some harm. We knew
a gentleman who was afraid of passing beneath the shadow of a
certain steeple in London, lest it should fall upon him. Lenhopek,
according to Feuchsterleben, mentions, a woman whose entire body
turned black upon being accused, by her daughter, of a heinous
crime ; and a philosopher is said to have gone grey in a fit of grief
for the loss of a manuscript in a storm at sea. Terror makes the
hair stand on end, but sorrow makes the hair straight. Its turning
suddenly grey indicates extreme prostration of the vital powers, and
the depressing emotions that produce it have been chronicled of old
for inexorably bringing down the grey head with sorrow to the grave.
Some melancholies have passed their lives in collecting toys, whilst
others have squandered their fortunes in designing and constructing
figures of a monstrous and ridiculous shape.

Do you see yonder luckless wight, motionless in his chair, with his
eyes fixed on the fire, where he is building ideal castles among the
smouldering embers before him 1 He is conversing with himself: and
were Dr Wigan here, he would declare that it was a decided case of
duality of mind : one side of his head is larger than the other, and,
consequently, one cerebrum is smaller, less energetic, and the less
conceptive of the two. Who is he 1 Nobody ; or, at least, in the
language of the great world, he is a cipher without a name. And
yet the thread of destiny is interwoven with as many various colours
in the low as in those of high estate j for each one's life is a novel
of its own. Dr Wigan may be right, for upon the hypothesis of
the brain being a two-fold organ, his history is two-fold through-
out its course. One brain has always been weaker than its fellow,
and the better of the two has had the greatest difficulty in over-
ruling the errors of the worse. When quite a boy he meditated
suicide, and selected a deep pond with steep banks for the purpose
of drowning himself. He fixed upon the day, and walked to the
spot with the deliberate intent of so doing. But when he arrived
there, the sun was shining, and the deceitful water looked so clear
that he could see the ooze and sludge at the bottom of it. He
thought he could have jumped in and have done the deed had the
water only been turbid and the day dull. As it was, his stronger
brain, or perhaps his good angel, held him back and bade him
return. Twice, in after years, he seriously meditated a murder
which would have rivalled in horror the atrocities of much more
recent date. But again his good angel, or his better brain, inter-
posed and stayed his murderous aim. For years, suicide was never
absent from his thoughts, and often did he soliloquize upon the
edge of his razor, as he. felt its keenness and examined its fitness
for the dreadful purpose. Such was the fiery trial of his inward
life; but his outward was just the reverse,?steady, regular, frugal,
and industrious ; till at length his guardian angel, old age, or his
better brain, obtained the mastery over his evil propensities, and
released him from his lot. See ! there he sits, gazing on the fire,
wherein he descries, among the ignited coals, a yawning chasm,
within which is a glowing cavern leading to a brilliant vista full of
diamonds. The crumbling cinders have fallen in and crushed the
image,?he starts from his reverie. He rises and looks out upon
the scene before him. The brief autumnal day is setting on the
dim moors,?there are storms of wind and rain,?the swallows arc
leaving, or have left,?and the year is on the wane. In the distance
lies the gloomy and troubled outline of the sea. " Ah ! he mur-
murs to himself, " that world of waters ! a few years more, and I
shall be like the undulations that rose and sunk this morning on the
bosom of the deep, and are now lost and forgotten among tlie
countless billows of the ocean ! Pensa, c/oe questo di mai non
raggioma.

" Life is not to be dated by years,
There are moments that act like n plough,
And there's never a furrow appears
But has torn up the soul and tlie brow !"
Saul, the king of Israel, and Alexander the Great, were men of
melancholy temperaments, and the wry-neck of the one as well as
the extraordinary height of the other, indicates a scrofulous diathesis
in both. The moody jealousy of Saul when he sought to transfix
David to the wall with a spear was soothed by the means of music,
and the dire remorse of Alexander for having slain his friend
Clytus with a javelin at a feast was the deleterious effect of wine.
They were both of them men of incorrect lives,?the one was a
drunkard, and the other a wilful transgressor of the Divine com-
mand. Each was a great man in his way; although tlie
dignified reserve, humble birth, regal address, and national policy
of the son of Cis surpassed by far the haughty demeanour of the
son of Philip of Macedon, as, with admirable military skill, he
penetrated the ghauts or passes of modern Affghan, and descended
into the plains of the Punjaub, or rode in splendid panoply along
the ranks mounted on his fierce Bucephalus. Saul was a hypo-
chondriac to the last, for in a desperate fit he went and consulted a
proscribed witch at midnight. To-morrow, said the disturbed shade
of the prophet, thou and thy sons shall be with me, at this time j
and the next day, as the sun went down, the enemy pressing in hot
pursuit on the king's discomfited troops, Saul, together with his
armour-bearer and his three sons, was left among the dead on the
field of battle. Racked with the paroxysms of an ague, too mighty
for cure, Alexander, as he issued his last commands from the banks
of the Euphrates at Babylon, counted out the few scanty weeks,
days, and hours that still remained to him of all his earthly glory.
Melancholy had marked them for its own ; and the stories of their
lives are left like lofty columns standing alone in the midst of the
desolation of ages, in order to admonish a reluctant world that
mental disease of the worst description is the invariable result of
intemperance, wilfulness, and the indulgence of excessive desires.
One is almost tempted to conclude with the idiot, that the world
is a large madhouse, and a private madhouse is the world in
miniature.

The more deeply we dive into the mysteries of the mind o?
spiritual being, the more completely do we find ourselves involved in
the darkness of a sliadowy atmosphere through which are flitting
past us phantasms that have no existence in the external world of
daylight beyond. Within the wide aerial halls of the soul all is
ghostly. Solid things of sight are gone, and nought remains save
what material-minded men of earth stigmatize and reject with scorn
as visionary, ideal, or unreal; until, as it occasionally happens, they
are taken by surprise on the sudden breaking down of the fragile
wall of flesh, which unexpectedly exposes to their sight, and perhaps
lets loose upon their astonished senses, some of those unreal visionary
elements of thought in the substantive shape of hypochondriacism,
hysteria, ecstasy, cataleptic somnambulism, or trance; and then they
close their eyes against the unwelcome vision, and cry out madness !
Little do they imagine that they themselves are such as they behold.
A very slight alteration in the equipoise of the nicely-balanced
moral and intellectual faculties would easily disarrange their own
understandings and transmute them, beyond the power of their will
into monsters of crime or folly"?such as, in fact, they are apt to
hear of or regard with pity in the well-regulated cells of Bethlem, or
within the careful precincts of a more secluded asylum. Many a
culprit at the bar of justice is the victim of disease much more than
the condign felon of an impartial verdict; and a medical philosopher
with the lantern of a modern Diogenes might, among the convicts at
Portsmouth, or in any one of our penal settlements, read a tale in the
history of each of those unhappy outcasts, so pitiful and pathetic,
that, according to the apt hyperbole of the dramatist, " our tears
would drown the wind" at the recital of it. We are the prey of cir-
cumstances?our usefulness and happiness, nay?our very characters
and influence depend upon events over which we have not the slight-
est control. Our birth, name, lineage, country, epoch, fortune, age,
and place, we must receive such as they are bestowed upon us?wc
must take them, such as they are, for we cannot choose. A mis-
shapen skull, a hump back, a clubbed foot, a defective liver, a weak
stomach, and a degenerate set of nerves belong to our family ancestry
and descend to us either as a collateral bequest, or as our patrimony
by right; and if they prove themselves to be heir-looms or legacies
which fail to help us forward in the path of life, we must submit to
* " L'homme a beau vanter dans sou orgueil, la superiorite de son intelligence,
sur celle des animaux: les maladies mentales qui viennent 1'afHiger mettent sonvent,
non pas meme au niveau, mais fiu-dessous de la brute; puisqu'alors sa vie et
ses actions sout bors de sa sphere d'existence, au lieu que celle des animaux sont
consequentes a leur manifcre d'etre et ne s'ecartcnt point de l'etat dans lequel ils
furent crces."?Histoire des Epidemiqucs, par Ozaiiam. P.ude edit. Paris. 1835,
Tome iv. p. 250.

the failure and abide the consequences of our innate errors and de-
fects. Society must protect itself: and the forum judicii cannot
pretend to draw the precise line of demarcation between actual trans-
gressions and possible imbecility which belong alone to the casuistry
or moral theology of the forum conscientice. Time, the father of
experience, has no leisure for deciding subtleties so delicate as these.
He divides and swallows down the good and the bad, and?the world
goes on !
