The Pathology Of Insanity
===========================

501
?vtgtnal Comnutmcattons.
A LECTUBE, DELIVEKED MAY 20TH, 1850, IN* THE MIDDLESEX COUNTY
ASYLUM, II AN WELL,
:Author:  DR. JOHN IIITCHMAN.

Gentlemen,?The time has now arrived, in wliicli it becomes my duty to
solicit your attention, to some " dry statistics," and to facts which, as
they have no immediate practical bearing, may, I fear, prove somewhat
tedious to you. The portion of labour allotted to me, is to describe the
appearances found after death in the bodies of the insane, and to inform
you of the conclusions to which I have come respecting them.

In the great hospitals of London, the various derangements of the
body have attracted your attention. You have studied the disorders of
the ear, and investigated the diseases of the eye:?you have learned to
detect, to diagnose, and to treat the various injuries to which the arm
or the leg may be exposed, and to amputate the injured member when
all remedial resources have failed to heal. You have studied the varied
functions of the body, and have learnt such remedies as are calculated
to bring back health and vigour to the limbs which have been rendered
powerless by disease. I rejoice that you have proceeded further, and
that you have, in the wards of this great institution, directed your
attention to the diseases which affect the mind. For in comparison
with these, all other ailments sink into insignificance; thus the con-
vulsive twitcliings, the short vision, and the endless aches which
Johnson endured were considered by him as trifles, compared with one
dreadful disease which seemed to threaten him. " Of the uncertainties
of our present state," he says, " the most dreadful and alarming is the
uncertain continuance of reason." All reflecting minds will agree with
the great moralist on the transcendent importance of this subject. The
disorders of the senses, of the limbs, of the body, possess some miti-
gating circumstances. Deafness, total and complete, may beset a man:
the voice of friendship, the tones of childhood, or the language of love
may never fall upon his ear; his life may be passed amid unbroken
silence, and yet, like Kitto, he may enrich the biblical literature of his
country, and be useful to all generations. A man may be blind, and
yet pour forth from the treasure-house of his soul such truths as the
" world will not willingly let die." Physical darkness may surround
him, and yet he may perceive the lovely in nature, and the beautiful in
art. The virtue, the wisdom, the valour, and the beauty of Greece and
Troy may move before him, and their heroes be rendered deathless by
his own narration of their glorious deeds. A man may be blind, and
yet the gales of Paradise may fan his brow?the rich discourse of angels
fall upon his ear, and
" Adam, the goodliest man of men since born,
His sons; the fairest of her daughters, Eve"
502 THE PATHOLOGY OF INSANITY.
may walk within liis view: for him
" The morn, with rosy steps, may sow
The earth with orient pearl,"
and in the consciousness of duties nobly done, he may triumphantly
exclaim?

" It is not miserable to be blind.
Nor bate a jot of heart, or hope,
But still bear up, and steer right onwards."
A man may lose an eye and an arm, and yet do the " state some ser-
vice." From the proud waves of Trafalgar he may raise the shout of
victory, and telegraph a sentiment that shall be lasting as the language
in which it was spoken. The limbs may be powerless; but if the mind
be firm, the patriotic statesman, like Chatham, may be usefully carried
to the council-chamber of his country, and there, with indignant
eloquence, as with the peal of a war-trumpet, or the blast of the
thunder-storm, he may startle the lethargy and awake the patriotism of
the indolent and the careless. But if the mind be diseased, then?
" Farewell to all his greatness "?the man is useful no more. His best
friends wish to hide him from the gaze of the world, and even sympathy
for his fate will sometimes die away. His whole being is changed?nay,
his very virtues arc tarnished. The brave man dwindles to a coward;
the wit becomes a fool?

"From Marlboro's eyes the tears of dotage flow,
And Swift expires a driveller, and a show."
Surely here is a mission high enough for the greatest amongst us.
Can medicine have a loftier aim than to alter this state of things 1 to
call back the troubled mind to health, to peace, and to usefulness. Arc
you philosophers, as well as medical men 1 do you delight to exercise
your minds in abstruse speculations, to investigate the nature of things,
to study physiology in the high and legitimate sense of that term 1
Here, too, this subject has its charms. The nature and the attributes
of the human mind have engaged the attention, and absorbed the
faculties of some of the wisest of our race. It is a study which attracted
alike the philosophers of Egypt, Greece, and Rome; and which, out-
stripping in the grandeur and intensity of its interest all that even
the most sublime of the physical sciences had to bestow, could make
Plato thus apostrophise his own being?

'Aortpac tjaaOptlr, aari)p IfioQ' liOt ytvotfiijv
ovpavbc, we TroXXoIf ufjfiaaiv t"i? at ftXtTrw.
The magnificence of the " starry sky," even when illuminated by that
light, which Newton revealed to mankind, even when " cycle in epicycle,
orb in orb," and world after world roll before the eye, in all the majesty
and splendour and beauty of harmonious law, pales before the still
brighter marvel of the human mind; which, after recognising the
beauty of the celestial bodies, measuring their magnitudes, discovering
their laws, and predicating their movements, can rise from the great
perception of a law, to the still greater idea of a Lawgiver. No wonder,
then, that this great power should have attracted notice in every age;
that its nature should have been closely scrutinized, and its attributes
carefully recorded. Nor need we be surprised that it continues to be
imperfectly known; for the march of truth is as slow as it is majestic.
It has ever been so. The circulation of the blood had been suggested
by the discoveries of Cesalpinus, Columbus, and Servetus, before the
time of Harvey. Vaccination, as a prophylactic agent against small-
pox, had been long talked of by the Gloucestershire peasantry, before it
was practically enforced by Jenner. Steam had been experimented
upon, and its expansive power detected, by the Marquis of Worcester, a
hundred years before it was brought into the full service of mankind
by the talents and skill of James Watt. Unzer, Prochaska, and Whytt,
had long groped among the facts, which in our own day have moulded
themselves into a marvellous and beautiful " diastaltic nervous system
under the plastic genius of Marshall Hall; thus, as the Poet Tennyson
has quaintly expressed it?

" Tlrrougli the ages, one increasing purpose runs,
And the thoughts of men are widened by the process of the suns."
The deep meditations of Thales within the beautiful islands of the
Ionian Seas, and the philosophic speculations of Pythagoras respecting
the human soul, led on to the sounder theories of Parmenides and the
Eleatics, and through them ultimately to the school of Socrates and
Plato. From the genius of Plato arose the neo-platonic philosophy,
and the doctrines of the Alexandrian school. The inadequate and
speculative character of the ancient metaphysical philosophy aroused
(in the course of ages) the master-minds of Des Cartes and Bacon, by
whom the " inductive method " was revealed for the improvement and
guidance of mankind.

In passing over the metaphysical theories, which for several centuries
engrossed the attention of reflecting minds; in reviewing the utterances
of these ancient philosophers by the light of the present age, one is per-
fectly astonished at many of their statements;?thus Pythagoras could
recognise in the human soul three distinct faculties, reason (rove), intel-
ligence (<ppijv), and desire (dvfxug); regarding the first as peculiar to man,
while the latter two were endowments which he possessed in common
with all animals: and Parmenides, who flourished five hundred years
before the Christian era, actually gave utterance to the great principle,
which has been in our own time so ably supported and enforced by
Gall and Spurzhcim?Parmenides said, " the highest degree of organi-
zation gives the highest degree of thought."

This, with certain restrictions, is undoubtedly true, but mankind
have ever loved extremes. In religion, in politics, and even in philo-
sophy, this has been universal. The French encyclopedists, recognising
the variety and the grandeur of physical facts, and perceiving that we
become acquainted with objective nature in all her countless forms
through the agency of the senses, originated that " sensational philo-
sophy," which was so warmly espoused, and ably advocated, by our
immortal countryman, John Locke, The genius of Berkeley, penetrat-
ing the surface of things, feeling assured that phenomena must have a
substance, a " noumena " for its very cxistencc and manifestation, that,
in truth, the senses could only detect the quality, or property, rather
than the substance of things, and that there were in man volition
and impulses innate, and independent of all sensation; and knowing
further, that the information conveyed by the senses required the cor-
recting influence of the pure reason, regarded all such information as
treacherous, and wholly dependent for its form upon the subjective
powers of the human mind, thus becoming as extreme in one pole of
thought as Cabanis or Gall was at the other?if, indeed, Fichte of Ger-
many has not surpassed him in the transcendental notions of the same idea.
Let it be ours to adopt a spirit of eclecticism from these various schools,
avoiding the extreme materialism of the one, and the speculative idealism
of the other;?knowing, as we do from experience, that by some mys-
terious and inexplicable union matter is influenced by mind, while
mind is dependent for its manifestations upon the healthy condition of
the material brain. In psychology, as in physics, it is well to take
Bacon for our guide, who says?

" Dure via) sunt, atque esse possunt ad inquirendam et inveniendam
veritatem. Altera a sensu et particularibus advolat ad axiomata maxime
generalia, atque ex iis principiis eorumque immota veritatc judicat et
invenit axiomata media: atque hcec via in usu est. Altera a sensu et
particularibus excitat axiomata ascendendo continenter et gradatim, ut
ultimo loco pcrveniatur ad maxime generalia, qua; via vera est, sed
intentata."

In the lecture which I gave in this room last year, and which you
will find published in the current number of the Psychological Journal,
thirty seven eases were selected for observation: now, however, I purpose
embracing a larger amount of time, and to include the deaths of four years,
which will enable us more nearly to conform to the Baconian precept?
by having a larger basis of facts, from which to proceed " continenter
ct gradatim." The following synopsis embraces all the particulars:?
From Janvary Is/, 184G, to January I si, 1850, inclusive, there have
died 103 Female Patients: of these, the respective ages were as
follotv:?

From 20 to 25 years   2
? 25 to 30 do  (5
? 00 to 05 do  1)
? 35 to 40 do  8
? 40 to 45 do  5
? 45 to 50 do  IIJ
? 50 to 55 do  7
? 55 to CO do  5
? CO to 05 do  12
? 05 to 70 do  8
? 70 to 75 do  11
? 75 to 80 do  ft
? 80 to 90 do  1
Not ascertained     11
Total  103
THE PATHOLOGY OF INSANITY. 505
Causes of the 103 Deaths, from January 1st, 1846, to January ls?,
1850, inclusive.
DISEASES OF THE BRAIN AND 1X8 MEMBRANES.
Exhaustion after mania   5
Apoplexy  6
? serous  2
Epilepsy   4
General paralysis   II
Paralysis  3
Softening of the brain  3
Fungoid tumour of the dura mater   1
Fracture of the skull and extravasation of blood, from an accidental
fall   1
Total 30
DISEASE8 OF THE RESPIRATORY ORGANS.
Pulmonary consumption  19
Pneumonia, and Hepatization of lung   4
Abscess of the lung  3
Emphysema of lung   1
Pulmonary apoplexy  .? ? ? ? 1
Hydrothorax   I
Chronic bronchitis   1
Total    30
DISEASES OF THE HEART, AND ITS MEMBRANES.
Pericarditis    1
Hypertrophy of the heart   2
? with Anasarca   1
Fatty degeneration of the heart  I
Total  5
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE ORGANS, AND THEIR CONNEXIONS.
Scirrhus of liver  1
Cirrhosis of liver  1
Inflammation of bowels  2
Dysentery  1
Total    5
DISEASE OF THE URINARY ORGAN8.
" Bright's Disease" of the kidney   1
DISEASES OF THE REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS.
Scirrhus of ovaries  1
? and abscess of do  1
? of uterus   4
T otal  0
CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES.
General debility    H
it and abscess of back   ^
Exhaustion from abscess
Old age and natural decay    5
Total   18
NO. XII. LL
506 THE PATHOLOGY OF INSANITY.
Cancer of mamma   1
Erysipelas   1
2
Total  103
Form of the Mental Malady in the 103 Patients, who have died between
January 1st, 1846, and January 1st, 1850, inclusive.
Mania    20
? with epilepsy   J
? with general paralysis  4
Melancholia  4
? with general paralysis   3
Incoherence  13
Imbecility   34
? with epilepsy  7
? general paralysis  1
Dementia  5
? with epilepsy   3
? and general paralysis  1
? general paralysis  2
Senile insanity  4
Idiocy, with epilepsy  ..  1
J 03
The Duration of the Mental Malady, in these 103 Patients, ivas as
follows:?
Not more than G months  4
? 1 year  1
2 do  G
3 do  8
? 4 do  4
5 do  5
G do  2
? 7 do  &
? 8 do  2
? 0 do  5
? 10 do  1
? 11 do  3
? 12 do  1
? 13 do  1
? 14 do  3
? 15 do  0
? 1G do  0
? 17 do  2
? 18 do  3
n 19 do  3
? 20 do  2
For more than 20 years   18
Not ascertained  24
Total  103

Of these patients, ninety-four were submitted to post-mortem exami-
nations. In fifty-one of these, the calvarium presented some slight
departure from healthy structure?this being chiefly absorption, or
attenuation in various parts. The dura-mater was preternaturally
adherent in about one-third of the cases. In nine, the superior longi-
tudinal sinus was thickened by long deposits. In thirty-seven, and
these chiefly among the aged, the basilar, and cerebral arteries were
atheromatous. In four, there were tumours, varying in size from that
of a hen's egg to a walnut, arising from the dura-mater, and pressing
upon the anterior, lateral, and superior surfaces of the cerebral lobes.

In ninety, the arachnoid membrane was more or less opaque, thickened,
or inflamed; in a corresponding number, the pia-mater was congested
with blood, or infiltrated with fluid, and in one case, (an epileptic,) it
was strewed with hydatids. In sixty-eight cases, there was marked
shrinking, or atrophy of the convolutions, and in all these, there was
an excess of sub-arachnoid fluid. The cineritious neurine of the convo-
lutions was injected, and of a rose-colour in three cases, all of which
were recent, and died while suffering under acute mania. This struc-
ture was pale and blanched in sixty-four instances; it was of a dark
brown colour in six instances. The fibrous parts of the encephalon
were softened in eleven cases, and greatly congested in twelve cases; in
five cases, (and all these died from general paralysis,) it was firm, tough,
and granulated along the surfacc of the lateral ventricles. The tlialami
optici and the striated bodies, as well as the corpus callosum, were
softened in three instances, in which the general structure of the encepha-
lon did not participate in the malady, and in all these there was paralysis
prior to death, of a paraplegic or hemiplegic character. In three cases,
there were great differences in the size of the opposite hemispheres of
the brain; in one, the left lobe was one-tliird less than the right, and the
whole brain weighed only one pound, six ounces and a half. This
patient was idiotic, and the right arm was shrunken and paralysed from
birth. In ten cases, the lateral ventricles were stretched, and distended
with clear serous fluid; and in two patients, who died of apoplexy*, the
right ventricle was filled and lacerated by effused blood: in one patient,
the middle of the left hemisphere was distended with pus. Thus, in
ninety-three cases, there was disease, of some kind or other, in the
cranium, the membranes, or the brain, and in one only, was there no
trace of cerebral disease, and she died of cirrhosis of the liver, after
having been for some time despondent and suicidal; and I may add,
that in the examination of nearly 400 cases, (with the exception of the
above case,) I have invariably found some change in the structure of
the brain or its covering. Other institutions, where cases in an early
stage of the malady are examined, have published very different results;
thus, Dr Webster has given the summary of ICS cases examined at
Bethlem Hospital, as follows:?

The arachnoid membrane thickened and opaque in (52
The pia mater infiltrated in 14;?
Turgidity of the blood-vessels in 120
The colour of tbe brain was altered from its natural tint in . . . -if)
Blood was effused in 3'2
And the medullary parts were congested in 32*
A microscope consisting of a simple lens, or doublet, frequently reveals
changes of structure which pass unobserved by the unassisted eye, and
* Medico-Chirurgical Transactions. Vol. xxxii.
still higher powers are more successful. But there is one fact, which
you must ever bear in mind, in making pathological investigations on
the brain, which is this, capillary hypenemia?the most important of all
changes?rapidly disappears after death; if the brain be not examined
for two days, you need not be surprised at finding no sign of active
disease in the convolutions, after an acute .attack of mania. Venous
hypenemia, on the contrary, in dependent points, becomes hourly more
aggravated after the death of the patient, and if the blood has become
fluid from the evolution of ammoniacal vapours, will produce various
discolorations in adjoining structures and tissues which may deceive
the inexperienced. Again, the amount of cerebral spinal fluid will be
materially increased or diminished, according to the position of the head
in relation to the spine, and this has been a source of a thousand
blunders; some practitioners actually regarding all fluid beneath the
membranes of the brain as abnormal, instead of being what it really is,
when not in excess, an essential constituent of the healthy brain.
" Softening," again, is frequently the result of a post-mortem change,
caused by the contact of fluid, or incipient decomposition: the best test
that I know, to determine this point, apart from the time which has
elapsed between the time of death and the examination, is to ascertain
whether the softening be circumscribed or not, and if it be the former
and of a grey colour, and if under the microscope, magnifying 220
diameters, you perceive the compound inflammatory globule of Clugc, or
as they have been more recently called, exudation globules, then you
may be assured that the softening is the result of vital changes; but if it
be diffused over a large extent of surface, if two days have elapsed since
the patient died, and if it be destitute of granular cells, simply white
in colour, then you may feel certain, that it is a post-mortem
result. There is another caution, which is of pre-eminent importance,
namely, to be careful that you do not confound the congestion produced
by the position of the head, with the congestion induced by abnormal
action; by simply leaving the head to depend for a short time below
the level of the trunk, you may gorge the posterior sinuses of the head
with blood, and produce all the appearance of congestive apoplexy, in
the medullary structure; you will at once perceive the vast importance
of this fact, in a judicial point of view; it has been forcibly illustrated
by Dr Burrows, in his recent, work 011 the Cerebral Circulation, and as
I have not only tested his experiments 011 the rabbit, but have further
ascertained the influence of position in effecting changes in the human
subject, I draw your attention to these diagrams with niucii confidence.

These diagrams are in opposition to the previously recorded opinions of
the highest authorities in cerebral disease?viz., Abcrcrombie,' Clutter-
buck, Copland, and "Watson; but I am happy to add, that the latter
gentleman has yielded to the force of demonstration, and has recognised
the truth and practical value of the facts to which I have beon drawing
your attention. To return to the nccroscopic results in the ninety-four
cases, T am enabled to state to you, that the appearances generally
observed," after death, in the brains of lunatics, are?in recpirc cases,
inflammation of tho arachnoid membrane, and occasionally a deposit of
lymph or pus upon its under surface. It is very rarely adherent to tho
brain. The pia-mater is infiltrated. There are a rosy hue of the vesi-
cular neurine of the convolutions and congestion of the medullary struc-
ture of the brain. In chronic cases, there are varying conditions of the
calvarium: it is occasionally enormously thickened, but the more fre-
quent change is attenuation, in small circular spots, and sometimes over
large spaces about the junction, and at the sides of the frontal and
sagittal sutures. Preternatural adhesion of the dura-mater to the cal-
varium, great opacity, and thickening of the arachnoid membrane, with
effusion into and beneath its sac, together with a congested condition of
the pia-mater, with effusion of a clear fluid between it and the sulci of
the convolutions; the convolutions are frequently marked with small
lacunre or " pits," and are otherwise atrophied; there are varying states
of consistence and colour of the " grey matter," mostly pale on the upper
stratum, but red, soft, and mammillated in the lower layer of the cortical
substance; there is effusion of serum in the lateral ventricles. The
choroid flexuses are frequently infiltrated with fluid, and possess simple
cysts, varying in size from a millet seed to a currant. With these are
various lesions of other organs of the body?the most common being
changes in the size and character of the mesentery, displacements of the
colon, thic.keuing of the mucous membrane of the bowels, tubercles on
the lungs, chronic pneumonia, and cardiac disease. While, in some
cases, I have been informed, no lesions whatever have been discovered.
This statement I only believe in so far as it is written, no lesion was
discovered. I have never seen an autopsy of an unequivocal case of chronic
mania without detecting some cerebral lesion. It would be impossible
to enter into the special detail of the ninety-four cases examined, during
the time embraced in the table, but I will solicit your attention to the
description of one case of acute mania, one of chronic mania, and one of
melancholia; and I will then place before you my own views of the
pathology of insanity. The case of acute mania fell under my notice in
1847; the patient was forty years of age, and had experienced two
attacks of mania, the first of which occurred in the early part of 1845,
and was ascribed to disappointment in love; she recovered from this
attack, and subsequently married the person to whom she had been
previously attached; after having been married eight months, she was
deserted by her husband; soon after this, she experienced a miscarriage,
accompanied by much hemorrhage, and this was followed by aberration
of mind. She was brought to us in March, 1847 ; she was much ema-
ciated, and her friends informed me that she had not taken food volun-
tarily for two months. She was at this period very dirty in her habits,
and in a deplorable state of melancholia. She was short in stature, and
of a nervo-sanguineous temperament. She was frightened at the
approach of any person, and held up her hands in an appealing manner,
whenever she was spoken to. She seemed to have lost her sense of
personal identity, and wandered about the wards, exclaiming that she
was not herself, but some other person, and that in consequence of this
metempsychosis, some terrible doom would befal her. (I may mention,
parenthetically, that this feeling of terror was greatly relieved by
morphia.) She improved for a short period, but in November, 1847,
an acuteaMack of mania set in, which defied all treatment, and in nine
months after her admission, she died. In the autopsy, the calvarium.
was found to be normal, the dura-mater healthy, the arachnoid mem-
brane was thickened over the Pacchionian glands, which were few and
small, and this membrane was slightly opaque over the cerebellum. The
pia-mater was intensely congested, and presented over the face of each
convolution quite an arborescent appearance from the injected vessels,
which were of a scarlet colour; the most minute artery was plainly dis-
cernible, each hair-like ramification standing out in beautiful contrast
with the membrane, through which it passed, and the structure upon
which it rested. The vesicular neurine of the convolutions was much
injected, and had a faint pink hue; the membranes peeled off the brain
with the greatest ease. There was no excess of serum within the lateral
ventricles, and I should have stated that there was not any in the sac of
the arachnoid, or beneath it. The fibrous structure was pale, as con-
trasted with the peripheral surface: the choroid flexuses were pale, the
right was disteuded, with six or seven cysts, varying in size from a hemp-
seed to a horse-bean. On examining the chest, the lungs and heart
were found healthy. In the abdomen, the liver was pressed down
toward the os ilii, as if from the pressure of stays; but neither it nor the
kidneys were diseased; the mucous membrane of the stomach and bowels
was healthy, and the uterus and ovaries were in the same condition.
I regard this as an interesting and instructive ease. It will be observed
that the first attack of the malady was induced by nervous shock?that
it originated from a moral cause; the second appeared to arise from tlio
disturbance and exhaustion of child-birth and hemorrhage acting upon
a mind predisposed to insanity.

The chronic case is selected indiscriminately from a large number.
A. B. died on the 29th of May, 1849; she had been in the asylum
nearly seventeen years, and had been thirteen years insane when
admitted. The calvarium was found normal; the arachnoid membrane
was very opaque, thick, and strong, and contained fluid in its sac; the
pia-mater was infiltrated with serum; the convolutions of the brain were
much atrophied, and the sulci between them looked like so many little
rivulets, so full were they of serum ; the vesicular neurine was pale and
soft. The entire brain weighed two pounds four ounces avoirdupoise.
The mitral valve of the heart was thickened, and the left kidney
had become converted into a cyst, containing a brownish coloured fluid.

Melancholia.?Although melancholia is undoubtedly a variety of
mania, as we perceive the symptoms of the one succeeding to the other
(as in the cases of S. R. and others) with a precision almost equal to
the sequence of day and night, still I have thought it well to refer to
it as a distinct form of mental disease, (it being popularly regarded as
such,) as it gives me the opportunity to state that displacement of the
colon, and a dark colour of the vesicular neurine of the convolutions of
the brain are not, as some authors have stated, peculiar to melancholia,
and that I know of no lesion which is diagnostic of this form of mental
disease; nay, in all the cases which I have examined, the chronic
cases of melancholia presented the same appearances which are found in
chronic mania. The difference of the symptoms during life being caused
mainly (as I think) by the energy of the circulation, or by some cha-
racter of the blood, rather than by any conspicuous structural change.
I shall refer to one of the cases of melancholia, because it possessed an
interest peculiar to itself. This case, however, must be regarded not as
the type of a form of mental disease called melancholia, but rather as
an illustration of one of the causes of insanity, to which I shall refer
hereafter. The patient was M. G.; she was forty-six years of age, and
at the time of her death had been insane ten months. She was the
mother of sixteen children, and when admitted into the asylum on
Feb. 7, 1848, was suffering from prolapse of the uterus and hepatic
disease. She had attempted suicide twice prior to admission, by cutting
her throat. The wound inflicted in the last attempt was unhealed when
she came to this asylum. She retained the suicidal disposition for five
or six weeks after admission, but it disappeared as her health became
more impaired by bodily disease. In three months, she became much
better in her mind, and left the asylum on leave of absence; she soon,
however, returned; from this period she moaned very much, and moved
her body to and fro in an agitated manner as she sat in the chair.
She always said that " she had been poisoned by quack medicines,"
" that her bones were rotten," and the like. Her husband said she
had never taken quack medicines. She answered all other questions
rationally. She died in six months after her admission, from disease of
the liver. The autopsy revealed no thickening or distortion of tho
skull, no opacity or disease of the arachnoid membrane. There was a
slight effusion beneath the pia-mater, but so slight that I could not
regard it as abnormal. The convolutions of the brain were firm and
healthy; their neurine Avas not discoloured or softened; the fibrous
parts of the brain were healthy; there were not more than two drachms
of clear fluid in the lateral ventricles?in short, it was a small but healthy
brain. The viscera of the chest were healthy. The mucous membrane
of the stomach and small intestines were congested, and the liver was
extensively diseased, being in that condition which is termed cirrhosis.
It will not serve any useful purpose to enter into descriptive details
of individual cases of imbecility and dementia, as they presented, in each
instance, appearances similar in kind, but greater in degree, to those
which have been detailed to you as characteristic of chronic mania.
Idiocy.?One case only of idiocy has fallen under examination in the
female department of the asylum. Her brain was very small, weighing
only, as I have before stated, one pound six ounces, and having one hemi-
sphere imperfectly formed. Let me remind you that the skulls of some
idiots are well formed; there is a congenital idiot in No. 6, Female Ward,
with a head of the average female size, and I have known many such.
We have now reached a point in our examination of this most interest-
ing subject, at which we may fairly notice the opinions which have been
entertained by various authors respecting the pathology of insanity.
They are many and conflicting. We will pass some of them under
review, in order to detect the one from the many?to seize the unity
which must exist somewhere amid all these apparent discrepancies. We
will first hear the distinguished Esquirol, who is entitled to the first
place among the pathologists of this department of medicine. He says,
" The inspection of bodies of lunatics offer numerous varieties as to
situation, number, and kind of morbid appearances. The lesions of
the encephalon are neither in relation to the disorder of the mind, nor to
the maladies complicated with it. Some lunatics whose mental and
bodily disease had given suspicion of extensive organic change, have
presented but slight lesions of structure in the brain, while others
whose symptoms have been less severe, have been the subjects of great
and numerous alterations. But what disconcerts all our theories is,
that not unfrequently, even in the instances of patients who have passed
through all the stages of insanity, and have lived many years under
derangement, no organic changes whatever have been traced, either in
the brain or its containing membranes." These are startling assertions
from one so experienced, but they are greatly modified by the know-
ledge that the anatomy of the brain was then less perfectly understood
than at this moment, and especially by the following expressions,
appended to the above observations. " Few bodies of lunatics are now
examined in which there are not proved to exist at the same time
injections or adhesions of the meninges, softenings and tubercles in the
brain, serous effusions in the cavities, &c.; While at the period when
we made our earliest investigations, we only kept account of 'obvious
and manifest alterations." Greding, after having examined 220 cases,
regarded malformation and irregularities in the skull as the chief cause
of insanity. Kiesloff, a modern German writer, ascribes the mischief
to contractions of the osseous canals at the base of the skull. Bayle
regards the inflamed and thickened membranes of the brain as the
source of this malady. Guislain says that it is a sanguineous erethism,
short of primary inflammation in the brain. Foville, according to
Prichard, ascribes the mental affection to organic change in the grey
matter of the cerebrum. Cullen -writes that it is caused by an irregular
distribution of the nervous fluid. Mason Good and Crichton adopt the
opinion of Cullen; Nasse regarded the thoracic viscera as at fault.
Pinel thought that if it arose from any physical lesion, it was from dis-
ordered abdominal viscera. Jacobi shares in this opinion. Weichman
ascribes the malady to a contracted colon; Sheppard to disease of the
blood. Heinroth, and some others, regard insanity as a purely psychical
influence, with which the mere animal organism has nothing to do. The
examination of more than 300 cases, and the records of many more,
lead me to the belief that each of these writers was correct in the indi-
vidual instances which came before him, but that ho is wrong when the
idea is extended to numbers. I feel convinced that; jarring discord
will ever be found, so long as individuals ascribe this malady to one
isolated and individual lesion. The true pathology of insanity (as I
believe) is recorded in the following table; but the limits of this lec-
ture will prohibit my entering into the proofs of each position; they
can; however, be fully substantiated by facts in my possession. I
might have been more precise than I have been; thus you will perceivc
that I state?

Itnuhwite on oil) !<? <>u ,ifiui*i?:v 1 ji'.? ?.>:]] '].<
yJinjjfini oJohoki fiic wh^tki <r'>dT /fiis'i'ifi-Hi- (l....,1 1
THE PATHOLOGY OF INSANITY. 515
INSANITY MAY BE PRODUCED
PRIMARILY
-4.?By some change in the Brain itself, induced by moral (psychical)
Causes?Joy, Grief, Fear, Anxiety, Shame, dc., Intense and prolonged
Intellectual exertion.
B.?By similar change or changes induced by physical (somatic) causes
in the Braill o- Impaired nutrition. Irregular Development of the
Hemispheres. " 1 m:;i.; br<.
SECONDARILY.
A.?By malformation, or disease of the Bones of the Skull.
B.?By changes in the Membranes of the Brain.
C.?By changes in the Cerebral Circulation?<?. g. Deficiency of blood
through a mechanical closure of the Arteries from Atheromatous deposits, or
ly Arteries otherwise diseased. By retardation in the return of venous blood
from any cause, mechanical or vital. By an excess of blood, or its too active
circulation ; or the converse of these from various conditions of the heart, and
other causes.
D.?By impoverished Blood (impaired nutrition). By Blood contain-
ing other than its healthy constituents?e. g. Blood containing
Alcohol, " Hachish," Lead, dc.
B.?By defect or disease of the Organs of Sense. , r, , .
F.?By diseases of the Assimilating Organs.?Primary?Unhealthy Chyle *
Secondary?Arrest of Secretions. See above Blood diseases.
G.?By sympathy of the Brain with the irritation,of remote Structures
and Organs?e. g. The Skin, Mucous Membranes, Heart, Lungs, Stomach,
Liver, Kidney, Bladder, Testes, Ovaries, Uterus.
* * Each and all of these causes act by producing functional disturb-
ance, or structural change, in the yesicular neurine (grey
matter) of the Encephalon. : : i m U"' . i j i
i.fci ii inili rjj'.if nolhi'J .aundtno*.) odi to t?.tji.in
IDIOCY?Vesicular Neurine of the Brain, congenitally defective;?or
changed in its character by Convulsive', or other Diseases in
Infancy.

// i.li'j-i i j i J ill -'Hill- ,UT> r-.'if J K ll Illioln fjl !.?' >*I 1 ?| <.
Now, I have designedly used the word " enceplialon," because there
are some portions of the base of the brain, and of the cerebellum, the
pathology of which is not as yet understood, and of which I entertain
some notions, not yet fully matured for publication. I wish, however,
to add, that there are many persons whom it is quite necessary to detain
in Lunatic Asylums, whose brains are not diseased?in the strict sense
of that word, nor are they sympathetically affected by the lesions of
remote organs, or irritated by poisoned blood. The organs of the
whole system are physically healthy, and their functions are carried on
in accordance with health; but they have an imperfectly developed
brain?the instinctive emotions predominate so largely over the higher
faculties of the mind, as to render their actions quite incompatible
with the well-being and comfort of society. In such individuals, were
they to die suddenly from some accident, there would be no disease
of the calvarium, no thickening of the meninges, no structural change
in the brain to be seen after death. These persons are prone to insanity
of a violent and persistent form, but there is a lengthened period of
their existence in which there is no somatic disorder?the individual,
in fact, is living the life of an animal, while he is surrounded by the
conventionalities, the laws, the privileges, and the requirements of
a more exalted state of being. I regard M. C., in No. 6 ward, as an
elevated example of this class of individuals.

There is another class of persons, the very opposite of these, who
may be the subjects of various hallucinations, and yet be free from any
active or sympathetic disturbance of the brain. There is an attribute
of the human mind called imagination; it is variously possessed by
different individuals. There are those so cold, so passionless, so destitute
of the ideal faculty?so abstractedly intellectual, so purely scientific,
that, as Wordsworth says, they "would peep and botanize upon their
mother's grave." It is not to these that I now refer. " What do you
see, sir'2" said Fuseli one day to a student, who, with his pencil in his
hand, and his drawing before him, was gazing into vacancy. ' Nothing,
sir," was the answer. " Nothing, young man !" said Fuseli, em-
phatically ; " then, I tell you, that you ought to see something?you
ought to see distinctly the true image of what you are trying to draw.
I see the vision of all I paint, and I wish to Heaven I could paint up to
Avhat I saw!" It is a rich endowment, this imagination. It clothes the
landscape with beauty, and spreads refinement and grace over all things.
Its jdeasures have been described in a glorious poem by a member of
our own profession: its utility has been proved by the sublime dis-
coveries of Kepler, and the beautiful theories, and splendid results of
Sir Humphry Davy. Endowed with this faculty, we may with llogcrs
clothe the past with the soft hues of memory, or, with Campbell,
illumine the future with the sunshine of hope. By its power, a Shak-
speare can startle the mind with the hideousness of a Caliban, the guilt
of a Macbeth, and the treachery of an Iago?or fill it with pure delight
by the creation of such beings as Ariel, Miranda, and Cordelia;?in
short, passing the confines of earth, it can, with Dante, penetrate the
gloom and the darkness of the prison-house of souls, or, with Milton,
hear the song of angels, and see them prostrate their crowns of amethyst
and gold in adoring ecstasy, before the throne of the Omnipotent. All
this may be done with impunity, when the perceptive faculties arc
healthy, and the imagination is modified, directed, and controlled, by a
sound judgment; but when the perception is weak, and the judgment
not strong, an excess of this ideal faculty leads to eccentricities of con-
duct?to Utopian schemes, and wild visions verging on insanity. To
such minds do I refer?thus, the painter Blake, lived in an imaginary
world, and was guilty of freaks, which, ha<t he not possessed a gentle,
kind, heroic wife, might have confined him for life within the walls of a
lunatic asylum. Allan Cunningham, in his charming " Biographies of
British Painters," relates, " visions, such as arc said to arise in the sight
of those who indulge in opium, were frequently present to Blake; never-
theless, lie sometimes desired to see a spirit in vain. 1 For many years,'
said he, ' I longed to see Satan?I never could believe that lie was the
vulgar fiend which our legends represent him?I imagined him a classic
spirit, such as he appeared to him of Uz, with some of his original splendour about him. At last, I saw him. I was going up stairs in
the dark, when suddenly a light came streaming amongst my feet;
I turned round, and there he was looking fiercely at me through the
iron grating of my staircase window. I called for my things ; Katharine
thought the fit of song was 011 me, and brought me pen and ink. I
said, ' Hush! never mind,?this will do;?as he appeared, so I drew him
?there he is !' Upon this, Blake took out a piece of paper, with
a grated window scratched on it, while through the bars gazed the most
frightful phantom' that ever man imagined. Its eyes were large, and
like live coals, its teeth as long as those of a harrow, and the claws
seemed such as might appear in the distempered dream of a clerk
in the Herald's Office. ' It is the Gothic fiend of our legends,' said
Blake?' all else arc apocryphal.'" Cases of hallucination, occurring once
only in life, and ever after influencing the conduct of the individual, are
occasionally met with, in whom there is probably no appreciable physical
lesion, but where, from some temporary excitement, the mind has
become impressed with the objective reality of its own imaginings?
although not habituated to this, from special organization as men, like
Blake; or, where the senses have been so acted upon by diffused, or
imperfectly defined objects, as to impress with false notions the percep-
tive faculties, and through them the reflective powers of the mind. In
all ages, in all climes, in all churches, there have been enthusiasts whose
fervid imaginations have thus deceived their senses. Paganism abounds
with such tales, and I for one believe, that the great founder of Islamism
was as often self-deceived as deceiving?that, in those frequent retire-
ments at the cave of Mount Hara, where he went to muse on the
hollowness of the idolatry around him, and the reality and greatness of
that Allah whom he adored, his imagination and feelings became so
excited, that his senses were no longer faithful, and that visions were
seen, and voices heard, which he enforced so powerfully afterwards,
both by tongue and sword. And we know that, in the venerable
church to which we owe so much, for preserving alive the elements of
freedom, of science, of poetry and art, during the long dark night of
barbaric feudalism, there were many such self-deceived enthusiasts?not
even the genius of Ignatius Loyola was exempt, for he tells us, that in
the cavern of Manresa, after long fastings, maceration, and penance, as
" he lay awake in his bed at night, he saw plainly, with his bodily eyes,
the blessed Virgin appearing to him with the Holy Infant in her arms,
both regarding him with looks of benign complacency and encourage-
ment." Again, the distinguished monk of Saxony, writing in tlie lone
room at Wartburg, and worn by fatigue and study, imagined that Satan
had come in person to confront him, and to destroy his labours. He
seized upon the inkstand, and hurled it at the fiend. It was shivered
on the opposite wall. The spot remains to testify to the temporary
hallucination of the man, at the same time to proclaim to all genera-
tions that no power of earth or hell could shake for a moment the great
soul of Luther, or deter it from the accomplishment of that mission
which he believed it his duty to fulfil.

The Giant of the Hartz Mountains, or, better still, the white grave-
stones which in a dark and gusty night have appeared as walking
spectres, steeple-high, to the terrified rustic, are illustrations of my
meaning in the second particular. The hallucinations excited by
such feelings, and such objects, although accompanied, as all thought
probably is, by molecular changes in the brain, would leave no struc-
tural lesion which the eye could detect, unless followed by more con-
firmed insanity.

The causes arranged in the second group act only so far as they
influence the first. Moral causes, according to Pinel, prevail over the
physical; and Esquirol, in a memoir presented to the Society of Medi-
cine, states that cases of madness, occasioned by moral causes, are to
those arising from physical causes, as 4 to 1, They are placed, you will
perceive, in Class A of the primary group.

The experience of Esquirol and Pinel accords with that of this insti-
tution, in assigning the preponderance to moral causes. I am, however,
quite convinced that in the majority of cases of insanity, the cause will
be found to be both moral and physical?i. e., there must be previous
physical weakness in the brain for the moral shock to end in permanent
lunacy. In estimating moral shock, we have no accurate standard for
our guidance. The hide of the rhinoceros, and the apex of the elephant's
trunk, differ not more widely in their susceptibility to impressions than
the minds of various men.

"Chorda that vibrate sweetest pleasure,
Thrill the deepest notes of woe."
But the influence of impressions are different at different periods, and
some minds are more sensitive to one feeling than to another; thus,
on February the 28th, the same afternoon in which Dr Conolly,
with great eloquence, was addressing the members of the College of
Physicians on the causes of insanity, there was tossing in the Straits of
Dover a ship called the " Floridiau," with 200 emigrants on board. It
was a most tempestuous day. As the evening drew in, the storm at sea
became more fierce; the snow fell fast, darkness covered the deep, and
the vessel was in great peril. From some cause, during the night,
the officers lost their reckoning?the ship was dashed against the Essex
coast, and off Harwich became a wreck. While she was falling to
pieces, two sailors and an emigrant lashed themselves to the masts, and
upon these were floated off' amid the breakers. During that long night,
and the following day, they were tossed to and fro upon the surging
waters; and when at last they were rescued from their perilous posi-
tion, two of them were well-nigh dead from exhaustion?nay, the
emigrant was exhausted in a similar manner; but, while warmth, rest,
and safety brought back reason, health, and vigour to his companions,
they aroused in him the ravings of insanity?thus, in two men out of
three, fright, danger, and cold, produced bodily exhaustion alone?
while, in the third, perhaps from yreater fright, they ended in madness.
From him the impress of that fearful night may never pass away?
darkness, confusion, and fear may be his for ever.

To revert to the pathological synopsis : moral causes are placed in
Class A of the primary group; while blows on the head (like to that
which produced epilepsy, and subsequently insanity in J. G.), " sun-
strokes," idiopathic inflammation of the brain, and the like, fall into
Class B of the same order of causes.

There are several skulls on the table, which illustrate the various
changes which the hones of the head sometimes undergo in long-con-
tinued insanity. In one, you perceive that the osseous structure has
become much thickened and spongy: viewed through the microscope, it
is one mass of perforations, and I have been unable to detect in any
portion of it a single well-formed bone cell. ^ t
That specimen is three-quarters of an inch in thickness, and forms a
marked contrast to this cranium, which in many parts is not thicker
than cartridge paper: you observe, that it is diaphanous over a large
portion of the frontal and parietal bones; it is as hard and brittle as the
other specimen was soft and spongy: viewed through a quarter-inch lens,
it will be found to possess a large number of" bone-cells," and the
Haversian canals are exceedingly minute. These cases are similar to
many which Greding examined; and without now discussing the matter
as to whether these changes are causes, or coincidences, or consequences,
we admit such malformations and diseases as occasional causes of insanity,
and group them in class A of the secondaiy series.

The numerous cases of Bayle, and those reported by Dr Webster and
others, where thickened and inflamed meninges were the only appreciable
lesions to be found after death, are allocated in class B.
I have so frequently found all the arteries supplying the brain in a
diseased condition, from atheromatous deposits, and other changes, that
I recognise such lesions as one of the causes of mental derangement; this
group G, may also receive the cases referred to by Kiesloff', as arising
from contraction of the osseous canals at the base of the cranium.
Among the causes arranged in the secondary group, few are more
important than those placed' in class D. A systematic study of mental
diseases has been carried on in England for much too short a period to
enable us to give precise and definite details of the specific character of
the blood, by which insanity is produced. Our facts are too few, and
organic chemistry itself too imperfect for such a desirable consummation
beside which, the subtle essence, which may be sufficient to rouse the
nervous system into the wildest action, may have entered into new com-
bination, by the very process which had been resorted to for discovering
its presence, especially when the nature of the agent is wholly unknown*
and no clue is given to the chemist by which he may trace out its pre-
sence, and display its character. It is, however, quite, certain that each
organ has, as it were, an idiosyncracy of its own, by Avhich it is more
susceptible of the influence of one poison than of another?e. g., ,the liver
and the salivary glands to calomel, the spinal system to strychnia, tho
brain to opium, and the like. A remarkable instance; of ,tlie: effects
which some drugs produce upon the senses arid the mind, came under
my observation in the summer of 1844. A lady,, (the wife, of a captain
m the navy,) who was suffering from spasm about the.uterus, bad two
grains of the extract of Indian hemp prescribed for her by tbe physician
in attendance; soon after taking it, she fell asleepy between two and three
hours after, she awoke, with an excruciating pain on the top of her head,
which was followed speedily by hallucinations of a frightful character.
She recognised all the friends who approached her, and spoke to them
in an entreating manner about the spectres around her bed. She occa-
sionally screamed with horror; at other moments, she was wanton in her
expressions and gestures. She saw demons, hide'ous in form and threat-
ening in aspect, and for two hours she was full of terror. As these
hallucinations passed away, another, of a different character, remained:

she felt herself to be in the presence of a handsome person, listening,
with pleasure, to suggestions which she afterwards contemplated with
much remorse. She was a very pure-minded, religious person, and sub-
sequently informed me, that frightful as were the spectres, the feelings
which came on afterwards were so abhorrent to her, " so sinful," that she
hoped the drug would never be administered to her again. It was admi-
nistered again, clandestinely, by her medical attendant, who could not
believe that such effects were produced by the drug, but regarded them
as the offspring of hysteria. Precisely the same results ensued, and for
six hours this lady was decidedly insane. I watched the whole of these
symptoms throughout their duration, and am confident that they were
neither feigned nor the offspring of hysteria, but purely the result of the
drug; and the eminent physician who prescribed it, now shared in the
same opinion. The hallucinations, in the latter stages of the drug's
operation, may have assumed the forms they did from the pre-existing
disease about the ovaries, as the delusions of E. J , described in my
former lecture, took their rise apparently from disease about the abdomen;
and nothing is more common than for us to discover bodily ailments in
the first instance, by the peculiar " delusions" of the patients. The
insanity which is dependent upon some poison circulating in the blood,
is frequently of short duration, as in the case just detailed to you?
(perhaps " delirium"*?is a more strict appellation than insanity for such
cases, but it obviously differs from the latter disease only in the extent of
its duration)?the poison being carried out of the system by some of
the emunctories of the body. The duration of the disease will vary in
proportion to the success of remedial measures. The miasma-poison,
whatever it may be, which produces intermittent fever, continues, in
some persons, to exert its baneful influence for many weeks, and even
months, while in others, it rapidly disappears under the use of blue pill,
emetics, and quinine; and in like manner, will the duration of such cases
oi mania be dependent on the principles of treatment. The comparison
between these blood poisons reminds me, that Sydenham has recorded
that mania frequently supervened upon the intermittent fever which
prevailed between the years 16G1 to 1GG4. I believe that in some of
the cases of " suppressio mensium," there is a morbid condition of the
blood; there is retained in the blood that which contaminates the system,
in the same manner as urea may do when the renal function is suspended.
It has been long observed by practitioners, who have had much to do
with female diseases, that there is some connexion between unhealthy
uterine secretions and rheumatism, and I have no doubt that there is a
close connexion, in some cases, between these and insanity. In by far
* The ready manner in which she recognised her friends at the bedside, distin-
guished it from delirium.

the greater number, this important function acts simply by relieving the
brain of congestion, in the same manner as the hemorrhoidal flux in
males; but in others, there is a depurating agency effected by it; near
to the catamenial period, some chronic lunatics become fierce, and the
melancholic suicidal. The cases of insanity in which a morbid poison
has been generated in the body and absorbed by the blood, are distinct
from those which arise from defective blood?blood wanting in fibrine?
and which are characterized by a general debility of the muscular system
at the same time. These cases are more common, perhaps, in agricul-
tural than commercial districts. Some of these patients are irritable and
noisy, but a very common feature in this form of the malady is extreme
taciturnity, or they speak in monosyllables, are indifferent to their dress
and surrounding things; others are insensible to, or careless of danger,
and make feeble efforts at self-destruction, their attempts are not con-
cealed or vigorous, and seem to arise from no definite purpose?e. g.,
they attempt to go down a staircase regardless of the steps, or to pass
through a window of an upper story; but all their actions are dream-
like and feeble.

It may occur to you that my table embraces almost every disease,?
it does so; and there is no disease mentioned in it which has not been
the precursor of insanity.

Can so many lesions produce one distinct effect 1 I answer, Most
certainly, in parties predisposed to mental disease. We meet with the
same phenomena in every malady. The lungs are commonly regarded
as the seat of the respiratory function, and yet disease in the brain will
affect respiration. Pressure upon the pneumogastric nerve at its origin,
or in its course, will diminish or disturb this function as completely as
an irritant upon the lung itself. I wish to place the diseases of the
brain upon the same scientific basis as the diseases of other organs; in
other words, I am anxious to prove, that the pathology of insanity is
not more paradoxical than is the pathology of respiration, or any other
important function. And I am sure that the especial lesions of the brain
which produce insanity, may be demonstrated with as much accuracy
as lesions which produce disturbance and disease in any other intricate
structure. The above table contains the germs, the nucleus of the
truth in this matter. I feel that I have reconciled the discrepancies of
all authors on this subject, and that my humble labours have not been
in vain. But to return. Can so many various lesions produce one
distinct effect 1 I repeat, most certainly. Bear with me, while I carry
out the analogy to which I have already referred. Injuries or diseases
of the cranium may disturb the intellect?disease, or injury of the ribs,
the bony covering of the lung, may disturb respiration. Diseases of
the dura mater, the periosteum of the skull may derange the under-
standing?periostitis of the ribs may affect the breathing; inflammation
of the arachnoid, or effusion of serum or lymph from its surface, may
lead on to insanity; inflammation of the pleura, and its consequent
exudations, embarrass respiration; diseases of the arteries produce
parallel results in both cases; and different poisons conveyed by the
blood affect both organs in an analogous manner. In neither of the
structures of the lung named is the function of respiration especially
located, nor is any one of the parts of the brain enumerated, the precise seat
of intelligence; but all these lesions operate upon these two respective
functions, in a corresponding ratio to their encroachments upon the
ultimate ramifications of the air-tubes in the one case, and the vesicular
neurine of the convolutions in the other. In every case of insanity,
there is irritation, or disease of the grey matter in the encephalon?
the especial character of this disease may be different in each case,
Avliile irritation of this structure may arise from simple sympathy with
remote organs. In very rare cases, the disease may be limited to simple
erythema of the convolutions; and where this is strictly idiopathic, and
isolated, I believe no physical disorder would be manifested in other
organs of the body; just as in simple arachnitis, a most rare disease,
there would be no disorder of the intellect. Dr Hodgkin has described
such cases; and the case of S., referred to in my first lecture, goes
to show that insanity may exist for a long time, without necessarily
involving this membrane. You will perceive by this accurate drawing,
that the vesicular neurine consists of two distinct portions, separated
by a very fine delicate white line. This line of demarcation has doubt-
less an important purpose, and these two parts are variously affected
in diseases, as shown by variety in their respective colour and consistence
in some cases. The upper portion, under the microscope, is formed of
such simple elements, such minute granular masses, that I have been
unable to detect any marked histological change in its structure, under
chronic disease, except that the granules arc more diffused, and, as it
were, separated from each other by a thin homogeneous fluid. In
recent cases the change in its blood-vessels and its consequent colour is
well marked. In chronic cases of dementia, of an aggravated form, the
nerve-vesicles in the lower planes of the grey matter of the convolutions
have appeared to me to be broken up and disintegrated; and by a
simple lens, when the upper plane of grey matter is carefully removed,
this lower plane is seen to be rough and mammillated.

Time forbids my enlarging upon this absorbing theme. No one can
more deeply feel that this lecture 011 the pathology of insanity has been
defective and imperfect, than I do. If, however, it has awakened an
interest in your minds, so as to induce you to study the malady, my
purpose has been fulfilled. I want to see young, and ardent, and honest
minds engaged in this pursuit. It is a field in which " the harvest is
indeed plenteous, and the labourers are few." The malady needs inves-
tigation, for it seems to be marching onwards with fearful strides. Its
consequences arc tremendous. It renders useless the strength of the
peasant, the ingenuity of the mechanic, the skill of the artisan, the
genius of the painter and the poet, the learning of the scholar, the
wisdom of the statesman, and the patriotism of the monarch; its influ-
ence strctchcs from the cottage to the throne. Like Death itself,?
" jEquo pulsnt pede, pauperum, tnbcrnns
Eegum que turres."

This being so, it becomes all-important to investigate its nature. In
what, then, does the disease essentially consist? what is the especial
and " ultimate'' change in the convolutions of the brain, by which this
malady is produced? Tliis question cannot be answered at the present
time. Although there must be some one elementary change, upon which
insanity is dependent, it is doubtful whether, it will ever be demon-
strated: there will occur a multiplicity of visible changes in that struc-
ture, by any of which insanity may be caused through embracing the
momentary one; and these alone will be demonstrated by future research.
Herein insanity differs f rom no other disease. The boundaries of our
wisdom are quickly reached. With all our boasted acquirements, we
stop at the border-land of actual knowledge. It is the same in physical
science, apart from life. We see a stone fall to the earth, and we try to
explain it, by ascribing it to the unerring law of gravitation, but what
is this? The difficulty becomes tenfold greater when life is superadded;
for, depend upon it, the mysteries of sense and thought will never be
unravelled by any comparison with merely physical agencies. Let us
not hide our ignorance in a cloud of pompous Avords, and then flatter
ourselves that we are wise. We are living in a time when the vital
endowments of organs are overlooked, and persons begin to imagine
that electricity may produce a monad, which, in the progress of ages,
may become a man! Creation and life are mysteries higher than can
be reached by human philosophy. Let us study the wondrous endow-
ments of organs, and the obvious conditions upon which their healthy
manifestations depend, leaving nicer subtleties to vainer men, and con-
tenting ourselves with the divine tradition?

Tlavra 61' avTov lyivtro, Kal xuP'C avrov iyhvtro oi'Sk Iv o yeyevev. 'Ev
avTt{> >r) ijv, Kal r) Ztoi) i]v to QCjq twv avOpunrwi>.
