Lectures on the Pathological Appearances Observed in the Bodies of Tiik Insane
===============================================================================

0ricunnl ?ommum'cntions.

DELIVKIIKD AT THE MIDDI.EHKX COUNTY LUNATIC AHYI.l'M,
:Author:  Bit. JOHN IIITC1IMAN,
Rett dint Medical Officer to the Female Department of the Institution.
NO. II.

In my address on Saturday last, I endeavoured to give you some
idea of the pathology of "General Paralysis." In this lecture, I
shall have to solicit your attention to another complication of in-
sanity, which unfortunately, like general paralysis, is in almost every
case incurable; and I trust that that frightful word, " incurable,"
will stimulate your research, rather than diminish your interest in the
disease. The complication to which 1 refer is "Mania with Kpi-
lepsy." If neither disease be well understood in its simple condition,
we must expect obscurity in their compound form, lipilepsy is still
a mystery. Notwithstanding the great labours of some modern
pathologists, and the close observations of such able men as Marshall
Hall, Todd, Wilson, and others, I fear we must confess that our
knowledge of epilepsy is not much greater than that possessed by
Aretreus, who flourished at Cappadocia during the reign of Vespasian.
This is not because there have been no observers. Dr. Copland, in
his great and marvellous work, the " Dictionary of Practical Medi-
cine," gives references to more than two hundred writers on this
subject. The disease has every attribute which is likely to arrest
attention, and to excite research. It is sudden in its seizure, and
hideous and appalling in its progress. It begins with a scream,
which is the very accent of terror, and ends with a sleep, which
sometimes merges into death. Its importance cannot be overrated.
The very names which have been attached to it proclaim its moment.
In the time of Hippocrates it was called "Morbus Sacer;" the elegant
and classic Celsus styles it, "Morbus Major;" while Pliny and Scneca
give to it the title of " Morbus Comitialis." It has been associated
with the stars, and called " Astralis;" with the infernal regions, and
styled " Scelestus." In one era, the unhappy patient has been
deified; in another, and a later age, the convulsions have been re-
garded as the stragglings of a satanic power. Be it ours to regard
it as a bodily disease, influenced by, and influencing the operations
of, the mind. Adopting, in truth, the wise statement of Hippocrates,
who says,?" Neither truly do I count it a worthy opinion to hold
that the body of man is polluted by God, the most impure by the
most holy; for were it deified, or did it suffer from any other thing,
it would be like to be purified and sanctified, rather than polluted by
God But this disease seems to me to be nowise
more divine than others; but it has its nature such as other diseases
have, and a cause whence it originates, and its nature and cause are
divine only just as much as all others are; and it is curable no less
than the others, unless when from length of time it is confirmed, and
has become stronger than the remedies applied. Its origin is here-
ditary like that of other diseases."?{The Sacred Disease. Sydenham
Translation. 184 G.) The symptoms of epilepsy are familiar to you.
The disease has been thus graphically portrayed by Lucretius:?
" Quin etiani, subito, vi morbi srepe conctus
Ante ocnlos nliquis nostros, ut fulminis ictu,
Conciilit, et spumas ngit; ingemit, et tremit artus;
Desipit, oxtentat nervos, torquetnr, nnhelat
Inconstnnter, et in jactamlo membra futigat.

Jnde ubi jam morbi rellexit caussn, . .
Turn qnnsi vnoillnns, primum consnrgit et omneis
Pnullatim rcdit in sensiis, nnimamqne receptat.
Do rcrum nuturA, p. 379. J nip!/-
The treatment of this malady, its aggravation under certain cir-
cumstances, and the influence which it exerts over the curability of
insanity, have been placed before you. The more humble task ap-
propriately falls to me, of describing the lesions which precede or
accompany this disease, or rather, which are left behind in the brain,
and other organs of the body. To unfold, however, more of its
pathology, I shall quit occasionally the coarse revelations of the
scalpcl, to discourse on the more subtle agencies which usher in this
formidable malady.

Of the six epileptic patients who have died during the past
fifteen months, three only exhibited special peculiarities. In all
there was great congestion of the encephalon, but with this excep-
tion there was no lesion or deformity either in the brain, or the
base of the skull, which is not common to chronic cases of mental
derangement apart from epilepsy. I shall limit my descriptive
details, therefore, to these three cases. One of them, J. G., possessed
considerable interest, and she was pointed out to the gentlemen who
formed the class of last year, because at the onset of her fits, she
began turning round and round with great rapidity; sometimes these
gyrations would be carried on for several seconds, at others, she
would pass half way round, and then fall with great violence. When
eight years old, she received a severe blow on the forehead, which
fractured the external table of the frontal bone; the scar which re-
mained was triangular in form, and about two inches in length, (?'. e.
from the base to the apex of the triangle.) The blow was followed
immediately by epilepsy. She, however, grew up to womanhood;
married, had children, and became a widow in 1837, at which time,
by the combined influence of poverty, grief, and epilepsy, she became
insane. She was admitted into this asylum on March 7, IS!38, and
was ordinarily gentle in her deportment, possessing a few hallucina-
tions, but these were harmless in their character, and she was pleased
with any attention from the officers and nurses, except for a few
hours preceding the paroxysm of epilepsy, when she became morose,
suspicious, jealous, and angry. At the commencement of the fit, she
would rise from her seat, and pass into rapid gyrations, as before
stated; when in bed, she had a lesser tendency to rotate, but even
there, I have seen her roll over to her face, and from that position
on to her back again. She died in the night of the 18th of December
last. She was then in the 06th year of her age, and had been insane
eleven years, and epileptic forty-eight years. In the autopsy, the
scalp was found to be healthy. The calvarium had a deep indenta-
tion of a triangular form in the centre of the frontal bone. This
Avas limited to the first table, as no corresponding mark was visible
on the cerebral surface of the bone. The inner table was very
deeply grooved by the passage of the meningeal artery; so much so
that the bone was quite thin, and diaphonous along its course. The
base of the skull was irregular in form, and much contracted at the
anterior part upon which the cerebral lobes rested; the "crista
galli" of the ethmoid bone was large and long. The dura mater was
very firmly adherent to the surface of the skull. The arachnoid
membrane was opaque; the pia mater congested with blood; the
Pacchionian bodies were of great size; the brain was congested with
blood throughout its structure, but the congestion was most intense
about the cerebellum and medulla oblongata. The lateral ventricles
were devoid of fluid. The pituitary body was much atrophied. The
heart was small, and its muscular structure flabby. The tricuspid
valves of the right ventricle were diseased and thickened. The other
viscera of the body appeared to be healthy. The other patient was
J. G., whose case has been detailed to you already to some extent,
when speaking of the obscurity of pulmonary disease in the insane.

This patient was quite imbecile. She was admitted on the 11th of
January, 1843, and had then been insane one year; her insanity was
ascribed to epilepsy, and the epilepsy was produced by fright in child-
hood. She Avas in the 38th year of her age at the time of her decease,
which took place from extensive disease of the lungs, at the time and
in the manner already related. The calvarium was irregular in form.
The dura mater was very adherent to the skull. The arachnoid mem-
brane was opaque and milky over the cerebellum, but not elsewhere
(except, indeed, around the Pacchionian glands, which I believe to be
universal.) There was a large quantity of brown-coloured serum be-
neath the sac of the arachnoid, filling up the anfractuosities of the
convolutions. The convolutions were atrophied, and widely separated
from each other by the above fluids. The form of the encephalon
was peculiar: the left lobe of the cerebrum being much larger, and
three-quarters of an inch longer, than the right lobe. The vesicular
neurine of both hemispheres was soft, and varying in hue from a
dark brown to a pale fawn colour. The lateral ventricles contained
about one ounce and a half of serum; their lining membrane was
dense, gritty, and strong. The middle lobe of the cerebellum was
much shrunken, and had a pale, macerated appearance, like to
animal structure which had been immersed a long time in fluid.
The encephalon in other parts was much congested. The pituitary
gland appeared healthy. Th$ condition of the pulmonary organs 1
need not repeat. The membrane of the heart, at the junction of the
auricles with the ventricular openings, was inflamed on its external
surface, and presented the appearance of small acupunctures in lines,
or faintly resembling "psoriasis inveterata," when it attacks the
angles of the mouth. The abdominal viscera were healthy. The
inequality of size in the two hemispheres of the cerebrum, in this
latter case, may remind some of you, perhaps, of Dr. Wigan's book,
entitled, the " Duality of the Mind." The very name of the volume
startled metaphysicians, and led to its neglect. It was certainly a
misnomer. It advertised a paradox, if not an absurdity. Had that
amiable physician given some other title to his book, it would have
attracted more attention. It is a charming philosophical romance
?a perfect reflex of the doctor's own mind?ingenious, sparkling,
eccentric, credulous, and amusing. It is clever and analogical; and
although fancy and feeling do predominate in its pages over deep
thought and sound reasoning, it nevertheless contains many truths.
It is moreover a honest book. It contains the genuine faith, the
sincere convictions of the writer; his motive and aim in the pubr
lication are conspicuous in every page, and they are simple and pure:

and, for these qualities, one may pardon much looseness ot style,
some illogical conclusions, and perhaps a too capacious credulity.
To return to the autopsy, although I have seen another epileptic
brain thus irregular in its formation, still. 1 have met with a third
patient in whom there was this irregular development without
epilepsy, (there is an exact outline of her calvarium on the table,)
which enables me to state, that the above inequality had more to
do with the manifestations of the mind than with the convulsions
of epilepsy. The patient to whom I refer had spiculte of bone pro-
truding from the sides of the skull, near to the superior longitudinal
sinus, on to the upper parts of the brain. The calvarium was irre-
gular in its outline, as you perceive from the diagram before you,?
the membranes were much thickened,?the vessels of the brain were
atheromatous, and the cercbral hemispheres varied in si/.e, as in the
case of J. G.; yet this patient was not epileptic, but very insane;
indeed, her case is so interesting, that, although it has been pre-
viously published, I cannot refrain from again alluding to it. This
poor woman was blind, and suffered greatly from bronchitis. She
caused great noise at night by striking at " the witches," whom she
thought surrounded her. She beat the sides of her "crib-bedstead,"
and thus caused much noise, and bruised her own hands, in her
efforts to knock down these intruders. Had she been under the
care of the patrons of restraint, she would, in all probability, have
had her hands muffled, and been thus left under the torturing im-
pression that she had been overpowered by the wizards and spirits
who thronged around her; under a happier arrangement, the bed-
stead was muffled, instead of herself, by padding it with coir, and
thus she was prevented from injuring her hands, while all the noise,
induced by formerly striking its boarded sides, was completely
removed. I have frequently heard her hold a lengthened parley
with these imaginary foes, and have seen her at other times attempt
to correct her delusions; she would then carefully feel with her
hands at all the points in which she imagined their presence, and
not finding anything, would as attentively listen for a footfall, or
other movement, (for, in conversation, she never regarded them as
disembodied things, and would frequently ask me whether 1 did not
see them pass under the bed, or out at the windows,) when on
such occasions, she neither felt nor heard anything, she would say,
Iheres nothing?it is my fancy." If at this moment her cough
commenced, she would exclaim, with an oath, " Oh, here they are
again, squeezing my lungs out f

You all remember the interesting anecdote of Nicolai of P?crlin,
detailed to you by Dr. Conolly, in his first lecture, furnishing as it
does a fine example of a philosophic mind triumphing over the
delusions of sense; but here is an opposite case, in which the mind,
weakened and diseased, becomes the slave of corporeal impressions.
You cannot have failed to observe, too, in your own personal expe-
rience, how powerfully the healthy senses contribute to the support
of tlie mind when in a weak condition (to use such language). How
often, in awaking from a troubled dream, do we require all the aid
of the eye and the ear to convince us that it is not a reality. Again,
how easy it is to yield oneself to reverie, if we exclude all the
impressions conveyed to us by the senses. Hence this poor creature,
shut up in a world of darkness, was constantly the prey of wild
chimeras,?at one time, laughing aloud at their imaginary pranks
and gambols; at another, swearing at, and cursing their insolence;
in a third, struggling with terror under their inflictions,?for I have
seen her black in the facc, from the loaded state of the bronchial
tubes, and frightened by the thought that her suffering was produced
by the harpies, who were striving to strangle her. Here, then, as it
appears to me, an intimate connexion between psychical phenomena
and physical organization (however strange that relationship may be)
is abundantly proved. An irregular, ill-shaped, constricted skull,?
the meninges thickened and diseased,?small anterior cerebral lobes,
?spiculaj of bone touching the superior edges of both lateral hemi-
spheres,?the circulation through the brain interrupted by bony
growths,?the blood itself impure, through an imperfect respiration,
?the hemispheres unequal in size, and dissimilar in form,?a loss
of the correcting power of one of the most important of the senses,
and a distant physical irritant (mucus in the bronchi), lending its
influence still further to disturb the already deranged seat of intelli-
gence; these, physiologically, seem to furnish scope for the wildest
delusions of the intellect, and here we perceive they existed. This,
too, my friends, is one among many chronic cases in which the
medical man may improve and tranquillize, even when he cannot
heal; another, among hundreds, which demonstrates that an efficient
medical staff' is required even for chronic lunatics, since the worst
features of her mental malady, its rage and its terror, were influenced
by, and corresponded to, the varying states of the physical disease.

' As I have before stated, this ease also illustrates an important
fact., namely, that certain parts of the brain may be extensively
diseased without inducing epilepsy: it also stands in remarkable
contrast with the following epileptic case. Thus: the patient,
E E , (whom many of you saw, about three weeks ago,
in a semi-comatose state, and who then presented a livid appcarancc
about the lips, checks, and fingers) died 011 the 1st instant. She
had been epileptic many years, and yet, 011 examination after death,
the brain presented no changes, except such as arc common to cases
of chronic mania. There were 110 spiculaj of bone protruding from
the skull at any part; there were no cysts of any kind in the lateral
ventricles, or elsewhere; in short, there was no lesion of the cerc-
brum or cerebellum (that I could detect) which was likely to induce
epilepsy, but 011 looking at the base of the skull for the pituitary
gland, I found it much hypcrtrophicd, gritty, and of a brick-dust
colour. The abdominal viscera were healthy, but the heart was
very small, and its muscular tissue soft, ilaccid, and degenerated in
its structure. It weighed only five ounces and six drachms, avoir-
dupois. You may remember that sonic most distinguished anato-
mists have ascribed epilepsy to lesions of the little pituitary body,
whose state has been just referred to; and I have frequently found
this gland enlarged, and otherwise altered in epilepsy, when no
other cerebral change was discernible. Its structure, consisting ot
nucleated vesicles?its blood-vessels?the manner in which it is
invested by the dura-mater?and its connexion with the brain
through the infundibulum, another "high-classed" body?and its
being found in the brains of an extensive class of animals, induce
me to attach considerable importance to its derangements, nor the
less so, that it has long been regarded with respect by observers in
all times. I do not believe with the ancients, that it secretes the
mucus of the nostrils, more than I believe, that the pineal gland is
the especial scat of the human soul; but as both these minute bodies
have, for long ages, had functions appropriated to them, we should
act unwisely to pass them slightly over in our investigations of
cerebral disease. Is this body in any degree excretory in its func-
tions? I oncc found this structure very much hypcrtrophicd, in
fact, of twicc its normal size, in a patient who was not known, at
the time of her decease, to be epileptic; but 011 further investigating
her history, I found that she had been cpilcptic for many years.
Epilepsy is frequently kept in abeyance by other diseases, and is
sometimes suspended for many months by a powerful appeal to the
credulity, or the faith of the patient. Pulmonary consumption has
been known to arrest the convulsive malady. Thus M A
became phthisical three months ago, and she has not had a fit since
she began to expectorate, although during one month, commencing
from the 23rd day of January, she had as many as one hundred and
seventeen epileptic fits. She has been closely watched during the
past two months, and has not had a single paroxysm of the malady,
although, previous to the above occurrence, she had four, five, and
six fits daily: so true is it, as Shakspearc long ago observed, that
one disease, or even one feeling, will inlluencc the career of a
second:?

"Tut, man! one fire puis out another's burniug,
One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holpby backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with another's languish;
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die."
Iluinco and Julkt, Act I., Sccno li.
To return to the nccroscopic nppcaranccs. The lesions of the
brain are by 110 means uniform in epilepsy. In one woman who
died suddenly in 1817, the convolutions of the brain were strewed
with a great number of knotty indurations which wcro caused by the
cysts of true hydatids; they varied in size from that of a vetch, <0 a
large bean, but of a corrugated and rounded figure; and one situated
in the corpus striatum of the left ventricle was as large as a pigeon's
e?8- A f?w of these cysts, which contained limpid fluid, possessed
within this some clear spherules, which were probably young hydatids.
The corrugated hydatid membranes which had lost their fluid, con-
tained a white grumous material, resembling an impalpably fine
mortar?this grumous mass, under the microscope, was found to
possess a large number of microscopic crystals having a rhombic
figure. In other cases, the clinoid processes are found elongated;
in three cases of epilepsy which have fallen under my notice, the
brain was greatly congested, and bulged suddenly upwards and
laterally, 011 the removal of the calvarium, so as to give the idea
that it had experienced some amount of pressure from its natural
covering. This condition is, perhaps, a frequent concomitant of the
epileptic paroxysm, and may explain the method of cure in those
rare cases, which have been relieved by tying the carotid artery, or
trephining the skull. In other instances, no lesion whatever has
been found in the brain at all likely to solve the phenomena
exhibited during life, and we are led to suppose that the epilepsy was
causcd by disorganization of the kidneys?irritation in remote
structures, or from a poisoned condition of the blood?instances of
apoplexy from the first cause are numerous?I have seen some cases
of epilepsy also ascribed to it?and the effects which follow the
insertion of strychnia into the veins, is a familiar illustration of the
power of a poison in the blood to induce the disease. Anything,
moreover, which interrupts the circulation of blood through the
medulla oblongata, the mesoccphalon, and the sensory ganglia at the
base of the brain may induce epilepsy. There is no known specific
lesion which is pathognomonic of this disease. Congestion of the
above-named structures is a frequent cause; but more frequently
still, an irregular circulation, or an anaemic condition of the brain,
are productive of this malady: the researches of Andral have demon-
strated that anaemia, and liyperoamia excite the same train of pheno-
mena, and that in a great number of convulsive diseases our only
guide to a safe practice is the previous history of the patient. The
last moments of an animal which is dying from loss of blood,
resemble a fit of epilepsy. You will have observed that many of our
female epileptics arc far from having a ruddy, congested appearance,
and I have frequently drawn the attention of gentlemen who have
been with me in the epileptic wards, when a patient has been seized
with a paroxysm of epilepsy, to the sudden transient pallor which
pervaded the face, and the panic-look which preceded the character-
istic shriek of this malady; after the shriek, or scream, we observe
the gradual accession of the congestive stngc, as the circulation
becomes impeded by the universal spasm of the muscles of the head
and neck. Still wc should be in error, were we to regard an anaemic
condition of the brain as the sole excitant of epilepsy. There are
conditions of existence, and of vital phenomena, which we can never
unravel. Individuals differ as widely in their susceptibilities, and in
their liability to special diseases, as they do in the expression of their
countenances, and in the variety of their tastes. A\ e need go no
further for illustration, than tho fact, that the same kind of intelli-
police which blanches the cheek of one individual, paints with crimson
the face of his friend. All that our present knowledge enables us to
state is, that epilepsy may be produced either by somatic, or psychical
causes, and that, originating in the former, it may ultimately induce
intellectual disorder; while intense mental excitement may give rise
to such somatic disturbance, as to produce the convulsions of epilepsy
?the cases of J G , and J G , illustrate the lirst

position, and instances of the latter are numerous; thus, the strong
mind of that good man, John Wesley, and of his great rival in
apostolic zeal, Whitfield, could remain sane, and in a comparative
degree calm, while bringing before the excited imaginations of their
hearers the sublime transactions of the judgment hour, the rapturous
joys of heaven,?or the frightful agonies of a self-pictured hell, but
not so, with many of the recipients of their doctrines; to them, such
scenes, described in earnest language by a powerful fancy, assumed a
present reality, and madness and epilepsy frequently sprung up like
an epidemic disease. In Wesley's journal for June, 1751), I read:

" 1 had but just spoke, when I heard a dreadful noise on the further
side of the congregation, and turning thither, saw one Thomas
Skinner coming forward, the most horrible human figure I ever saw
?his large wig, and hair, were coal black?his face distorted beyond
all description; he roared incessantly, throwing and clapping his
Iiaiwls together with his whole force. Several were terrified, and
hastened ont of his way Not a few of the triflcrs grew serious,
while his kindred and acquaintance were very unwilling to believe
Aeir own eyes and ears. They would fain have got him away; but
he fell to the earth, crying: ' My burden, my burden. 1 cannot
bear it.' Some of his brother scoffers were calling for horse-whips,
till they saw him extended on his back, at full length. They then
said lie was dead; and indeed, the only signs of life were the wor/cini/
of hia breast, and the distortions of his face, while the vchut of his
neck were swelled, as if rauly to burst" Again, in another place,
after describing similar scenes, under other prcachcrs, the following
observations are recorded: " Some said these were purely natural
effects; the people fainted away only, because of the heat and close-
ness of the rooms," and others were sure "it was all a cheat; they
might help it, it they would. Else, why were these things only in
their private societies? A\ hy were they not done in the face of the
Min? to-day I was enforcing these words (here follows a text) not
in a close room, neither in private, but in the open air, and before
inoie than JOUO witnesses. One, and another, and another, was
struck to the earth exceedingly trembling. . . . One person dropped
down close to me who was a strong assertor of the contrary doctrine.
While he stood astonished at the sight, a little boy near him was
seized in the same manner. A young man who stood up behind,
fixed his eyes on him, and sank down himself, as one dead; but
soon began to roar out, and beat himself against the ground, so' that
six men could scarcely hold him."

Similar scenes are frequently recorded iu other parts of John
Wesley's Journal.
Charles Wesley arrested the spread of this mental epidemic among
his congregation, hy distinctly telling them from the pulpit, that he
thought nothing better of them for these convulsive attacks, and by
directing his porters to take the persons thus afflicted to the outside
of the chapel, and to leave them there. After this, he states, " his
porters had nothing to do." (Southey's Life of Wesley.) Lord
Byron presented a remarkable instance of the power of psychical in-
tluenccs in inducing this malady. Thus, at the 77th page of the
third volume of Moore's Life of Lord Byron, Ave read,?" Such effect
had the passionate energy of Kcan's acting on his mind, that once,
in seeing him play Sir (Jiles Overreach, lie was so affected as to be
seized with a sort of convulsive tit; and we still find him, some years
after, in Italy, when the representation of Alfieri's tragedy of Mirza
had agitated him in the same violent manner, comparing the two
instances as the only ones in his life when anything under reality had
been able to move him so powerfully." Some of the epidemics of
the Middle Ages assumed the convulsive form under intense religious
excitement; and it has been calculated that, even in England, on the
introduction of Methodism, upwards of 4000 persons were, within a
very short period, affected with convulsive diseases. Insanity and
epilepsy depend for their manifestation on special and separate parts
of the enccplialon, and hence, throughout my observations, in order
to keep its pathology distinct, I have been referring to the latter
malady as though it had been idiopathic, or apart from the former.
Dr. Conolly has already detailed to you, that when it supervenes
upon, or even when it has preceded mental derangement, it renders
the insanity well-nigh incurable; and the prognosis is thus unfavour-
able, from the supposition that the disease has extended through a
large portion of the enccplialon?has reached from the periphery of
the brain to the great ganglia at its base?or has spread from these
to the surface of the hemispheres. I need not, however, tell you
that epilepsy may exist without necessarily involving the intellect.
The " foremost man of all this world,"?he whom Brutus slew?was
an epileptic; and many Greek writers maintain, that the conqueror
in the battle-fields of Bcder and Ohud?the great iconoclast and
prophet of Arabia?was subject to paroxysms of this fearful disease -
as is the late distinguished exile of CJacta, but a few months ago
the most loved, as he was the most liberal and the most enlightened
of a long line of illustrious pontiffs.

There is one important fact in connexion with the epileptie
patients, who have died during the period we have been reviewing,
which 1 have not yet alluded to,?the deaths of two of them were
quite sudden. One died while taking a bath, a second while having
her breakfast. In both instances it is certain that there was not a
scries of epileptic paroxysms. Now, had they died in bed, with the
face downwards,?and in three-fourths of those who die the face is
prone,?their deaths may have given rise to some doubts as to
whether their end had been accelerated by the position which the
face had assumed in reference to the bedclothes. Here, however,
no such cause could be assigned for the fatal result, the death in each
case being caused by apoplexy,?i. e., by extravasation of blood upon
the brain, or by a fatal congestion of its vessels. Death ensues in
epilepsy from various causes. I have given to this subject great
attention, and my belief now is, that the most frequent cause of death
is venous congestion of the brain, or an effusion of blood, constituting
" apoplexy."

2nd. From asphyxia, the result of congestion or pressure upon the
mesocephalon, and the upper part of the spinal chord,?the " respi-
ratory tract" of Bell.

3rd. From spasm of the glottis, continuing long enough to induce
such changes in the blood as paralyze the action of the heart, or end
in fatal coma.

?ith. I think it is possible that during the epileptic paroxysm, the
face being pressed on the pillow, and that part of the sheet opposite
the mouth being saturated with saliva, that suffocation may ensue
?from a mechanical exclusion of the air by the wetted sheet, and the
pressure of the head upon it;?i. c. I believe a fatal termination may
ensue under such circumstances, which would not arise if the face
was freely exposed to the atmospheric air: first, because the pre-
existing congestion of the brain and spinal chord has blunted the
respiratory sense, and thus reduced the cncryy of the inspiratory act;
next, the inspiratory act, in the absence of all consciousness on the
part of the patient, with the nose closed by the pillow, even if
excited, may draw up the welted sheet into the mouth, and thus,
without excluding all air, may admit it in quantities too small for
the continuance of life; and in these rare cases, the usual charac-
teristics of suffocation would be more conspicuous than in those
where all air had been instantaneously shut off from the patient.
It is this sudden and unexpected demise of many epileptic patients
which imparts to this disease additional importance; and which, as you
have already heard, formed one of the greatest barriers to the intro-
duction of the Non-Restraint System. It was said to be necessary to
fasten the epileptics, to keep them on their backs, lest they should be
suflocatcd during the night in a paroxysm of their malady. It is ono
of those arguments which, being founded in error, must totter and fall,
as fact after fact reveals itself. It is one of those objections which
gives me very little concern. Statistics will destroy and erase it.

Given, that a patient, one in five hundred, rolls on to her face, and
becomes suffocated by that circumstance,?where is the justifiable
" restraint which will prevent it? Did not as many patients die in
this asylum from supposed suffocation, as now, at a time when they
were fastened by the hand every night to prevent it? There are no
records. Ilut those who knew the asylum well, then and now, admit
the fact. If such be the fact, then all argument is at an end. Tt is
enough, that a system which produces greater comfort, greater happi-
ness, and an equal number of cures, should be as safe as the more
lmrsh plan, which it has displaced; being this, its adoption is not
only justifiable, but absolutely necessary; nay, it cannot be withheld,
except in violation of some of the most sacred duties which man
owes to man. There is 110 need of an elaborate, controversial dis-
quisition 011 the physiology of the disease, to demonstrate the inutility
of such fastenings, or to justify the absence of restraint. It is more
than justified by the above-named facts; and this, by an argument
which is understood by the wise, and the simple, by the philosopher
and the child, and by the unlearned, as well as by the professional
man.
V J
