The Treatment of Insanity, Ancient and Modern
==============================================

Art. II.

The early history of medicine clcarly proves that diseases which are
now of ordinary occurrcncc were known to the ancients, and that
they were well acquainted with many remedies for the treatment of
them which we still esteem valuable. The reason of this is obvious.
The practice of mcdicinc was originally founded on observation and
experience. AV e accordingly find that the priest-physicians?named
the Asclepiadie, 011 account of the Temples of Health in which they
officiated?not only proscribed remedial measures to those who, for
the cure of their diseases, resorted to the shrine of yEsculapius,
but " noted down with great care," says the learned Dr. Adams, in
his preliminary discourse to the Works of Hippocrates, published by
the Sydenham Society, " the symptoms and issue of every case,
from which observations they became great adepts in the art of
prognosis.'"' Unshackled by authorities, the Greek and Arabian
physicians looked to nature, and, as Dr. Bostock remarks, were
necessarily diligent collectors of facts.t They thus unconsciously
anticipated the spirit of that inductive system of philosophy, the
principles of which were, many centuries afterwards, so clearly pro-
pounded by Lord Bacon. It would, therefore, be wrong to infer
that before the age of Bacon philosophers were not guided by any
idea of eliminating principles from an induction of facts. Hence, Dr.
Adams observes?" Whatever may now be thought of his general
views or pathology, all must admit that the mode of prosecuting the
cultivation of medicine adopted by Hippocrates was in the true
spirit of the inductive philosophy,'?all his descriptions of disease are
evidently derived from patient observation of its phenomena, and
all his rules of practice arc clearly based on experience."! The
Arabian physicians, llhascs, Avicenua, Avcrrhoes, from the frag-1
incuts preserved to us by Galen,? and the recently collected writings
of Paulus yEgineta, || were, in their treatment of disease, clearly
governed by the same inductive principles. Nay, without wishing
to disturb the shade of Sir William Temple, by instituting a com-
parison between the knowledge of the Ancients and the Moderns, in
as far as the science of medicine, and thereby provoking the genius
of a Swift to retort upon us another " Battle of the Books," we will
venture to affirm, that notwithstanding so much is said triumphantly
upon the Baconian method of induction, medical authorities of the
present age constantly disregard that guiding star which should
direct them through the labyrinth of their investigations; and, con-
sequently, it has been said, that in the present state of medical
science wc have " more false facts than false theories,"?a severe and,
we arc afraid, very just censure. To collcct facts that maybe relied
* The Genuine Works of Hippocrates, by Francis Adams, LL.D. 2 vols.

London. Vol. i. p. (1.
f Bostock'n Sketch of the History of Medicine. London, 18:15. P. 120.
+ Op. cit., p. 17.
? Ciitlcn. Opusculii Viiria Grtcco ot Lalin6. 4to, London, 1040.
II The Seven Hooks of l'uiilu.s .I'.ginctn. Translated by Francis Adams, LL.D.
*3 vols. London, Sydenham Society, 1811.

upon, and to associate them consecutively, requires patience, diligence,
and much critical acumen ; but to hazard an ingenious theory requires
little intellectual effort : the inventive faculty is always busy in the
minds of ignorant people. Hence, it was profoundly observed by
Mr. Mills, that speculations upon abstract causes?the nature of
the mind and soul?by no means should be regarded as any indica-
tion of intellectual advancement, but rather the contrary ; for " such
inquiries stand at the very threshold of human knowledge." * Ac-
cordingly, Ave may lay it down as a principle, in the practice of
medicine, that the more obscure may be the pathology of a disease,
the more careful we should be in observing its phenomena, and col-
lecting such data as may guide us in its treatment; in order to illus-
trate which we may carry our induction back to such facts as were
observed in the remotest ages, associating them with the modes
of treatment which are at present conceived to be the most en-
lightened.

Among the diseases above referred to as having been known to
the ancients, insanity, in almost all its phases, appears to have been
well marked; and the retrospect is interesting and useful, as evincing
the early recognition of the principles upon which the disease is
still treated. "We have many examples of mental disease recorded
in the Scriptures. Saul was afflicted with melancholy,t and after
taking what remedies'! his servants and physicians prescribed, finding
his case beyond remedy, it was conceived to be a visitation from on
high.? When Saul had been soothed, and refreshed, and calmed by
music from the harp of David, the " evil Spirit"?which undoubtedly
means the paroxysm?passed away ; and the cflcct of music in such
eases is still well known and taken advantage of in many public
and private asylums. The disease was so far common, that David
feigned himself mad, when, to escape the wrath of Saul, lie sought
the protection of Achish, the king of Gath. || " Have I need of
madmen," said Achish, " that ye have brought this fellow to play
the madman to me ?" Again, the learned Calmet recognises, in the
imaginary transformation of Nebuchadnezzar, that form of mono-
mania designated Lycantrophy, which, he observes, accounts satis-
factorily for all that Scripture has recorded of him.lf Upon the
* Mills's (John Stuart) System of Logic, Katiocinativc and Induclivc. 2 vols,

8vo. London, 1810. Vol. i. p. 200.
1 Samuel, xvi. 20. J Genesis, 1. 2.
? Calmct's Dictionary, by Taylor. 5 vols. lto. 1841. Art., " Saul."
I| 1 Samuel, xxi. 10?1-').
?J Calinet, op. cit. Ait., " Nebuchadnezzar.''
THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 107
same principle, Dr. Mead explains tlie possession of the demoniac
described in St. Luke.* A very particular account of tliis dis-
ease was given by Marccllus di Sida, a Greek physician, fragments
of whose writings have been preserved by /Etius and Oribasius.
He states that the malady is commonly aggravated at the ap-
proach of spring, as in the month of February ; and he adds, that
in certain countries it is sometimes epidemic.t Those labour-
ing under Lycantropia, observes Paulus yEgineta, " go out during
the night imitating wolves in all things, and lingering about
sepulchres until morning. You may recognise such persons by
these marks?tliey are pale, their vision feeble, their eyes dry,
tongue very dry, and the flow of the saliva is stopped ; but they arc
thirsty, and their legs have incurable ulcerations from frequent falls.
Such are the marks of the disease. You must know that lycan-
trophy is a species of melancholy, which you may cure about the
time of the attack, by opening a vein and abstracting blood to faint-
ing, and giving the patient a diet of wholesome food. Let him use
baths of sweet water and then milk-whey for three days, and purging
with the hiera from the colocyntli twice or thrice." + The absurd
imaginations of persons, says Dr. Arnold, afflicted with this species of
insanity arc almost innumerable; and he cites authorities for persons
who have believed themselves transformed into wolves, dogs, lions,
cats, cows, oxen, &c.? We recently read in a foreign journal, an
account of some young women, secludcd in a convent, avIio fancied
themselves metamorphosed into cats, and on a sudden, when at their
devotions, unanimously set up a hideous mewing and screaming.
However strange or incrcdible the extraordinary fancies of such mo-
nomaniacs may appear, we must take into consideration the influence
of moral causes on the insane mind. " Two centuries ago, persons
were everywhere to be found," observes Dr. Pritcliard, " who fancied
themselves to be possessed by demons, just as the ancients were
pursued and agitated by the furies. Da)monomania occupics, there-
fore (as well as lycantrophy), an important place among the forms of
insanity described by old writers; and we arc informed by Jacobi, that
this is still the character which, in some catholic countries, insanity
connected with superstition frequently assumes. ' In modern times,'
says M. Esquirol, ' the punishments which the priest denounces
have ceased to influence the minds and conduct of men, and govcrn-
* Mead, Opera Medica. 2 torn. God. 1718. Vol. i.
f Sprengel, Hist, do In Medicine, i) torn. Paris, 1815. Vol. ii. pp. 174, 175.
{ Puulus yEgenetn, op. cit. vol. i. p. !)80.
? Arnold's Observations on Iusnnity. 2 vols. London, 1800. Vol. i. p. 122*

ments have recourse to restraints of a different kind. Many lunatics
express as much dread now of tribunals of justice as they formerly
entertained of the influence of stars and demons.' Such unfortunate
persons are always acted upon by apprehension, fear, and terror, as
if such were the veritable causes of their preternatural possession.
Thus, an individual is now at the Pctites Maisons because he is afraid
of the police, who would formerly have burned him for being a
devil."'"' There is nothing so very extraordinary in the origin ol
the notion of demoniacal possession, when we remember that
there was formerly a more or less direct intercourse supposed
to exist between the material and spiritual world. Hence Dr.
Davis, iu his Introduction to " Pincl's Treatise on Insanity," truly
remarks,?

"The mythologists, who maintained the existence of spirits of
different orders and qualities, believed that, in some instances, the
intellectual faculty was merely deranged by the malignant influence
of a demon; and in others, where the change of character was more
evident and complete, they imagined an actual exchange of the in-
dwelling soul to have taken place, and the maniac was consulted as
the organ of an oracular spirit, or shunned as embodying an emissary
of the evil principle. Accordingly, in all countries remarkable for
their superstition, the treatment of mental affections has been asso-
ciated with other duties of the sacerdotal office. At both extremities
of ancient Egypt?a country at that time exceedingly populous and
flourishing?temples were dedicated to Saturn, whither melancholies
resorted in quest of relief. Whatever gifts of nature or productions
of art were calculated to impress the imagination, were there united
to the solemnities of a splendid and imposing superstition."t
Nor is it at all surprising that such erroneous notions should
have been entertained in those early ages respecting the nature of
insanity, when we find, even in our own time, men of scientific
eminence prejudiced by feelings which would appear to be of the
same description. It is very remarkable that Dr. Burrows, who
had so much experience a few years ago in this department of the
profession, should, in the Introduction to his Commentaries?which
is, nevertheless, an excellent practical work,?thus express himself
respecting the nature of insanity : " Madness is one of the curses
imposed by the wrath of the Almighty on his people for their sins;
and deliverance from it is not the least of the miracles performed by
* Pritclinnl's Treatise on Insanity. London, 183.r>. P. Dl.
+ Dr. Davis, Introduction to Pincl's Treatise on Insanity. SliclIU'ld, 1W0.
T. xxiii.

our Saviour."* We arc certainly taught to believe that the fall of
our first parents brought " death into the world, with all our woe,"
Imt why madness should be singled out as the instrument of Divine
wrath, any more than any other disease, we are at a loss to conceive:
besides, the very foundation of Christianity itself, being a great social
revolution in the progress of civilization, so far from being a de-
liverance from the calamity, rather augmented its diffusion; and wo
therefore find the accomplished and eloquent historian, Dr. Robert-
son, truly observe:?

"When the human mind is roused by grand objects and agitated
by strong passions, its operations acquire such force, that they are
apt to become irregular and extravagant. Upon any great revolu-
tion in religion, such irregularities abound most at that particular
period when, men having thrown oft' the yoke of their ancient
principles, do not yet fully comprehend the nature, or feel the obli-
gation, of those new tenets which they have embraced. The mind
in that situation, pushing forward with the boldness which prompted
it to reject established opinions, and not guided by a clear know-
ledge of the system substituted in their place, disdains all restraint,
and runs into wild notions, which often yield to scandalous and im-
moral conduct. Such was the effect in the first ages of Christianity,
as well as at the era of the Reformation. The renunciation of the
ancient faith, and ignorance of that which they had embraced,
excited converts to acts more resembling insanity than that of that
religion which inculcates the purest morality and government of our
passions."

The truth, however, would appear to be this: that the pheno-
mena of insanity, even in the contemplation of an educated mind,
are so perplexing and startling, and the aspect of a person in a
state of mania is frequently so dreadful, that humanity recoils
from so sad a spectacle, and becomes unconsciously agitated by
superstitious emotions. Not many months ago it was our painful
duty to attend, 011 the Continent, a lady to whom we were called
in consultation, she having been for several days suffering under
an acute attack of mania. One of the most eminent physicians
in Prussian Germany was in consultation with us; and we were
together examining the patient, when suddenly she started and
made a dash at the window, through which she would inevitably
have precipitated herself into the street, had we not, single handed,
* Dr. Burrows 011 tlic Causes, Forms, Treatment, &c., of Insanity. London,
18'-iN. Introduction, p. i.
f Robertson's History of Charles V. Dugald Stewart's edition, 12 vols. Lon-
don, 1817. Vol. iv. p. CO.

and not without difficulty, held her back. The attendants, deceived
by her apparent tranquillity, had left us in consultation; and the
instant our confrere found himself called upon to help us, by holding
the patient, he retreated; and afterwards assured us that he could
not, under any circumstances, reconcile himself to touch an insane
person. He could not explain his dread; but allowed that it was a
feeling that existed instinctively in his nature, which he could not
control.

The ancients describe melancholia and lycantropia more fully
than mania; thephrensy, described by Hippocrates?phrenitis?was
febrile delirium;* but in some cases, obviously chronic mania;?
thus, in one of his Aphorisms, he states?" Persons above forty years
of age who are affected with plirensy, do not readily recovcr."t Tho
greater number, however, of physicians among the ancients conceivcd
madness and melancholy to be only modifications of the same disease,
differing " intenso et remisso graduBurton, in his " Anatomy of
Melancholy," has, with his usual research, collected a host of curious
facts andanccdotes illustrating thedifferent forms of this disease, under
which he was himself, says Mr. Granger, a sufferer, "for he composed
this book Avith a view to relieve his own melancholy; but increased
it to such a degree, that nothing could make him langlv but going to
the bridge-foot, and hearing the ribaldry of the bargemen, which
rarely failed to throw him into a violent fit of laughter. Before he
was overcome with this horrid disorder, lie, in the intervals of his
vapours, was esteemed one of the most facetious companions in the
university ."J We learn from Galen, that mania was supposed to be
connected with inflammation of the brain; and melancholia, with
derangement of the pyloric and cardiac extremities of the stomach.
Their treatment may be said to have been, as in the present day,
medical, physical, and moral. They also used coercion. " Above
all things," says Paulus yEgineta, "persons affected with mania
must be securcd in bed, so that they may not be able to injure
themselves, or those who approach them; or swing in a wicker-
basket, or a small couch, suspended from on liigh."?
The treatment which Celsus describes as proper in cases of in-
sanity merits particular attention; it is in every respect interesting,
involving many principles of practice which arc still recognised.
" It is unnecessary," says Celsus, " to oppress those with very harsh
* Ilippocrntcs, op. cit. pp. 35G, 357. + Aphorism 82.
J The Anatomy of Melancholy. 2 vols. London, 1837. Vol. i., p. 134,
? Paulas jEgiuetn, op. cit. vol. i. p. 385.
coercive measures whose malady only extends to words, or even
trifling assaults witli tlie hands; but it is proper to confine those
who conduct themselves violently, lest they may injure themselves
or any other person."

" The ancients," he tells us, " recommended such patients to be kept
in darkness, and judged that darkness itself tended to tranquillize the
mind. But Asclepiades thought darkness might excite so much terror,
that he advised them to be kept in the light. Neither should be with-
out exception. It is best to try each, and to keep him in the light
who dreads darkness, and him in darkness who dreads the light.
It is absurd to apply remedies where the furor is at its height;
but when the case admits of relief, no time should be lost. Ascle-
piades has characterised blood-letting as tantamount to murder; but
if the patient's strength permit, he ought to be bled. It requires
deliberation about the administration of injections. After the
interposition of a day, it will be proper to shave the head, and then
foment it with warm water in which vervains have been boiled,?
with astringent remedies; or to foment it first, then to remove the
hair and again foment; and lastly, to embrocate the head and nostrils
with rose-oil. * * * Such is the treatment to be pursued towards
those who are not debilitated; but if there be weakness, the head is
only to be moistened with rose-oil, to which some wild thyme or
something similar has been added."

" It is necessary," continues Celsus, " to conduct ourselves towards
all insane persons in a manner that shall be suitable to the nature, dis-
position, and habits of each. The groundless apprehensions of some
must be alleviated; as it. happened to a very rich man who dreaded
starvation, and who changed his purpose when made to believe that he
had acquired hypothetical possessions. The audacity of others re-
quires coercion, as is done with those persons in restraining whom even
stripes are applied. Yet we should assent to them more frequently than
oppose them, by which means the mind will be gradually brought
from an irrational to a more rational method of discourse. Sometimes
the mental energies of the patient should be clicitcd; as is done with
literary men, to whom a book is read, either with a propriety of
accentuation, if they be pleased with it, or in a perverted manner, if
that itself offend them; for by their emendations they begin to reason.
Some have been brought to eat, who had previously refused, by being
placed among those who were feasting. To all persons so affected
it is very difficult to obtain sleep, which is above all' things neces-
sary; for after this, many begin to recover. Saffron oil, with iris, on
the head, aids in producing sleep, and also in tranquillizing the
172 the treatment of insanity.

mind; but if they continue vigilant, some procure sleep by giving
them a decoction of poppies or henbane to drink. * * * Nor is it
improper, if blood have not been previously let, to apply cupping-
glasses to the incised occiput when there is continued vigilance and
delirium, which will relieve the disease and procure sleep. There is
another species of insanity which admits of a longer duration, be-
cause, for the most part, it begins without fever. Blood-letting in
this is beneficial; if any circumstance impede this, the first remedy
is abstinence, the second is to purge with white hellebore, and the
third is to administer a vomit.*

The medical treatment here described by Cclsus, corresponds in
a very remarkable manner with the treatment which is still found
to be most effective in this disease. The moral management, too,
is recommended to be mild and persuasive, excepting in case of
furor,simulating that described by Sophocles, where Ajax acts the part
of a madman among the shepherds and cattle of his rival Ulysses;
and by Euripides where Orestes is affected with madness after the
murder of his mother. In such cases, correction and coercion are pre-
scribed. " When he has said or done anything wrong, he must," ob-
serves Celsus, "be chastised by hunger, chains, and stripes. He must
be made to attend, and to learn off something that lie may remember,
for by this it will happen that by degrees he will be led to consider
what he may be doing. It is also beneficial, in this malady, to be
put into sudden dread, for a change may be effected by withdrawing
the mind from that state in which it had already been."+ We are
not, however, to infer that these extreme measures were resorted to
in any other cases than those of extreme furor. We find, indeed,
that Coelius Aurelianus, a physician, a few years before Galen, com-
plained loudly of unnecessary restraints and cruelties being inflicted
upon lunatics. He was the Pinel of his age.

From the early history of mcdicine, we learn, as we premised, that
the ancients were in possession of many valuable remedies which they
used in the treatment of insanity. The most ancient Greek physi-
cian with whom we arc acquainted, Melampus of Argos, cured the
daughter of King Prretus, of melancholia, by bathing and the ad-
ministration of hcllebore.? Venesection was also a remedy of very
ancient origin, for Fodalirius, on his return from the Trojan war,
* Cornelius Celscus ile Medicina. Lib. iii. cap. xviii.
t Ibid. t Galen, op. cit
? Although Ovid in his Metamorphosis has recorded Ibis cure, wo imagine it, not
altogether a mylh. See Strabo, lib. ix.; Herodotus, book ix. c. 3!); Pliny, Hist.
Nat., lib. x. c. -19.
cured the daughter of Damethus, who had fallen from a height, by
bleeding her in both arms ; and the practice of incision and scarifi-
cation was employed in the Grecian camps before Troy. The fol-
lowers of Hippocrates opened veins in the arms, feet, temples,
tongue, &c., and cupped in almost every part of the body.*
Opium, or some preparation of the poppy, was certainly known in
the earliest ages; it has been conjectured that it was opium
which Helen mixed with wine and gave to the guests of Menelaus,
under the expressive name of Nepenthe, to drive away their cares,
and the conjccture certainly receives some support from the fact that
the Nepenthe of Homer was obtained from the Egyptian Thebes?
hence the tincture of opium was called the Thebaic tincture.t
Ilyoscyamus was used by Hippocrates; and Celsus, as we have
seen, prescribed a decoction cither of henbane or of poppies to pro-
duce sleep in mania.| The most favourite, and apparently successful
remedy employed in the treatment of mania and melancholy was
hellebore. The Greek, Arabian, and Roman physicians held it to be
an unfailing specific; and so celebrated were its effects, that many
learned modern authors have come to the conclusion, that we have
lost sight of the remedy which went by that name. This would
appear to be the opinion of Dr. Arnold, and Dr. Lorry, who, refer-
ring to this method of cure under the name of helleborism, laments
" the unhappy lot of the modern insane," who have no longer the ad-
vantage of a " certain cure."? The classical reader will remember many
allusions to hellebore, and the far-famed Anticyris islands where it was
gathered. Horace, after giving a lively description of a madman
who fancied himself attending a show, followed by a troop of come-
dians, and impersonating actor and spectator, adds,?
" He when bis friends, at much expense and pains,
Had amply purged with hellebore his brains,
Coine to biinself. 'Ah, cruel friends !' he cried ;
' Is this to save me ? Better far have died,
Than thus be robbed of pleasure so refined,
The dear delusion of a raptured mind.' "||
?So also Perseus tells Nero, in the sixteenth verse of his fourth
Satire, that instead of taking upon himself the heavy responsibility
* I.e Clerc. Ilist. de la Mcdccine. lto. Amsterdam, 170'2. Tome i.
t Paris Pharmacologia. London, 1813. 1'. II.
J " Quidam somnutn molliunter potui dando aquam in qua papaver nut hvoseja-
mus decoeta .sit."?Loc. (it.
? Observations, p. 1, ct seq. i! Francis Horace.

NO. X. N
of government, which demanded more experience and sound judg-
ment than he possessed, it were better for him to take powerful
medicines to clear his understanding :?
" Thou bast not strength such labours to sustain:
Drink hellebore, my boy,?drink deep 1 and purge thy brain."*
Dr. Cox, in his " Practical Observations 011 Insanity," accuses
Dr. Lorry of having " betrayed an undue veneration lor the ancients
at the expense of the moderns," in giving credencc to the infalli-
bility of this remedy ; and suggests that, " had the ancients been in
possession of calomcl and tartarizcd antimony, it is probable that
they would have preferred them to hellebore; for," he adds, " this
celebrated root seems to have possessed no spcciiic virtue?no anti-
maniacal property; but to have acted on the stomach and bowels."t
This is somewhat of an assumption.

The hellebore used by the ancients in maniacal cases is now
proved to be identical with our veratrum album ; and the anomalous
effects produced by this and other electro-stimulants on the nervous
system are well-known. It is obvious that it did more than act on
the stomach and bowels ; for Hippocrates expressly says, in his six-
teenth aphorism, " Hellebore is dangerous to persons whose flesh is
sound, for it induces convulsions."} lie prescribed it in tetanus,
and gives a variety of cautions respecting its administration; in
fact, recent experience proves that veratria is a valuable remedy in
many nervous affections. The action of sabadilla, another electro-
stimulant, is equally remarkable. Plenek reports the case of a young
man who was rendered insane by the application of sabadilla powder
to the tcmples.?

The ancients, on account of their ignorance of pathology and
therapeutics, used these different remedies, to a certain extent, empi-
rically; but guided by observation and experience, they were, pro-
bably, as successful in the treatment of insanity as in the treatment
of other diseases. Their mistaken notions respecting the functions
of the brain and heart, and the properties of medicines generally, to
which they attributed certain occult qualities, did not mislead or
blind their judgment as to the positive effects arising from their
administration. The progress of medical science places the modern
physician in a very different position; lie can reason therapeutically
* Drydcn.

+ Practical Observations 011 Insanity, by Joseph Mason Cox, M.D. London,
1800. Note, page 7.
J Uippocratcs' Works, op. c!t., p. 'iio. ? Murray, Materia Mcdica. Apj>.

on the modus operandi of the medicines lie prescribes, and in all
cases adapt these to the morbid action, or condition of the organ that
may be affected. Without being guided by this twofold principle, he
would be prescribing in the dark, and would resemble Swift's
Apothecary?" pouring bodies of which he knows little into a body
of which he knows less." The modern treatment of insanity must
depend, therefore, on the pathological view we take of the cause of
the disease, which explains the very contrary and antagonistic modes
of treatment which have been pursued by different physicians of
eminence. Does the disease arise from an excessive quantity of
blood in the brain 1 or from some irregularity or disturbance in its local
distribution 1 If so, venesection, to a certain extent, may be clcarly in-
dicated. Does it depend on some derangement of the digestive
functions, acting by sympathy on the brain 1 If so, cathartics and
alteratives may effect a cure; and such cases may be cited in support
of the views of those French pathologists who consider the abdominal
viscera the seat of the disease. Again; does it arise from debility?
from loss of blood 1 Hemorrhage has been known to produce in-
sanity ? In that case, tonics and stimulants are necessary. Ilufeland
relates the case of a boy between thirteen and fourteen years of age
who suddenly began to talk in a wild and incoherent manner, and
became ungovernable. This state was assuaged by soporifics; but
the paroxysm was observed to recur whenever he was placed on his
feet. When examined, a reddish spot was noticed on one foot,
which, when pressed, occasioned a fresh paroxysm, and, upon an in-
cision being made, a minute piece of glass was discovered and ex-
tracted. The boy was furious during the operation, but every
symptom of violence vanished when the offending cause was
removed.* " Insanity," observes Dr. Battie very truly, " discovers
so much variety with respect to its causes and circumstances, that,
like any other disease, it rejects all general methods of cure."-)- " A
variety of medicines," says Dr. Charlesworth, physician to the Lincoln
Lunatic Asylum, " has been employed with a view to the cure or
abatement of insanity, without peculiar results. The causes of
insanity are so various, and it arises from so many different local
affections of the head, stomach, and alimentary canal, requiring
different modes of treatment, that the recommendation of any single
medicine is impossible."!- Nevertheless, physicians have not failed to
* Ilufeland apud Burrows, op. cit. p. 211.
+ Treatise on Madness, by William Battie, M.D. London, 1758. P. 9-1.
J Remarks on the Treatment of the Insane, by E. 1'. Charlesworth, M.D.
London, 1828. P. y.
attach special importance to certain medicines, all of which are
doubtless valuable, but not one can be considered specific, nor
upon any one ought any practitioner to pin an exclusive faith. The
following table, which we might extend to an indefinite length,
exhibits the authorities in favour of the following narcotics and
stimulants:?

Opium is recommended by Odier, Cox, Brandretli, Cliiarruggi, Dremling, Reil.
IIyoscyamus, by Fotliergill, Willis, Stoerck, Selig, Meyer, Ilufelaml.
Belladonna, by Theussenck, Vogel, Buclioz, Ludwig, Remer, Sclimulz, Ilufe-
lnnd, Franck.

Stramonium, by Allioni, Maret, Stoerck, Remer, Reel, Greding, Scbueider,
Ilufeland, Burrows.

Digitalis, by Dariora, Ferriar, Currie, Fonzago, Jones, Muller, Guisluin, Morus,
Burrows, Ellis, Ilallaran, Pritcliard.
Tartar Emetic, by Willicli, Muller, Bodel, Frize, Burserius, Baldinger, Ilufe-
land, Fordyce.

Camphor, by Wherlbof, Lobenstein, Ivinneir, Remer, Avenbriigger, Perfect,
Percival, Ilufeland, Copland.

Musk, by Thilericus, Loclier, Selig, Pargetier, Gmelin.
We believe that each of these remedies, and many others Avhich we
could add, arc valuable, but no general rule can be laid down for
their administration, for no two cases of insanity are alike, and the
physician must be guided by the peculiarities of the symptoms he
may observe in each. Without, however, having a clear pathological
notion of the state of the circulating and nervous systems, we repeat,
it is impossible to prescribe upon philosophical principles.
As preliminary measures to ensure the cure of insanity, all physi-
cians, ancient and modern, have agreed on the necessity of early
treatment and removal from home. " liecens curalioncn,'" observes
Celsus, " non Jiabct di/ficilem" So also Piso and Avicenna, " Circa
initio, diligenlissime curandci est mclancliolia.'''' Dr. Willis, in his
evidence before the Committee of the House of Commons, relating to
the case of George III., stated that nine out of ten patients placed
under his care within three months after they had "begun to be
mentally affected, recovered. Dr. Burrows reported 221 cures out
of 212 recent eases. Dr. Finch stated that sixty-one out of sixty-
nine patients recovered who were placcd in his asylum within three
months after the attack. From the reports of the lie treat near York,
seven out of eight recent eases terminated in recovery. M. Pinel
states, that the greatest number of recoveries takes place during the first
month, and the average duration of the disease is six months. The
statistical returns throughout Great Britain, France, Germany, and
America, prove the same fact; therefore it behoves the relations and
friends of persons so affected to watch the stage of incubation. We have
already published a distinct memoir on this very important subject.

Removal from home is also imperatively necessary. " This," says
Haslam, " should be enforced as early in the complaint as possible.
During the continuance of the patient in his own house, lie can never
be kept tranquil. The interruption of his family; the loss of the
accustomed obedience of his servants; the idea of being under
restraints in a place where he considers himself the master, will be
constant sources of irritation in his mind. It is also known, from
considerable experience, that of those patients who have remained
under the immediate care of their relations and friends, very few
have recovered.""' When Dr. Willis undertook the care of George
III., he considered an alteration of surrounding circumstances so
essential, that he changed, not only the furniture of the king's
apartments, but also his attendants.

Esquirol assigns the following reasons for the seclusion of the insane:
1st, for their own safety, as well as for that of their family or the public;
2nd, for the purpose of withdrawing them from causes of excite-
ment ; 3rd, in order to overcome resistance to the means of cure;
and 4th, for the purpose of subjecting them to the regimen adapted
to their condition. + Numerous facts, observes Esquirol, prove that
confinement alone has cured many insane persons, and that it has
sometimes produced this effect instantaneously.^ We had recently
a patient under our own care who was always well conducted with
us after the first few days of his return; but whenever he went home,
the malady returned, from some local associations, probably, which
affected the mind.

Here we may be asked whether modern physicians have made any
progress whatever in the successful treatment of insanity 1 And this
inquiry we should feel inclined to answer affirmatively, although no
uniform system of practice has been, for very obvious reasons, agreed
upon. We no longer hear, in any asylum, of periodical vcnescction
and vomits?chains and stripes. Dr. F. Monro, in his evidence re-
specting the treatment of the patients in Bcthlcm, before the Com-
mittee of the House of Commons, in 1815, states that "patients arc
ordered to be bled about the latter end of May, or beginning of May,
* Ilaslum, Observations on Insanity. London, 1798. T. 130.
t Esquirol, Dcs Maladies Mentales. 2 torn. Paris, 1838. Tom. i. p. 4.0.
J Esquirol, Observations on the Illusions of the Insane. Translated by Lid-
dell. Loudon, 1833. P. 82.

according to the weather. After tlicy have been bled, tliey take
vomits once a week for a certain number of weeks; after tliat wc
purge them. That has been the practice invariably, for years be-
fore my time; it was handed down to me by my father, and I do
not know a better practice"* " The period of physicing," says
Haslam, in the same Report, " continues from the middle of May,
regulated by the season, to the latter end of September. Two bleed-
ings, according to discretion; half-a-dozen emetics, if there should
be no impediment to their exhibition; and the remainder of the
time, till Michaelmas, a cathartic once a wcek."+ " The curable
patients," says Crowtlier, " are regularly bled about the commence-
ment of June, or latter end of July ; I have bled 150 patients at a
time.";}: We find Dr. Willis advise, as the first indications in the
curative process of madness,?manacles, fetters, and stripes; he also
recommends " that the food should be slender, and not over-delicate,
clothing rough, bed hard, and treatment severe and rigid. Those
labouring under obstinate madness, were rarely submitted to any
curative means."? With this evidence before us, we may fairly con-
sider that Ave have made some advancement in the medical and moral
treatment of the insane,?at all events, we " know a better practice"
than that which had been handed down to Dr. Monro by his fore-
fathers.

The Commissioners in Lunacy, in their last Report, have published
a full and satisfactory account of the medical treatment which is
adopted in the lunatic asylums under their surveillance. They
addressed an official circular to the proprietors or superintendents of
them, requiring to be informed of their " methods of treating insanity
and the disorders complicated with it,?1st. In mania; 2nd. In
epilepsy connected with insanity ; 3rd. In paralysis connected with
insanity; 4th. In melancholia." They likewise requested medical
officers to give them accurate information as to the result of their
experience in the employment of particular remedies,?such as blood-
letting, general or topical; cmctics ; purgatives; antimonials;
opiates, or anodynes of any kind ; antispasmodics; tonics; stimu-
lants ; and hot and cold bathing, respectively; and also to commu-
nicate their observations as to the nature of the diet and regimen
which have been found by them most beneficial in the treatment of
* Reports, No. 1. Minutes of Evidenco taken before the Select Committee np
pointed to consider of provision being made for the better regulation of mad
houses in England, May, 1815, p. 95. + ibid. p. 0,'}.
? Practical Remarks on-Insanity. By Bryan Crowtlier. London, 1811.
? Vide Burrows' Commentaries, p. 087.

insanity in its various forms." To this circular, the Commissioners
received answers from fifty-three asylums; so that we have before us a
complete view of the medical treatment now adopted. It is, per-
haps, to be regretted that these answers contain so few allusions to
the pathological views entertained by the several writers. General
bleeding is, upon the whole, much condemned. Dementia and in-
curable insanity arc often the result of injudicious bleeding.
Violent paroxysms of acute mania depend, according to Dr.
Sutherland, not on cerebral inflammation, but on irritation ; and
the arterial congestion found in post-mortem examinations in such
cases, he conceives not to be the result of inflammation. Here
Ave at once come to the questio vexata. The experience of Foville,
in one of the largest lunatic asylums in France, is in favour of
general and topical bleeding ; and the views of the late Dr. Pritcliard
entirely coincide with those of M. Foville. "My own experience,"
lie observes, " has afforded me sufficient opportunities of forming
opinions on the cfFccts of remedies in insanity, since, for twenty
years, I have never been without patients labouring under that
disease, who were, more or less, under my carc and observation.
Long before Dr. Foville's remarks were known to me, I had pur-
sued the practice which he has recommended, having been led to
adopt it by similar considerations," [pathological appearances indi-
cating inflammatory action;] "and I entertain no doubt of its prac-
tical advantages. I am very far from approving or wishing to re-
commend such detractions of blood as those which appear to have
been practised by Dr. Kusli; but I have been convinced, by the
evidence of numerous facts, with respcct to which I could not be
mistaken, that bleeding, both local and general, is, under due limita-
tions, serviceable in cases of insanity."* We have no doubt, from
our own observation, that cases may occur in which bleeding may
be serviceable, and in a strong plethoric habit cut short an attack of
mania; but the after consequences arc of course to be duly con^
sidered. "The quantity of blood," says Sir Alexander Morison,
" must be regulated by circumstances; the plethoric and the cachectic;
the strong and the weak: difference of sex ; constitutional varieties ;
the highly and moderately excited, all demand consideration, and
require different measures. One case may require the loss of sixteen
or twenty, another only ten, eight, or six ounces of blood, or even
a smaller quantity."+ The advantage to be derived from topical
1 Dr. Pritcliard, Treatise on Insanity. London, 180?). P. 2f>8.
f Sir Alexander Morison, M.D., Outlines of Lectures, edited by Ins soil;
Thomas Coutts Morison. London, 1818. P. 037.
ISO the treatment of insanity.

bleeding appears to be, however, admitted generally, in the evidence
before us. After all, we can but agree with the verdict which Dr.
Copland pronounces on these conflicting opinions:?

" In estimating," he observes, " the opinions of physicians attached
to public institutions for the insane, as to the propriety or extent ot
vascular depletions, the sphere of their practice should not be alto-
gether unheeded, and especially the circumstances of the patients
having been treated previous to admission, and the duration ot
tho.se which have been called recent cases. It is very obvious, that
a patient who has been ill only three or four days, but during that
time has been very actively treated, will not bear evacuating means
on admission into an asylum; whilst another case, that would have
been benefited by vascular depletions in the first few weeks of the
malady, may be injured by them after a Aveek or a fortnight had
elapsed. After all that can be advanced 011 this point, the propriety
of prescribing sanguineous depletion, to whatever extent, must
depend upon the pathological knowledge and discrimination of the
physician; and if he possess not these qualifications in a high degree,
and unless he study and practice his profession as a whole, and as a
profound and comprehensive seiencc, and not as a trade or mechanical
art, divisible into a number of separate parts, lie cannot truly possess
them?he is quite incapable of rationally and judiciously treating
insanity or any other class of maladies."*

Whatever views may be entertained concerning the proximate
cause of insanity, there can be 110 doubt that the immediate indica-
tions of treatment arc to equalize and modify the circulation, par-
ticularly within the brain, and tranquillize the nervous system.
Whether the disease depend upon an excess in the quantity of blood
in the brain, 011 a want of equilibrium between the arterial and
venous circulation,*|* 011 its local distribution, 011 the rate or manner of
circulation, or 011 any alteration in the constituents and qualities of
the blood itself,^ arc inquiries of much interest and great difficulty.
" The history of all cerebral disease, and the examination of those
instances where it has been fatal," observes l)r. Holland, "show the re-
markable influence of these several conditions; and particularly how
small an amount of obvious change in the circulation, as in the slighter
degrees of inflammation of the membranes, is capable of producing
great disturbance in the mental functions."? The effect of wann
'* Copland's Dictionary of Practical Mcdicinc. London, 1814. Vol. ii. Art.
" Insanity."

f Abercrombie, Pathological and Practical Researches on Diseases of the Braiu
and Spinal Cord. Edinburgh, I8v!8.
\ Burnett, " Insanity tested by Science." London, 1848.
j Holland, MeJic:U Notes and Reflections. Loudon, lfilU. P. JM'j,
THE treatment of insanity. 181

and cold bathing, under such circumstances, is very obvious, and has in
all ages been recognised. Celsus advises us to begin with hot, and then
proceed by degrees to tepid water ; and, lastly, to pour cold water over
the head and whole body; then to dry and to anoint. He expressly
says,?" It is very beneficial for one who has a weak head to hold it
where a strong stream of water may fall 011 it:"* hence the douche
is a remedy of great antiquity. Hoffman rccommcnds warm bathing
in the following terms:?" It is not from reason, but from a long
course of experience, that avc assert the excellence of this remedy in
maniacal cases; for we have seen numerous instances of inveterate
melancholy and raving madness happily cured by its means, after
the use of bleeding, diluting medicines, and medicines consisting
chiefly of nitre. And this kind of cure I have recommended to
many foreign physicians, who, as well as myself, find it highly ser-
viceable and beneficial. Whence I have often Avondercd that this
method of cure for madness should be so much neglected in our
time; whilst bathing has from the earliest ages been employed for
this purpose, insomuch that the ancient physicians had recourse to
it as a thing they entirely depended upon." t According to Poggius,
the Florentine, the insane were in his time placed in warm baths up
to the knees, waist, or armpits, with the view of drawing the blood
downwards, whilst the head was left exposed. Pommc treated
maniacs by employing the warm baths for eight hours every day, and
applying at the same time cloths wet with cold water to the head,
lie even kept them in the bath for twenty-four hours, j Pinel intro-
duced Pommc s plan in France, ordering that the patient should
sit in a warm bath, while a column of cold water descended upon
the head, varying in height according to the effect desired. Some-
times he limited this to a mere sprinkling ([douche 01 arrosoir); the
intention being to drive the circulation towards the surface, and
diminish, by refrigeration, the energy of the brain. This, however,
is a remedy which should be applied with great caution. Esquirol
affirms that he has known disorganization of the ccrebrum produced
by the shock of the douche, and madness thereby rendered incurable.
He tried it 011 his own person, and thus expresses himself:?"It
appeared to luc as if a column of ice were broken on the parts, but
the pain was much more acute when the stream fell 011 the front
parietal suture; it was more supportable 011 the occiput."? Hcnce,
* Com. Celsus, op. cit.

+ Hoffmann, New Experiments and Observations upon Mineral Waters, with
Notes by Slmw. London, 17U1. 1'. 188.
t Ortesebi, Giorncl Med., torn. ii. p. 100.
? Esijuirol, op. cit., torn, ii. c. Jo.
182 the treatment of insanity.

when the douche is applied, patients are generally observed to pre-
sent the hack of the head to the stream. In the Commissioners'
Report, the evidence is favourable to the employment of warm and
cold bathing; but the shower is, upon the whole, recommended in
preference to the douche, which we have ourselves known to produce
violent reaction. Bricrre de Boismont has recently revived the plan
adopted by Pomme. The following is a resume of the conclusions
to which he has come, extracted from a Memoir just submitted to
the French Academy:?

" 1. Every acute form of insanity, mania particularly, may be
cured within one or two weeks.
" 2. The treatment employed to obtain this result, consists in pro-
longed baths and continued irrigations.
" 3. The duration of the bath ought to be from ten to twelve
hours, but may be prolonged to fifteen or eighteen hours.
" 4. The irrigation accompanying these baths should be continued
the whole time, but may be suspended when the patient becomcs
tranquil.
" 5. When patients have had eight or ten baths without any relief
or improvement in their appearance, they may be discontinued, but
at a future period renewed.

" G. The bath should be given at a temperature of 28? or 30? cen-
tigrade, and the irrigations at 15?.
"7. Cases of recent acute mania yield most readily to this treat-
ment ; next come simple acute delirium?insanity from drunken-
ness?\le delire des ivrognesJ?puerperal mania?melancholia ; but
these cases arc not relieved so readily as acute mania.
" 8. Chronic mania, with agitation and intermitting mania, have
been improved, but not cured, by this treatment. It has not been
tried in eases of mania combined with paralysis and epilepsy.
" 9. Facts recently eollcctcd since the publication of this memoir,
prove its success in cases of hysteria and certain nervous diseases,
without mania.
" 10. From the above facts, it may be affirmed that cases of acute
mania arc more readily cured by this than any other form of treat-
ment.
" Lastly. The employment of prolonged baths is by no means new
in science ; but this plan of treatment, which is so easy, and which
might be tried everywhere, has not been generally applied in such
cases."*
The bcncficial effects of sedatives in tranquillizing the nervous
system and curing insanity, arc recognised and attested by every
authority in the report before us, and fully corroborate the views on
* Gazette Meilicale de 1'nris, 1:2 Janvier, 1800, p. 01).

this subject of Dr. Seymour,* which we noticed at some length in
the first number of this Journal. The circumstances under which
opium, morphia, belladonna, digitalis, &c., are contra-indicated, must
be obvious to every practitioner. The treatment of insanity, how-
ever, does not depend solely on the exhibition of medicines ; the
moral treatment is of as great, and sometimes even of greater, im-
portance. And as Ave are now exceeding our limits, we shall conclude
with the following observations made by Dr. Conolly, in the report
before us:?" I consider the direct treatment of any form of insanity
by mere medical applications, to be very limited ; but the indirect
treatment of mental maladies by innumerable means acting on the
body and the mind, is of immeasurable importance. These means
can, I believe, seldom be efficiently applied, except in well-con-
structed and well-conducted lunatic asylums, superintended by well-
educated men, aided by benevolent and active attendants. By such
means, I believe many insane persons to be capable of cure; and
all, however incurable and hopeless, capable of improvement and
relief, "t
Seymour on Mental Derangement. 2 vols. London, 1847.
+ Report, p. 44.4.
