English County Lunatic Asylums
===============================

It is the earnest desire of the Editor of this Journal to make it a
medium of communication for all persons interested in medical psycho-
logy, or engaged in the care and treatment of the insane, and at the same
time to afford such information as may conduce to a correct estimate,
both in England and abroad, of our practice and progress in this
department of medical science. For believing, as we do, that insanity
ENGLISH COUNTY LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 563
is a disease of somatic origin, and, in its early stage, generally amenable
to medical treatment, we consider it as direct and natural a subject for
medical investigation as a fever or a pleurisy. We regard lunatic
asylums as hospitals for the cure of the insane; and although, unfortu-
nately, the obscurity of the disorder, its obstinacy, and the circumstances
which prevent its early recognition and the adoption of curative treat-
ment, too frequently convert them into mere houses of detention, still
we must not lose sight of the fact that, in their primary intention, they
are hospitals devoted to the cure of one of the most dreadful maladies
to which mankind is liable.
The medical report of a lunatic asylum should, therefore, resemble a
hospital case-book; it should contain a careful summary of the symp-
toms presented by the patients on admission, together with the history
of the case; it should indicate the mode of treatment adopted, with the
results of such treatment, marking the success or failure of the curative
means employed; it should also contain a record of the morbid appear-
ances observed in post-mortem examinations, and such general remarks
as might serve to elucidate the subject. We do not mean to say that the
report should contain the full particulars of each individual case, but
that it should offer such a general summary of the particulars we have
indicated as might serve for increase of knowledge and improvement of
practice.
That the reports before us do not meet our demands?that the majority
of them fall short in one or more points of the particulars we have indi-
cated?is, we are fully aware, to be ascribed, not to any want of willing-
ness, or zeal, or intelligence, on the part of the different medical officers
who have assisted in preparing them, but to their servile, uninfluential
position, the amount of service required of them, and the inadequate
assistance afforded them. We also doubt whether many governing
bodies of our public asylums could be found who would sanction the
publication of such reports as we think needed; for we fear that the
cost of printing would influence them more than any prospective benefit.
It was a common thing formerly to say?" They manage these things
better in France," but the present Number of the Journal shows the
error of that saying, as applied to the management of public asylums;
but so far as reports are concerned we may with justice assert that?
" they manage these things better in the United States." We have had
occasion from time to time to notice some of the Transatlantic Reports,
and we unwillingly acknowledge that, in many essential points, they are
greatly superior to most of the pamphlets under notice. An improve-
ment which would add considerably to the practical value and utility of
our reports, would be the adoption of one uniform plan of matter and
arrangement: at present, no two reports are drawn up in the same
manner, and in many the arrangement is very inconvenient and com-
plicated. We would also suggest the mutual interchange of reports
between the resident medical officers of the various asylums.
We have before us Reports of the Yorkshire (N. and E. Ridings),
York City, Suffolk, Lancaster Duchy, Liverpool Borough, Gloucester-
shire, Cheshire, North Wales, Devonshire, Somersetshire, Cornwall,
Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, Staffordshire, Dor-
504 ENGLISH COUNTY LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
setsliire, Bedfordshire, Oxfordshire, Lincolnshire, and Surrey Asylums;
for which we are indebted to the kindness of the resident medical
officers of these establishments, and to whom our best thanks and
acknowledgments are due.
Of the foregoing twenty institutions, eight are pauper and twelve
general asylums. On the 1st day of January, in the present year, they
contained 5281 patients?2304 males, 2538 females, and 439 whose sex
is not distinguished. These figures show an excess amounting to nearly
ten per cent, of females over males. The number of patients treated in
these establishments during the year 1849, amounted to G781. Of
these, 685 were discharged recovered, 135 relieved, and 512 died.
These numbers give an average of 10*1 per cent, of curcs, and 7-5 of
deaths. The average number of recoveries was greater in the general
than in the pauper asylums. Taking the Cornwall, Lancashire, Oxford-
shire, Somersetshire, Suffolk, and Surrey, to represent the pauper?and
the York City, Devonshire, Gloucestershire, Lincolnshire, Nottingham-
shire, Staffordshire, to represent the general asylums, wc find 10'8 per
cent, of cures in the latter, to 8'8 per cent, of cures in the former. The
number of deaths also differ, being 8'6 per cent, for the pauper?5'G for
the general asylums. We subjoin a table giving the total number of
patients treated during the year, with the per-centage of recoveries and
deaths.
No. of Patients. Cures per cent. Deaths per cent.
Yorkshire  204   ir>-2   5-4
York City  181   0*3   0*
Suffolk   342   12-8   8-7
Lancaster  080   0-4   9*1
Liverpool  100   18"   10*3
Gloucester  391   11 '5   5*8
Cheshire   245   9*   4'
North Wales   142   12-0   7*
Devonshire  402   10  0*5
Somersetshire   284   9?   6*
Cornwall   2/58   8*5   110
Northamptonshire   370   10*2   0*
Leicestershire   232   10*   0*
Nottinghamshire  344   11*   0*
Staffordshire   301   11*   3*0
Dorsetshire  191   8*9   9-4
Bedfordshire   332   8*4   12'
Oxfordshire   382 ... ... 12-8   10-2
Lincolnshire   193   H>9   4*0
Surrey   841   g.   7-2
W' e observe that in some reports the number of recoveries is calcu-
lated on the number of admissions during the year; in some, on the
average daily number of residents; in others, on the total number treated
during the year; we have preferred the latter mode, as being equally
just to the different establishments, and affording a more correct criterion
of the real curability of the disease. Suppose an asylum contains, on
January 1st, 250 patients, and admits 50 patients during the year, the
total number treated during the year will be 300; if of these 45 recover
and 15 die, the recoveries and deaths will be respectively 15 and 5 per
cent., and the average chance of recovery 1 to G'C.
MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES. QG5
The expense for maintenance and treatment of patients varies con-
siderably in different asylums, ranging from about 65. Gd. to 1 Is. per
patient per week, as is seen in the following examples:?
Cost per head per Week.
s. d.
Cornwall   6 7^
Yorkshire   7 1^
Bedfordshire  7 6
Oxfordshire  9
Lincolnshire 10
This shows a very considerable difference, which may be partly owing
to some variety in the method of keeping the accounts.
It is gratifying to observe the steady diminution in the contract price
for all sorts of provisions and necessaries, during the successive quarters
of the year 1849.
We have purposely excluded Han well Asylum from the preceding
calculations, for in its present crowded state it is devoted to the care,
rather than the cure of, the insane. Several of the Reports before us
contain a great deal of valuable information. When so much industry
and talent are exhibited, it is almost invidious to paticularize; but the
Lincoln, Hanwell, and Dorset appear to us to merit especial notice, the
Lincoln being, in fact, a very valuable treatise on the management of
lunatic asylums. The Surrey and Littlemore (Oxford) contain useful
statistical calculations.
We have received also the following reports of Scotch lunatic asylums
?Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Dundee, Murray's, and Montrose, for which
we offer our best thanks to the respective donors, at the same time
regretting that the crowded state of our pages prevents our analysing
them in the present Number.
