Mental Health
==============

The Editorial Board does not hold itself responsible for the opinions of contributors
Vol. I. No. 1 JANUARY 1940 Price lOd. (1/- Post Free)
Foreword
With this issue the Journal now entitled Mental Health comes into being.
It is edited on behalf of three of the principal mental health organizations of
the country, namely, the Central Association for Mental Welfare, the Child
Guidance Council, and the National Council for Mental Hygiene. It has
long been the desire of these organizations to achieve a closer measure of
co-operation, and the need for economy and for avoiding overlapping and
consequent waste of effort which has become imperative owing to the war,
has provided an opportunity for taking the first step to achieve this aim.
An Editorial Board has been formed consisting of representatives of each of
the organizations so that the different aspects of their work can be given their
full value, and it is obvious that a joint journal with its wider scope must be
more valuable in that it can represent the whole field of mental health in true
I proportion. Members of the Central Association for Mental Welfare and
the National Council for Mental Hygiene will find that the essential features
of the former journals issued by those organizations have been preserved.
The association of the Child Guidance Council with the new journal will
extend the field in a way which is most important at all times, and especially
during a war. It is more than ever vital that the coming generation should be
sa eguarded from undue strains and stresses and that they should be given the
opportunity to become stable and harmoniously balanced individuals, for upon
t em will devolve the great burden of building up the post-war world.
The amalgamation of the journals will, we hope, prove the first step
towards the full amalgamation of the three organizations which has been so
strongly advocated in the Report of the Feversham Committee. This is a
project which the war need not postpone but rather bring nearer because of
the greater need for co-ordinated effort. We hope that all those who subscribed
to the former journals will continue to subscribe to the new publication, and
t at we shall acquire many new readers. The need for guidance towards
mental health must inevitably grow, and grow rapidly, in these difficult times,
and a wise and instructed public opinion supporting those who are at the
spearhead of the movement will help to guide it aright. We trust that the
journal may prove successful and that it will be of benefit to all those whom
Jt seeks to serve.
L _
