The Toddler in the Home
========================

By Mary Chadwick,
S.R.N. George Allen & Unwm, Ltd.
2s. 6d.
In the introductory chapter the author tells us
that there is a dearth of literature concerning the
Problems of the child who is no longer a baby
but has not yet started school. There is actually
no lack of information in the American publica-
tions and one seems to remember books on the
nursery years which had described very well the
difficulties which the mother will meet in handling
the child who is a toddler.
It is surely an indication of an increased
interest in this age that the nursery school move-
ment was, until the war, steadily advancing, and
that so many maternity and child welfare centres
held sessions and play groups for the toddlers.
What Miss Chadwick points out, however, is
Quite true that here we are dealing with an
Interim period, where dawning individuality and
increased activity tend to produce a more difficult
and a more rebellious child. The baby can
usually be trained by a steady routine, and the
older child can be reasoned with and treated to
some extent as an equal. This book deals with
certain major situations in the young child's life,
'aying stress first of all on the importance of the
Mother's handling. She must deal firmly with
his difficulties but not expect too much, and a
8ood point is made in criticizing any " undecided
treatment The author wisely cautions the
niother against wanting to do too much for the
child, interfering too much with his natural daily
rhythm of behaviour so that unconsciously she
,s training him to want a mother's interest and
attention, until she herself becomes tied by his
demands. Such a situation is particularly likely
to lead to bitter jealousy in the older child when
a new baby arrives, and a chapter is devoted to
the relationship of the child to his parents,
particularly in connection with jealousy, and
another to the problem of a rivalry with a new
brother or sister. Points are made showing that
much can be done to help the older child in
doing things for the baby, and a word of caution
is uttered against the impatient adult who will
not give the toddler time to fulfil his small tasks
of helping in the house.
The book then goes on to common-sense advice
about clothing, diet, and the training in habits
of sleep, elimination, and the difficulties which
may arise in connection with such " bad "
habits as masturbation, finger sucking, nail
biting, and so on. It is pointed out that too
great attention paid to these bad habits may
increase the child's capacity to use them as a
weapon against the parents. In considering his
general development through to school age,
advice is given on much that is of value, together
with some indication of the toys and games likely
to be most popular with a toddler.
The book as a whole, however, is disappoint-
ing. It fails to give a fresh or illuminating
explanation of the emotional difficulties of the
young child, and the impression gained is rather
that the author has " toned down " her views to
make them acceptable to the general public.
Actually the public is now in many ways well
informed about these difficulties, and there is
little in the book which would not be known to
and practised by any young mother with reason-
able understanding and good common sense.
Those who have not these invaluable qualifica-
tions for motherhood are unlikely to read it, nor
are its evident truths sufficiently succinctly put
to convince them of the errors of their ways, if
by any chance they should come across it.
E.M.C.
