News and Notes
================

Professor Mapother

By the early death of Professor Edward Mapother both psychological medicine
and the large circle of his friends have suffered an irretrievable loss. As Head of the
Maudsley Hospital from its beginnings soon after the World War, he had a unique
opportunity to build up a great psychiatric hospital and to develop not only the
clinical but the teaching and research aspects. All these opportunities he grasped
fully,

so that the Maudsley has come to be regarded as equal, if not superior, to any
similar institution in the world. There is no doubt that Professor Mapother's work
has done much to establish psychiatry as one of the most important branches of
Modern medicine.

Professor Mapother was closely associated with the work of the National Council
for Mental Hygiene, of which he became a member in 1924, and served for some time
?n one of its Standing Committees. He also gave valuable help as a member of the
Special Sub-Committee appointed by the Council to consider amendments and
^commendations in connection with the Mental Treatment Act of 1930. His wisdom
and knowledge were always at the Council's service, and in spite of the many demands
?n his time he was never too busy to give help and advice whenever it was needed.
Our deepest sympathy goes out to Mrs. Mapother in the great loss which we share
with her.

The Passing of a Pioneer
-------------------------

The death of Mrs. Elizabeth Miriam Burgwin on February 1st, at the age of 89,
has revived memories of the beginnings of compulsory education for handicapped
children.

When, in 1891, the London School Board instructed the School Management
Committee to prepare a scheme for the establishment of Special Schools, they
appointed Mrs. Burgwin?then Head Mistress of the Orange Street School,
Southwark?to be Superintendent of such schools, and sent her on a six months'
tour to Germany and other countries to study their methods of teaching handi-
capped children. On her return, the first Special Classes were organized in
London, and in 1892 two Special Schools were opened.

From this time onwards, Mrs. Burgwin worked unceasingly to further the
education of physically and mentally defective children and to develop educational
method and technique designed to help them, and on her retirement in 1916, a
testimonial of ?1,000 subscribed by teachers in Special Schools throughout the country
(members of the National Special Schools Union of which she was President) marked
the high regard in which she was held.

Mental Welfare Work and the War
--------------------------------

Enquiries made from various types of areas in which active Mental Welfare
work is being carried on, have revealed the fact that up to now the war has not, in
the majority of instances, had any very appreciable effect on either the type or the
volume of this work, except in reception areas where the closing of Occupation
Centres and the development of Home Teaching in their place, has been necessitated.
The following points from replies received may, however, be of interest:

The Cambridgeshire Voluntary Association is providing facilities in practical
Mental Deficiency training for students attending the Mental Health Course (trans-
ferred to Cambridge with the London School of Economics), and the opportunity of
enabling them to see something of rural social conditions is felt to be a valuable one.
The Cumberland and Westmorland Voluntary Association and the Suffolk
Voluntary Association specially stress the increasingly acute shortage of institutional
accommodation. In the former area this has been intensified by reason of the fact
that one institution (Dovenby Hall) has received some 75 defectives evacuated from
Shotley Bridge Colony, and in Suffolk the holding up of plans for an extension of
institutional accommodation has meant that vacancies only now become available
through the discharge of a larger number of patients on licence.

The chief effect of war conditions noted by the West Lancashire Association is
the extra work arising out of the collective evacuation of Liverpool's Occupation
Centre children to North Wales.

The Kent Association reports some increase of visiting?usually in the more remote
parts of the county?occasioned by unsuitable billeting of "problem" children.
The Portsmouth Mental Treatment Department has noted a slight increase of
work carried out for the Juvenile Court, due not to a heavier incidence of juvenile
delinquency but to the fact that there is now a slightly larger proportion of subnormal
children amongst juvenile delinquents. At the Mental Treatment Clinic there has
been a definite falling off in attendances.

In Staffordshire all the ten Occupation Centres were closed on the outbreak of
war and a temporary scheme of Home Teaching was substituted. Within three
months, however, nine of the Centres were re-opened, and the tenth re-opened in
February. The Lichfield Centre gave shelter to 30 defectives from West Bromwich
for a fortnight at the beginning of the war. As Great Barr Colony has been required
to evacuate 200 beds for other purposes, the pressure on institutional accommodation
in the county is acute.

The Essex Mental Welfare Department has had a considerable increase of work
both in evacuation and in reception areas, and has been able to offer useful service
in connection with mentally subnormal evacuees, some of whom had?unclassified
and unprovided for?found their way into evacuation parties at the last moment and
quickly presented serious billeting problems. An increase in the number of Licence
cases, and of applications for advice in dealing with difficult relatives, for whom the
special arrangements hitherto made had broken down under stress of war conditions,
is also noted.

In Oxford, the Mental Health Department has found itself called upon to deal
with numerous problems connected with evacuees and with the local Hostel for
Difficult Children, and the Child Guidance Clinic has had a great extension of
work. This has led to the appointment of a Psychiatric Social Worker, part of whose
time is allocated to the Mental Hospital.

Reference is made below to the work involved in connection with the exemption
from military service of defectives under Statutory Supervision; one worker draws
attention, in addition, to the problem of the feeble-minded ex-Special School boy (who,
as such, is not exempted) accepted for military service and finding himself heavily
handicapped by his inability to understand the technical instruction with which
every recruit is now confronted. One of these willing but troubled lads, telling her
?f his fears of the time ahead in which he would be required to put into practice what
he was supposed to have learnt, said to her: " I can't understand that Bren gun and
will be the ' cells ' for me On the other hand, another worker reports that
several high-grade boys known to her, who have found their way into the army,
are doing well and are thoroughly happy.

Exemptions from Military Service
----------------------------------

Amongst the categories who have been exempted from the provisions of the
National Service (Armed Forces) Act, 1939, are the following:
Men who are the subject of an order or inquisition under the Lunacy and Mental
Treatment Acts, 1890 to 1930, or are being detained in pursuance of section twenty-five
of the Lunacy Act, 1890, or as criminal lunatics or in pursuance of an order made
under the Criminal Lunatics Act, 1884, or are undergoing treatment as temporary
patients under section five of the Mental Treatment Act, 1930, or are persons placed
in an institution or a certified house, or under guardianship, under section three of
the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, or are the subject of an order under section six,
eight or nine of that Act, or are under supervision provided under paragraph (b)
of section thirty of that Act, or are inmates of a home approved under section fifty
of that Act, or are the subject of a notification under sub-section (2) of section
fifty-one of that Act.

The completion of the necessary Forms claiming such exemption for defectives
under Statutory Supervision is proving to be, in the more thickly populated areas,
a somewhat formidable task involving much time spent in clerical work, visits of
enquiry, and correspondence. Thus, in Birmingham, as noted above, the Special
Schools After-Care Department is dealing with 1,000 such cases, and proportionately
large numbers are being dealt with in London and Essex, and in every large urban
area where a vigilant school Medical Service and an efficient administration of the
Mental Deficiency Act have resulted in the extensive use of statutory supervision.

Mental Deficiency Institutions and the War
-------------------------------------------

We are indebted to the Board of Control for the following information:
Two Certified Institutions?Shotley Bridge Colony, Durham and Westwood,
Bradford?have been completely vacated for the period of the war.

In twenty-one Institutions, a portion of the accommodation has been set aside
to serve as a Casualty Section, and the displaced patients have been "overcrowded "
in the remainder of the buildings. These Institutions are:

Brandesburton Hall, Hull ; St. Catherine's, Doncaster; Oulton Hall, Yorks;
Cranage Hall, Cheshire; Brockhall, Lanes; Calderstones, Lanes; Leicester Frith;
Aston Hall, Derbyshire; Coleshill, Birmingham; Great Barr Park, Birmingham; Cell
Barnes, Herts; Bromham House, Beds; Borocourt, Oxon; Coldeast, Hampshire;
Botley's Park, Surrey; Hortham, Bristol; Hensol Castle, Glam; The Manor, Epsom;
Leavesden, Herts; Caterham, Surrey; Darenth Park, Kent.

C.A.M.W. Annual Report, 1938-9
The Annual Report of the Central Association for Mental Welfare for 1938-9 is
now available, and a copy will gladly be sent to any reader of this Journal who
cares to apply to 24 Buckingham Palace Road.

The Report records the diverse activities of the Association amongst which may
be noted its work for individual cases, its Guardianship scheme, its educational
courses for teachers, doctors, workers in Occupation Centres, etc., its Holiday Homes,
its after-care of epileptics, its organization of Occupation Centres and Home Teaching
carried on for the Middlesex County Council, and its share in the maintenance (with
the Child Guidance Council) of the Joint Register of Foster Homes for Nervous,
Retarded and Difficult Children, and in the formation of the Mental Health Emergency
Committee. A summary of the work of the North Eastern Council for Mental
Welfare is appended, and a note is given of the work done in connection with the two
Mental Hospitals in South Wales to which the Association has seconded a member
of its staff.

The Report does not cover any part of the war period, but points out that if
at first sight the difficulties of the present time seem overwhelming it should be
remembered that they are no greater than those which threatened to submerge the
Association at the outset of its career in August 1914.

The National Council for Mental Hygiene
----------------------------------------

Since the outbreak of war the Council has been directing special attention to
the question of preventing the incidence of neurotic manifestations which would
reduce our national efficiency, and of maintaining the morale of the civilian population
in times of special danger. A large number of lectures have been given in many
parts of the country to A.R.P. and First Aid Workers, nurses, teachers, etc., and also
to the various units of the Port of London River Emergency Service. Syllabuses of
special lectures have been prepared and widely circulated, and the Council is dealing
with a great many applications for speakers.

Notes and articles of special value to civil defence workers of all kinds and for
teachers in reception areas have also been prepared, and a series of articles
?n " Psychological Problems of the War as they affect the Nurse" was
recently contributed to the Nursing Mirror. It was felt that this series would
achieve a valuable purpose in giving the general nurse some insight into the
Psychological implications of illnesses with which they have to deal, especially war-
time casualties.

The scenario for a mental hygiene film entitled " Make Friends with Fear " has
been prepared by a special Committee of the Council. This is being produced under
the auspices of the Central Council for Health Education and will, it is hoped, shortly
be available for general release.

Regular monthly meetings of the Council's Executive Committee have taken
Place since hostilities began, and a joint Sub-Committee has now been formed,
consisting of the members of the Council's Standing Committees, who will
consider in detail psychological problems arising out of the present situation.
Meetings of this Sub-Committee will take place on the same day as the Executive
meets.

Arrangements are being made to hold the Council's Annual Meeting in June
next, and this will be followed, as in former years, by a Public Meeting, at which an
address on a mental hygiene subject will be given.
The Council is also actively co-operating in the work of the Joint Mental
Wealth Emergency Committee, to which reference is made elsewhere, and has
contributed grants towards their expenses.

Cental Nursing as a Career
----------------------------

The essay on this subject, published in the present number of the journal,
should help to stimulate the recruitment of mental nurses, for the writer has
clearly expounded the great improvements in conditions of service which have
taken place since the days when mental hospitals were popularly regarded as
asylums for the irrecoverable, and where no great degree of skill in nursing was
either expected or indeed considered necessary. The result was that this branch
?f the nursing profession tended to be regarded with some disfavour, as being
lnferior and offering no great scope either for advancement or for the display of
special ability.

The writer has rightly shown that far from this being the case candidates for
mental nursing should not only be equipped with very high nursing qualifications,
but should also possess in an exceptional degree attributes of sympathy and tact as
well as patience and forbearance. These will enable him or her to understand the
delicate mechanism of the human mind and so help to bring about the recovery of
the patients in their charge. Mental nursing should be regarded as a highly skilled
profession which demands of the best, since here we have to deal with patients who
by the very nature of their illness require nurses with exceptional qualities both as
regards training and personality. When this has become more generally recognized
we may look for a considerable increase in recovery rates among mental patients,
as upon the nurse depends to a great extent the chances of improvement and of
ultimate cure.

Nurse Liddell, who contributed this essay, was awarded the "Lord" Memorial
Prize for 1939, and successfully competed for a similar prize in 1938. The competi-
tion, which was instituted by the Society of the Crown of Our Lord in memory of
the late Dr. J. R. Lord, C.B.E., Medical Superintendent of Horton Mental Hospital,
is held annually under the auspices of the National Council for Mental Hygiene whose
Selection Committee awards the prizes.

Mental Health Emergency Committee
----------------------------------

This Committee continues to meet regularly and is working in close touch with
the Board of Education and the Ministry of Health.

It is satisfactory to record that the Ministry has shown its appreciation of the
value of mental health work amongst evacuated children by agreeing to make
grants to two Local Authorities (Northampton and Reigate) to allow of the
services of the trained workers loaned by the Committee being retained, and
it is hoped that applications for such grants will be followed up by other
Authorities.

The Ministry has also agreed to meet as an evacuation expense the cost
of maintaining Homes for Difficult Children, including the salaries of trained
workers and, where necessary, the cost of psychiatric treatment at a recognized
Centre.

In Bradford, Brighton, Northampton and Reigate, the workers loaned by the
Committee for work amongst evacuated children have continued to carry on, and
workers have been sent, in addition, to Bedford, Caernarvon and Chester and to
the Berkshire Mental Hospital. The Committee has also been able to give
considerable assistance in connection with the Cambridge Survey of Evacuated
Children.

Other matters considered by the Committee include the provision of treatment
for children suffering from the effects of air raids (in conjunction with the Invalid
Children's Aid Association and the Women's Voluntary Services), camps for evacuated
children, the need for the provision of psychiatric teams for cases suffering from
mental breakdown under stress of war conditions.

The Committee is seeking to keep an up-to-date record of Mental Treatment
Clinics for children and adults, and has noted with satisfaction that a number of
the former in London closed down at the beginning of the war, have now been
re-opened.

Child Guidance Council
------------------------

The Annual Report of the Child Guidance Council, published in February,
contains a list of 48 clinics in England and Wales "recognized" by the Council,
and of 13 clinics in Scotland represented on the Scottish Association for Mental
Hygiene.

Clinics which have appeared in the Council's list for the first time are the
Cambridge Child Guidance Training Centre (Group 1) and three in Group 2a;
the Portsmouth Clinic organized by the Mental Treatment Department, held in
the school clinic, and in charge of Dr. Mary Capes, the Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital Clinic (Dr. Burbury) and the Barnsley Health Department Clinic (Dr. Joyce
Marshall). Two temporary " war " clinics also appear in the list; one at Guildford
(Group 1) and another at Reigate (Group 2a). The new clinics in Scotland are
the Royal Infirmary Clinic (Edinburgh) and the Kilmarnock Clinic held at the Child
Welfare Centre.

Of the clinics which closed on the outbreak of war, only 7 in London have
remained closed, and subsequent to the re-opening of the Maudsley Hospital Clinic,
sessions for children were no longer held at the three " North London " clinics of
the London County Council.

A new clinic is being established at the West London Hospital and some work
ls also undertaken at the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital and at the Prince of
Wales Hospital, Tottenham. Of the 46 clinics (i.e. excluding the " emergency "
clinics) in the Council's list, 17 are wholly supported by Local Authorities, 5 are
Partly so supported and 24 are voluntary.

The Southampton Clinic, which was the only one to close outside London, was
re-opened on January 1st. Bradford City Council has approved plans for the
establishment of a full team clinic and it is expected that the appointments to the
staff will be completed shortly after Easter. In Halifax, a visiting psychiatrist
(Or. Montgomery) is seeing problem schoolchildren and delinquent children from
the juvenile courts. At Burton-on-Trent, the Director of Education is interested in
the establishment of a clinic.

From the Report of the Liverpool Clinic, just received, we note that despite
the exigencies of the black-out and wartime travelling, the Midland Group of clinics
was enterprising enough to hold a meeting on November 11th which was well
attended. Dr. Esher spoke on the psychological effects of war conditions, and the
Paper was followed by a discussion on the place of Child Guidance in the mental
health services of the country.

Earlier in the year, " Play Therapy " was the subject of an interesting discussion
by the same group of clinics.

Miss I. M. Laird, M.A., B.Ed., a former holder of one of the Council's Fellow-
ships in Psychology at the London Child Guidance Clinic, has been appointed
Woman Inspector by the Board of Control (Lunacy and Mental Deficiency).

Child Guidance in London
--------------------------

In the L.C.C. School Medical Officers' Annual Report for 1938, particulars
are given of the number of new cases of London schoolchildren treated at the various
Child Guidance Clinics used by the Council. These are as follows:
Maudsley Hospital, 397 ; London Child Guidance Clinic, 203 ; East London C.G.
Clinic, 125 ; Institute of Child Psychology, 99 ; North Western C.G. Clinic, 25 ;
Tavistock Clinic, 77 ; West End Hospital, 75.

A table giving the results obtained shows that 89 children were adjusted, 113
improved, 52 not improved, 198 found to be unsuitable or not co-operative, 25 placed*
12 transferred and 525 were still under treatment. The remaining 233 cases were
referred for consultation only.

Cambridge Evacuation Survey
-----------------------------

During the past four months, a Survey has been carried on for the purpose of
collecting data on the experiences of Cambridge with some 400 children evacuated
into that area from Tottenham. The services of teachers, educational experts,
psychiatrists and professional social workers, in touch both with the foster-homes
and with the children's own homes have been enlisted, and the first results of the
enquiry are now available, and embodied in a " Memorandum on Practical Recom-
mendations " recently issued.

For dealing with the problems presented by " misfits " and difficult children*
three types of homes are suggested:

1. A Hostel for the temporary reception of children who are unsuitable for
immediate billeting by reason of health, cleanliness or behaviour
(estimated at 5 per cent.).

2. A Home, or Homes, for Emergency and Observation providing for
children needing immediate removal from billets owing to illness, etc., in
the household or to problems created by the children themselves.
(Estimated requirement: one home, accommodating 30, for every 4,000
evacuees.)

3. A Home for Difficult Children permanently unsuitable for billets and
accommodating not more than 10 to 15 in each. (Estimated number:
at least 2 per cent.)

Amongst other recommendations the Committee urge the appointment in every
Receiving Area or group of areas of trained Social Workers (one to every 500 children)
and of a Psychiatric Social Worker, and suggest that the Evacuating Authority should
be required to appoint experienced and responsible School Helpers; one available
for each head teacher, to deal with questions concerning the welfare of individual
children.

In view of the wide publicity given to the sins and vagaries of evacuees and to
the sufferings of foster-mothers, it is encouraging to be informed that, so far as this
particular group of children are concerned, 70 per cent, were found to have made a
normal adjustment to their new conditions, and to have presented no special
difficulties.

The Chairman of the Research Committee is Dr. Susan Isaacs and the Hon.
Secretary, Miss S. Clement-Brown.

Mental Deficiency Course for Medical Practitioners
---------------------------------------------------

It is satisfactory to be able to record that despite war conditions, the Central
Association for Mental Welfare was able to hold as usual the Course on Mental
Deficiency and Allied Conditions arranged annually in co-operation with the London
University Extension and Tutorial Classes Council, for medical practitioners.
The Course, which began on Monday, April 8th, with 65 students, and lasted a
fortnight, followed the lines of those held in previous years, and included lectures,
clinical instruction and practice in mental testing under the supervision of a
psychologist. It is designed specially for School Medical Officers, Certifying Officers
to Local Authorities under the Mental Deficiency Acts, and Medical Officers of
Institutions.

A Medical Officer of Mental Health
------------------------------------

In the recommendations made at the end of her Survey of the Mental Health
Services in Oxford City, Oxon and Berkshire, Dame Ellen Pinsent urged the
" immense advantage " which would be attained " if each Authority had on its
medical staff one man who, both by qualifications and experience", was an expert in
Mental Health matters.

The Feversham Committee arrived at much the same conclusion although its
recommendation on the subject takes the form of advocating that every Authority
should appoint a mental health staff (psychiatrists, psychologists and social workers)
to be shared between the mental health committee and the education committee.
Such a development may seem to lie very far in the future but it is encouraging
to note that war exigencies have brought about something very much like it in Oxford,
where the Medical Superintendent of the Mental Hospital has been appointed to act
for the Medical Officer of Health as Director of all Mental Health Services for the
duration of the war.

Aconsultingpsychiatristhasbeen appointed by the Hertfordshire County Council.

Mental Welfare Library
----------------------

The attention of our readers is called to the C.A.M.W.'s Mental Welfare Library,
which is able to supply books of interest to Mental Health workers of all types?
teachers of retarded children, supervisors of Occupation Centres, workers in Institu-
tions, psychiatric social workers, psychologists, students in training, etc.
The annual subscription for one volume (excluding postage) is 10s. ;
subscriptions for shorter periods (6 months, 5s. 6d. ; 3 months, 3s. 6d.) are also
arranged.

Enquiries are invited and should be addressed to the Librarian, 24 Buckingham
Palace Road, S.W.l.

Child Guidance Publications
------------------------------

A list of the Council's publications has been printed and is available on applica-
tion to the Medical Director at 23 Queen Square, Bath. The 1939 Supplement
to the list of books on child psychology in the English language will shortly be
available.

Staffordshire Mental Welfare Study Week
-----------------------------------------

We are asked to announce that the Study Week held annually by the Staffordshire
Mental Welfare Association, will again be organized and is to take place from Monday,
July 29th to Friday, August 2nd.

Provisional particulars can be obtained from Mrs. Jennie Benson, Organizer of
Occupation Centres, Crabbery Chambers, Crabbery Street, Stafford.

Staffordshire Mental Welfare Association
------------------------------------------

On April 1st, 1940, the staff and functions of this Association were taken over
by the Staffordshire County Council with whom, since its foundation 20 years ago,
it has worked in close co-operation, resulting in the gradual creation of a scheme for
the community care of defectives, including the establishment of a network of Occupa-
tion Centres and Industrial Classes covering the county.

The value of the " voluntary " side of the work is fully recognized by the Council
and provision is made for the continuance of the Association, and for the activities
of its Voluntary Visitors and its Local Committees to be left undisturbed. In this
way there is ensured the preservation of the " voluntary spirit ", which has been in
the past, and will continue to be in the future, such an essential factor in pioneer
achievement.

Scottish Association for Mental Hygiene
----------------------------------------

On the outbreak of war, the Scottish Association set up an Emergency Committee
consisting of the President (Sir William M'Kechnie), with the chairmen of the Sectional
Committees, Dr. Clarkson (Mental Defect), Professor Drever (Child Guidance) and
Dr. Harrowes (Mental Health) for the purpose of carrying on the work and of dealing
with any new problems that presented themselves.

The Committee meets regularly and has turned its attention particularly to the
possibility of helping in the solution of billeting and other problems connected with
evacuation, and of securing the re-opening of After-Care, Occupation and Employment
Centres which were closed down on the outbreak of war. It is also arranging for
lectures on Mental Health subjects to A.R.P. and other war workers, and it is hoping
to publish articles in the Scottish press dealing with the psychological effects of
air raids and other wartime conditions.

The Secretary of the Association, which, it will be remembered, represents an
amalgamation of the Scottish Association for Mental Welfare and the Scottish Child
Guidance Council, is Dr. Constance Hunter, and its address: 23 Eglinton Crescent,
Edinburgh.
