Fortitude in War
==================

MENTAL HEALTH
The Editorial Board does not hold itself responsible for the opinions of contributors
Vol. I. No. 3 JULY 1940 Price lOd. (1/- Post Free)

By H. CRICHTON-MILLER, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.
Fortitude can be a great virtue. It can also be an innate quality. In so far as
xt is innate, it is a fortunate attribute, and in so far as a man lacks innate fortitude,
the more is he to be commended for displaying whatever fortitude he can achieve.
^ is easier to observe this in adolescents than in adults. Among them the differences
are more marked as between the " quitters " and the " stickers ". The reason for
this is that only in maturity do we reach our high-water mark of acquired fortitude,
whereas our innate capacity for endurance shows itself in conduct from earliest years.
To some, then, fortitude is a gift of the gods; to others, a moral achievement.
If we analyse the different challenges that demand fortitude, we see that they can
he roughly classified in two ways. First there is endurance in regard to a painful
experience, as opposed to fortitude in anticipating any such experience?the grit of
the soldier in desperate fighting as opposed to the calm of a civil population in
anticipation of invasion. This difference turns largely on the conceptual factor?
that is, our inherent capacity of imagination. There are those who are self-possessed
Until the machine-gun opens fire, but no longer; whereas others build up reputations
as "jitter-bugs " until a bomb lands in their immediate neighbourhood, after which
they assume a totally different personality?or so it seems to observers. The first
?r?up react with apprehension to the objective menace; the second react to it with
fortitude, although they wilted in the face of the imagined danger.
The second way in which we can classify fortitude is according to the nature of
the challenge?whether material or moral. Some men will stand shell fire heroically,
and yet be unable to appear at a public function without some form of chemical
reassurance, generally alcohol. Others will stand obloquy and ostracism for political
0r religious opinions, and then be unable to endure the dentist's minor torments.
^ Woman left a ball, and sobbed herself to sleep because her frock had appeared drab
a?d out of fashion, causing her intense mortification. Yet this same woman not so
?ng after refused an anaesthetic for a fairly difficult confinement and astonished
0ctors and nurses by her powers of silent endurance. In short, what is appropriately
CaHed " animal courage " bears very little relation to social courage.
This question of animal courage brings us back to the factor of inheritance.
ls closely associated with aggressivity, and aggressivity is of all character traits
It
66 MENTAL HEALTH
the one which is most closely based upon hormonic (or " glandular ") balance. As
proof of this we have only to consider the reduction in aggressivity which is unfailingly
achieved by castration in most bisexual species. Hence we find, as we would expect,
that the human subject displays fortitude when the glands of aggression are well
developed and functioning healthily. These are mainly the adrenals and orchitic
glands. But aggressivity has its counterpart in submissiveness, which it is now
fashionable to equate with masochism, as it is to equate aggressivity with sadism.
This tendency is unfortunate, and leads to inaccuracy and superficial thinking. Just
as aggressivity has its biological basis in glandular activity, so also has submissive-
ness. And just as aggressivity contributes to fortitude, so also does submissiveness.
In the last few weeks there must have been thousands of cases where a man was
displaying aggression and fortitude in the front line, while his wife in flight and carrying
an infant was displaying submissiveness and fortitude in no less measure.
We thus see that there is an intimate connection between the physiology of the
body and the degree of fortitude expressed in behaviour. But this physiology is
itself susceptible to the action of many agents, bacterial or chemical. Thus the virus
of influenza is recognized as having a particularly detrimental effect on the adrenal
glands. Many a doctor has heard from a man in his prime the complaint which
runs something like this: " I suppose I've got over that attack of 'flu that I had three
weeks ago. But you know my nerves are all to pieces still. I don't know what it is,
but I seem afraid of all sorts of things that normally mean nothing to me. I'm afraid
of the News Bulletin on the wireless; I can't trust myself to make a sudden decision
in my business; I wake in the night hearing imaginary burglars?I suppose I shall
recover my nerve ? " This indicates the way in which a bacterial poison can under-
mine the organic basis of courage and self-confidence. Of chemical agents the best
known and the most ancient is alcohol. We talk of the " Dutch courage " derived
from alcohol. All we really indicate by that is a condition of mental blur in which
we discriminate less accurately between safety and danger. But the most modern
chemical to be used to promote courage is Benzedrine. This is a very valuable and
very dangerous drug. Its action is somewhat obscure, but in general it seems to
stimulate the adrenals and at the same time to promote sugar metabolism. Evidence
is accumulating that a large proportion of German troops and aviators are sent into
action under the influence of Benzedrine. Unquestionably it has an action on
behaviour which is comparable in its specific character to the action of such alkaloids
as Hyoscine, Morphine, Cannabis Indica or Datura?in other words it produces a
particular effect on behaviour, and it does so without incurring any very appreciable
reaction after the effects have worn off. It will probably become usual to use this
drug for prize-fighters, professional footballers, athletes, examination candidates and
racehorses. Such reflections help us to bear in mind that character always has a
basis that is ultimately chemical. But that is in no way equivalent to stating that
personality is limited by its chemical components. Far from it. The unique quality
of mankind is the capacity to make a choice and pursue a purpose that transcend mere
physiological resources.
This brings us to the purely psychological aspects of fortitude. First of all,
MENTAL HEALTH 67
let us consider habit formation. Consider two children of the same age, say two boys
of seven years. The one has been taught to swim and is thoroughly at home in the
Water; the other has been taught to climb trees and displays agility and self-assurance
even on top-most branches. Transpose the boys, and you will probably observe
that the tree-boy cries when he is urged to throw himself into the water, while the
swimmer will be afraid to trust himself to stout branches, despite your assurance that
they are safe. In fact, what appears to be great courage resolves itself largely into
a question of self-confidence based upon previous experience?in other words, the
difference between the known and the unknown.
A different aspect of habit formation presents itself in connection with what
Psychologists call " patterns of infantile behaviour ". The simplest example is that
of the child who is given a sweet to bribe him to stop crying. This procedure
establishes a pattern of behaviour which may be formulated thus:?" By exploiting
Pain or frustration, I shall obtain gratification." In short, it is training the child
to be a " quitter ". The reverse procedure is to offer the bribe only if and when
the child exercises self-control. Theoretically this is the correct way to foster
endurance, for the formula then becomes:?" By exercising as much self-control as
* can, I shall obtain gratification." Thus we can train the child to be a " sticker
fiut in point of practice the method is dangerous; it can very easily be overdone,
and unduly self-controlled children often turn out to be rather unhappy and very
^troverted adults, simply because they were denied tenderness when they were
entitled to it. One of the results of mistaken management in childhood is to drive
the child from reality into a phantasy escape. Peter Pan would have been less
concerned with his phantasies of Captain Hook, and more disposed to return with
^endy to reality, if he had experienced more orthodox maternal tenderness in his
early days. In other words, the imaginative child, deprived of tenderness in the
aPpropriate phase, does not develop fortitude in the face of reality but rather a
compensatory valour in phantasy. Now this contrast between fortitude in phantasy
and fortitude in reality runs all through character and conduct. The blusterer cannot
lay claim to fortitude in reality, and it is only in relation to reality that fortitude
counts. The dreamer is not courageous until he has learned to " . . . Dream,
and not make dreams his master ", or as Francis Thompson puts it: " Learn to
dream when thou dost wake." For, after all, fortitude is, in its essence, the negation
?f escape from life. Temptations to escape beset every one of us all through our
Hves, particularly in that state of sophistication which we are pleased to designate as
c^ilisation. We escape from effort because sloth no longer implies starvation;
We escape from danger because we have contrived so many?if deceptive?safety-first
devices; we escape from reality into a make-believe world of mechanized entertain-
ment, where we can comfortably indulge in '' Dreams of the unfulfill'd and unpossest.''
So we see that fortitude has many roots in the individual personality. But it
Would be a mistake to ignore the social sources of fortitude. Leadership and social
contagion can count for much. These operate by suggestion, and the transmission
r?m the leader to his subordinates, or from the group to the individual, of a common
and transcending purpose. The best examples of the former mechanism comprise
68 MENTAL HEALTH
exploits of native levies or troops of primitive peoples led by Europeans. In such
cases the troops are rarely in a position to choose their own purpose on any grounds
of knowledge or reason. They simply accept the inspiring example of the leader as
sufficient motive for courageous conduct. But leadership counts at every level of
human development. No human group is so individualised as to be insusceptible
to the effects of powerful leadership. Middleton Murry says of this phenomenon:
" The only sort of miracle that has meaning for grown men?the miracle whereby
a hero creates heroes." History will tell in ages to come of the heroic defence of
Verdun in the Great War. It is impossible to believe that the men of the Maginot
Line were essentially different. But in 1940 there was no one to rally his men with
the grim challenge: " Debout les morts ! "
When the individual derives his courage from the group in which he finds himself,
rather than from the leader, the process is one of social identification. The forces
of mob contagion can be so powerful as to make savage brutes out of decent men,
and heroes out of shivering weaklings. All revolutions in general tend to be manifesta-
tions of social conflict between those who are defending their vested interests and
those who have everything to gain and nothing but their lives to lose. It is therefore
easy to understand that the fortitude of the former group is much more personal
and rational, while that of the revolutionaries is more social and passionate.
As far as one can learn from observers' reports, the populace of Barcelona, who
were very inadequately protected from air attack, developed a high degree of fortitude
on a basis of common social experience.
It has been said by Harold Nicholson that the Germans possess every form of
courage except civic courage. Accepting this as a correct estimate, it means that the
national temperament and upbringing make for fortitude; that as a people they are
suggestible, and therefore easily led by an aggressive leader, and also intensely
susceptible to mob influences. R. L. Stevenson says of such folk that they are
" not led so much by any desire of applause as by a positive need for countenance
But the psychological aspect of fortitude, whether personal or social, does not
take us far enough. It stops short of any consideration of values. For psychology
in so far as it claims to be scientific, only tells us the mechanisms whereby a man's
conduct is courageous or otherwise. Professor Macmurray has said: "Scientific
psychology is the science of human behaviour in so far as it is instinctive, habitual or
unconscious. There cannot be a science of human behaviour in so far as it is conscious
and intentional." This means that human choice may be casually determined, or
may be free and deliberate. One man " sticks " because his temperament imposes
it upon him: another man " sticks " because he has consciously chosen his purpose.
One man "quits " because his early upbringing has predisposed him to do so;
another man " quits " because he has never accepted a value higher than self-interest.
The highest form of fortitude from the ethical point of view is that which has
the least temperamental basis, which has developed in spite of adverse upbringing,
and which is most independent of social influences. In short, he is the greatest hero
who was cast in the mould of a coward. For such a one must have accepted as
his purpose in life a role for which he was fitted neither by nature nor nurture. And
MENTAL HEALTH 69
what matters to us as a nation at this crisis is not how well or how ill our children have
been bred and brought up, but how to transform the material available from
mediocrities into heroes. Clearly we must exploit leadership and social influences
to the utmost, avoiding only any form of deception. But that is not enough. There
must be a general revaluation on a great scale?personal revaluation, whereby
individuals discard the old values of self-interest and narcissan security, to adopt new
values that can promote fortitude in the highest degree. We are not agreed about
these values. Some would say the supreme values for which we are fighting are
freedom, justice and good faith. Some would say that we are fighting for a new order
m the civilised world. Some would claim that we are fighting to promote the
Kingdom of God. But whether we accept new values that are merely political, or
mainly ideological or frankly religious, the consideration that counts is whether a
man's values are sufficiently dominating to neutralise completely all personal con-
siderations that would otherwise limit his fortitude.
And what are the criteria of such fortitude ? First the hero must be able to:
" . . . meet with triumph and disaster,
And treat those two imposters just the same."
Then he must be able to wait?suspense, uncertainty, unemployment, immobility?
aU the minor calls for fortitude?none of these things should take from him " Courage
and gaiety and the quiet mind ". And when he has learnt " from fears to vanquish
fears "5 he should be ready to meet the supreme and ultimate test. For the hero?
whatever be the sources of his fortitude?is the man who, in the last resort, answers
Unreservedly the call to make the supreme sacrifice:
" Die for none other way canst live."
S
