Diseases of the Nervous System
================================

:Author: F. M. R.
Walshe, O.B.E., M.D., D.Sc., F.R.C.P.
E. and S. Livingstone, Edinburgh. Price
12s. 6d. net, postage 8d.

As this book is designed for Practitioners and
Students it is permissible that it should be
reviewed by one who is not a neurological
specialist. And no comment or criticism will
be made on the neurological statements that it
contains. The method of presentation, however,
is important and the author in his preface
describes the task that he has undertaken as
follows: "To deal only with what is possible
in general practice in the matter of diagnostic
methods and of treatment, to strip the subject
of unnecessary complexities and to confine
myself to what I have seen and believe to be
true."

The book is divided into two parts. The first
of 40 pages covers the General Principles of
Neurological Diagnosis and is probably the most
valuable section. The second part of the book
is a Descriptive Account of the More Common
Diseases of the Nervous System and occupies
some 230 pages. But this includes a chapter
of 20 pages on the Psychoneuroses which the
author concedes are Diseases of the Personality
and so not of the Nervous System. There are
nine figures of which two are photographs, an
X-ray of bilateral cervical ribs and a picture of
the palmar aspect of a hand in a similar case.
The presentation is clear, concise and dog-
matic. The chapters are easy to read and to
understand and throughout bear the imprint
of the author's attitude towards the problems
of medicine. Description and diagnosis are
given more prominence than treatment. Not
that the author is averse to treatment but
management and nursing of neurological cases
rank first with him and he is desperately anxious
to save the chronic sufferer from exploitation
by charlatans both within and without the
medical profession. Physiotherapy and especi-
ally electrical forms of treatment are regarded
with suspicion and one feels that the author may
have been unfortunate in his choice of collabora-
tors in these respects.

Dr Walshe's views on psychotherapy are well
known to his medical colleagues and are stated
again here with his usual frankness. Psycho-
genic factors in illness are very important an"
must be recognized as such. But because their
occurrence is largely due to inborn tendencies
not too much must be expected in the way
amelioration, except in the case of " traumatic
neuroses " which will tend to get well once
matters of law and compensation are decided-
Dr Walshe emphasizes the importance of the
part the general practitioner should play in the
treatment of psychoneurotic cases and believes
that a careful history, an intelligent under-
standing of the situation and a thorough
explanation of the position are all that |s
required in the vast majority of cases. It lS
only in the severer forms of anxiety and 111
patients with marked obsessional symptom*
that the attentions of the psychotherapist w"
be called for.

The psychological aspects of migraine'
writer's cramp and enuresis are dismissed as no
proven. The medical treatment of the latter lS
still in the author's hands mainly a matter of
belladonna. And anyhow there is consolation
in the fact that it is rare for the condition to
continue after the age of twelve. But psycho-
logical questions are only of secondary interest
to neurologists who are not usually influenced
W researches into psychopathology. The main
object of this book, an up-to-date comprehensive
survey of the common diseases of the Nervous
System, seems excellently served.
H.C.S.
