Alfred Adler
============

:Author: Phyllis Bottome. Faber &
Faber, Ltd. Price 10s. 6d. net.

This is the third appreciation of Adler
published in England since his death at Aberdeen
in August, 1937. It is written by a well-known
novelist who, with her husband, was in close
touch with Adler and his family for the last ten
years of his life. It is the most intimate account
yet available in English and gives many personal
details which will be of interest to those who
knew Adler only from his lectures and his
writings.

No attempt is made to gloss over those aspects
of Adler's character which were apt to be some-
what disconcerting to his friends and associates.

Orthodox Individual Psychology tended to
become more and more a closed system, and
Adler was the only arbitrator to decide what was
and what was not orthodox. Even those who
valued most highly Adler's contribution to
Medical Psychology might easily be regarded as
suspect and, with the exception of his daughter
Dr. Alexandra Adler, there was at the time of
Adler's death not a single medical man or woman
whom he would accept or acknowledge as being
capable of representing his views. The author
does not state this in so many words but from
what is said in the book and what is common
knowledge there is no doubt that this was the
case.

The book shows signs of somewhat hasty
preparation and there are so many inaccuracies
and mistakes in detail referring both to individuals
and organizations that the knowledgeable
English reader is left in doubt as to what credence
is to be placed on statements and conclusions
dealing with incidents centred in Austria and
America. The author represents the non-
acceptance of Adler's views by professional
colleagues as due either to their cowardice or
jealousy. This may be true in specific instances,
but it is in the main an unwarrantable assumption
of which no proof is or can be given. And there
is a tendency throughout the book to stress
Adler's Messianic mission and to suggest that
while " the common people heard him gladly "
doctors and psychologists rejected him to their
own deprivation and loss.

So it may be said that while the book is
interesting and valuable as the expression of the
views of an ardent follower and an intimate
associate it cannot be accepted as an adequate
valuation of Adler's place in either Medicine or
Psychology. How great was his contribution
not only to medical psychology but particularly
to child guidance and training will be assessed
finally not by references to the opinions of
adherents however gifted and experienced but
by the trend of future thought and practice.
H.C.S.
