Mental Disorders
=================

26 MENTAL HEALTH
Book Reviews
Twenty-fifth Annual Report of the Board of
Control for 1938.
Parti. H.M. Stationery
Office. Is. 6d.

The Report of the Board of Control for 1938
is a fine record of achievement. After years of
struggle, great improvements in conditions and
treatment, both in mental hospitals and mental
deficiency institutions have taken place. It was
chiefly due to the Board that the Act of 1930
became law and this revolutionized the official
outlook on mental illness so that early treatment
came into the forefront of policy. The voluntary
organizations such as the National Council for
Mental Hygiene who have worked for nearly
twenty years to educate public opinion to demand
early and preventive treatment have also con-
tributed much to the desired end, for as Sir
Laurence Brock has said a Government Depart-
ment cannot act in advance of public opinion,
though without its backing no Act can come into
being. It is very regrettable that the extension
of these hardly won advances will tend to be
shelved during the war and some of the already
existing facilities may even have to be curtailed.
Out-patient Centres. Only three public mental
hospitals in England have no centre associated
with them for out-patient treatment. Existing
centres now number 177, most of which have
sessions at least once weekly. The total number
of patients seen exceeded 19,000 with an aggregate
of 74,000 attendances during the year. This
suggests that a real attempt at treatment is
replacing the merely diagnostic service which
was formerly the rule rather than the exception.
It is to be hoped that the war will not reduce the
activity of out-patient centres since the need for
them among the civilian population even if not
greatly increased is not likely to be reduced.
Part-time Psycho-therapists. The appointment
of a part-time medical Psycho-therapist on a
sessional basis to the staff" of St. Bernard's
Hospital (formerly Hanwell) to treat patients
likely to benefit is an important precedent.
The existing staff of most mental hospitals have
neither the time nor the training to give this
specialized and intensive form of treatment.
The National Council for Mental Hygiene has
long advocated this policy.
Nurses'1 Homes. The provision of Nurses'
Homes goes forward surely though slowly, and
the Board's hope that demands for emergency
work at night will be reduced to a minimum is
very important. The part that the nurse plays
in the treatment of patients in mental hospitals
cannot be over estimated, and only if the nurst
health and happiness are safeguarded can she b
expected to carry out her duties with the efficient,
and tranquillity that mean so much to th-
patients under her charge.
Voluntary Treatment. The increase of volun-
tary admissions is encouraging, but the numbers
are not so high in many hospitals as they ought
to be. For this, Public Assistance Officers,
Medical Superintendents, and Visiting Com-
mittees may all be to blame. As the Board
points out, it does make a real difference to the
patient and his relatives if certification can be
avoided. It is to be hoped that public opinion
will bring pressure to bear on those who through
lack of human understanding or indifference to
the feelings of others prefer a course which is
easier for themselves although more damaging
to the patient. A specious excuse is sometimes
put forward that voluntary patients discharge
themselves too soon, even a few days after
admission. But when patients do this, it is
usually a reflection on the conditions or treat-
ment in the mental hospital. This is proved by
the fact that those hospitals which have the
highest proportion of voluntary admissions do
not necessarily show the highest proportion of
voluntary patients discharging themselves against
medical advice.
Storage of Patients' Clothing. The insanitary
habit of tying patients' clothes in a bundle at
night is rapidly disappearing. Nothing could
be more damaging to a patient's morale than to
have to wear creased and messy clothes; indeed
the superior type of patient strongly resents
being deprived of his personal belongings and
having to wear ugly and clumsy garments.
The trouble and expense of providing suitable
hangers for clothes is abundantly repaid by the
improvement in the patient's outlook. An
interest in his personal appearance is an impor-
tant factor in restoring the patient's social
adaptation.
Physical Training is still very limited in mental
hospitals, but it awakens the patient's interest
and reality and should certainly take a more
prominent place. It must, however, be carried
out by properly trained instructors or nurses,
and the ex-army sergeant is quite an unsuitable
person.
Libraries. It is strange that there has been so
much apathy and in some cases active opposition
to the introduction of adequate library facilities
in mental hospitals. Many medical superin-
tendents seem to resent the introduction of
voluntary visiting librarians as if they feared that
MENTAL HEALTH 27
would in some way have an unfavourable effect
upon the hospital; but where the experiment has
been tried the happiness of the patients has
manifestly been increased. The National Council
for Mental Hygiene has strongly advocated the
establishment of a well organized library in
every mental hospital, and it is hoped that even
in wartime the project will not be neglected.
Mental Deficiency
The total number of defectives under care,
either in institutions or in the community was,
at the end of 1938, 89,904 (as compared with
86,510 at the end of 1937). Of these 46,054
were in Institutions or Homes, and 43,850 were
under some form of community care.
Ascertainment. The number of defectives
reported to Local Authorities, whether subject
to be dealt with or not, was 125,859 representing
a proportion to the population of 3-07 per 1,000
as against 2- 99 a year ago.
In addition, 3,536 feeble-minded children
between 1 and 16 were informally notified for
After-Care on leaving school, and if these are
added to the number given above, the total
number of cases known to Local Authorities
?n January 1st, 1939, was 129,395, or 3-15 per
1,000 (as against 3-07 the previous year).
The number of defectives ascertained to be
subject to be dealt with, was 95,418, viz. 2- 33 per
1,000, as against 2-26 last year.
The number of children between the ages of
7 and 16 notified by Education Authorities
during the year was 3,425, and it is discouraging
to note that this represents a decrease of 485 on
the number notified during 1937.
The Board regret that the number of defectives
' subject to be dealt with " and in receipt of
Poor Relief (8,506) has remained almost
stationary for the last four years, after the
initial drop due to the passing of the Local
Government Act in 1929, and they draw attention
to the provision by which such defectives can be
Placed under Guardianship under the Mental
Peficiency Act and continue to receive a grant
ln aid. They urge that this procedure should be
adopted in order that training and special care
can be provided in addition to monetary relief.
The Table of Ascertainment Rates provides,
as always, much illuminating information as to
the varying standards of administration which
are to be found throughout the country. Thus,
ln Cardigan, whilst the proportion of defectives
reported is given as 8-03 per 1,000, only 1 -46 are
subject to be dealt with and only ? 23 under some
form of care; in West Hartlepool, on the other
band, out of 1-18 per 1,000 reported all were
subject to be dealt with, and -92 were placed
under care. In Ipswich?to take another
example?4-13 were reported, 3-76 were subject
to be dealt with, and 3-67 were placed under
care.
Institutional Accommodation. During 1938,
the total number of beds increased from 43,552
to 45,717, and practically all the larger Authori-
ties in England had sufficient beds to meet at
least their most pressing needs, though in Wales
no progress has been made. In Institutions
approved under Section 37, there was a net
decrease of 410 beds, and no new approval was
given during the year to such premises unless
the scheme provided for the complete separation
of the defectives from the other inmates and
the patients were restricted to a type for whose
requirements it was within the capacity of the
institution to provide.
Community Care. Of the 36 per cent, of
defectives subject to be dealt with, who were
under statutory care in the community on
January 1st, 1939, 3,107 were on Licence,
4,531 under Guardianship, and 39,009 under
Statutory Supervision. For the first time for
many years there was a decrease in the number of
Licence cases (3,155 in 1937) which the Board
attribute in part to the effect of their Circular
No. 850, issued in June 1938, as a result of which
there was a review of the position of all defectives
who had completed their second year of Licence
after leaving an institution. Of the cases
considered, approximately 350 were discharged,
being those in which it was clear that Licence
had ceased to fulfil a purpose which could not
equally well be served by some measure of
friendly supervision.
Occupation Centres and Home Training. The
number of Occupation Centres remained the
same (191) as in the previous year, but there was
an increase of 101 defectives in attendance, and
more Centres were open for whole-time sessions.
Three Centres were housed in their own premises
and in five other areas plans 'for building were
under consideration. The growing recognition
by Local Authorities of the need for expert
physical training is noted with satisfaction.
Twenty-two Home Training schemes of varying
types and scope were brought to the notice of
the Board during the year.
Attention is drawn to the urgent need for
some recognized standard of training and salaries
for Occupation Centre workers. Until, it is
pointed out, " there is more general agreement
as to the proper scale for supervisors, and until
it offers a living commensurate with other careers
calling for the same personal qualities and the
same kind of experience, it will be difficult to
establish a satisfactory scheme of training or to
secure an adequate supply of candidates of the
right type
