Strategic Planning for Mental Health
=======================================

:Author: Colonel J. R. REES, M.D.

It would be hard to imagine a time more unusual or more trying than the
Present for a discussion such as this. I believe that some people feel that Societies
giving time and attention to subjects like the present one, in war, are somehow fiddling
like Nero, but I have no sympathy with that point of view. Just now, at this time,
We should, more than ever, be thinking out where we stand and making plans for
winning the war and for establishing work for mental health firmly for the future.
My thoughts in this paper may be somewhat at random, but both my first and
my last points of emphasis are concerned with the present situation in this country.
Our own mental stability, our vision and our practical commonsense, have never
been challenged so much as at present. If we are to pull our weight during the
War period we must be sure that we ourselves have got on to friendly terms with
?ur own personal fear, we must be clear that whatever happens to us individually
the spirit that is in everything true and progressive can never be damaged, and if we
believe this we can go quietly and resolutely forward working to the utmost, and
demonstrate that mental health is a reality. Let us then turn our interest and
Perhaps some of our aggressive qualities on to this vast problem of mental health,
as one of the adventures of the present day, and see what we personally can plan
and achieve.

Many people who have written about this problem of mental health have
formulated definite aims. I will not attempt to do that with any exactitude, but it
seems clear that we would wish, all of us, to do something to make our race more
^venturous, more adaptable, happier and, if possible, more intelligent. I shall
barely touch on the remedial side of our work. Medicine has, in any case, been
fer too much a matter of repairing and patching people up. The real Medicine
?f the future will be largely prophylactic, and certainly in our field the important
fhing is to stress the positive aspects of mental health instead of concentrating our
interest on ill health. Of the three main branches of psychiatric work?for the
defectives, the psychotics, and the neurotics?the third is probably the most impor-
tant from the national point of view, and certainly here prophylaxis is far more
important than treatment, in fact it provides the only road to an ultimate solution
this particular medico-sociological problem.

We can therefore justifiably stress our particular point of view with regard to
fhe proper development of the human psyche, even though our knowledge be
lncomplete. We must aim to make it permeate every educational activity in our
National life: primary, secondary, university and technical education are all con-
Cerned with varying stages in the development of the child and the adolescent. Those
^ho provide the education, the principles upon which they work, and the people
* Summary of an address given at the Annual Meeting of the National Council for Mental
^giene on June 18th, 1940.

upon whom they work, must all be objects of our interest, for education that ignores
the commonsense principles that have been more clearly evolved of recent years
is likely to be of indifferent quality. Public life, politics and industry should all
of them be within our sphere of influence. It needs little imagination to see
improvements that could be effected in each of them.

Especially since the last world war we have done much to infiltrate the various
social organizations throughout the country, and in their work and in their point
of view one can see clearly how the principles for which this society and others
stood in the past have become accepted as part of the ordinary working plan of
these various bodies. That is as it should be, and while we can take heart from
this we must be healthily discontented and realize that there is still more work to be
done along this line. Similarly we have made a useful attack upon a number of
professions. The two easiest of them naturally are the teaching profession and the
Church : the two most difficult are law and medicine. Anyone whose memory
goes back for even a dozen years can realize how big a change has been effected in
the outlook of professional people, while certainly anyone with vision can see how
much still remains to be done.

If we are to infiltrate the professional and social activities of other people I
think we must imitate the Totalitarians and organize some kind of fifth column
activity ! If better ideas on mental health are to progress and spread we, as the
salesmen, must lose our identity. By that I mean that we cannot help so effec-
tively if speaking for a National Council or any other body as we can when we make
a more subtle approach adapted to the particular circumstances of the moment.
It really wouldn't matter if no one ever heard of this Council again provided that
the work was done. Let us all, therefore, very secretly be " fifth columnists ".
At the same time, however, there is no reason why we should not as individuals
and in small groups make use of a perfectly open approach to the question of mental
health. We have all of us got contacts with men and women who are concerned
with the various aspects of life that I have just been mentioning and we could most
of us get together small groups for informal discussions on these topics, and out
of this might grow definite bodies or committees of persons interested in each of
these fields of work, being convinced that it was worth while to work out their own
specific problems and their own plans. While a central office can sometimes help
in a project such as this, only the determined work that we as individuals can put
in will ever provide the dynamic for such activities.

In this field, as in every other, we ought to be thinking ahead and foreseeing
events so far as that is possible. We have often been too spasmodic in our work
and I feel we need a long-term plan of propaganda. The time is past when we
need be in any way apologetic for directing people's interest to questions of mental
health. Practically everybody is ready for such ideas. They were before the war,
and it is far truer now than it was then. I doubt the wisdom of a direct attack
upon the existing state of affairs; even though there is a war on, that would still
raise opposition, whereas the more insidious approach of suggesting that something
better is needed?" why shouldn't we try so and so "?is more likely to succeed.

The evolutionary process is essentially British, and I think that we should make
it a fundamental in our propaganda plan.
Parliament, the Press and other publications, are the most obvious ways by
which our propaganda can be got across, and it needs the thought and work of every
one of us to get this going. Medical Members of Parliament are always ready to
help with any well thought out plan of campaign which is clearly for the good of
the country, but we need not limit ourselves to them. There are many energetic
men in Parliament who are very willing when properly coached with questions
and supplementaries, to ask them, and to follow up by personal contact to make
sure that points of importance are adequately dealt with. I still live in the hope
that some day we shall get Members of Parliament to submit themselves to per-
sonality and efficiency tests, for I feel sure that if they did they would then insist
upon all candidates for Parliament going through the same elementary routine,
and we might later have some chance of its being applied to the Civil Service !
In the past we have made sporadic attempts to provide a Press service which
can give statements on matters of topical interest and explain to the reporters, and
through them to the public, the meaning of various phenomena which are "hot news "
in our morning papers. Actually we have as a group not nearly enough alertness
and enthusiasm about this matter of helping the Press and so influencing the times
m which we live. Every one of us reads papers and journals but we are often too
inert to take action about the points which should so obviously be taken up, whether
the subject be politics, local government, social affairs or the decisions of the courts.
Whether it be in matters of religion or those of home life, there are points which
arise in the papers every day, in some of which we should interest ourselves. The
policy of the Press, like that of the B.B.C., is affected by the size of its fan-mail.
Even if our letters are not published, they still produce their effect upon the editorial
mind, and some of them certainly will be published and in this way will make people
think. Here again we had probably better be secretive and not mention this Council
0r any other body, but simply write or speak as individuals. Don't let us mention
Cental Hygiene (with capital letters), though we can safely write in terms of mental
health and commonsense. When we do write it is important to remember that the
Understatement of a case is much more likely to be effective than its overstatement.
Your attention must not be confined merely to the Daily Press, for there are
innumerable weekly and monthly journals and special professional and trade papers,
and it is as a rule much easier to get articles, notes, comments or letters into these
Papers than into the Daily Press. Quite often, also, they are more carefully read
than the daily paper.

I should like to see us go beyond these more obvious points and set out on a
campaign to get certain points and ideas which are of importance stressed by well-
known novelists in their books. Priestley, Morgan, Walpole, and a score of others
Whose books have a wide appeal?even Dr. Cronin?might be willing to co-operate.
^ am not suggesting, of course, that they should write propaganda novels it would
surprising if those had any circulation, but in an ordinary human story it should
n?t be difficult to give some emphasis on a point of view, and the gradual building
up of a series of such emphases over a period of years would be the soundest kind
of propaganda. This Council has recently been co-operating in some experiments
with films, and there the same idea has been emphasized that just one point can
be got across to the public through this medium. Those of you who know books
and their authors, and films and their makers, might be doing some long term
planning of the right kind of propaganda.

I have said several times that I believe we should be careful about the mention
of the Council or any other body which might be thought to be furthering some
particular point. Many people don't like to be " saved ", " changed " or made
healthy. I have a feeling, however, that " efficiency and economy " would make
rather a good appeal because there are very few people who would not welcome
these two suggestions. It has even crossed my mind whether we ought not to have
a subsidiary company called the Social Efficiency Board and get Mr. Bevin or some-
one like that in as Chairman ! It seems to me that in approaching national matters,
local government and social affairs we should be on much stronger ground if we
were constantly stressing our interest in efficiency and economy, and certainly we
can "sell" mental health under these headings as well as under any other.
Oldham and Bristol, and possibly one or two other places, have their own com-
mittees or councils for mental health, and this is, I believe, an extremely wise move.
Government in this country is being de-centralized in many ways during the war,
and for our particular work I believe that the more we can spread the responsibility
the better will be our progress. These matters of man's mind and outlook are
sufficiently vital and interesting to attract in every area groups of intelligent men
and women who will take on the function of local councils or committees. Let
us learn from the Oxford Group and have week-end parties; all over the country
we have people to our hand, medical students, teachers, journalists, civil servants,
trades union officials, and all sorts of other people, whom we might get together and
amongst whom we should find sensible, balanced people who could lead in local
activities. Provided we have one such stable person in any group I should feel
quite happy in giving that group its head. We all make mistakes, and no doubt
it would drop some bricks but on the whole it would stir up interest of the right
kind and advance our cause.

I have in this article merely been feeling around in this vast field of policy. I
have touched on a few points hoping to stimulate people to think of many more,
and particularly of those that are within their own particular powers to follow up.
I would like to close with fresh emphasis on the fact that we each of us as individuals
carry a great responsibility for the mental health of the nation, now during the war
and in the much better future that must come. We need vision and courage. We
mustn't merely plan and be theorists, but we must also experiment, and it is worth
remembering that in a time like this it is much easier to spread sensible ideas or,
if you like, to teach in a quiet way, than it ever has been before. " It all depends
on me " is quite a good slogan, and Mr. Morrison's " Go to it " is yet another
of the dynamic sayings of the moment. We can apply both of these to ourselves
in this particular field of work.
