The Neuroses in War
=====================

:Type: Book Reviews
:Author:By various Authors.

neurosis among civilians, for, in the former case,
though the conflicts always include the indi-
vidual's personality and background, the
precipitating factor is the stress of war and the
object of treatment is to return the man fit to
continue service. Suggestion, and hypno-
analysis are practical methods which had good
results in the last war and with members of the
Services collective hypnosis is a time-saving
device. The need to reveal to the patient the
meaning of his symptoms and their motivation
is the aim of psychological analysis. An
appendix on psychiatric pharmacology contains
certain methods of drug therapy for emergency
use.

A great deal can be learned from the experi-
ences of the psychiatric organization in the past,
and Drs. Wilson and Wittkower advocate two
principles, namely, prophylactic elimination of
unsuitable men and early treatment of casualties
as near the line as is possible. They urge that
the common anxiety case should be recognized
by the authorities.

Civilians have not the advantage of being
members of an organized group and Dr. Bion in
discussing the War of Nerves makes a number
of constructive suggestions based on psycho-
logical understanding as to how the civilian may
attain the soldier's morale yet retain his civilian
status.

In conclusion Dr. H. Crichton-Miller stresses
the need for observers to think in terms of the
total personality and, for the benefit of those
with little knowledge of psychopathology, defines
Hysteria as a social condition and anxiety as an
individual one.

The impression one gets after reading this book
is that the Authors from their personal experience
of nervous disorder gained in the last war and
in peacetime have offered their knowledge and
opinions, but while they anticipate similar forms
of breakdown in the present war they are pre-
pared to modify and even change their views in
accordance with fresh experience. For the
medical officer this book will be a source of
interesting information about the men and women
he will have to treat whether in the Services or in
civilian practice. For the layman, while a
certain amount of the material is technical and
requires specialized knowledge, there are several
chapters, notably those by Drs. Miller and Bion,
which he will find to be of personal interest.
L.M.M.

Edited by Emanuel Miller, M.A., M.R.C.P.,
D.P.M., with a concluding chapter by
H. Crichton-Miller, M.D., F.R.C.P. Mac-
millan & Co., Ltd. 10s. 6d.

The twelve authors of this book have worked
together as a team to give to the public at a time
When it is most needed a comprehensive account
?f the neuroses of war. In the preface the Editor
^ates that one reason for presenting this subject
ls that from their clinical experiences of the last
^ar they expect a high incidence of neurosis in
this war, not only in the Services but among
civilians, and also that to most medical men
Psychological medicine requires a specialist's
Mention.

Each chapter may be regarded as an essay on
? Particular aspect of the subject and while there
ls a certain amount of overlapping this enables
the reader to appreciate differences of point of
view and approach, not so much to the theory of
Psychological disorder, but to the mentally sick
^dividual.

The literature is surveyed in the first chapter,
and far from being an international bibliography
^, a masterpiece of clear thinking by Drs.
^ittkower and Spillane. Dr. Millais Culpin
has drawn on his notes taken during the last war
0 give vivid pictures of the mode of onset of
. reakdown among soldiers. The clinical study
^continued by Drs. Emanuel Miller, A. T. M.
Wilson and Eric Wittkower, who classify the
yarieties of neurosis and psychosis, describing
111 Particular the psycho-somatic disorders only
gently acknowledged, notably Effort Syndrome,
hypertension, Stress Dyspepsia, Peptic Ulcer,
fc- Precise differentiation between organic and
Actional diseases is not now expected as the
Patient is seen as an individual bodily ill through
^otional disturbance. R.G.G. and Dr.
onald Hargreaves nevertheless indicate the
'?Terence between reversible functional illness
irreversible functional disease.

Dr. Miller's remark that the psychopathology
War neurosis is an illustration of the way in
flJch men escape from disaster and court it at
and the same time concludes an excellent
aPter describing the theory of these disorders,
f reatment occupies three chapters and its various
jP^s are dealt with by Dr. Frederick Dillon,
-j/- J- A. Hadfield and Dr. Maurice Wright.
Soi!r emPhasize that mental breakdown in
sj 1(hers during wartime is comparatively a much
^Pler problem to deal with than peacetime
