Education of the Handicapped
=============================

:Author: Brampton and Kowell, both ot Teachers'
College, Columbia University, U.S.A.
Volume One?History, 260 pages, price
7s. 6d. Volume Two?Problems, 440 pages,
price 9s. Published in Britain by Harrap &
Co., Ltd.

These transatlantic editors set themselves an
ambitious task in dealing with a subject that
rarely receives the attention it deserves. In
Volume One they aimed at defining the various
groups of the handicapped, and then tracing the
history of the care and education of each group
separately. Seven groups are dealt with, namely,
the visually handicapped, the hypacusic (!), the
speech defective, the crippled, the under-
vitaiized (!), the mentally handicapped and the
socially handicapped. To give adequate treat-
ment in a volume of this size demanded not only
wide study, but judgment and almost ruthless
selection of material. It is in these latter
directions that the authors are found wanting.

Only dry bones of innumerable facts are given
us: no vivid pictures of the work of outstanding
pioneers, or cross sections of important stages
in progress. In many cases so little information
is given regarding events mentioned that the
mere statement of the facts would be meaningless
and worthless to a reader who did not already
know a great deal about the subject.

As we should expect, most space is given to
developments occurring in the U.S.A. One can
only hope that the majority of the statements are
accurate, but doubts arise when we read on
page 125, in connection with the education of
cripples in England, that " Birmingham passed
the Education Bill in 1918 ". It seems useless
to devote space to the recital of the advantages
of certain named methods of teaching the
" hypacusic " (page 79) without giving any
description of the main features of those methods.
In the section on tuberculosis, discussion of
details as to medical treatment is quite out of
place in such a book as this. It is, however,
only fair to say that the chapter on the Socially
Handicapped, contributed by Dr Sanford Bates,
shows a thorough grasp of the subject and a
desire to be interesting as well as helpful.

In Volume Two, we dip into many hetero-
geneous problems. The treatment is very
uneven and caters rather for the student prepar-
ing to answer examination papers than for the
administrator or teacher faced with practical
issues. Chapter Fourteen deals with " Problems
of the Mentally Handicapped " in twelve pages !
One has only to read the lengthy quotation from
a Dr Dunlop, given on page 338, to realize how
far removed the authors must be from the real
work of educating mental defectives. Would
that we could succeed in teaching normal pupils
what Dr Dunlop believes we should teach the
mentally handicapped.

We are indeed grateful to those who con-
tributed Chapters Nineteen and Twenty; one
describes the Jersey City Plan for the Prevention
and Control of Juvenile Delinquency, and the
other the Montefiore School for the Socially
Handicapped in Chicago. Both give helpful
details regarding experiments in the solution of
problems connected with juvenile delinquency.
E.L.S.R.
