The Integration of the Personality
===================================

:Author: C. G.
Jung. Kegan Paul. 15s.

In order to value this book of Professor
Jung's it is necessary to look back through
his previous work. His main contribution
to psychology must be considered to be his
researches into individuation. Two Essays on
Analytical Psychology was written over twenty
years ago and since then a great deal has been
added to the basis he laid down then. Psycho-
logical Types was a far more elaborate view of
the same problem looked at from a rather
different angle from the angle of Types. In both
cases there is no detailed analysis of the pro-
cess, or part of the process, going on in a
patient. It is true that the Psychology of the
Unconscious dealt with clinical material but it
dealt with a neurotic process which individua-
tion is not, it is normal or supernormal.

Though it could never be said that Professor
Jung's previous books were not related to
clinical experience, he is often accused of
obscurantism. Actually he is difficult rather
than obscure, and clear if the trouble is taken to
understand what he says. The truth is that
Professor Jung has a thoroughly original mind
and has founded a completely new view of
psychology which has a method of its own
and has reaped already a rich harvest. This
originality, which demands new concepts, is
simply thought to be obscure owing to its
novelty.

It must be admitted, however, that Analytical
Psychology is a difficult subject to master,
partly on account of its complexity, but more,
I think, on account of the way in which it pre-
sents long known facts in a new light, namely
in a psychological light.

The first three chapters of The Integration of the
Personality give an introduction to the main
body of the book which is contained in two main
chapters, one on a series of patients' dreams,
the other on Alchemy.

There is much in the first three chapters which
follows up and amplifies what Professor Jung
has previously written. Most welcome from a
clinical point of view is a clear description of
how he applies his knowledge to the treatment
of patients. He says that when an eruption
from the unconscious occurs, "it is like a flow
of lava in which all sorts of minerals gush forth
in one glowing stream, welling up from the
entrails of the earth. There is no use in
rationalizing or intellectualizing this activity.
Yet it is all important to maintain a sense of
mutual understanding between patient and
doctor whilst the eruption lasts, so that the
patient never loses the feeling of intelligent
companionship. If he does lose contact with
his directeur de conscience, he may fall a prey
to panic inspired by the overwhelming strange-
ness of his vision."

Though at this time the intellect is powerless,
Jung does not undervalue its power, for " when
the main shock is over ... we try to reduce
the seemingly incomprehensible events to
rational sequences and to personal and imper-
sonal origins." This constitutes the process of
assimilation, and with this comes enrichment of
the personality.

The next two chapters are detailed example
of how Jung handles material from the un-
conscious, that " glowing stream ". First he
analyses a long series of patients' dreams which
show some aspects of the individuation process-
It is this chapter which fills the gap referred to
before. The next chapter is on alchemy and
here Professor Jung shows that alchemy was
not just the maudling of deranged minds but
a deliberate method of experiencing the
unconscious through the medium of material
experiment. In other words the alchemist,
starting from a sort of chemistry, discovered
that he could experience visions which, though
expressed in a chemical language, are expres-
sions of the collective unconscious.

Jung's analysis of alchemy is undoubtedly the
most penetrating that any psychologist has
attempted and it is especially illuminating
because he relates it to other expressions of the
mdividuation process, namely Christianity and
Gnosticism.

The discovery of the " objective psyche ", as
collective unconscious is sometimes called,
and its processes has a significant bearing upon
the problem of personality. This is the subject
the last chapter. It is only by inference
therefore that it can be made to cohere with the
rest of the book. The chapter is couched in
cautious terms and represents Jung's contribu-
tion to a problem which he does not regard as
having reached a solution or to be defined;
"e relates it to the Chinese concept of Tao which
cannot be defined, it is simply an experience.
As with all Jung's books he goes beyond the
"mits of specialization so that this book can be
read not only by a specialist but also by the
General reader. M.F.
