The Problem Teacher
====================

:Author: A. S. Neill. Herbert
Jenkins. 5s.

A teacher's problem, as diagnosed by the
author of this book, appears to be that he is
incurably middle-class in his ideas, economically
dependent on continuing to be so, and yet
socially barely on the fringe of the bourgeoisie.
He suffers therefore, it is contended, all the
privations?social, sexual and psychological?of
his religious and moral ideology without the
corresponding middle-class compensations of
prestige and affluence. The result is an
" irritable mechanic devoid of inspiration,
afraid of emotion which might bring him to
loggerheads with his mentors, and clinging to a
narrow intellectual syllabus, unaware of what
is in his own heart and in the hearts of his
children.

Neill sees the bare isolated subject teaching
of the average curriculum and the craze for
examination successes, as indirect outcomes of
an attitude which expresses itself more directly
in repressive discipline exercised by a pedagogue
whose dignity is his only prop.

(As the book concerns the " problem"
teacher, much of this must be allowed to go
unchallenged, though one would have welcomed
some wider recognition to the many whose
hearts do lead them to an understanding of the
children they teach and who accomplish so
much in despite of curricula, regulation and
ideology.)

The teacher's salvation is described to be in
the direction of bending his energies to change
all this by making politics his chief interest in
life. To this end his training should include
contact with the major current political view-
points, as well as international travel and as
much understanding of his own psychology as
can be crammed into the time available. Then,
and pre-eminently, a first hand study of children
at play. Psychology should displace teaching
method and should concern his own and the
children's emotions, not the learning processes.

Those of us whom Neill has helped to see
how true education can be achieved by a
sincere awareness of the abiding human needs,
will not find this book hard to swallow though
we may be a little disappointed that the author
has not yet assimilated his own aggressive
daemon. Those who need educating to this
viewpoint will still be unconverted, because
the book is an attack written in a spirit which
will produce a counter-attack and proceeding
probably from the same self-conscious wilfulness
which led the writer to call a previous book
about Summerhill, " That Dreadful School ! "
R.T.
