Evacuation Survey
==================

Edited by Richard Padley
and Margaret Cole. Routledge. 10s. 6d.
This is a comprehensive survey of the First
Evacuation Scheme and contains sections by
various contributors on different aspects of this
gigantic national undertaking. The Survey is
both exhaustive and masterly and will provide
ample material for future reference.
The first section gives an excellent exposition
of the genesis of the first scheme, of the actual
Evacuation in September, 1939, and of the
results of the experience of the first six months.
The hopelessness of expecting unqualified
success from so enormous an experiment in
socialization planned by officials who, however
well meaning, had no knowledge of the psycho-
logical factors inherent in the situation is
betrayed throughout. Tribute is paid to the
excellence of the transport arrangements which,
however, one feels were excellent if they were
intended to scatter the largest possible number
of children as widely as possible. They cer-
tainly attained this object but, unfortunately, to
the utter confusion of the well-laid schemes of
many schools for keeping intact at least sections
of the pupils, family groups and friends.
Much careful investigation has been made
both into the reasons for refusal of parents to
send their children away and into the reasons
126 MENTAL HEALTH
for return. As a result, it is demonstrated that
though the response to the scheme on the part
of parents is shown to have varied regionally
the drift back assumed similar dimensions in
each area. Here is food for thought for the
sociologist.
The repercussions on the various public
services are admirably demonstrated and
throughout the section dealing with this aspect
is to be observed unanimity of criticism in one
direction?the lack of any contact between
evacuating and receiving authority and the
set-up of billeting authorities independently of
local education authorities.
It has to be borne in mind that the book is a
report to the Fabian Society, that all contri-
butors were given an entirely free hand and were
at liberty to express their own personal opinions.
The similarity in various accounts of happenings
and experiences testifies to the value of the book
as an accurate record. As a whole the writers
show an understanding of the psychological
factors involved in the situation. It is, how-
ever, open to question whether " children soon
forget " as one writer states in connection with
separation from home and whether enuresis is
" almost unknown among the country children "
as another would have us believe. The sugges-
tion that in this district evacuated children were
afraid to get out of bed at night in the country
because " ghosts and bogies walked by night "
is an interesting one.
This book is most certainly to be recommended
to all who are interested in the subject whether
from the point of view of sociology, administra-
tion, education or general human interest.
