The Dilemma of Penal Reform
============================

MENTAL HEALTH 57
Book Reviews

:Author: Dr. Hermann
Mannheim, with a preface by Prof. A. M.
Carr-Saunders. Allen & Unwin. 1939.
pp. 228. 7s. 6d.

This book is based on a course of public
lectures given at the London School of Economics
in 1938-9. Professor Carr-Saunders points
?ut that for the constructive development of
Penal Reform we need, firstly, accurate systematic
sociological and psychological surveys of
offenders and offences and, secondly, we need
to clear up our ideas about our social responsi-
bility to offenders and about our concepts of
guilt, punishment and reformation. This book
is a general introductory survey of this second
group of problems.

The author points out how serious an error
has been " on principle to divorce the idea of
Punishment by the State from moral con-
siderations . . and that " only on a
moral basis is it possible to argue successfully
with the lawbreaker ". He realizes that such a
moral basis is hard to define and that room for
discretion must be left in dealing with the
individual offender. Indeed, he brings strong
evidence to show the need for individual treat-
ment of offenders on this and other grounds
and, by his admission of unconscious factors
as influencing the attitudes of society and
offenders to each other, he tacitly admits an
objection to too literal an interpretation of his
view that the offender must be tackled on a
moral basis. The psychopathologist would
at once point out that for some offenders, at
{east, the moral approach is difficult if not
^possible since there is little or no common
ground in this respect because of their patho-
logically distorted moral outlook. The reviewer
has the impression that Dr. Mannheim would
regard such cases as best dealt with by the
Psychiatrist.

He points out the need for greater co-operation
aQd research between the penologist, the
sociologist, the lawyer, the politician, moral
Philosopher, the educationist, the psycholo-
gy and the psychiatrist. So far as the encyclo-
paedic researches he suggests are concerned, such
c?"?Peration is long overdue in this country.
The book is divided into three sections dealing
resPectively with the economic, social and legal
Problems involved in Penal Reform. His
standpoint is primarily that of the lawyer and
sociologist, and the psychological side is only
nefly discussed though by no means neglected.
The Criminal Justice Bill, unhappily suspended
owing to the war, comes in for considerable
discussion. Inter' alia he welcomes those
sections of the Bill which stimulate the use of
probation and extend the influence of the
Juvenile Court, and points out how the problems
of the latter exemplify the conflict that often
arises between fundamental legal doctrines and
the particular needs of some offenders. There
is a lengthy discussion of the problems and
inconsistencies of Juvenile Court procedure,
and he makes the interesting suggestion that the
age of criminal responsibility should be raised
to 14 years and, moreover, that children under
14 should not be brought before a Juvenile
Court?which is a Criminal Court?as "care
and protection " or " beyond control " cases.

He regards this age as " obviously not sacro-
sanct " and suggests the change might be made
gradually. There is certainly some psychiatric
support for such changes and indeed there never
has been any psychiatric reason why the present
age of 8 years should be adopted. He thinks
that a Chancery Court might be established to
deal with these younger offenders and points
out the great advantage such Courts would
have in not being bound by the rules of Criminal
procedure. Since most of the methods of
treatment at present belonging to the Criminal
Courts would be at the disposal of the Chancery
Court, it seems that the author might in time be
disappointed in his belief that the children
would incur less stigma (and presumably less
mental trauma) than under the present system.
However, the step is certainly one psychiatrists
would approve and it would facilitate their work
for the Juvenile Courts. Dr. Mannheim also
points out the advantages of extending the
jurisdiction of Juvenile Courts to include
offenders up to the age of 21. He points out
many difficulties in this and suggests compromises
and also shows how such a development is in
keeping with the proposals in the Criminal
Justice Bill to keep minors out of prison. Of
course, arbitrary age groups will never be quite
satisfactory in such matters and much of what
is here discussed supports a plea for greater
elasticity in the machinery for dealing with the
younger offenders, but those who call too
urgently for such changes will find here many
reasons why it is so difficult to give effect to
their wishes.

At the end of the book there are some inter-
esting comments on " Future Trends of Penal
Reform ". Psychiatrists will agree with the
suggestion that institutional treatment should
be for periods of at least three months and that
imprisonment should be inadmissible for
persons under 21. Many would also agree with
his suspension of judgment on the desirability
of having psychiatrists as members of the Juvenile
Court.

Many problems are discussed besides those
concerning juveniles and it is not possible to do
the book justice in a short review. A great
deal of information is included and the reader
cannot fail to be impressed by the wisdom of the
author's discussion and the spirit of common-
sense compromise which colours his decisions.
The book is definitely to be recommended and
Dr. Mannheim is to be congratulated on having
produced a very readable survey that is also a
strong argument in favour of Professor Carr-
Saunders' plea for the greater recognition of
Criminology as a science worthy of representa-
tion in University curricula.
D.C.
