Intelligence and Fertility
============================

By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.A., M.B., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.

Burden Mental Research Department, Stoke Park Colony, Bristol
fertility of the Dull

If the population is grouped in various ways, for example, according to occupation, or geographical situation, it is usually found that the different groups are not
Producing at the same rate. This phenomenon is called differential fertility.
n this paper the grouping to be considered is based upon general intelligence, as estimated so successfully on mental test scales such as the Binet. It is well known at present in this country, as in many others, that the dull have, on average, more burden than do the bright. The evidence for this is irrefutable; but most of us,
We have given the matter thought, will probably have reached the same conclusion
simply by observing facts within our personal knowledge. A teacher at a junior
elementary school, drawing children from a well-mixed population, is probably as
well placed as anyone for appreciating the full extent of the present tendency.
General intelligence depends to a considerable extent on heredity. This is
reflected in a certain average degree of resemblance between, for example, parents
and children, or between brothers and sisters. Of course there are exceptions; and
it is the striking exceptions that tend to catch the eye; nevertheless, if considerable
numbers are studied, it will be found that bright parents tend, on average, to have
children of more than average brightness; similarly for the dull. It is certain that the level of general intelligence is also affected by environmental factors, especially,
perhaps, those operating very early in life. But as long as heredity plays a part,
and there is no doubt that that part is an important one, the fact that the dull are
of higher fertility than the bright must inevitably be that a succeeding generation is
inferior on the average in general intelligence to the generation that preceded it.

The Effect of Unequal Fertility
--------------------------------

How great is the magnitude of this effect ? Is it comparatively trivial, or is it
large ? A short while ago Cattell (1937) on the basis of a large scale experiment
estimated the fall in average I.Q. to be about 3 points per generation. It should
be carefully noted, however, that the mental test he was employing was one of his
own and his I.Q.s show a greater range than do the Binet I.Q.s?so familiar to most
people?which can well be accepted as a standard. Allowing for this, i.e. that
a given difference in Cattell I.Q. corresponds to a smaller difference in Binet I.Q.,
the fall per generation in terms of the latter measurement would be between 1^ and
2 points per generation. The studies of my colleagues and myself, carried out on a
group of Bath schoolchildren, also permit an estimate to be made. (Some of these
observations have been published, 1938?the rest are now being analysed.) Our
observations yield a figure in substantial agreement with that of Cattell, indicating
a fall in average Binet I.Q. of a little more than 1^ points per generation.
Is this a serious fall ? On any view other than one of extremely short range it
is a very large and important fall indeed. Its effect, if it were to continue at the
present rate for a considerable period, could only be described as catastrophic. At
first sight, perhaps, a fall in the average figure for the whole population from 100 to
98 ? 5 might not seem great, but its importance may be better realized by considering
what the effect would be on the numbers of highly gifted and very backward persons
in the community. Taking an I.Q. of 130 or more to correspond to a very high intelligence, and one of 70 or less to correspond to pronounced dullness and frank
mental deficiency, this rate of decline continued for only a single generation would
mean that the highly gifted would be fewer by 20 per cent, while the very dull and
mentally defective would be more numerous by more than 20 per cent.

Fertility of Mental Defectives
--------------------------------

It is sometimes thought that it is sufficient to contrast "defectives " or very
dull persons with "normals", conceding that the former show a higher average
fertility. This is a very inadequate picture. Actually, the very brightest of all
produce, on the average, the fewest children; those somewhat less bright somewhat
more children ; those of average intelligence produce the average number of children;
those who are somewhat below the average somewhat more than the average number;
those who are distinctly backward distinctly more than the average number of
children. The relation is essentially linear; the degree of infertility of those of above
average intelligence is proportional to the amount by which they exceed that average;
similarly for the higher fertility of those of below average intelligence. Considering
the extremes, it probably would not be far from the truth to say that the dullest
Persons in the population have an average of about three times as many children as
do the brightest.

One important point should be noted in connection with mental deficiency.
High grade mental defectives corresponding to the legal term " feeble-minded " are
simply extremely dull persons, so dull that care and supervision are often required
for their own sake or for that of others. Their reproductive rate is very high.
Low-grade defectives, however, are different. They tend to crop up in family groups
?f any level of mentality. For the most part they are themselves incapable of
^production; furthermore, a group of their parents will not usually differ greatly
ln average intelligence from the population as a whole; these parents will also display
more or less average fertility. The relation between dullness and high fertility,
therefore, holds until we reach this very lowest level of all, when it no longer obtains.
Idiots and imbeciles, in fact, usually owe their mental state to causes, whether
hereditary or non-hereditary, different from those which produce the dullness of the
Very backward and the feeble-minded.

It will be seen, therefore, that differential fertility in regard to intelligence is not
Slmply a problem related to mental deficiency. It is a tendency common to the
whole population, and any analysis of its causes, or estimation of its effects, or any
attempts actually to alter it, must take into account this circumstance.

Observations on Brothers and Sisters
-------------------------------------

So far we have considered differential fertility only in terms of parent and child:
that the dull have more children than the bright is in fact the accurate way to describe
Vyhat is happening. In practice, however, it is extremely difficult to make observations
Slmultaneously on parents and children. In the first place, while a good mental test
ls a highly efficient instrument of measurement in the case of a child, it is by no means
s? efficient if applied to an adult. A test like the Binet is satisfactory because in any
?rdinary civilized community children are all receiving sufficient education of the
ri?ht kind to enable them to answer the test questions correctly if they have attained
the appropriate level of mental development. But as soon as they grow up differences
1,1 surroundings, occupation and the like make an increasing difference to the result.
^ school teacher will do better than a blacksmith even if as children their test results
Were identical. True underlying, potential mental ability?general intelligence?
ecomes very difficult to measure because of confusion arising from different expense. It sounds paradoxical, but is probably quite true, that the effect on the test
result of a highly efficient education could hardly be detected, if at all, while that
education was taking place, but it would produce an effect, and an increasing one,
if the test were given later, in adult life.

A second, and equally important, difficulty is that of obtaining a sample of
grown-up people which adequately represents the population. Actually, it is almost
impossible. Schoolchildren, however, are available for such psychological observations and with some trouble a good sample can be selected; but any attempt to
test the parents would yield an incomplete and certainly biased group. To measure
differential fertility in regard to intelligence, therefore, by measuring parents and
children, it would be necessary in practice to test the parents as children and then
wait until their own children were available for testing: needless to say a troublesome
and unpractical proposition.

The great majority of studies are carried out quite differently. Children only are
measured and fertility is estimated by the number of sibs (brothers and sisters) that
each child possesses. Such an investigation is comparatively easily carried out, and
although it yields a measure of differential fertility which is somewhat indirectly
calculated, the estimate obtained by means of such studies is perfectly valid. It is
found that the dullest children have most sibs and that as intelligence increases so
does the number of sibs decrease, the very brightest children having fewest sibs of all.
The reason for this is, of course, that dull parents tend to have dull children and many
children, therefore the dull child tends to have many brothers and sisters; conversely
for bright parents and the above-average children. An estimate of the average fall
in I.Q. per generation is quite easily made given one further piece of information: a
measure of the extent to which sibs tend to resemble each other in regard to intelligence.
This measure, too, can easily be made by testing a population of children which
includes many sets of sibs. Given a large group of children of measured intelligence
and with known numbers of sibs, we know, first, that if differential fertility were not
operating the average I.Q. would be the same in two successive generations and would
be equal to that of the group under observation. Next we calculate from the data
how many sibs children of each intelligence class possess, and also what the average
intelligence of each group of sibs will be. Thus we arrive at the average I.Q. after
the lapse of a generation. This is how the figure of one and a half points fall (or a
little more) per generation, mentioned earlier in this paper, was obtained.

A Misinterpretation
---------------------

The fact, however, that investigations are in practice made not on parents and
children, which would theoretically be the direct way, but on brothers and sisters
instead, has led to some misconception. The observer fully conversant with the
whole argument often states his results in terms of his actual observations. That is,
instead of saying that dull parents tend to have more than the average number of
children he often says simply that dull children tend to have more than the average
number of brothers and sisters. This does not matter if he is addressing an audience
familiar with the general facts; but it may mislead those who are not. It may
actually be thought that what he means is that children are bright because they come
from small families.

The possibility of misunderstanding was brought home to me eighteen months
ago when I read a paper on intelligence and family size to the Eugenics Society.
The audience was perfectly familiar with the general thesis and the paper was concerned
not with the fact of differential fertility but with results obtained in a special investigation which threw some light on the nature of the phenomenon. The lecture was
reported at some length in the daily press; and the accounts given were substantially
accurate. Correspondence and further press comment soon made it clear, however,
how much I had contributed to a misunderstanding the possibility of which had
hardly occurred to me previously. It may be useful to consider a few of these
comments, especially as some of them raise points of much practical importance.

The Daily Sketch (October 20th, 1938) printed a column under the heading
' Big Family Slander ", stating that doctors, psychologists, writers, people from the
stage, business men, heads of working-class families?all were indignant at the report
of the Burden Mental Research Trust which suggested that: " Bright children were
often only children; dull children came from large families." Mr. J. B. Priestley,
interviewed, said: " I think a child from a large family is far better equipped for
modern life than an only child. Early in life he has* had to deal with other people,
to face his own problems. As regards intelligence he is quite equal to the only child.
The only child may develop a stronger imagination than a child from a large family
hut his intellect is not usually any higher." Mr. Lupino Lane expressed much the
same views.

My observations dealt, of course, with intelligence test results, and intelligence
m this sense, technically, general intelligence, is not appreciably influenced by such
factors as the number of sibs a child possesses. Mr. Priestley was, of course, quite right
m stressing the fact that there are important differences between the background of the
only child and that of the child from the large family ; but the effects such differences
produce are not measured by a mental test of the Binet type. General intelligence
may be regarded as basic, native, potential capacity. What use the individual makes,
0r is permitted to make, of his endowments is another matter. Two persons of identical IQ. may serve very differently their own interests and those of society.
Nevertheless, it remains true that general intelligence in the technical sense is of basic,
fundamental importance and is much the most important measurement that can be
made on a child. Because of the operations of differential fertility it is inevitable
that at present dull children should tend to come from families of larger average size
than do bright ones; that bright children are more often only children than are dull
ones. But they are, of course, not bright or dull because of the size of their family.
Furthermore, given a certain level of general intelligence there is no doubt that the
child from the large family does enjoy advantages which may well permit him to use
more successfully the native endowments which neither he nor anyone else can
change.

Mr. Sacheverell Sitwell, also interviewed, recalled Napoleon and John Sebastian
Bach. " Read your history," he said, " look about you to-day." To take the
Second point first, Mr. Sitwell could easily convince himself that the position to-day
ls not what he imagines it to be. Even comparatively few enquiries amongst a
well-mixed sample of people could leave no doubt about the magnitude of the present
trend. What so often misleads us, unless we are careful, is the tendency to notice
the striking and exceptional and not to see the far more numerous but not specially
interesting cases. Some people would argue that opposites attract each other; for
example, that tall men tend to marry short women, or that blondes tend to marry
brunettes. Put to the test of actual observation and measurement it is found that
this proposition is not true. On the average, like tends to marry like. The wives
of a thousand tall men are taller on the average than the wives of a thousand short
men. We may, however, be misled simply because we notice the striking exceptions;
a very tall man married to a very short woman impress themselves on the memory;
we do not notice a hundred examples in which there is no particular difference. And
it must always be remembered that all observations of this kind are concerned with
averages. Children of any degree of brightness may come from families of any size,
but the average difference is unmistakable. For example, in the group of Bath schoolchildren the brightest 4 per cent, (on the mental test results) included children from
families of all sizes. But as many as 25 per cent, were only children, while 16 per cent,
had four sibs or more. In the case of the dullest 8 per cent, of children, once again
all family sizes were represented; but only 7 per cent, were only children, and 51 per
cent, had four or more sibs. The correct deduction to draw from the facts is that
it is a great pity that many parents of bright only children did not proceed to contribute large families of children, who would also have been very bright.

Past and Future
-----------------

Mr. Sitwell's first point, however, raises a question of much importance. There
is no reason to suppose that the present inequality in fertility has existed for very long.
His appeal to history would in all probability be upheld. Detailed information is
lacking, but there is little doubt that the present marked differences in fertility date
from the time of the sharp decline in the birth rate which occurred in so many countries
in the latter part of last century. In a word, from that time, when the total fertility
of the population declined, the decline was greatest amongst those of highest intelligence. Actually, it is inconceivable that a fall at the present rate in average general
intelligence could have been going on for very long.

This immediately raises the point that perhaps differential fertility will soon
cease to operate; that fertility will become equalized throughout groups of differing
intelligence, and with the same suddenness as it must be presumed to have attained its
present disparity. This is quite possible, and there is, in fact, evidence pointing to the
conclusion that the rate of decrease of general intelligence is slower now than it was,
say, thirty years ago. For this reason some observers refuse to take too tragic a view.
Nevertheless, we cannot be certain how soon this change will occur and a fall at the
present rate continued for only a century would have very serious results.
Possible Causes

A final word may not be out of place about the possible causes of this kind of
differential fertility, though in this paper I have been chiefly concerned to explain the facts and to do what I can to remove the erroneous impression which the press
account of my lecture apparently helped to foster in the minds of a good many
People.

To say that reduced fertility is due to birth control is no answer at all. In one
sense this may be largely true; but this is merely the method by which the result is
attained; it merely explains how and not why. Questions of prudence, of anxiety
about supporting and educating a large family are undoubtedly factors. Thought
for the future is a characteristic of the more intelligent, who are deterred from undertaking too great a responsibility. Related to this is the question of age at marriage.
Women married at thirty will have, on the average, considerably fewer children than
those married at twenty.

It is not impossible that there is a real biological relation between high intelligence
and low fertility. It may be that the higher the level of general intelligence, the more
numerous are the objects of interest of life, with a consequent weakening sometimes
?f sex and parental instincts.

Another important possibility has been pointed out by Prof. R. A. Fisher. There
!s no doubt that at present, in every walk of life, there is an economic advantage in
being one of a small family. Above all else this permits parents to give a child opportunities superior to those they themselves have enjoyed. Infertility is in fact a social
asset. Now people tend to be promoted in the social scale for many reasons, amongst
which are physical strength, good looks and, above all, intelligence. To these we
must add relative infertility. The effect is to concentrate these qualities in the
same persons. That is, high intelligence and low fertility tend to become associated
together not because of a real underlying biological correlation but because both are
socially advantageous and thus tend to come together.

Any discussion on causes must, however, be speculative. There is no doubt
about the facts and the actual magnitude of the effect can be estimated reasonably
accurately. What is required is further investigation into causes, for there is the
hope that when the true underlying factors are revealed it may be possible to arrest
so unfortunate a tendency by measures under social and economic control.

REFERENCES
-----------
1. CjVITell, R. B., 1937. The Fight for our National Intelligence. P. S. King, London.
2. Raser Roberts, J. A., Norman, R. M. and Griffiths, Ruth, 1938. " Studies on a Child Population. III. Intelligence and Family Size." Ann. Eugen. Camb. 8, pp. 178-215.
