Guide to Mental Health
=======================

:Author: H. D. Jennings
White, M.A., Ph.D. The C. W. Daniel Co.
Ltd. 15s. net.

This is an interesting book written for the
general public and, as this type of book is often
stated to be, particularly for the author's patients.
It represents the point of view of a lay psycho-
therapist and its plan is based on the concept of
the Goal, originally, of course, so far as modern
psychology is concerned a formulation of
Adler's. Nine of the twelve chapters are devoted
to a study of nine different Goals. The oppor-
tunity, however, is taken to expand some of
these chapters partly by way of illustration and
partly to allow the author to express his views
(or the views of others he has adopted) on
matters which obviously interest him and which
he considers relevant. For example, nearly
two-thirds of the Chapter on the Goal of
Supremacy is devoted to an analysis of famous
characters, including Alexander the Great,
Mohammed, Napoleon, and Nietzsche. Mystic-
ism and the Buddhist tradition are dealt with
in the chapter on the Goal of Bliss. And in
the chapters on the Goals of Faith and Salvation
the historical foundations of Christianity are
represented as symbolizing more ancient beliefs
or are explained in terms of astronomical
phenomena. One is irresistibly reminded of
the interpretations placed on the measurements
of the Great Pyramid by those who profess to
find in these not only relics of the past but also
indications for the future.

Those looking for guidance in the problems
of Mental Health will find much of practical
value. But what may perhaps be regarded as a
main criticism is this. Efficient psychological
treatment will tend to be an individual applica-
tion of general principles, individual alike to the
psycho-therapist and to the patient. Every
psycho-therapist will evolve his own method
which he will modify in accordance with the
requirements of each patient. But if this is
admitted a point may be reached when indi-
viduality of technique, opinion and interpreta-
tion or a specific combination of these will be
developed into something in the nature of a new
revelation. This as a working principle may be
extremely effective in the hands of its originator
and its exposition may make interesting reading.
Those indeed who regard psycho-therapy not so
much as a science as an art may place no limits
to their own individual methods. They will not
hesitate to invent new terms and to invest them
with a sectarian significance. Doctors have
(or should have) what lay practitioners lack,
namely, a corporate sense of responsibility to
their profession. Pioneers there must be, and
these may be compelled by circumstances to
plough a lonely furrow. But there comes a
stage in all scientific achievement when the task
becomes one of co-ordination and synthesis
rather than that of emphasizing personal
preferences or adding new names to an already
overburdened terminology. Words such as
Eutrophia and Moralisis may be needed to
indicate a particular philosophy, but as part of
a scheme intended for general acceptance they
are a hindrance rather than a help.

In conclusion, two points may be mentioned
to indicate the author's approach to psycho-
pathology. He stresses the psychogenic origin
of many, apparently physical, ills, but he does not
seem so inclined to consider that pathological
states of a physical nature may prove harmful
to mental health. Also he appears to regard all
mental illness as unitary in the sense that it has
a single underlying cause. Two quotations will
illustrate this: "Behind every abnormal goal,
therefore, we seek for the complementary fear
which is the source of the abnormality." And
again, " These same fears still further isolated
and exaggerated underlie the psychotic goals
in which the individual prefers death to the
situation which is feared. From this point of
view suicide is the central or limiting symptom
of psychosis and an extreme phobia the central
cause.'' In other words, Neurosis and Psychosis
are different stages in the same process.
H.C.S.
