Mental Nursing as a Career
=============================

:Author: Irene Y. Liddell

The Editorial Board does not hold itself responsible for the opinions of contributors
Vol. I. No. 2
APRIL 1940
Price lOd. (1/- Post Free)

Staff Nurse, Claybury Mental Hospital ; winner " Lord" Memorial Essay
Prize, 1940

The metamorphosis of public opinion is notoriously slow. Although the last
two or three decades must have done much to disabuse the public mind of its misconceptions with regard to mental hospitals, there is still some distaste felt by parents at
the suggestion that mental nursing might be a suitable career for their daughters.
Before an attempt is made to overcome this, the conditions and opportunities which
the mental nursing service offers to-day will be outlined.

Conditions of Mental Nursing
-------------------------------

Eighteen is the earliest age at which a girl may enter a mental hospital for training.
Her commencing salary, together with various emoluments?and with consideration
of the fact that she is taking a training?compares very favourably with other branches
?f nursing and other types of work. It is not expected that the probationer shall
have matriculated or possess the school leaving certificate, as it is in many general
hospitals, but such attainments are appreciated and the standard of education required
has for a long time been on the up-grade.

Efforts are made, to-day, to allow the young probationer to become acclimatized
to her work in wards allotted to convalescent patients, as it is probable that her future
attitude to her work will be largely influenced by the impressions received in the early
Part of her training. In past times, many a girl must have been frightened away
^together by being plunged too suddenly into contact with patients whose mental
Alness was at the acute stage. It is encouraging to know that this eventuality is now
foreseen and as far as possible prevented.

Training of Mental Nurses
--------------------------

The course of training is usually for three years and during that time the nurse
attends several series of lectures which help her to understand and to recognize various
types of mental illness. The earliest of these will deal with elementary physiology,
with hygiene, with first aid and with the rudiments of practical nursing. She will
'earn during these first few months how to make a bed, take a temperature, do a simple
dressing, how to recognize instruments and appliances in everyday use, and what
special precautions must be observed in relation to her patients. Later she will be
given a further course of lectures which will prepare her for the preliminary part of the
examination held for mental nurses by the Royal Medico-Psychological Association.
The main subjects of this are physiology and practical nursing. After an interval,
the nurse proceeds to the lectures for the final part of the R.M.P.A. certificate. These,
while embracing the subjects already mentioned, include also psychology, both normal
and abnormal. If she satisfies the examiners she will, when she has completed the
stipulated period, be trained and qualified to hold a more responsible position.
Should she fail at either examination she will by no means have to abandon her
training as opportunities are given to sit more than once if necessary.

As an alternative to these examinations there are those held under the auspices
of the General Nursing Council which admit the nurse to the State register. Many
nurses do sit for both the R.M.P.A. and the State examinations, and the nurse who
proposes to follow her mental by general training is well advised to do so, as the
preliminary part of the State examination is the same for various branches of nursing.
The nurse who goes on to general training will find the grounding she has received
in the mental hospital an enormous help, and many general training schools are
willing to shorten the course for the nurse who has been trained in a mental hospital.
To the doubly trained nurse, lucrative positions of an administrative nature are open
in the mental hospitals, but should she prefer to remain in general work she will find
that the time spent in mental training will by no means be wasted as she will have
acquired from it a valuable insight into human nature.

Recreation in the Mental Hospital
----------------------------------

That, roughly, is how the training of the nurse proceeds as regards her work.
The work is, of course, not the only aspect of life in a mental hospital. There is the
social side. Some of the finest and most modern nurses' homes are attached to mental
hospitals and these have excellent dining and recreational rooms. It is the practice
for dances, whist-drives and social evenings to be held and to some of these functions
the nurse may invite her own friends. There are facilities for tennis, hockey and
badminton in nearly all the hospitals, and, in some, for golf and swimming as well.
The girl who enjoys sport will find an excellent outlet here as inter-hospital events are
continually being arranged and the competition is keen.

For the more studious type of girl there is a library and the quiet of her own room
in which to read and study when she wishes it. The majority of mental hospitals
work a ninety-six hour fortnight and this allows considerable time for relaxation and
the development of one's own pursuits. There is little trace in the mental hospital
of to-day of the rigorous "military " discipline for which some of the general hospitals
were notorious; the importance of adhering to rule is no less in evidence here than
elsewhere, but generally speaking the rules do make an appeal to common sense and
are not petty and irksome. Mental nurses are protected by their own Union which
is continually on the look-out for opportunities to improve the conditions of the
service and which also provides legal representation should it ever be required. The
nurse who makes mental work a career can look forward to adequate provision in
her old age as she will pay contributions to a superannuation fund which ensures her
a pension.

Opportunities for the Mental Nurse
-----------------------------------

Certain courses are open to the nurse on the completion of her training: she may
decide to remain in hospital, where she will after a time occupy a more responsible
position and in some hospitals may be allowed to become non-resident: she may
decide to branch out into private nursing, in which case she must bear in mind that
her working hours will be longer and may be irregular, and also that mental nursing
in a private home, if it has some advantages, has also peculiar difficulties?the
responsibility is greater and there is not the moral support of superior officers to rely
upon. If the nurse takes her general training and returns to mental work with, say,
also her fever and midwifery certificates, the highest positions are open to her, providing she has the personal qualities necessary to hold them.

The Progress of Mental Treatment
---------------------------------

In this discussion so far, the nurse has been referred to as " she " ; it must be
pointed out that in a mental hospital the same training and opportunities are
?pen to young men. It is quite probable that on reading the foregoing a person
seriously contemplating mental nursing as a career?not as a stop-gap?would feel
that whilst having learned something of the conditions of the service, he or she still
knew nothing about the work as a whole. This, it seems, can best be supplied by
some account of the history of mental nursing, its aims and ideals, its hopes and its
failures. It must be fairly generally recognized that the mental hospital of to-day is
a very different place from the " asylum " of half a century back. Nevertheless, it
ls apparent that certain sections of the lay mind are not aware of how great the
difference is. Insanity, its causes and symptoms must, they would argue, always be
much the same. Let us consider three factors which may help to elucidate the changed
conditions of to-day.

The first of these is the fact that in the old days the type of patient herded into
the asylums was more or less irrecoverable. Many thousands of people who spend
a limited time in a mental hospital to-day?many voluntarily?would never have been
Placed under care fifty years ago. The standard of intelligence amongst the masses
Was lower and the demands of life much less urgent, and somehow or another these
People would have " weathered the storm", or if they did eventually find their way
into the asylums, it would certainly not have been in the early stages of their mental
illness as is the case to-day.

The second factor is the changed times in which we live. The very speed of life
to-day, the stresses peculiar to a mechanized age, not to mention numerous other
social and economic causes with such effects as the increasing horror and devastation
war, have bred a type of neurosis of their own. It has, too, become recognized by
the medical profession that the " functional " disturbances of many patients, whose
symptoms " toe the line " as far as the recognized idea of some disease is concerned,
are nevertheless of neurotic origin and the fundamental cause of the trouble is
frequently revealed as long established anxiety neurosis and phobias. This growing
feeling of the very close interaction between mental and physical states tends to bring
under the care of the mental hospitals a type of patient whom our grandparents would
have hesitated to pronounce insane or even neurotic. It is not desired to give the
impression that such persons need be certified; large numbers are treated as voluntary
patients in our hospitals every year and many of these are recruited from the class
under discussion. It obviously makes a great deal of difference, from the nursing
point of view, that there is a so much greater percentage of border-line recoverable
cases. It is true that many mental hospital patients are not regarded as recoverable,
but can we safely say that of any case in this age of scientific progress ?

That brings us to the third factor to be considered in accounting for the change
in our hospitals. During the past forty to fifty years?almost simultaneously if one
can for a moment view time in relation to the development of the race and not the
individual?a group of thinkers sprang up in Europe and America and began a rather
belated study of the human mind. True, such study was far from new; it had been a
vague form in the province of philosophy and metaphysics, but it was new in its
application and intention. The infant sciences, psychology and psychopathology,
became an adjunct of medicine and many and varied schools of thought arose.

Anyone engaged in mental nursing would be well repaid to learn something of the
work of the men who formed the nuclei of these schools, Charcot, Miiller, Freud,
Jung, Adler, Bergson and McDougall, not to mention the fascinating experiments of
Pavlov. These and many others, both by themselves and by their conflict with each
other, gave birth to knowledge, the effects of which are evident in mental nursing
to-day. Not only should this study be absorbing because of the relation it bears to
the work of every day, but because it helps one better to understand the aims of the
research which is going on from day to day, and above all because it lifts the mental
nurse out of the category of a mere wage-earner and makes her feel part of a great
campaign to rid the world of a scourge. Perhaps the part is a small one, but viewed
from this standpoint mental nursing does offer to the aspirant something vital,
something more than the material opportunities outlined in the earlier part of this
discussion. It offers an absorbing interest; it is a refining process in the development
of character, for unusual patience and forbearance must emerge in the nurse for whom
mental nursing is a vocation. It offers, too, opportunities for service to the helpless
and afflicted and the joy of seeing them restored ; these are real values, quite as
real if not quite as obvious as monetary gains.

The Ideal Mental Nurse
------------------------

As regards the type of person best suited to the work, as a rather general rule the
cool, level-headed, not over sensitive person is best. But a mental nurse should not
be insensitive and unimaginative; in fact, the sensitive type of person, provided with
a good fund of intelligence, reacts better to the work and will not find it an undue
strain. Mental nursing ought to be regarded as a highly skilled profession, for what
can need more delicate attention than an unbalanced mind ? The best people are
needed and one feels that when the work is better understood it will attract these
people, for there is in it a subtle and difficult art, which would appeal to the welldeveloped mind. No doubt as the number of chronic cases decreases and the number
which can be treated successfully increases, there will be a response to the work from a
type of person which might surprise us now, could we foresee it.

Mental nursing has much before it and from day to day important strides are
being made; as witness the new treatments to which schizophrenia, most intractable
of insanities, is beginning to yield. The nurse has her part in the administration of
these and other new treatments and the results are most encouraging. A feature of
some of the new methods is the increased pliability of the patient's mind which is
induced, and the nurse, because of her continual contact with her patients, has
fine opportunities for helping them to reach and maintain the improved level
attained.

It is understandable that a person in whose mind the old misconceptions of mental
nursing lingered might hesitate before adopting it as a career. It is hoped that this
discussion will have helped to dispel the idea of a dark and gloomy haunt with little
interest except ministrations to the hopeless, and will have revealed an interesting and
varied career with great opportunities for the present and even greater opportunities
in the future.

