Emergency Hostels for Difficult Children
=========================================

By EVELYN FOX, C.B.E.
MENTAL HEALTH
The Editorial Board does not hold itself responsible for the opinions of contributors
Vol. I. No. 4 OCTOBER 1940 Price lOd. (1/- Post Free)

In the original evacuation scheme, drawn up to meet a contingency that was
still theoretical and hopefully remote, attention was largely concentrated on the
Process of getting children out of London and other vulnerable areas and on the task
?f ensuring that a billet of some kind was available for every child who needed it.
On the whole, the schemes worked amazingly well and there was no lack of co-opera-
tion on the part of householders who willingly received into their homes, for an
indefinite period, unknown children accustomed for the most part to an entirely
different environment.
But there was one aspect of the problem to which sufficient attention was not
?iven by those in authority and the nature and extent of which it has taken time to
reveal. In making its evacuation plans, it is true the Ministry of Health realized
that there would be blind children, deaf children, crippled children and mentally
defective children for whom special provision would be needed, and the Board of
Education in its Circular 1469 issued in May 1939, referred to a small proportion
?f children who would not be acceptable in ordinary billets on account of " behaviour
difficulties " and who would need accommodation of hostel type. Experience,
however, quickly showed that the number of such children was far greater than was
Anticipated and that the upheaval involved in being sent away from a familiar home
to live with strangers precipitated in many cases trouble of a serious nature. More-
?Ver, the discovery of these children was left to chance, for no provision had been
made in the official plans for the visiting of the schools to be evacuated and for the
Ascertaining of cases likely to present special difficulties. Had this been arranged,
during the twelve months September 1938-9, much unnecessary suffering both to
the children and hostesses could have been avoided.
In October 1939, in its Circular 1882, the Ministry of Health drew attention to
the Board of Education's suggestions as to hostels for " problem children, but it
Was not until February 1940 that the subject of Hostels was fully dealt with in an
official communication (Evac. Memo. 8) and the various types of children for whom
they were required enumerated in detail. From its formation in January 1939, the
Cental Health Emergency Committee has been alive to the need for recognizing the
Urgency of making provision for children who could not be fitted into ordinary
blllets, and in September 1939 it instituted a system of loaning Mental Health workers
98
MENTAL HEALTH
to receiving areas for the purpose of helping to deal with evacuation problems of
the kind.
From every area to which these workers were sent, overwhelming evidence was
received as to the peculiar needs of these " difficult " children. Where Billeting
Officers were people of understanding and where the help of trained social workers
was available, it was found that much could be done by discussion and advice to
clear up problems which were disturbing the child or his foster-parent, or by transfer
to a more appropriate type of billet to help a child whose disordered behaviour had
its roots in unhappiness and insecurity. Nevertheless, it was proved beyond doubt
that when everything possible along these lines had been done, there still remained
a residue of children unable to adjust to any billet, however carefully chosen, without
a preliminary period of skilled observation and understanding treatment, and that
for this group, provision for Hostel placement was essential.
Billeting Authorities had early discovered that Hostels of some sort were
going to be necessary for children who were " misfits " through minor illnesses or
dirty habits, as well as through temperamental difficulties, and that there were others
for whom emergency provision must be made either because foster-parents could no
longer put up with them or because illness or domestic crisis in the household
necessitated their removal. By the spring of this year such Hostels or " sick bays "
had sprung up in every Civil Defence Region under the auspices of Billeting Com-
mittees, or voluntary organizations with little understanding of the needs of the
various and often very different groups for which they catered. Such a Hostel often
served only a small area, and any kind of classification or specialization was therefore
impossible. To add to the difficulties, the problem of staffing was acute, for, although
the Ministry of Health was prepared to meet administrative expenses, the responsibility
of the actual running of the Hostel devolved entirely on the local Committee. Many
workers with knowledge and experience of difficult children were discovered by
the Mental Health Emergency Committee by means of its special Register, but the
demand nevertheless continued to exceed the supply.
Confronted by these acute problems, the Committee, in November 1939,
suggested to the Ministry of Health that a useful purpose could be served if a Survey
of existing Hostels were instituted, and in May 1940 it was asked by a responsible
authority, through the Child Guidance Council, to conduct a Survey in one region.
This Survey was accordingly carried out by an Educational Psychologist with
special experience of the problems involved, and her report on the twenty-two Hostels
visited was recently before the Committee.
The data collected, not only through the Survey and by Mental Health workers
all over the country but from various other sources of information also, indicate that
the main problems connected with the Hostels as at present constituted are as
follows:
(1) Classification of Hostels.
(2) Selection of Children.
(3) Provision of Skilled Advice.
(4) Staffing and Training of Workers.
MENTAL HEALTH 99
(1) Classification
At present, owing to the mushroom growth of the majority of the Hostels, no
systematic attempt is made at classification. Practically all of them contain a mixed
group of children sent there for various and diverse reasons?e.g. for minor physical
ailments, for delinquency, for enuresis, for mental defect or for some deep-seated
Psychological disturbance needing prolonged treatment. Some local Billeting
Officers frankly regard the Hostels as " dumping grounds " for any children present-
lr*g any sort of difficulty, transient or chronic, mild or severe; others send to them
children for no other reason than that the parents would take them home if they were
left with an ordinary foster-mother. Children suffering from some purely temporary
emotional disturbance, who should be drafted back to billets after a short period of
observation, continue to remain in the Hostel indefinitely, and generally speaking
there is no clear concept in the mind of those responsible as to what exact need the
Provision is intended to meet. This failure to classify the children sent to any one
Hostel also intensifies the staffing difficulty, for while a Warden may be excellently
adapted to deal with one special type of child, he or she may fail entirely in handling
a problem of quite another type.
To meet this difficulty, it has been suggested* that the Hostels should be
established on a regional basis and that they should be of the following types:
(a) Sick bays for children suffering from minor physical complaints and disorders.
(b) Clearing and Observation Homes where difficult children can be under observation
for a period. In connection with these, it is recommended:?
(i) That a person with special training in psychological methods should
examine the children, and that the time of stay should be limited.
(ii) That the Warden in charge should be able to give reliable observation
and that the Home should therefore be adequately staffed.
(Note.?This Home could also accommodate children temporarily
out of billets because of illness or absence of the householder.)
(c) Homes for children suffering from temporary emotional disturbances, e.g.
spasmodic enuresis, behaviour difficulties due to mishandling, wrong
environment, etc.
(d) Homes for children with persistent psychological difficulties?persistent enuresis,
stealing, truanting, etc., also those of backward intelligence and educational
retardation from causes other than lack of intelligence.
Note.?The Homes under (c) and (d) should, when at all possible, be placed in
an area where psychiatric advice is available, at any rate for the more serious cases.
(2) Selection of Children
The usual procedure for selecting children for admission to a local Hostel
ls that a complaint against a child is made by a householder either to a Medical
Officer or a Billeting Officer. This is then investigated (with varying thoroughness)
and brought before the authority responsible for the Hostel. Whether or not the
* This suggestion and others indicated in our article are, at the time of writing, under
c?nsideration by the Mental Health Emergency Committee.?Ed.
100
MENTAL HEALTH
child is admitted thereafter rests frequently on the opinion of one person only, and
there is no guarantee that that person has any special understanding of the implications
of psychological disturbance.
Any systematic classification of Hostels such as is suggested above, makes it of
primary importance that a more enlightened method of selection and disposal of
children should take the place of the present haphazard procedure, and so far as
possible it is suggested that it should be placed in the hands of a worker with special
training and experience, e.g. a Psychiatric Social Worker or trained Mental Health
Worker or an Educational Psychologist working under a Psychiatrist or the Medical
Officer supervising the Hostel or group of Hostels (if such exist) and in co-operation
with all the Billeting Officers concerned. Such team work would go far to ensure
that the right choice of Hostel is made, and that, moreover, a child is not accepted
for any Hostel if his need can equally well be met by a change of billet.
(3) Provision of Skilled Advice
In only a few Hostels do there appear to be any facilities for skilled psychological
or psychiatric treatment nor are the services of a psychiatric social worker
usually available. That such assistance should be forthcoming is considered
to be of the utmost importance, and wherever possible the services of a consulting
psychiatrist, through a local Child Guidance Clinic or at the Children's Department
of a Clinic for Mental Treatment should be available. If such facilities are quite
unobtainable, it is suggested that Wardens should at least have the right to call in
the help of a specially trained Social Worker in any case of special difficulty. She
should also be used for the purpose of re-billeting, in co-operation with the Billeting
Officer, children who are considered to have made a satisfactory adjustment as the
result of their treatment in the Hostel, and her close and constant touch with the
Hostel should ensure that no child drifts on there simply because it is no one's concern
to see that he is discharged. This worker should, if possible, be employed by the
Local Authority in whose area the Hostel is situated?a grant for the purpose can
now be obtained from the Ministry of Health and many appointments of the kind
have been made?but if for any reason this is not possible, it is suggested that there
should be such a worker for each Civil Defence Region under the Regional Medical
Officer of the Ministry of Health and that an essential part of her duty should be
the work described above in connection with any Hostels in the area.
It should be pointed out, however, that as the number of cases, both adults
and children, needing social help because of mental disturbance, is at present so
great and ever-increasing with the evacuation of the civilian population from danger
zones, she should be used only for this special work and not employed also in social
work of a more general nature.
A further consideration in regard to the provision of skilled advice for Hostel
staffs, is that which concerns the needs of children who are mentally dull, educationally
retarded for some other reason, or actually mentally defective. In every Hostel
such children are to be found, and they attend the local Elementary School where
MENTAL HEALTH
101
too often there is no provision for " C " children as a group or for individual
remedial teaching. In view of the scarcity of such provision in the country as a
whole even in normal times, and of the present general educational disruption,
facilities of the kind can hardly be expected, but their absence tends to add very
considerably to a Warden's difficulties in helping this particular group of children.
To find a practicable solution of the problem is not easy, but it might perhaps lie
along the lines of arranging for teachers in a reception area, courses of lectures by
an Educational Psychologist on methods of dealing with the dull and backward.
Such courses can be given through the Mental Health Emergency Committee by
the Educational Psychologists on the staff of the Central Association for Mental
Welfare.
(4) Staffing, and Training of Workers
Essential as it is that Hostel Wardens should be people specially suited for this
difficult work, it may not be desirable at present to prescribe any rigid rules as
to qualifications or attainments, for it has been found that the types of workers
at present employed are many and diverse. Some of them have had previous
experience with " problem " children, some have a knowledge of nursing, but more
often they are people whose only qualification is " commonsense " experience in
catering and domestic management. Occasionally a Committee is lucky enough to
find someone with a natural gift for handling children, though without any academic
qualifications, but such persons are rare. In view of this general lack of adequate
training and experience the absence of facilities by means of which Wardens can
obtain expert advice on handling cases of special difficulty (referred to above) is all
the more deplorable, particularly when?to their credit?most of them are only too
aware of their limitations and only too anxious to receive such advice. To this
difficulty there is added the all too frequent handicap due to the fact that no informa-
tion as to a child's past history and special difficulty is supplied on admission, and
the Warden is left to experiment blindly until he hits on the best method of approach.
Nevertheless, in spite of all these adverse factors it is found that Wardens
everywhere, with too often no special experience or training and their hands unneces-
sarily tied, are carrying on their difficult task with the utmost devotion and the highest
tribute is due to them for the great measure of success they have achieved.
In reviewing the necessity for the careful selection of Hostel Wardens, the
Rental Health Emergency Committee has found itself confronted with the need for
Jnstituting some specialized course of training for suitable candidates, possessing
the right type of personality and with an innate understanding of children's difficulties
(qualities which are regarded as of greater significance than any academic qualifica-
tions). A sum of money has been set aside by the Child Guidance Council for this
Purpose from a Treasury Grant allocated to it, and a three months' Course of
Training is now being instituted for older women chosen for their innate suitability
to be given in selected Children's Homes. No fee will be charged, and candidates
desiring to make application for it are being invited to send particulars of their
102
MENTAL HEALTH
previous experience, age, etc., to the Registrar, 24 Buckingham Palace Road,
S.W.l.
So impressed is the Committee with the urgent need of arriving at a better
understanding of the principles which should be observed in connection with the
selection of children for Hostels, their management, staffing, etc., that it is prepared
to lend free of charge to a limited number of Regional Medical Officers of the Ministry
of Health, workers with special experience of the subject, to carry out a Survey of
existing Hostels in areas under their jurisdiction. For this service it is hoped that
early application will be made.
The Mental Health Emergency Committee has envisaged the future and not only
the present compelling need. For?despite the haste with which they have been set up
and their consequent shortcomings and inadequacies, especially the frequent lack of
fully equipped psychiatric services?experience of these Homes for Difficult Children
has demonstrated beyond all shadow of doubt that they have a permanent part to
play in the world after the war. Every Local Education Authority and every Child
Guidance Clinic is, under completely normal conditions, frequently called upon to deal
with children whose emotional tangles can only be satisfactorily sorted out in a speci-
ally organized environment and to whom "wholeness of mind" can only be brought
if they are removed for a time from the disturbing conditions under which they are
living. Too often it has been found impossible to provide what is so urgently needed.
In these Emergency Homes, though they have frequently had to work under insuper-
able difficulties, unhappy children have found happiness, insecure children have been
made to feel secure, frustrated children have been released and children ostracized
because of bad habits making them a burden too intolerable for the ordinary house-
holder to accept, have been restored to the company of the socially adapted. It is
surely unthinkable that this wartime experiment should be brought to an end when
the special circumstances which evoked it are ended, and the Committee is concerned
to urge that no effort should be spared to ensure that the Homes should not only be
more systematically organized as a war emergency measure but that they should be
modelled on a pattern which can readily be fitted into the machinery of a community
at peace.
Note.?The Mental Health Emergency Committee referred to above consists of representatives
of the Central Association for Mental Welfare, the Child Guidance Council, the National Council
for Mental Hygiene, the Association of Mental Health Workers and the Association of Psychiatric
Social Workers. Its chairman is Mrs. Montagu Norman. A leaflet describing its work can be
obtained from the Hon. Secretary, 24 Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.l.
