Retarded Sixth Grade Pupils
============================

By Anna Johnson,
Wkittier School (for Retarded Children), Denver, Colorado.
In speaking of these retarded children who have come under my
supervision this year, I desire to say that, with the -exception of two
pupils, I consider them all normal, physically.
These two I have mentioned as exceptions have failed to reach
the required minimum of efficiency which would have enabled them
to continue in the regular grades, not because they are abnormal
mentally, but because of illness that has kept them out of school;
also they are both handicapped through defective hearing. All the
others who have failed to stand the test of the course of study have
done so for various reasons other than physical ones.
The reasons, so far as I can ascertain, are truancy, slow mental
development, excessive cigarette smoking, lack of application to
their school work, in some cases vicious dispositions which have made
them difficult cases to discipline, and the moving about of the family
from place to place. About one-fourth of them are retarded because
of mental inability to grasp the main subjects prescribed in the school
curriculum, although even they are bright along some lines. The
other retarded ones are both physiologically and psychologically
normal.
I have had this year an average number of twenty-three pupils
belonging; an average daily attendance of about 96 per cent. The
average age of these children on entering last September was fifteen
years. The grade entered was the sixth grade June class. At the
end of this school year one pupil will have completed three grades,
three pupils two and one-half grades, five two grades, six one and one-
half grades, and six one grade.
So far as mental activities go I have found the truant children
very bright. They all have had a wide experience outside of school
subjects, and they have proved themselves capable of assimilating
their experiences and adjusting them to their studies, especially
in geography, history, composition and reading.
Among the several cases of retardation that come under truancy
and irregular attendance, I wish to state that there has been only
one case of truancy in my room this year, and that was caused by
discordant home conditions rather than any dislike for school on the
* A report to the Superintendent of Schools, Denver, Col., June; 1913.
(161)
162 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
part of the pupil. However he was absent only two days and has
not repeated the act. These truant children have been the most
regular in attendance, many of them scarcely missing a single day
during the school year. They all come under the list of those that
have completed more than one year's work.
There were a few special cases of truancy beginning with a
pupil who finished the work of three grades. On entering school
last September his age was 15 years and 6 months. This pupil had
been under the discipline of the Juvenile Court for the past two years.
On account of his truancy and the periodical migration of the family
he had spent from six weeks to three months in school each year
from the time he was eight years old, this being his age on entering
the first grade. When he entered the Retarded School he came with
a certificate for the February fourth grade. Through error in assign-
ment he was placed in the sixth grade. When the error was discov-
ered I had a talk with the boy about it, assuring him that he could
do the work of the grade if he would come every day and do the very
best he could. This he promised to do, and he kept his word. From
the first day of school until the second week of February, when the
family moved out into the country, he had been absent only three
days, and those on account of illness. As far as discipline is con-
cerned the boy seemed almost hopeless. He had the most vicious
temper I have ever seen; he really was to be feared at times. He
did not sit, stand, walk, or talk like any other pupil in the room,
always assuming a defiant manner; and as for obedience, it was simply
a negative quantity so far as he was concerned. However, he found
no blind obedience exacted of him, no punishments planned for him;
and he learned that fallibility was not considered a crime.
I soon discovered that this boy had the innate sagacity to respond
to the joyous spontaneous expressions of the class; hence, in a short
time he settled down to the right attitude toward his school work.
I found that his truant wandering days had been profitably spent
in accumulating knowledge, which he soon worked over into a very
fine finished product for the school-room. He had more practical
knowledge than any child I ever saw. He never read a lesson more
than once, and could make the brightest recitation in the room. He
was an omnivorous reader, and read every book I could find for him,
besides reading extensively from the Public Library. The only
thing he had to work hard for was his arithmetic. Sometimes he
worked three hours a day on it. When he left for the country he
was beginning eighth grade work. A few days ago I saw his mother
who told me that he had passed the eighth grade county examination,
and hoped to enter high school next fall.
RETARDED SIXTH GRADE PUPILS. 163
In another case of professional truancy the boy has completely
reformed. This boy had spent two years in every grade beginning
with the third grade. He would stay out of school weeks at a time,
and when in school would not apply himself to any single subject.
When he entered the Retarded School in the sixth grade he could not
have done creditable work in a regular fourth grade. He did not seem
to have a liking for anything in the line of school activities. He had
never read a book in his life outside of the school reader; it was
positively painful to listen to his reading. While reading a variety
of stories to the children, I found that he would listen most attentively
to myths, therefore I seized the opportunity and supplied him with
that class of literature until he had mastered the mechanical ability
to read and incidentally acquired a love for it. The result was that
by December he was reading one book a week from the school library.
He now reads well and it is a pleasure to listen to him. All his other
subjects have improved in proportion. At the end of the year he
will have finished the work of one and one-half grades. Best of all,
he has developed into a strong, trustworthy, self-reliant boy. During
the whole year he has been absent three days, and those on account
of illness.
There has also been marked improvement towards reform in
two cases of excessive cigarette smoking. These two boys at the
beginning of the year smoked from five to fifteen cigarettes a day.
They insisted upon leaving the room two and three times during the
morning session, and this I found was for the purpose of smoking.
After assuring them that there was no punishment in store for them,
and that I would not tell, they told me what they were doing, also
showed me their supply of cigarettes. They gradually stopped their
smoking within the vicinity of the school. If there is any smoking
done now by these boys it is done before and after school; but I have
every reason to believe that very little of it is done, judging from their
changed physical appearance. In the fall when they entered school
they were two nervous anemic-looking boys, with a faculty for nothing
but restlessness. Now they are a pair of healthy-looking youngsters
who are not afraid to look you in the eye and tell you how they have
cut down their cigarette ration. They are also good workers and have
made great progress in their studies.
I wish to speak of two special cases in which too much discipline
or the lack of discipline has been the chief cause of retardation.
The first case is that of a boy whose age was sixteen years when he
entered school last September. As near as I can find out he was about
seven years old when he first went to school. He had been nine years
reaching the sixth grade. All along the line he had been a source of
164 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
trouble, never adjusting himself to anything but mischief. His
attendance at school has always been regular, his health perfect, and
he is not mentally deficient. His whole being seemed full of negative
elements; he seemed to glory in doing the thing one did not wish
him to do. He had had so many punishments during his brief span
of life that he had lost all sense of proportion as to right and wrong.
After studying him for a few days I had a long talk with him. I
told him that thenceforth he must take care of himself; that I did not
intend to rebuke or condemn him, for he was to be responsible for
his own conduct as well as for the conduct of the room. He gradually
learned to control himself. He found that his feelings were always
considered, hence he became sensitive to my wishes that he should
do right. He has a great capacity for responding to kindness and loves
to see people happy. I have found an infinite amount of goodness in
this boy, and have myself learned many moral lessons from him.
His best study is arithmetic. This study we boomed from the begin-
ning and gradually worked the others in. At the end of the year
he will have completed two grades. He is a great reader, and has
done research work for his class, both in history and geography.
His manual training has improved in proportion to his other school
work. This boy has reached such a degree of self-control that I am
sure he will fit into the many-sided activities of school and life.
The other case of difficult discipline is that of a boy who last
year was under the supervision of the Juvenile Court for the simple
reason that he would not behave in school. He had to report on his
conduct every week. The only thing that kept him within the bounds
of corrigibility was fear of the Detention Home and the Reform
School. He seemed so destitute of fine feelings for one so young that
he made a positively gruesome impression. The first month of school
he did nothing so far as prescribed school work was concerned, but
he did errands for me, helped me pass supplies, and assisted in keep-
ing the school room clean. This gave him a great deal of pleasure
and established confidential relations among all concerned. He was
not asked to submit to any stringent rules. He had many directions
given him, some corrections, but no punishments. I think he missed
the punishments and moral lectures that he had been accustomed to,
but when they were not forthcoming the only thing for him to do
was to fall in line and join in the same activities with which the others
of the class were occupied. This he did. He was tired of standing
out as a distinct type, and while he has not made great strides
intellectually he has developed a great deal of self-expression along
the right lines.
From the time he first entered school until this year he had spent
RETARDED SIXTH GRADE PUPILS. 165
two years in each grade, with the exception of the second grade.
This year he will finish creditably one grade, and I am sure that the
high degree of self-respect which he has attained will keep him from
dropping back into his apparently outgrown habits.
In behalf of the other retarded children whom I have had in
my room this year, I want to say that there has not been a single
failure among them, either in scholarship or conduct. There has
been a marked and strong improvement in all of them, especially
along the lines of conduct, and after all that is one of the most avail-
able tests of education.
