Statistics of Population?A Criticism
=====================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.
Department of Commerce and Labor, Bureau of the Census
Washington, D. C., January 23, 1913
To the Editor of The Psychological Clinic:
In regard to the errors in the New York statistics1 alleged to have been derived
from the Census,?after considerable difficulty I think I have gotten to the root
of the matter.
What I could not explain very satisfactorily to my own mind was the state-
ment that in 1900 there were so few persons of mixed parentage and in 1910 more
than half a million. The fact is that two different definitions of parentage are
used. In 1910 the compiler of the table has accredited to any given country, as
for instance Ireland, only those persons both of whose parents were born in
Ireland. In 1900 he has accredited to Ireland
1. Persons with both parents born in Ireland.
2. Persons with one parent born in Ireland.
3. Persons with Irish mothers, but with a father of some other
foreign nationality.
The two figures are therefore not comparable, and the conclusions which he draws
as to the tremendous loss in population of Irish parentage are altogether unjus-
tified. There was some loss between 1900 and 1910, but according to the available
figures for 1910 it was somewhere about 30,000 persons instead of 165,000 as stated
in the table. I have run down the persons of Irish parentage so far as the material
is accessible for the two censuses, and it is given in the following table:
1 See "Age and Progress in a New York City School" by William E. Grady in TnE Pstcho-
logical Clinic, Vol. vi., no. 8, January 15, 1913.
NEWS AND COMMENT 27
Irish Parentage.
1910 1900
1. Both parents born in Ireland  562,466 595,267
2. One parent born in Ireland the other in the
United States  113,954 97,556
Total land 2  676,420 692,823
3. Mother Irish, father of other foreign nationality  32,688
Total 1, 2 and 3  725,511
My figures for 1900 and for 1910 are not exactly identical with those of the table.
The 1910 figures given in the printed table were probably derived from some
preliminary figures. Why the figures for 1900 should not correspond I do not
know, but there is a difference of only about 2000 in the result. I have verified
the figures which I took from the population volume of 1900.
These figures for Ireland show that a properly constructed table would prob-
ably show less change than the figures printed in the Clinic, but I presume that
they would not in any very high degree alter the main results of the table. I
think it is rather unfortunate that errors of this kind should creep into the Clinic.
With kind regards,
Yours very truly,
(Signed) Roland P. Falkner.
Volunteer Co-operation with Public Schools.
It is hard for the average citizen to realize that in expenditures alone the
public schools represent one-third of the transactions of the municipality; that
of every dollar of taxes he pays, one-third goes to the building of school houses
and the payment of teachers' salaries. Besides this, the human element in the
schools is worth more than all the waterworks, gas plants or streets that the
municipality could buy. Our own children are the raw material which we pour
into our great educational factories, and our employees and co-workers are the
product. On the character and efficiency of this product depends the real welfare
of any city.
It is a popular fallacy that Americans are interested in education, that the
voters are concerned about the public schools and give time and money for their
betterment. When a crisis faces the school system, citizens join in enthusiastic
support of a faction or more often in destructive criticism, but usually the business
man takes the schools very much for granted and seldom is aroused to a real
interest in education.
"School boards serve without pay. 'Good men,' for the most part, are put
upon them. Why not leave it there?"
But individuals here and there are learning that good men without modern
methods or careful scrutiny or progressive ideas may produce poor results in a
school system as easily as in a bank.
The need is evident for a volunteer organization, with funds sufficient to
28 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
secure the services of experts who shall definitely study, day by day, the problems
of the school in order that the Board of Education may have thorough apprecia-
tion as well as intelligent criticism. It is only thus that democracy can show its
power through the schools.
Such a volunteer organization serves as a clearing-house of information, as
a research bureau for facts, and as a mouthpiece for organized public opinion.
It will work through and with the constituted authorities in constructive efforts
and not through random comment. The Public Education Association of Phil-
adelphia for a full generation has sought to serve this puropse.
James S. Hiatt, Secretary.
