Vocational Training as a Preventive of Crime
=============================================

:Author: G. W. Gayler,
Superintendent of Schools, Canton

Youth, as we all know, is the name given to a pretty well-marked
stage of human life beginning about the age of fourteen or fifteen
and lasting about ten years to the time of complete maturity. The
limits of this period are rather indefinite. It is immediately preceded
by a year or two of rapid growth and great physical and spiritual
change. This short period of change is the time when the boy is
at the parting of the ways. He is ceasing to be a child, but is not
yet a man. He is in the 'hobble-de-hoy' stage of life. He is just
merging into manhood's estate and for the first time he is beginning
to see the world from a man's viewpoint.

The body assumes new forms. The muscles develop rapidly,
the heart and arteries are enlarged, blood pressure increases, blushing
is greatly developed, the voice changes, and is at times beyond control?the whole physical being undergoes a new birth.
The world now takes on new aspects and new life. New interests
develop, new friendships are formed. The soul is never so sensitive
again. A breath of criticism hurts. A word of commendation
helps. The work of the world is now seen in a way as never before,
and with this comes the desire and the will to do. There is a longing
for actual work and a distaste for the preparatory training of home
and school.

This is the most vital and difficult of all periods of child life after
infancy, most fraught with danger and the severest test of parents
and teachers. Because of these changes, because of the value of
child life and the danger at this time, the boy or girl now deserves
the most careful study, and the most careful handling. There must
be expert guidance and supervision to insure that the youth comes
through this age successfully. Here is where men and women are
made or marred.

Strange to say, it is just the time when in general there is a
loosening of the reins of discipline and a lack of general supervision
so that the child is now thrown more than ever upon his own resources, often without any guidance whatsoever.
A well-known writer upon educational topics has said, "One of
the blunders of civilized countries, a blunder that has led to an enormous increase in the number of youthful vagabonds and criminals,
has been to neglect the adolescent, and to act as though there were a
sharply defined line separating the child from the man, and that it is
wise to care for the child systematically up to fourteen and then leave
him abruptly and absolutely to the tender mercies of the factory and
the street." It is generally considered that the child has arrived at
the age of accountability and that he is now able to take care of himself. Because of this he is allowed the greatest freedom in thought
and action which may later develop into wrong doing and often leads
to a criminal life.

The average home has largely lost its authority over the child
at this period. Its power of guidance in many cases is gone. The
child goes or comes, works or loiters, attends school or not, as he
pleases, not as the parent wills. Not always is this true,?too often
it is. Sometimes parents admit, even in the presence of the child,
that their authority is gone and that the child is beyond their control.
The Church has been losing the children at this age, especially
the boys. Nothing is there or in the Sunday School which attracts
and holds them. It does not make a strong appeal to them. They
do not desire to go. No authority says they must, so they remain
away. It may be the fault of the boys, it probably is. It may be
the fault of the management of the church, at least in part, but the
fact remains that something vital is wrong. The grip is loosened.
It is almost broken and it is time to take a new hold.
The business world, the community (commercial, industrial,
and agricultural) has been too busy making money to care for
children. All of us in part, some of us in large part, have been
squeezing the dollars and losing the boys and girls. Woe to the
community that through a number of years neglects the boys and
girls, and puts more value on factory or farm, street or store, than on
children and childhood! Of necessity, they will pay for it an hundred
fold later in terms of broken lives. We are now in fact reaping the
reward, and this is only a prophecy of what will happen if we do not
listen to the plea of leaders in the movement to care for the children
at this dangerous age.

The school must bear its full share of responsibility for the
loss of boys and girls at this stage of life. Studies in elimination
show, both in our own schools and throughout the country, that
practically 50 per cent of our children leave school at fourteen or
immediately after. On the average we are turning out a sixth grade
product. Not quite 20 per cent of the boys and girls enter the high
school, and less than 4 per cent graduate.

A compulsory school law compels the child to remain in school
until the age of fourteen. Before this age there is little desire to
leave but Avith the dawn of adolescence this desire comes, and the
bars are thrown down just at the time they should be up and held
firmly in place. Practically 100 per cent remain until the age of
fourteen?after this very few.

The attitude of school administrators and teachers, until a few
years ago was to take care of just those who voluntarily attend school
and to give no time and attention to the ones who withdraw. Now
a general movement is on foot to care for this large number who
leave school soon after the age limit is reached. We must take care
of all the children of all the people.

Dr Cooley says, "It is sometimes contended that the responsibility of the public for the education of the masses ends with the
elementary school. Those destined for the professions, the executive
positions, and the leisure class may enter the public high schools and
state universities, and obtain an education leading directly or indirectly to vocational efficiency. Not everyone however seems to be
conscious of the fact that the great masses who leave school at
fourteen?either from choice or from necessity?to enter into vocational life are entitled to as careful consideration in our educational
plans as their more fortunate brothers. As a matter of fact, this
great ninety per cent need vocational training and have as good a
right to expect it at the hands of the public as their brothers who
enter the so-called 'higher vocations'. "

What has been the result of the neglect of children by home,
State, Church and school during this vital and dangerous age?
The jailer of Cook County in a recent article in a Chicago daily
says: "It is the young man that is the criminal of today. Although
crime is increasing, the work of the professional crook is on the wane.
We don't have the number of confirmed criminals in our jails of today
that we had ten or even five years ago, but the number of boys and
young women there are increasing every day. Just take our jail
here as an example. We have seventy boys who are under twentyone years of age and they are the fellows that are charged with the
daring, violent crimes, too. They will tell you, as they have told
me, that they drifted into crime after being street and night loafers.
Most of them wanted money to spend to have a good time. They
talked things over in a pool room and two or three got together and
started to rob."

Chief Justice Harry Olson is quoted as saying in connection
with the crime wave which has been sweeping over Chicago, that
youthful criminals are responsible in the main for these crime conditions.
The auto bandits are young men,?the leader gives his age as
eighteen. Another is now twenty-five, but he commenced his career
of crime eight or ten years ago, and has served time both in the John
Worthy School and the Illinois Reformatory at Pontiac. The car
bandits of a few years ago were young men scarcely out of their teens.
Recently Chicago was shocked by two crimes, one a peculiarly
atrocious offense, both committed by mere boys. Within the last
year the people of Fulton County have been shocked by murders
committed by young men scarcely more than boys. Hardly a day
passes that we do not read of some crime committed by a youth in
his teens.

In commenting on this condition of affairs one of our metropolitan papers said recently: "These offenses only emphasize the
fact which the police and social workers know only too well, that a
serious proportion of crime in the great cities of America is committed
by youths."

Dr Cooley in his recent book' on "Vocational Education" while
discussing the subject of crime of adolescent boys and girls, says
that in the interval between 1838 and 1888 crime in general increased
133 per cent in France. The increase was 140 per cent in the case of
minors less than sixteen years of age and 247 per cent in the case of
minors between the ages of sixteen and twenty-one. He attributes
this degeneration chiefly to the decline of apprenticeship, to the lack
of adequate vocational guidance and instruction. If vocational
education will take care of boys and girls at this dangerous age and
in that way lessen crime and the tendency to crime, it is well worth
while.

Here are a few examples of head lines taken from the press for
a brief period of time: "Ten Thousand Boys Arrested Last Year"
(referring to one city); "Four Thousand out of the Six Thousand
Arrests Last Year were Boys under Twenty" (referring to a city of
less than 150,000); "Bandits Caught Mere Boys" (this is not
uncommon from many cities); "Over Half the Murderers Last Year
Mere Boys"; "Boy Burglars Getting Common"; "Thieving Increasing Among Children"; "Gangs Generating Thieves."
It seems impossible that there are so many youthful bandits
and murderers, but as we scan the papers we find among recent issues
enough to justify the assertion that a large percentage of crime is
due to the youth in his teens. I quote here from "The Problem of
the Children,"a pamphlet published by the Juvenile Court of Denver:
"We recall the case of a young man (and it is one of hundreds)
who had been in the criminal court and the police court at the age
of thirteen. At the age of twenty he shot down a policeman who was
heroically performing his duty. And yet suppose at the age of
thirteen that boy had been studied, helped, looked after and carefully
handled, at twenty would the policeman be maimed for life, or dead,
a young wife and child a charge on the community, and a strong,
robust young man a charge on the state for life? Perhaps not, and
even so we could have felt better about it, and in the sight of God
less accountability. Was the state responsible? Yes, even more
than the boy, for while he was in jail he was in the plastic stage.
The state had him in time and it did nothing?did not even try.
The state treated him as a man, dealt with him as a man. They
had tried in a day to put a man's head on the boy's shoulders, and in
attempting to do this tried what God had forbidden. In this the
state was foolish. Just as foolish as if it tried at thirteen years of
age to raise him to his full stature."

The state through its system of public schools must assume more
responsibility in caring for the youth of the state. In the first place
the compulsory school age limit must be raised from fourteen to
sixteen so that no child can withdraw from school and spend full
time working, either at home or for some employer, before he is
sixteen years of age. In the second place provision must be made
for the youth who must leave school at sixteen in order to support
himself or in order to help support the family. These provisions
must be through the establishment of part time schools, special
schools running for a short period during each year, and night
schools. Along with this must come a change in our course of study
so as to recognize both the nature of the youth and the social need of
the community?these two things should always determine the
subject matter offered. The system of elementary school work for
children up to the age of fourteen should be somewhat as it is now but
with more emphasis upon the fundamentals, some inspirational and
cultural work. These subjects should be simplified, abridged, and
adapted. More time should be given to the fundamentals and a less
amount of work should be attempted.

Beginning just after the age of fourteen, time and attention
should be given to prevocational and vocational work. If boys and
girls are to be saved to the school, the work offered must seem worth
while to them. It must appeal to them as being worth their time
and effort?and to do this it must have some bearing on the practical
work outside of school in which they are to engage. The time has
passed in this country when we can fit children into hard and fast
grooves and hope to hold them in school. Instead of attempting
to adapt the child to the course of study, we must adapt the course
of study to the child, or forever lose him.

If we are to hold the youth in school and educate him at least
in part, we must consider his newly awakened interests and instincts.
Through these only can we hope to give children the culture, the
preparation and the training which will make them efficient breadwinners and desirable citizens.
For those who can and will remain in school after fourteen there
should be offered as far as possible the six great lines of work leading
to the six great avenues of life's activities. Many schools can not
offer all of these. If not all, they can offer one, two, or three of them.
If it is impossible to offer any, the different subjects can be vitalized,
all obsolete and impractical material can be eliminated and the
subject can be made to throb with a newness of life never experienced
in the old subject. It can be presented so as to be in touch with the
life and thought of the modern world.

These six lines as drafted by the Illinois Educational Commission are:
1. A course leading to the speaking and writing professions
with language, literature, and history as its main subjects. (We have
had these subjects in our course for years. Vocational work along
this line is not new.)

2. A course leading to the scientific professions, especially
medicine and surgery, and devoting its chief attention to biology,
physics, and chemistry, studies dealing with life and the conditions
of life.

3. A course leading to the profession of farming with special
reference to domesticated animals and plants, and to the soil as the
sustainer of life, supported by the physical sciences and by the
principles of accounting.

4. A course leading to useful and artistic construction in the
building trades and in most lines of manufacture. Here manual
training, mathematics, physics, and art should hold the leading
place.

5. A course leading to the callings of the business world, with
commercial geography, economics, industrial history, commercial
arithmetic, commercial law, bookkeeping, stenography and typewriting'as its most prominent features.
6. A course dealing with the application of science and art to
the affairs of the well ordered home, Here sewing, cooking, food
values, marketing, serving, nursing, sanitation, textiles, home
decoration, and the laws of physical, moral, and mental development
in childhood are the special studies.

All this means taking care of the boys and girls who can go on
with their school life after the compulsory age has been reached.
Those who must leave in order to earn money on the farm, in the shop
or office,?the ones who have hitherto been neglected and who have
contributed largely to that class who have made our criminals,?
have not been provided for in this system. This has been and is
yet our weakness.

To take care of these children continuation schools in the form
of short time, part time, and night schools must be established.
For farm boys and girls short term schools of from four to eight
weeks during the winter months could be established with special
courses in agriculture and domestic science. This can be carried
on in connection with grammar and high schools. Groups of students
could do some night school work in the rural school buildings during
the long winter evenings.

In the part time school the pupils work a part of the time and
go to school a part of the time. Sometimes this is arranged so that
the pupils attend school one week and work the next week. It is
sometimes arranged that the student attends school from six to ten
hours a week, the employer giving him time off, and in some cases
paying for the time spent in school.

In the courses of study at this age practical work looking toward
a vocation in life must be the center. The cultural aim, the idea of
preparation for college, must be abandoned for all but a very small
number of children. This does not mean that all subjects looking
toward citizenship are to be abandoned. It means that the child
is to be allowed and encouraged more than ever to choose what he
should study in the light of what he desires to do after his schooling
is over. In this way only, it seems to me, will the boys and girls
be held in school during this vital and dangerous age from fourteen
to twenty.

It is high time that some organized efforts in all the various
social institutions were made to care for boys and girls who are passing
through this vital and dangerous age. There needs to be an awakening in the home so that it will give that protection and training which
the home from its very nature must give. The Church must do very
much more for boys and girls of this age than it ever has done in the
past, both in a social way and in a moral and religious way. The
missionary spirit must permeate the Church to such an extent that
it will feel the responsibility of caring for the boys and girls of the
community whether these children belong to its little group or not.
The school,? and here lies the larger work,?must also be missionary
in its spirit, and see to it that some effort is made to hold boys and
girls in school both by making school life more attractive and more
worth while, and by reaching out and helping those who by force
of circumstances must leave school early in order to take up the
struggle of life.
