Accuracy of Pupil Reporting
===========================

:Author: J. C. Lewis, K. J. Hoke, J. B. Welles, and G. M. Wilson,
Teachers College, New York City, N. Y.

During the past few years many studies in education, particularly those concerning retardation and promotion, have been based
upon the answers given by children to questions asked by the investigators. While this method of collecting data has been known to be
inaccurate, no one has attempted to see how much the error was nor
in which direction it lay, that is, whether it was in favor of the school
examined or not. In order to get some idea of this problem, a study
was made among the school children of a city near New York,*
who had attended the schools for the past six years and whose cumulative record cards for this period were complete. The children
were a selected group in that they had spent their entire school life,
six years in extent, in this particular school system. It was found
however on careful examination that the selection with regard to
race and financial circumstances was really a random one. The
age distribution as well as the grade distribution was normal. The
distribution by grades was,? grade three 9, grade four 33, grade five
54, grade six 74, grade seven 5, grade eight 1, total 176. The distribution by ages was,? 5 nine years old, 41 ten years old, 71 eleven
years old, 42 twelve years old, 12 thirteen years old, 4 fourteen, 1
fifteen; total 176. There were 63 boys and 93 girls, total 176.
The pupils were asked to fill out the following blank, and the
returns were secured from 137 of the 176 children in the six year
group:

Name
1. Have you ever skipped a grade?
2. What grade or grades have you skipped?
3. Have you stayed two or more years in any grade?
4. In what grade or grades have you stayed more than a year?
* The authors desire to recognize their indebtedness to Dr G. D. Strayer, Department of
School Administration, Teachers College, under whose direction this study was undertaken, and
whose co-operation made it possible. The original data for this study are on file in Dr Strayer'a
office.

To avoid too much disturbance and to have the questions answered
under normal conditions, the teachers gave them out and returned
them to the investigators. In one school the children were assisted
by the teachers in recalling their school-life, and in another school
the children had been cooperating with the principal in the correction
of their record cards just previous to this study. These facts would
tend to make a slightly larger percentage of the answers correct.
The investigators carefully examined the cumulative record card
of each pupil and checked the answers accordingly. In checking
up the answers, if the pupil said that he was retarded one year in
the second grade, but was recorded as having been retarded one year
in the first grade, his answer was accepted as correct. This liberal
construction tends further to make the percentage of correct answers
too large. If the pupil reported an answer in any other way than
that shown above, it was considered incorrect. Table I shows the
results in detail.

TABLE I.
ANSWERS OF 137 SCHOOL CHILDREN.
Normal Children
o
O
51
Incorrect
Say
ret.
Say
accel.
Accelerated
h
o
O
Incorrect
Say normal
Retarded
a
o
O
31
Incorrect
Say
normal
27
Say
accel.
17
1 yr.
too
few
2 yrs.
too
few
No
ans.

A double scoring was used in the case of double retardations
and promotions. By this method the actual number of pupils'
answers will be found to exceed the number of pupils by eleven.
Reading the table from the left we find that of the normal children
fifty-one gave correct answers, four incorrect; two of these saying
that they had been retarded and two accelerated. Of the accelerated
children three answered correctly and one incorrectly, the one saying
that he was normal. Of the retarded children, we find that thirtyone answers were correct, and of those answering incorrectly, twentyseven said that they were normal, seventeen that they were accelerated. Four reported that they had been retarded, but reported
one year less than the records showed and four two years less
than the records. Finally we find that six gave no answer at all.
Reducing this table to a percentage basis, and charting it, we find
that 93 per cent of the children who were normal answered correctly,
while 3.5 per cent said that they were retarded. Among the accelerated children the small number of cases distorted the percentages; one child said that he was normal.
The most significant facts were found in the answers of the
retarded children. Sixty-five per cent of the answers were incorrect.

This percentage was distributed among the different mistakes as
follows: 30 per cent reported normal progress, 19 per cent said they
were accelerated, 4.5 per cent reported one year less than they bad
actually been retarded. Another 4.5 per cent reported twTo years
less retardation than they had actually had, and 7 per cent gave no
answer. It may be evident therefore that normal and accelerated
pupils usually know what happened to them, but retarded pupils
do not recall readily their past life in school. The fact is brought
straight home to every school man that no accurate study of grade
progress can be made without fully kept cumulative record cards.
Let us apply the results of this inquiry to a well known study
based upon the answers of pupils as to retardation or failure,?" The
Incidence of Retardation" by Dr Louis B. Blan (Teachers College,
1911). This appealed to the writers as a splendid study; but their
scientific interest led them to the plan as described above for checking
up, for proving or disproving the results.

Blan studied 4579 children as follows: a New York City district,
1312 cases; Elizabeth, N. J., 1088 cases; Paterson, N. J., 1246
cases; East Orange, N. J., 448 cases; Plainfield, N. J., 485 cases.
By a method identical with our own as shown by an examination
of Blan's paper, pp. 22, 32, and 36, the 4579 selected pupils in the
five cities were studied as to the grade distribution of the 3947 cases
of retardation. These were reduced to a percentage basis for each
group and then the median of the five groups calculated. This
median for the fifth grade pupils is:

Per cent of failures in the fifth grade  11.2
" " " " " fourth "   9.2
" " " " third "   7.2
" " " " " second "   6.6
" " first "   7.2
Since our study tends to show that in the lower grades these figures are much too small, it is only fair to call attention to the evidence
in Blan's own study tending to support the conclusion which we reach.
We are surprised that so careful a student should have neglected
this evidence, tending as it does to prove the unreliability of a pupil's
report as to his own failure, a conclusion which if substantiated would
invalidate his entire study.

Blan says (p. 31): "Each pupil was asked to state in what
grade or grades he had been kept back for a second term. In the
event of the pupil's inability to remember accurately, a note was
made of such inability and recourse was had to the record card filed
in the office of the principal. Such action was necessary in 32 out
of 1312 cases and the writer was particularly fortunate in obtaining
full records of same."

The above quotation shows how little use was made of the
cumulative record cards in checking up pupils' answers.
Blan (p. 52) notes that the higher the grade the fewer failures
there are reported for lower grades, but it does not seem to occur
to him that this failure to report may have been due to the inability
of pupils to remember the failures that occurred so many years before.
Blan says: "In fine, then, it may be said that the fourth or fifth
grade pupil is left back in the third grade more than twice as often
as the eighth or seventh grade pupil."

In Plainfield, N. J., there were cumulative record cards which
Blan could have used, but of which he made little use. It appears
however that they had some effect in helping the memory of pupils.
The 485 pupils in this system reported 616 failures, or a larger proportion than in any of the other systems involved in the study.
The first grade failures reported in this system are from five to eight
times the median per cent of the other systems, and range from 30
to 39.2 per cent. In connection with this system Blan says: "The
writer, however, visited each class room of the fifth, sixth, seventh,
and eighth grades and questioned the pupils individually as in the
other cities. . . . Their memory seemed to wane only in the
case of the primary grades. . . . Wherever it was found that
pupils deliberately misstated the facts, their records as read from
individual history cards were invariably somewhat worse than they
cared to admit. For example, when pupils replied that they were
left back a given number of times, on checking up their statements
it was found that in no case were they left back less than they stated.
On the other hand, in quite a number of instances their history cards
showed one or more retardations above the number admitted by
them in class."

The values to be attached to the expressions "somewhat" and
"quite a number" in the above quotation can be best estimated
from the details of table I of this study. It must be evident that if
65 per cent of pupils' answers as to retardation are incorrect, the
only profitable way in which to study this question is through an
examination of the individual cumulative record cards.
Let us proceed a step further by distributing the retardations
as actually occurring and as reported by the children, and then apply
these facts to Blan's study. Table II shows the distribution of
reported and unreported failures, and the total of the whole number
actually occurring.

TABLE II.
Grade.
Number of
Retardations
reported
V IV III II I
IV.
III.
6 7
5 12
Number of
Retardations
not reported
IV
1
1
III
3
1
2
II
16
I
14
22
4 13
Total Retardations.
V
1
IV
4
2
III
6
2
3
II
14
21
5
I
21
34
13

Taking the first line, table II reads, beginning at the left, the
fifth grade pupils reported 1 retardation in grade five, 3 retardations
in grade four, 3 in grade three, 6 in grade two, and 7 in grade one;
and they failed to report 1 retardation in grade four, 3 in grade
three, 8 in grade two, and 14 in grade one; the distribution of total
failures among fifth grade pupils being 1 in grade five, 4 in grade
four, 6 in grade three, 14 in grade two, and 21 in grade one.
The next line of table II shows the distribution of fourth grade
retardations; the last line, the distribution of third grade retardations. It will be seen from the table that fourth grade pupils report
more inaccurately than fifth grade pupils, and that the third grade
pupils do poorest of all.

The only place where this table overlaps Blan's is in the fifth
year. It will be interesting therefore to calculate the incidence of
retardation for the fifth grade and compare the results with the
figures in Blan's table. Since Blan used pupils' reports, however,
it wall be proper for us to use pupils' reports in making the comparison. This comparison is shown in table III.
This table is derived directly from table II. The 4.7 per cent
under grade I of table III, simply means that 7 in table II is 4.7
per cent of 148,?148 being the total number of cases involved,
including normal, accelerated, and retarded, each retardation being
counted as a separate case. Likewise 6 in table II is 4.0 per cent
of 148, etc.

TABLE III.
SHOWING THE INCIDENCE OF RETARDATION FOR FIFTH GRADE PUPILS ACCORDING TO THEIR OWN REPORTS.
Grade
As per pupils' reports.
.7
IV
2.0
in
2.0
II
4.0
4.7
Blan, based on pupils' reports.
11.2
9.2
7.2
6.6
7.2

Table IV is derived from table II in the same maimer, but the
totals for grade V are used. That is, 21 is 14.2 per cent of 148;
14 is 9.5 per cent of 148, etc. The fifth grade incidence of retardation
thus derived is based upon the total retardations, the retardations
reported by the children plus those not reported. The figures
showing the corrected incidence of retardation for Blan's study are
TABLE IV.
SHOWING THE CORRECT FIFTH GRADE INCIDENCE OF RETARDATION FOR THIS
STUDY, AND THE CORRECTED INCIDENCE FOR BLAN's STUDY.
Grade
This study as per record cards
.7
IV
2.7
III
4.1
II
9.5
14.2
Blan,allowing for errors of pupils' reports
11.2
12.4
14.7
15.7
21.7
secured by simple proportion in each case, and assume that the
reporting of pupils in his study was inaccurate to the same degree
and in the same direction as the reporting of the children in this
study. If this assumption is correct, and Blan's own study bears
evidence that it is, the conclusions reached by Blan are equally
unreliable. The situation as to failure in upper as compared with
lower grades is exactly reversed.

It is not necessary to pursue the discussion further. While
this study is not conclusive, it points strongly towards the following
conclusions:

First.?Pupils' reports as to progress through the grades are
likely to be very inaccurate.

Second.?The inaccuracies are greatest in the lower grades
and where failure is involved.

Third.?Conclusions as to the progress of children through the
grades when based upon the reports of children are therefore more
or less inaccurate and may be directly contrary to the facts.
Fourth.?As the cumulative record card is being moie and more
generally introduced, we are justified in insisting that future studies
as to the progress of children through the grades shall be based upon
the evidence furnished by such card.
