Re-Averments Respecting Psycho-Clinical Norms and Scales of Development
=========================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1913, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VII, No. 4 June 15, 1913
 :Author: J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D.,
Professor of Clinical Psychology, School of Education,
University of Pittsburgh.

Recent discussions seem to call for a re-emphasis of certain
conclusions at which I had previously arrived.

1. An expert experimental, educational, or genetic psychologist
is not, in any legitimate use of the word, -a skilled clinical psychologist.1
The former have no more right to regard themselves as expert
clinical psychologists than the professional anatomist or physiologist
has to consider himself a medico-clinical examiner. The skilled
psycho-clinicist will require just as prolonged and thorough a technical preparation as the skilled medico-clinicist.2 Just as the preparation of the physician necessitates more than a thorough grounding
in anatomy, physiology, and embryology, so the preparation of the
clinical psychologist requires more than an expert knowledge of
general, experimental, educational, genetic, or abnormal psychology,
or of child study.3 He should have in addition a thorough training
in psycho-clinical procedure, which should include not only work
in a laboratory clinic but an interneship?a "hospital year," so to
speak,?spent in first-hand study of backward, feebleminded, epileptic, psychopathic, and disciplinary cases. These cases must be
juvenile subjects if the examiner intends to work with children.
He must have also a thorough training in educational therapeutics.
By this I include primarily not the so-called psycho-therapeutics
of the skilled psychiatrist?suggestion, psycho-analysis, re-education
?but particularly the differential, corrective pedagogics of the
educational expert on mentally deviating children. There is no
general scheme of corrective pedagogics. The method will have
to be differentiated to meet the needs indicated by a diagnosis of
each case. It will be as different for the feebleminded and for the
stutterer as it is for the deaf and for the blind. Finally, the clinical
psychologist must have some knowledge, didactic and clinical, of
physical, orthopedic, and pediatric defects, of neurotic and psychotic
symptomatology, and of personal, family, and heredity case-taking.
It is evident that there is no modern specialist who is equipped
with all these elements of knowledge except the properly trained
clinical psychologist. The general practitioner, pediatrician, orthopedist, neurologist, psychiatrist, educational, experimental, genetic,
or abnormal psychologist are all lacking in some of the essentials
which the expert psycho-clinicist must possess. The ordinary special
class teacher (or school nurse) is, of course, not to be considered for
a moment as a trained psycho-clinicist.4 To be sure, well trained
class-room teachers can learn to administer a few tests, and may
thereby be able to group children with approximate accuracy into
retarded, normal, and accelerated classes, just as an intelligent
layman may be able to classify, with some accuracy, people into
sickly and healthy groups. But surely the skilled physician attempts
to do more than roughly classify his cases. In the measure in which
he is competent, he makes a differential diagnosis of each case and
adapts the treatment to the diagnosis. The problem of the competent psycho-clinicist is precisely the same: He must attempt
not only to measure the amount of mental deviation but to give
a differential diagnosis of each case. The teacher or nurse may
indeed be of considerable service as an assistant to the psychoclinicist,?provided of course that she possesses the requisite tact
and the necessary technical training. To her (or him) may be
intrusted a considerable portion of the formal, mechanical testing,
and the collection of the data for the case histories. Her relation
to the clinical psychologist is much the same as the relation which
the trained nurse sustains to the skilled surgeon. The psychoclinicist would no more think of entrusting the final diagnosis of a
mentally abnormal child to the teacher or nurse, than the physician
would permit a nurse to make a differential diagnosis of a physically
diseased person. A teacher or nurse who is trained to give the
Binet or any other mental tests has no more right to call herself
a clinical psychologist, than a nurse who is trained to take the temperature, pulse or any other medical readings has a right to call
herself a physician.

1 Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives, 1, 110; Journal of Educational Psychology,
1912, p. 224. Medical Record, 1913. A similar view is evidently entertained by Bruner:
Addresses and Proceedings of the National Educational Association, 1912, p. 1110 f.
We shall for a long time be obliged to utilize more or less
unskilled, or only partially skilled, workers in the mental testing
of deviating children, because we shall probably not be able for a
long time in the future to secure a sufficient number of adequately
trained specialists to examine the millions of pedagogically deviating
children which clog the wheels of our educational machine. I do
not know that diagnosis based on this crude type of work?routine
testing by amateurs?will enable us to select mentally retarded
children with any greater precision than can now be done by the
ordinary class-room standards for determining pedagogical retardation. Nor will it give us any markedly superior insight into the
peculiarities of the mental defects of the children. I am quite
certain that many diagnoses by teachers or nurses based purely
upon the Binet tests will be very misleading, often humorously
absurd, and at times pernicious. I base this judgment upon extensive use of the tests on various types of children: normal, backward,
feebleminded, epileptic, insane, precocious. The diagnoses which
I make after an exhaustive study of all the available facts are quite
at variance with the Binet rating in a considerable percentage of
cases. In one school system where an amateur (teacher) is functioning as clinical psychologist over 49 per cent of the retarded
children tested were classified as feebleminded! I am free to confess,
however, that I have found the Binet scheme of more value than
have the psychologists in the Chicago schools (judging by personal
reports made to me by Dr Bruner).

In spite of all this, judicious and guarded testing by trained
teachers will have some value, because it will confirm (or refute)
the class-room teacher's judgment by a system of independent,
objective measures. Independent confirmation by outside examiners, even though they be of limited training, will be welcome to
teachers, school officials, and parents; although it must be said
that many parents will be reluctant to accept diagnoses not made
by experts of acknowledged authority. In London parents have
a right to demand independent examinations of mentally defective
children every six months.

It should be remembered that mental testing is only one phase
of mental diagnosis; the determination of mental status does not
automatically include the determination of the causative factors.
"The function of the Binet-Simon, or any other graded scale of
intelligence, is to give us a preliminary, and not a final survey or
rating of the individual." The testing is "merely a point of departure for further diagnosis."5 Grade teachers or nurses are "unfitted
for the two highest functions of the psycho-clinicist. First, they
are incapable of giving a satisfactory diagnosis (the chief consideration in any examination) of individual cases; and secondly, they
are unable to conduct research?to prosecute productive and constructive research."6 And I want to repeat with all possible emphasis
that the real function of the amateur?the examining teacher or nurse
or the 'physician unskilled in psychology?in the schools is not that
of the clinical psychologist or the expert diagnostician, but that of the
laboratory assistant to.the skilled diagnostician who, so far as mental
cases are concerned, must be the specially trained clinical psychologist.
That there are only a few clinical psychologists who have an
a dequate conception of, and training for, this type of work it is
almost needless to say?though unfortunately there are many
teachers and psychologists who quite delude themselves (through
mental vagueness, erroneous teaching, and fluid standards of what
constitutes a skilled clinical examination) into the belief that they
are prepared to function as competent consulting psycho-clinicists.
It is however no matter for wonder that there are only'a few competent clinical psychologists,?persons who are qualified to act as
professional or trustworthy consultants rather than men who, themselves lacking in clinical experience, may be able to write learnedly
on what the clinical psychologist should do. For clinical psychology
is just being born. I believe it is safe to predict that the type of
training outlined above will in future be demanded of the mental
examiner of deviating children.

2. Norms of 7nental functioning established by experimental or
educational psychologists by group tests on squads of children may
have little practical value as clinical tests.1 There are various reasons
why this is so.

First, group tests require written responses. But the clinical
psychologist must reduce written responses to a merely nominal
amount, partly because children differ in the rate or skill of writing
without evincing a corresponding difference in intelligence; partly
because many abnormal children suffer from special motor defects
of the hand, so that they cannot do themselves justice in graphic
tests; and partly because written responses require too much time.
A comprehensive psycho-clinical examination is a time-consuming
ordeal, hence there is no time to waste on the mechanics of writing.
There are, of course, many valuable tests which can only be done
in writing, and these should be given in as brief a form as may be
feasible.


Secondly, many of the best single group tests carried out by
the experimental and educational psychologists cannot be given in
less than from three to thirty minutes. It is quite practicable for
the educational psychologist to give lengthy tests because usually
during any one sitting he attempts to measure only a limited number of traits. But the psycho-clinicist, in order to get a comprehensive picture of his case, must test a very considerable number of
functions. Hence the time of each test must necessarily be reduced
to an "irreducible minimum."

Thirdly, experiments show that children do better when
tested in groups than when tested singly.8 For this reason group
norms may not be serviceable as clinical norms. Merely on a priori
grounds, since the conditions of testing are different, we would
always feel a certain amount of skepticism about the accuracy of
clinical norms which have been derived from group results. As a
matter of fact, nearly all norms now in practical use, whether mental
or anthropometric, have been secured by individual and not by
group testing.

It is just because our clinical norms must be based on individual
and not on group testing that the task of securing them is herculean.
It is this fact that I had in mind in previously emphasizing that the
establishment of extensive and reliable clinical norms requires a
large staff of workers and an ample subsidy.9 The problem would
be comparatively simple if group norms could be used with assurance for clinical work: it takes no more time to test forty pupils
at once in a group than to test one pupil alone. It is worth repeating therefore that it is probably not to the group results of the
educational and experimental psychologists that we must look for
our norms but to the clinical data of examiners of individual cases.
At any rate, some one should make a comparative study to determine whether there is any difference between norms established by
group tests and norms for the same tests established clinically.
3. So far as concerns the probing of the efficiency of mental functions by testing, the most serviceable clinical examining technique consists
in the graded scales of intellectual, motor, and socio-industrial (possibly also emotional) development.10 The high value which Thorndike11 ascribes to the correlation formula probably is justified so far
as concerns the diagnosis of the school system or of a number of individuals of the same ages when tested in groups. But the most
valuable contribution made thus far to the technique of clinical
diagnosis?and fundamentally diagnosis means precisely clinical
diagnosis?does not come from the correlation formula. If there
is any professional psycho-clinicist whose constant reliance in the
diagnosis of individual cases is the Pearson formula, I do not happen
to know him. No one has yet selected tests for developmental
scales on the basis of correlation coefficients, although it is probable
that in the selection of tests for such scales preference should be
given to tests which have been shown by group experiments to possess a high degree of correlation. Certainly the most important
type of "educational diagnosis" done to-day, from the point of
view of the practical good accomplished for the children, is clinical
diagnosis; and the value of the technique of individual diagnosis
would be little impaired if the correlation formula were non-existent.
4. The 'position I have taken in favor of the continued use of the
1908 Binet scale until an extensive mass of clinical data is available
for a thoroughly scientific revision of the scale12 seems to me to be justified by the developments. The analysis of the numerous revisions
which have appeared in less than a year is here out of place. It
is well to remind the reader that Binet's and Simon's own 1911
revision, so far as I can gather, is purely theoretical. Evidently
it was made to meet some of the criticisms lodged against the 1908
scale: viz., inequality in the number of tests for each age; the presence of scholastic, experiential tests; incorrect placing of tests, etc.
It was not based, as it should have been to meet any justifiable
scientific demands, on the retesting of large masses of normal children. Moreover, some of the changes introduced into the scale
fly directly in the face of experimental warrant. Thus the date
test is placed in Age VIII although the authors maintain that giving
dates are "facts that boys of nine are just able to retain" (Dr.
Clara Harrison Town's translation). "All the children at eleven
years" succeed in composing single sentences containing three designated words; children of eleven succeed in giving sixty words in
three minutes; "at eleven the majority" succeed in giving abstract
definitions; and yet, in utter defiance of these findings, these tests
are placed in Age XII. Here we have the absurd procedure of placing tests in an age in which they do not belong, in the interests of
a theoretical reconstruction, and of leaving an important age vacant.
It would likewise be interesting to know the evidence on which the
seven-digit and rhyme tests were placed in Age XV. Moreover, it
is more important to have supplied reliable tests for Ages XI, XIII,
and XIV, than for Age XV and for adulthood.

Of the other revisions which have appeared in rapid succession
it may be said that in no case are they based upon the performances
of selected normal children; in no case has an extensive number of
cases been tested in every age that has been revised (the one possible
exception is Goddard's survey; this is entirely commendable from
the point of view of the number of children tested, but it is vulnerable, I believe, because of the narrow-range scheme of testing
employed); in no case have the revisions been based on the testing
of children who have just passed their birthdays (some six-year olds
have been 6 years and 1 month, others 6 years and 11 months);
in no case has the wide-range method of testing been used, which
I have found essential for purposes of testing out the accuracy of the
placing of the tests ;13 in some cases revisions have been made in ages
in which only fifteen or twenty children have been tested, while in
other instances age-norms have been revised or supplied although
not a single child has been tested in those ages. This manner of constructing measuring scales may be fascinating as an intellectual
diversion, and the scales may indeed be suggestive and possess certain theoretical interests and values; but I must submit that the
serviceability for purposes of practical reliable diagnosis, of scales
thus constructed is questionable. Superficial work like this is misleading and tends to arouse contempt for the slip-shod standards
of scientific work obtaining in this field of applied psychology. Instead of glutting the market with measuring scales whose accuracy
has not been sufficiently established by extensive testing to render
them practically serviceable, it would be better if the investigator
devoted his time to thoroughly testing out, standardizing, and
establishing age-norms for single tests. It is this type of extensive,
detailed "draft-horse" work which is now most needed.
5. The improvement of ?nental measuring scales involves not merely
the standardization of the administrative procedure, nor yet merely the
establishment of reliable age-norms for the tests already incorporated
in existing scales ;u but it requires the addition of new tests in the
various age-steps: I have proposed ten as a reasonable number for
each age;15 the establishment of age-norms for half-years for younger
children;16 the establishment of various age-standards throughout
13 Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives, pp. 21, 28, 55.
14 Pedagogical Seminary, 1911, p. 70 fT.; Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives, p. 56 f.
15 Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives, p. 56; Alienist and Neurologist, 1912, May.
16 Journal of Educational Psychology, 1911, p. 206. The scheme there proposed should read
as follows: "The 6-year group will include children from 5 years, 10 months (beginning of 10th
month) to 6 years, 3 months (end of 3d month), while the 6}4 year group will include children
from 6 years, 4 months (beginning of 4th month) to 6 years, 9 months (end of 9th month)."
the scale for the same type of test; and the establishment of normal
norms of variation in addition to normal norms of performance.17
Since I emphasized the advisability of testing identical traits
at various age-levels by the same form of test, and thus determining
the status of specific individual traits in different individuals in
terms of normal age standards,18 this need has been recognized by
other writers.19 As I have stated before20: "We know little at
present that is scientifically accurate regarding the degree or character of the physical and mental arrest of our repeaters. We therefore stand in need of comprehensive serial graded tests of intelligence, so that we may determine not only the intellectual age of
deviating children, but the nature of the mental functions most
seriously affected." A series of consecutive tests, each differing
somewhat from the others, which I have used with various groups of
children and which can be given once annually for a period of six
years, are now upon the market.

I do not think that we shall be able to test existing scales in a
thoroughly reliable manner except by a wide-range method of testing multitudes of normal children.21 We should test, at the very
minimum, one hundred "normal" boys and one hundred "normal"
girls at each age by years and also by half-years in the earlier ages.
It would be better to set the number at one thousand for each age.
That would be a gigantic undertaking requiring the concentrated
attack of a large corps of trained workers, but the ultimate results
which this research would yield in human conservation would well
repay the toil and expense required.

17 Alienist and Neurologist, May, 1912; Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives,, p.
42, 104 f.
18 Pedagogical Seminary, 1911, p. 76 f.; Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives, pp. 8 f.,
56, 109; Journal of Educational Psychology, 1912, pp. 224 f.; Epilepsia, 1912, p. 368.
" Seashore, Journal of Educational Psychology, 1912, p. 50; and Pyle, same Journal, 1912,
p. 95.
20 Pedagogical Seminary, 1911, p. 82.
21 Pedagogical Seminary, 1911, p. 81; Journal of Educational Psychology, 1912, p. 225 f.;
Alienist and Neurologist, 1912, May; Epilepsia, 1912, p. 376; Experimental Studies of Mental
Defectives, pp. 21, 28, 55.
