Constructive Morals and School Life
====================================

By Herbert F. Clark,
Principal Olive Special School, Los Angeles, Cal.
There is a great deal of talk nowadays about teaching morals
in the public schools and of connecting in some vital way the work
of the school with real life. There is a strong feeling that the
school is an isolated factor in the real development of child life.
The following incident is an illustration of how recreation, school
work, morality and an element of business life all combined to
produce a wholesome development in a group of wayward boys.
The group consisted of eighteen boys from the Olive Special
School of the City of Los Angeles. The recreation was a two days
"hike" to the top of Mount Wilson. The basis for moral teaching
was the wayward conduct of three of the boys on that trip. The
connection with school work consisted in those days being regular
school days, with language lessons based upon the experiences of
the trip, together with the geographical knowledge learned and the
inspection of the Carnegie Observatory at the top of the mountain.
The business element consisted in providing a fund to defray some
expense that arose out of the trip, and the purchase of a money
order to send away the amount.
Mount Wilson stands about twenty-five miles northeast of
Los Angeles. It is necessary to take the interurban car to Sierra
Madre at the foot of the mountain and then go by trail a distance
of about nine miles to the top.
On the second day of January the boys mentioned above and
I decided to make the trip to the top of the mountain and return
the following day. These were regular school days, but some of
us who are dealing with the cruder material of humanity believe
that any activity in which boys may engage that is wholesome in
character, and carried on under proper conditions, is as truly educa-
tive as the program of the schoolroom. In other words a school
is made up of a group of children happily engaged in some whole-
some activity directed by a teacher who loses herself, or himself in
the spontaneous expression of the pupils. It is no crime in the
Special Schools of Los Angeles for a teacher to take his group of
boisterous boys and ''hike" away to the hills, or to the beach, or
(252)
CONSTRUCTIVE MORALS. 253
even turn out and have a good old fashioned game of ball right in
school hours.
But to the trip,?we took the car to Sierra Madre and with
our bundles of blankets and "grub" began our long climb. The
ascent was highly interesting with the camping-out lunches and
the night under the stars about half-way up. An early start enabled
us to reach the top about eight o'clock in the morning. It was
interesting to note that the boys most addicted to cigarette smoking
became most fatigued on the trip. Now it happened that several
of the older boys threw aside their luggage and hastened on ahead
of some of the smaller and more heavily laden. I, of course, re-
mained in the rear to see that none fell by the wayside. These
older boys reached what is called the three-quarter house and exer-
cising some of their criminal tendencies opened a door, entered the
house and stole two revolvers and a piece of ham. Before I reached
there I was met by one of the proprietors of the place who told me
that somebody had broken into their house and taken those things,
and that they were holding our boys for investigation. We had
met a man early in the morning who had left the hotel at the top
without breakfast and hence there was the possibility that he might
have committed the burglary. The man from the three-quarter
house admitted this, so we were rather chary about accusing our
boys. When I and the "rear guard" reached the three-quarter
house there was the rest of the group awaiting our arrival. They
were somewhat uneasy but denied any knowledge of the burglary.
Before long however two boys came to me and told me who the cul-
prits were, and sure enough we found the missing articles where
they had been "ditched" on the mountain side. One of the pro-
prietors of the place gave me two dollars and a half to give the
boys who had confided me the secret. I protested, but he was in-
sistent and I accepted the money and later gave it to the boys. He
was a deputy sheriff and could have arrested the boys and taken
them into custody, but he was willing to leave the final disposition
of the case to me. I told him I would take charge of it and bring
the case up for consideration at school on the following Monday
morning. We finished our trip, had a good time during the day
and returned to the city that evening.
On the intervening Saturday I took the matter up with the
head of our special school department. Aside from suggesting that
he thought it best to settle such things outside of court, when pos-
sible, he left the matter entirely in my hands.
On Monday morning when I arrived at school the guilty boys
met me with penitent spirit and tear bedimmed eyes and begged
254 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
for a chance to recompense the man on the hill for his expense and
trouble. They said they would refund the money he paid out, and
would pay him for any trouble he had been put to, and promised
that they would be good in the future. I took the matter up with
the rest of the class and we decided to grant the boys their request
provided the penalty of "swats" should be added. This meant that
the guilty boys must lean over a desk and allow each of the other
boys to give them a hard "swat" with a long paddle. The "swats"
were administered immediately to seal the bargain and the boys
set about getting the money. This took two or three days. When
that was done I put on the board the following letter, and for a lan-
guage lesson required all the boys to write it with the understand-
ing that the one best written should be signed by each one of us and
sent with the money to Mount Wilson.
Los Angeles, Cal., Jan. 0, 1913
Me. Geo. D. Kampiiefnek,
Mount Wilson, Cal.
Dear Sir:
We are enclosing the sum of $2.50 to reimburse you, in a
measure, for the financial loss you suffered by virtue of the way-
ward conduct of some of our boys. We regret very much the
trouble and expense to which you were subjected and deplore ex-
ceedingly the disgrace such conduct brought upon our school, and
each of us individually.
We thank you for your patience and leniency in this matter,
and shall hope to enjoy the trip again without such a needless
embarrassment.
Sincerely yours,
(Signed) The Boys.
When the best letter was selected and signed by all the boys,
we sent the guilty parties to the post office for a money order. This
they obtained and returned to the school. The letter and order
were then enclosed and the guilty boys sent to the post office with
the letter.
The elements of educational interest to me in the experience
were these: two of the boys showed their loyalty to the right ideals
of citizenship when they came to me and exposed the guilty parties.
It took considerable strength of character to break through the gang
rules and subject themselves to the cry of "snitch!" One of these
is an orphan boy who has sold papers on the streets of Los Angeles
since he was big enough to carry them. He has grown up in the
environment of the city streets and does not smoke cigarettes. He
is an ambitious lad and says he is determined to get a college edu-
CONSTRUCTIVE MORALS. 255
cation. He is the type of boy which the special schools of this city
are saving to lives of usefulness and good citizenship. He has
caught the idea already that the best citizen is he who is not afraid
to expose wrong doing.
Again, the whole group saw before we were through with the
case that whatever one or more of them did affected the reputation
and welfare of the whole group. The whole school was disgraced.
Their chances for another similar "hike" were jeopardized. Most
of them were exposed as being willing to condone wrong doing,
even if they did not actually participate in it. That lesson was
brought forcibly home to them in the writing and discussing of that
letter. The matter of settling the affair among themselves, ad-
ministering their own punishment, getting together the money
needed and closing the case up without throwing it into court, had
a great moral weight.
There was also the educational side to the case,?for once at
least the boys wrote a letter embodying good English and strong
moral worth. The difficult words were discussed and their bearing
on this case emphasized. Margins, proper spelling, punctuation
and good writing were essential. A wholesome motive underlay
the whole process.
The connection with real life lay in the fact that although the
whole affair took place outside the schoolroom, and so far as the
crime was concerned it came within the jurisdiction of the courts,
yet it was all brought home to the school for adjudication. The
adjustment involved several days, giving the boys opportunity to
earn the money, and time to let the moral lesson of it all "soak in".
In fact it involved quite an element of cooperating in that some of
the boys "chipped in" a nickel or a dime; in one case two boys
helped another shovel sand for "two bits," and when it came to a
"show down" one of the boys had to borrow a dime to make up his
share.
And finally, there is great educational value in the fact that a
teacher can so lose himself in a group of children that the problem
of discipline is taken from his shoulders and thrown upon the
pupils themselves. It removes that nervous strain and burden of
responsibility incident to punishing children. The offenses become
offenses to the group and not to the teacher. The school becomes
their school; its problems become their problems, and best of all
they see in the school a type of the world at large where the in-
dividuals in the group become subject to the group as a whole, and
where the conduct of each citizen bears a direct relation to the wel-
fare of everv other citizen.
