The Vitality of Teaching
=========================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1913, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VII, No. 1. March 15, 1913.

By W. Franklin Jones, Ph.D.,
Head of Department of Education, University of South Dakota,
Vermillion, S. D.
A few years ago I asked three of my critic teachers to select
from a senior class of seventy-six teachers the best twenty-five teach-
ers and the poorest twenty-five. Then out of each twenty-five so
selected, I asked them to select the best ten and the poorest ten.
When these lists were in hand, I asked my critic teachers to make a
study of these fifty selected teachers and to report, after due study
of each teacher, on the following questions:
1. Is discipline an evident problem, and is this end secured
through tight rein or through interest?
2. Do the students work, and is the work imposed or does it
seem to suit the child's own impulses?
3. What direct memory work is done, and is the memory end
reached through formal drill or through use?
4. Is the subject matter organized and handled from the adult
point of view or from the child's point of view?
5. Does the teacher seem to spend the class hour with subject
matter or with students?
6. Is the subject matter handled as book records or as
experience?
When each critic teacher had submitted her report for each
of the teachers (grade teachers), I undertook to compile the reports
for the purpose of discovering whether or not I could find any funda-
mental conceptions or laws on which the decisions could be directly
or indirectly based. I found two, and only two, such laws; and
neither of these was a conscious guide in the judgment of any of
the critic teachers. These two laws may be stated as follows:
I. The highest success is found in those teachers who work
from the child's standpoint; and the poorest success comes from
teachers who work from the logical or adult standpoint.
'Read at meeting of Heads of Departments of Education of the Middle Northwest, held
fci Lincoln, Nebraska, Dec. 19-21, 1912.
(1)
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
II. The poorer the teaching the more the work is imposed;
and the better the teaching the more the work seems to satisfy the
child's own impulses.
Now I am offering this to you as mere human opinion, even
though it is the combined opinion of three skilled critic teachers.
I have been studying and analyzing these data for three years, and
I have arrived at a number of conclusions which I am now ready
to offer you:
1. The nearer we come to a science of teaching, the more and
more clear it becomes that the child has a manifold of feeling,
impulse, instinct, that constitutes the real moving power in all
education.
2. We have been spending most of our time in studying and
organizing subject matter so that the child can "take it in;" and
our technical speech is to-day full of such betraying terms as "grasp-
ing," "comprehending," "absorbing," "inculcating," "implanting,"
"giving," etc. Our view of the educational field has been largely
from the standpoint of what we have to give. Thus we have paid
much attention to subject matter, and we have looked upon subject
matter as a kind of social inheritance that the child is to receive,
willingly or unwillingly.
But as we come nearer to a science of education we find the
child bristling with little impelling forces that work in their own
way, and we now come to admit that these impelling forces refuse
to hold our social inheritance sacred. Our subject matter, our
course of study, which represents a selection seemingly of the most
valuable experiences of the race, from the adult point of view, is
not taken seriously by the child; and while we offer it to him as
a carefully arranged logical whole, he breaks it as a mere plaything
and takes to himself only the little attractive particles here and
there that meet his favor. This suggests what I am ready to call
the Teaching Comedy: here stands the teacher anxious to give
to every child the richest gift that can be bequeathed to any human
being, namely, the most valuable experiences of the race, and no
child is willing to become so wealthy!
3. I believe it is time that we had grown a bit ashamed of the
Herbartian word "interest," since it is a word hardly dynamic
enough to express our teaching prowess to-day. We have found
a new term that is a little more powerful than the word "interest,"
meaning indeed that we propose to control interest; and this new
word, big with educational promise, is our word, motivation. Told
briefly, the big word in education to-day is motivation.
Now our new word indicates that interest is no longer a final
VITALITY OF TEACHING. 3
term, but that we have found the mass of rootlets that nourish and
grow and determine interest; and the big problem of education
to-day is (1) the identification and naming of each of these determi-
nants of interest, and (2) the development of a technique of handling
these determinants so that we can lead interest where we will. Here
is the most vital process in all Schoolcraft, for the reason that only
through it can we touch the life of the student; and motivation
must not be looked upon as a mere process of winning the student,
as I fear some have already conceived it, but as our means of calling
out initiative, personality, self-expression. Motivation means lay-
ing hands on the deep-seated springs of action, to the end of con-
trolling conduct.
What are the Determinants of Interest?
We have known for some years that the squirrel is interested
in the nut but not in the earthworm. We have known that the
robin is interested in the earthworm but not in the nut that reveals
the squirrel. We have observed that the cat is interested in the
mouse, the rat-dog in the rat, and the Irish setter in the prairie-
fowl; but we never happened to seize and make use of the fact
that all these interests are racial and ultimately inherited.
We have known that one squirrel lives essentially as every
other squirrel lives; that the interests of one squirrel are the inter-
ests of the squirrel race. We have known that cats kill mice, and
we have reared cats with the definite expectation that each new
brood, and each cat in the brood, would be interested in mice; and
yet we did not call in the educator and tell him that the vital thing
on which we built our expectation was instinct.
Now if you will take away the mouse-killing instinct of the
cat, you will at the same time have destroyed the cat's interest in
mice. If you will take away the rat-killing instinct of the rat-dog,
you will no longer have a rat-dog, for the dog's interest in rats will
be gone. Therefore,
4. If we could take away all impulse (this ultimately means
all instinct) from any creature, that creature could have no use
for anything, hence could be interested in nothing. Interest is
simply the feeling of usefulness of objects;- and since no creature
can have any use for any object unless that object promises to satisfy
an impulse, an instinct, we are face to face with the fact that the
ultimate determinants of interest are the impelling forces which we
call instincts.
The interests of the twentieth century squirrel are essentially
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the interests of the squirrels of all history. The interests of the
twentieth century cat are essentially the historic cat interests; and
the interests of the twentieth century man are essentially and funda-
mentally the interests of historic man. Were it not so, then we
should need no history, no literature, etc., since nothing is eternal in
the doings of men. But the fact is, the essentials of my life are the
essentials of yours; indeed they are the essentials of all human life,
and so the great problems of history, the great human interests,
never die; and history is a living study. The eternal things of life
do not die with the individual, but pass on to the next generation;
and the vitality of the race is revealed to us in the racial habits, the
inherited tendencies, the instincts.
Now, subject matter comes and goes; it is ever changing, and
we cannot predict it. I do not pretend to know what will be the
course of study of the elementary school in the next century. But
the child who is to react upon that subject matter I can predict,
for with all his manifold of feeling, impulse, instinct, attitude, he
will certainly reveal his race when he comes to act. I can tell more
or less definitely what any given squirrel will do, because I know
the squirrel race,?its impulses, instincts, attitudes. I can predict
more or less definitely what any given cat will do, because I know
its racial impulses. So, too, we can know a child and predict his
response if we know the stock of impulses that constitute his real
racial inheritance.
5. The most vital need, and the most enduring thing, in all
education is a working knowledge of the human impulses, human
instincts (all impulse is instinct at root); for they are the eternal
determinants of human interests; and when we have learned these
racial impulses and have developed a technique of handling them,
we shall have solved the biggest problem that has ever confronted
the educator; namely, the problem of controlling human interests.
We already know and have named many of these human im-
pulses; and we seem to know that there are more of them yet to
be known. There is the ownership impulse, the curiosity impulse,
the impulses of expression, experimentation, construction, explora-
tion, play, communication, rivalry, manipulation, imitation, secre-
tiveness, anger, fear, pride, affection, sex, sympathy, sociability,
jealousy, envy, pugnacity, emulation, physical activity, mental
activity, independence, reverence, shyness, collecting, hunting,
hunger and thirst, cleanliness, and modesty.
The lines of demarkation among these impulses are not well
drawn. There is more or less overlapping, and there are apparently
gaps here and there. But our study is young, and our first great
VITALITY OF TEACHING. 5
problem, I may repeat, is the identification and naming of all of
the racial impulses.
Now some of you may be about to say that this is a problem
for the "pure psychologist"; but my reply is, the pure psychologist
(whatever this may mean) has no problems. If he belongs to the
human race, his neutral mechanism, brain and all, has been fashioned
to suit the very impulses which we are seeking; namely, the impulses
that are common to us all and which make him and all of us human.
I may briefly say in passing that anything bids for interest and
attention just in the degree that it promises to satisfy impulse;
and this is the meaning of what we call "need". Just in the degree
that anything does satisfy impulse, it is useful; and so our "cul-
turists," our "useless education" brethren, are about to disappear
along with the old notions of use and interest.
The second part of our great problem is the development of
a technique of handling the human impulses, to the end of con-
trolling the human interests. We are hardly to assume to change
the human impulses. We have heard much in recent years about
"killing off" and "starving out" the "bad instinct"; but the fact
is, my brethren, we have no bad instincts. Had there been any
bad instincts, their defeat would have eliminated them ages ago.
All our racial impulses are valuable .as springs to action. They
represent activities that have proven so thoroughly valuable that
our forefathers have repeated them consistently through the years
until they have become reflex to the nth. power. Every instinct
is good at root, and we have none to spare; and the very attempt
to kill some of them is what I may call the Teaching Tragedy.
Because the ownership impulse impels the child to steal, is no sen-
sible argument for killing off the ownership impulse. We need only
to control the impulse by guiding it on to a better end. Because
the impulse of fear impels the child to lie, is no sensible argument
for killing off the impulse of fear. Now we have no impulses
but may go out toward undesirable ends, hence the need of con-
trolling them; but there is no one of them but may be made
to go out toward good ends; that is, toward ends that are good
for the race; and this is the ultimate test of all morality. These
racial impulses represent modes of reaction that have been extremely
good for the race, so good, indeed, that they have become the
eternal life of the race. Here then is part two of our great prob-
lem; namely, the development of a technique of handling the
impulses so that they may be guided by experience.
6. We get our driving force out of the racial impulses, the
6 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
strength of our fathers raised to the nth power; but we want this
accumulated energy guided by twentieth century intelligence. The
modern world must guide the accumulated energy of the ages. Such
is the ground of progress; and let no man say that we should destroy
any of the forces, any of the impulse that has accumulated through
all the years of man's history.
Now we have a name for this process of directing impulse away
from an impure end and toward a pure end. We have called it
sublimation. This name, which was first applied to the effort to
direct the sex impulse to pure ends, is now to stand for the process
of directing any and all impulse to moral ends. We may therefore
restate part two of our great educational problem, and say it is
the development of a technique of sublimation.
One does not have to go far in the study of the sublimating
process in education before one may discover that this process has
already been carried quite far in teaching; but it has been carried
on accidentally and non-consciously. Now we are to make it an
overt, conscious, and purposive tool in education. Our schools have
been utilizing the constructive impulse, the play impulse, the manipu-
lating impulse, and so on, it is true; but now we are utilize these
impulses as the only vital means of realizing our educational aims.
In no other way can we touch the life of an individual; and so
this linking together of subject matter and impulse, of experience
and the pathways of racial expression, of knowing and the deep
seated tendencies of doing, is in reality the vitality of teaching.
Now I have given thought to the application of the subli-
mating process to some of the problems of the teacher; and for the
purpose of illustration here I have chosen to apply it to the hardest
problem that I have ever discovered in education; namely, the
problem of developing the moral will.
A moral will, as I see it, may be briefly defined as the will to
serve the good of the race. When an individual is confronted with
two or more possible lines of conduct, and he chooses any given one
because he believes it will be best for all men, that will is moral.
To develop such a will, I may repeat, is the hardest problem I know
in education. The fact is, we are making men tremendously intellec-
tual in nearly every field of human knowledge to-day; but I have not
found an educator who is satisfied with our handling of the moral
problem. We know how to sharpen a man's wits, and we are sure
that we can train men up to do almost anything except one thing,
and that is the right thing, the moral thing. It is still altogether too
easy for a man to seek his own selfish ends in the world, to the injury
VITALITY OF TEACHING. 7
of society. Now the trouble with our moral teaching is, it does not
reach the real life of the individual; and if morality is ever to be
anything more than skin deep, if it is ever to be a genuine, vital,
living morality, it must lay hold of the deep-seated springs to action,
the racial impulses. But here arises a problem within a problem.
Every impulse is self-centered, self-satisfying, that is, selfish. How,
then, can impulse ever be made to realize ends that are good for
others? Exactly this is the point at which our moral teaching has
always broken down. We have assumed that morality demands that
the individual must deny self and give his life to the service of his
fellow men. Were this the actual meaning of morality, then we
could have no moral will, since we have no self-annihilating impulse.
Indeed if we could succeed in locating a man's moral center of gravity
anywhere outside of himself, he would become at once an unstable
moral creature, fit only for the insane asylum. But the fact is,
morality does not call for self-abnegation, but for community of
interests. Briefly and plainly told, the problem of developing the
moral will is the problem of enabling the individual to see clearly
that only that which is good for everyone is ultimately good for him;
that there is in reality no conflict between the highest personal
interests and the interests of the race. The moral center of gravity
is therefore within and not without the self; and thus morality is
self-centered and stable, fixed in the welfare of the individual self.
This puts every impulse at the service of morality, and we can never
have a moral will, indeed we can never have any will, without impulse.
With this orientation toward the moral problem, I see how we
can handle the problem, and that is, by sublimation; and in order
that I may make my meaning clear, I will apply the process to that
point in school education where moral training has the feeblest hold;
namely, the primary school. May I say in passing that childhood
should be a busy time for sublimation, and that with a morality
based on community of interests and not on self-abnegation, we can
lay in the primary school a moral foundation that may astonish not
only the modern Rousseau but the modern optimist.
The Sublimation Technique as Developed for the Play Impulse.
A teacher has planned to use a game, say the bean bag game,
ostensibly for a number drill, but primarily as a tool for developing
moral will. Here then we have the play impulse, a strong impulse
in childhood, called into moral service. Perhaps ten children are to
compete, thus adding the powerful and dangerous rivalry impulse.
Now in this game, in this little play world, the serious business, as
8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the child probably sees it, is winning the game. Under the strong
impulse to win (rivalry, in the main), when the competition is at
white heat, it is easy for children to stoop to cheating in order to
win. But the teacher's purpose is to develop the moral will, and
that means here, the will to play fairly. If this end is to be realized
each child in our little world of players must meet three requirements,
namely, (1) he must know the bill of rights, the rules of the game;
(2) he must feel the need of these rules as the guarantee of rights,
of every player's rights; and finally, (3) he must will these rules and
be ever ready to champion them and stand his ground when the bill
of rights is trampled upon. Here then is a magnificent opportunity
to develop moral backbone. Here we may teach the validity of law,
the respect for law, the love of law, the will for law, that guarantees
to everyone his rights.
The teacher introduces the game with the definite purpose of
stirring up the play impulse just as thoroughly as she can, since she
will need this impulse in full strength. She draws the concentric
circles on the floor, then marks off the thrower's line, then toes the
line and turns to the players and says, "Ready". She throws the
first bag and every child leans forward to see what she has scored.
Then she throws the remaining bags, and every child makes the count.
Now the teacher says, "I like this game because we can all play
it together; and I can be happier when I know we are all happy."
Then she inquires, "Do you wish to leave anyone out of the game?
or can you be happier when each one has a chance to enjoy our new
game?" (Here the teacher uses her skill in calling into play a new
impulse, namely, sympathy. It is largely on this impulse that she
is to base the community of interests). The rules are now reviewed
and each child is allowed one trial throw to see if he knows how
to play the game. The teacher then says, "We can't play our game
(pauses to give the play impulse a chance to react) unless we all play
according to the rules. What shall we do, then, with anyone who
breaks a rule?" They vote to rule out anyone who breaks a rule.
Then comes the trying question addressed to each one in turn: "John,
what shall we do with you if you break the rules that we must have
in order to play the game?" Each accepts the penalty for himself
as fully just. This is a vital step, for nowhere in the world is law safe
until accepted by the individual as his own law.
We now have a double motive at work, namely, the will to play,
and the will to have everyone play in order that all may be happy
together (impulses of play and sympathy). Other impulses no
doubt are, and still others will be, at work. The game starts with
the teacher assured that this double motive may be successfully played
VITALITY OF TEACHING. 9
against cheating, bad temper, etc. The first player toes the line,
turns to the class, and according to rule says, "Ready." This is
his overt notice to the world that he is ready to begin and is willing
for the whole world to see that he stands for fair play. He throws,
makes his count (indeed all make the count), and writes the amount
of his earnings opposite his name in the tabulum on the board.
The next player toes the line, forgets to say "Ready", and makes
his first throw. He is quickly called to account by any one, for this
is a world of law. Then the teacher says, " We are all sorry that James
broke our rule. What does James wish to do because he broke a
rule? " James votes to take the penalty in order that the game may
go on, and he writes a cipher after his name in the tabulum.
The game continues; and the teacher allows the competitive
(rivalry) impulse to come in and, in time, grow to white heat, while
all the time she is cautiously playing the.impulses of play and sym-
pathy in the foreground. She commends the manly play (appeal
to pride impulse), appoints a jury of manly players to settle close
decisions (pride, construction, independence, etc.), allows the players
to feel that they are running the game (independence), yet all the
time she is watching for opportunities to drive home the moral values
by linking them to the impulse of play and sympathy and pride and
so on. A game can serve no higher purpose than this. Even
rivalry may be played in trying to outdo in the nobleness of playing
fairly. The moral values are reached just in the degree that the
master hand of the teacher quietly builds up a little world spirit that
loves and wills nothing less than equal rights and fair play.
I would that all men were trained in such a moral world, a world
that knows keen competition and yet wills the square deal. The
spirit of such a world is sorely needed to-day, for it can cure fraud
and graft and greed, can cure all immorality indeed, and thus it solves
our needy problem of moral teaching.
Such is the possible prowess of schoolcraft; such is the vitality
of teaching. A teacher calls into service a little handful of childish
impulses, and manipulates them by combining or opposing them in
such ways as to avoid impure ends and realize such pure ends as moral
will. Gradually the child may be weaned away from ends purely
selfish, and he comes to love and will ends that make a better world
for all of us to live in. This is the essence of sublimation.
By way of brief summary, I may restate (1) that the biggest
word in education to-day, rightly understood, is motivation; (2)
that the most vital element in motivation is the manipulation and
control of the student's impulses to the end of calling out the deep-
10 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
est personality fully expressed in a moral will; and (3) that the most
vital problem in education to-day is (a) the identification and naming
of each and every one of our race-making impulses, and (6) the
development of a technique of handling these impulses in order that
we may control human interests in accordance with our most advanced
ideals.
