A Little More "Truth About Tobacco"
====================================

By Charles Keen Taylor,
Philadelphia, Pa.
In January, 1913, Harper's Weekly published an article which
made my "eyes like stars start from their spheres". This astonish-
ing essay not only absolves tobacco from all wrongdoing, but even
intimates that it might be beneficial. It warmly declares that
the much abused weed has never been shown to have worked actual
damage upon the average normal person, and that all lectures,
statistics, text books of physiology, and the like to the contrary, are
both absurd and ridiculous. In fact it decides that there is no
"evidence to condemn tobacco in any form, not excepting cigarettes" I
I marvelled greatly how such an article came to be printed
in a reputable journal, and my first explanation was silly. I thought
there must be one of those interlocking directorships one hears so
much about, between the tobacco trust and the publishers. Aban-
doning this idea, I then thought that the writer, a man financially
interested in tobacco or an habitual smoker, smuggled the article
into the magazine when the editor was not looking. This idea was
discarded as more silly than the first. Finally I arrived at the only
sensible explanation. The man who wrote it thought he was doing
his religious duty in destroying the damaging ideas extant concern-
ing tobacco. He sincerely thought he was right, and in his mind's
eye no doubt beheld thousands of young men and boys arising to
call him blessed. So he wrote with truth in his heart and sincerity
as his goal. As for the editor, he evidently thought the article was
presented as a piece of humor, a comic essay, and accepted it because
it is funny.
But the fact is that the writer of the serio-comic essay in question
seems to have had an unparalleled genius for making doubtful
statements, so that instead of appearing to be merely funny, the
contents of the article, in their possible effect, appear to be serious
enough. Furthermore with the standing of Harper's Weekly behind
it, the essay if unchallenged might help to make even harder the
already sufficiently difficult struggle for a better moral, mental,
and physical development of the young people of this country.
For this reason the present writer feels that he should set forth such
information concerning the effects of tobacco as he has found in his
(153)
154 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
statistical studies of children. It might be mentioned here that the
author of the article in question, Dr. Leonard K. Hirshberg, scrupu-
lously avoids mentioning any of the important statistical studies made
along this line. Perhaps he never heard of them.
A very simple method of taking up this subject is that of consid-
ering the doctor's article, paragraph by paragraph, so that none of the
absurdities and mistakes, due no doubt to pure ignorance of the sub-
ject, may be neglected. The first couple of paragraphs set forth
the dictum that the great opposition to the using of tobacco is largely
based upon a kind of puritanic dislike for anything that gives too much
pleasure. Also, those who know no better object to it because "it
gives its users contentment, peace, and a healthful, animal sort of
enjoyment, a sublime callousness to the ethical and theological puzzles
which fret and frazzle its enemies, a beautiful and irritating indiffer-
ence to all but the pleasant things of life". This last by the way
is a remarkable admission, though why our friend the doctor should
consider a callous indifference to the finer things of life as a distinct
advantage, I am really unable to imagine. It is very true that heavy
smokers, especially juvenile smokers, are often callous and insensitive:
that is one of the serious charges laid against the use of tobacco;
but why the estimable doctor should advertise that effect of the
weed as one to be desired I cannot imagine, unless it be that he
too by dint of smoking, or perhaps chewing, or both, has made him-
self indifferent and callous, and thinks his second state better than
his first. I doubt if an unnarcoticized public will agree with him.
Let us see what he says in the next paragraph. Here we have
his word for it that the chief critics of the use of tobacco are the
members of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union, patent
medicine advertisements, and school physiologies. This is really
too funny. It has the unconscious humor which is the very funniest
kind. The sight of the ignoramus parading as the sage has tickled
humanity ever since the dawn of civilization. As a matter of fact,
any one who knows anything at all about the question knows that the
most consistent and determined opponents of smoking are the school
teachers of the country, and the physical directors and athletic
coaches as well. From a direct acquaintance with hundreds of chil-
dren and young people they are likely to know what they are talking
about. The writer for some years was a regular teacher, and since
then, while carrying on special investigations of different kinds
among schools and pupils, he has become acquainted with many
hundreds of children, and yet in all that time he has never seen a
"Temperance Union" tract on the smoking question, and extremely
few patent medicine advertisements on the subject. As for the school
A LITTLE MORE "TRUTH ABOUT TOBACCO." 155
physiologies, it is very probable that the doctor is not aware that
the majority in use have been prepared by very able men of his own
profession, men whose names are not at all unknown either to the
medical world or to the general public. Besides teachers and those
directly engaged in the endeavor to improve the physical status of
children, there are very many students of childhood and of character
development. If the doctor, by way of curiosity, should care to
inquire of these, he would doubtless gain much valuable and startling
information. Just one good example will suffice, taken from a book
well known to those interested in the physical development of
children and young men,?"Anthropometry and Physical Examina-
tion," by J. W. Seaver, A.M., M.D. On page 184 of this volume we
read as follows:
"It has long been recognized by the ablest medical authorities
that the use of tobacco is injurious to the respiratory tract, but the
extent of its influence in checking growth in this and in other direc-
tion has, I believe, been widely underestimated." Then Dr. Seaver
cites the results of some very simple observations made at Yale and
Amherst. Studying the "growth" of a class at Yale it was found
that the weight of non-users increased 10.4 per cent more than that
of the regular u^ers of tobacco. In growth of height the non-users
grew 24 per cent more than did the regular users, and in lung capacity
the non-users increased 77.5 per cent more than did the users! Dr.
Leonard K. Hirshberg with commendable discretion gives no statis-
tics. Dr. Seaver does so, with interesting results, as you see. The
class of '91 at Amherst was studied in the same way, with very similar
results. So here we have an example of a critic of a type not men-
tioned by Dr. Hirshberg,?a type of critic to be reckoned with.
To make assurance doubly sure before passing on to the next exhibit,
let us consider a few figures obtained by Dr. Pack of the University
of Utah.* Dr. Pack received figures from the physical directors
of six colleges. In these colleges there were 210 candidates for
positions on the first foot-ball elevens. Of these candidates 117
were non-smokers. One third of the smokers and two thirds of the
non-smokers made the teams. The lung capacity of the smokers
averaged 30 cubic inches less than that of the non-smokers. Also,
considering scholarship, the average mark of the smokers was 74.5
and of the non-smokers 79.5. Besides this, the smokers scored
twice as many failures as the non-smokers. Further criticism of
this particular paragraph of Dr. Hirshberg's is unnecessary.
What says the learned doctor next? Says he, "Practically all
of the world's gigantic store of anti-tobacco literature is based upon
four fundamental propositions:
* Quoted, not verbatim, from The'Continent, January 2, 1913.
156 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
"1. Tobacco contains nicotine, which is a powerful narcotic
and poison.
"2. In the process of smoking, nicotine is absorbed into the body
and produces or induces many deadly maladies, including cancer,
paralysis, heart disease, bronchitis, blindness, and tuberculosis.
"3. Tobacco engenders a craving for alcohol.
"4. Nicotine is such a powerful poison (this is a classical argu-
ment and appears in all the school physiology books) that one drop
placed upon the tongue of a dog is sufficient to kill the animal."
The doctor now genially admits that nicotine is in fact a decided
narcotic and poison, but he claims, the drug enters the body in such
small quantities that "the body so soon grows immune to its effects,
that it does no harm whatever"! As to the smallness of the enter-
ing quantity, first of all, infinitesimal as it is, it is yet powerful enough
to produce very painful and characteristic disorders. Repetition, in
truth, as the doctor says, eliminates the appearance of disorder, and
this the doctor claims, proves that the body has become "immune".
And now, along the same line, comes another argument which must
have been the one which made the editor decide the article was a
humorous one, and consent to publish it. The doctor goes on to
show that people who have once had yellow fever, or small pox,
become immune to those diseases. Then says he, "it is the same with
nicotine poisoning"! The man who has gone through the mild
poisoning that attacks beginners is thereafter immune to all ill effects
of tobacco! That a physician, a real "M.D.", will say that the
poisoning produced by a drug produces an immunity for itself just
as a disease produced by bacilli produces immunity for itself, makes
one pause and wonder where that physician could have obtained his
M.D., or what kind of "callousness and indifference" would permit
him to write such a thing. It sounds well, of course', but drugs and
poisons do not all act in the same way. Alcoholic poisoning is a
beautiful example of the group of habit-forming drugs. No matter
how a man is poisoned?no matter how drunken he is upon his first
close acquaintance with alcohol, he is hardly less affected the next
time, and the next time. In fact he can readily be poisoned to the
end of his days, which are not likely to be many. Also, by taking
small doses of opium, one does not seem to become immune. In
fact, as in alcohol poisoning, and also in nicotine poisoning, the pres-
ence of the drug in the system seems to set up a craving for more of
the drug, often with serious results. However there is no need to
pursue this particular line further. The figures given by Dr. Seaver
and by Dr. Pack show that the regular taking of nicotine, even in
very small quantities, does not make the taker "immune" at all. but
causes serious and perhaps permanent effects.
A LITTLE MORE "TRUTH ABOUT TOBACCO." 157
The doctor now has one entire column devoted to the argument
that after all the smoker, even the cigarette smoker, really obtains
but a very small amount of nicotine, a fraction indeed of the amount
of the drug which existed in the smoked cigars, cigarettes, and pipes.
The cigarette too, let us say in passing, is absolved of all blame, the
user receiving no worse effects than could be obtained by smoking
kindling-wood, hay, or dried leaves. This last of course is absurd,
but we have no quarrel with the first part of this statement. The
smoker does in fact receive very little of the amount of nicotine
existing in his cigar or cigarette, but that little, as our statistics seem
to show, has some effect after all, and one not to be left unconsidered.
Next the doctor lights upon the saying that tobacco-using may
bring on cancer, catarrh, bronchitis, blindness, and the like. But
who on earth ever says that smoking is responsible for the occurrence
of any affection really caused by bacilli? As to cancer and blindness
however, our medical expert is rightly cautious, for too many smokers
have developed cancer on the lips, tongue, or in the throat, and too
many have had eye troubles directly attributable to nicotine poison-
ing to give a disclaimer much weight. So he dubiously admits that
in certain cases, far remote from ordinary, such things may happen as
cancer or eye-trouble as a result of too great an indulgence in tobacco,
but only in the case of very abnormal people. Even if nicotine can
encourage such effects in only a few the argument is clear enough that
it does have some effect. But we will let that go for the time being,
while we see what comes next. I wish we could go over the entire
article in complete detail, but space is wanting.
Next he declares that tobacco-heart has nothing whatever to do
with tobacco. He endeavors to show that Dr. Osier agrees with
this, but with poor success, though the effort from a standpoint of
ingenuity is first class. Then he quotes from Osier, as a "clincher",
"cardiac pain without evidence of arteriosclerosis or valvular disease
is not of much moment." Well this is true enough, for ordinary
cardiac pain, as anyone who knows anything about the heart will tell
you, is no evidence that anything is the matter with the heart itself.
But I wonder if the enthusiastic doctor ever heard of a sphygmograph,
or of a plethysmograph, and if he ever obtained pulse-records of
numbers of smokers and non-smokers with the aid of these ingenious
instruments. Many such records have been made by me and I have
seen the trembling finger of the instrument, moving lightly over the
blackened paper, mark the characteristic little irregularities that
appear in the pulse of the habitual smoker. There is no cardiac
;pain at all. Says Dr. Kenelm Winslow, formerly Assistant Professor
of Comparative Therapeutics at Harvard University, "In true
158 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
organic disease of the heart muscle, when the action is unusually-
strong and rapid, the patient is, in most instances, completely uncon-
scious of it". So one may have a cardiac trouble without pain in
the heart. And so one may have tobacco-heart without pain, too.
There is no question of pain at all. But that the regular use of nico-
tine does cause the introduction of an irregularity into the pulse is
easily demonstrated, and anything that will cause an irregularity in
something as important as the pulse, must be a matter of serious con-
sequence indeed.
Unfortunately we cannot stop at every sentence, and pick out the
very visible flaws, but we will have to consider one or two more re-
marks before closing. Says the doctor, many have "pointed out
the indubitable fact that the average boy smoker is not so bright as
the boy who does not smoke." Then he goes on to say that only
stupid boys smoke any way, boys who are stupid from birth and who
will remain stupid through life. I should like to ask, if it is not an
indiscretion, whether the doctor smoked when he was a boy! Next
he says that bright and healthy boys, if kept away from evil com-
panions, will not smoke. He then says, if you do not believe it,
ask any observant school-teacher. Well, for one, here is a former
school-teacher writing this present article, a teacher who has inci-
dentally made physical measurements and individual study of many
hundreds of boys. This particular teacher does not believe any
such thing as the learned doctor proposes. Why do boys smoke?
Not because they are stupid from birth, not at all. Merely because
they wish to imitate "grown-ups". In two things a boy can imitate
a man?one kind of a man. A boy can be as profane and a boy can
smoke as much, or almost as much. Then too, active boys like to be
considered "sports", and are not generally shown the difference
between "cheap sports" and "real sports". The cheap sport is
usually in evidence; he is no athlete, he is usually a corner-lounger,
and of course he smokes largely; also he is usually profane. So the
boy wishing to be looked upon as older and more mature than he is,
adopts the striking vices of this striking type of "sport", and so
becomes a smoker. This has been not only my observation, but that
of all close students of the question with whom I have become
acquainted, one of whom I may mention, Dr. Arthur Holmes, late
Assistant Professor of Psychology in the University of Pennsylvania
and now Dean of the Faculty of State College. The boy,?the aver-
age boy and not the abnormal one,?smokes in imitation, and suffers
serious consequences thereby.
In closing, I take the liberty of publishing, mostly for the first
time,.the results of some extended observations among school-children,
A LITTLE MORE "TRUTH ABOUT TOBACCO." 159
both of public and of private schools. Let us first consider records
taken from 450 private school boys,* boys of what we are pleased
to term the "upper middle class". Records were taken of boys of
from twelve to seventeen years inclusive. It was found that 15
per cent of the twelve year old boys, 20 per cent of the thirteen year
old, 38 per cent of the fourteen year old, 29 per cent of the fifteen
year old, 57 per cent of the sixteen year old, and 71 per cent of the
seventeen year old boys were either regular or occasional smokers.
Does Dr. Hirshberg dare to claim that 71 per cent of the boys in
these schools were born stupidf It is not likely. Now follow the
grades for these boys, contrasting those of the non-smokers with those
of the smokers. These grades were averaged from their school reports
for three successive months, and included marks for lessons as well
as for conduct.
Age  12 13 14 15 16 17
Grade, non-smokers  83 90 89 84 87 85
Grade, smokers  73 75 73 75 75 68
Even considering the fact that the smoker is likely to be an
outdoor boy, and less of a natural student in consequence than the
non-smoker, these figures are rather significant.
Let us now consider a group of 263 public school children,
twelve years old and older, in grades from 5th B to 8th B inclusive.
These boys were pupils in a public school of a very fine type and
high standing, and in a good neighborhood. The average age for each
class was found, and then the boys who were older and younger than
the average were studied, not only as to their smoking?that was
merely incidental?but as to many other interesting data. But with
regard to tobacco, this was found,?of the boys who were two years
younger than the average for their class, 2.3 per cent were smokers,
of those one year younger than the average, 10.5 per cent were
smokers. Boys of the average age included 38 per cent smokers.
Boys a year older than the average had 41.2 per cent of their number
smokers, 81 per cent of those two years over the average were smokers,
and 83.5 per cent of those three years over average. This is rather
significant. But, you say, the older boys would naturally possess
a higher percentage of smokers anyway. Well, let us consider all
of the boys of one age in these grades. Taking all those of twelve
years of age we find that in the highest grade there were no smokers
of this age and none in the next lower grade, in the next 14 per cent
* See also Taylor, Charles Keen. The Boy and the Cigarette. The Psychological Clinic,
Vol. IV, p. 54.
160 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of the twelve year old boys were smokers, in the next lower 16.7 per
cent, in the next 20 per cent, and in the next 23 per cent. Although
we cannot concede that these boys smoked because they were "born
stupid", we can see plainly that the boys who are advanced for their
age are not smokers, while those who are low for their age are so in
considerable proportion.
A study was made of the "disease" records of these 262 boys.
The total percentage of smokers was 30.4 per cent. Now if smoking
had no effect, we would be likely to see the proportion of smokers
having had "stomach trouble" to the non-smokers having had the
same disorder to be the same as above, that is 30.4 per cent. Such,
however, is anything but the case. The records show that of the boys
having "nerve disorders", all, that is 100 per cent, were smokers.
Of all having "stomach troubles" 71.4 per cent were smokers. Per-
haps this was caused by swallowing smoke and nicotine-laden saliva.
Of those having typhoid-pneumonia, 50 per cent were smokers, the
same is true of appendicitis. Of all who had diphtheria, 38.5 per cent
were smokers, and of those having disorders in the naso-pharynx
37 per cent were smokers. These percentages, you will note, are all
larger than the legitimate proportion of 30.4 per cent as noted above.
It is only when we consider the common diseases of early childhood,
which come before the "smoking age", that we find the proportion
the one that Dr. Hirshberg would expect, for it is exactly 30.4 per
cent, as one would suppose.
It is hardly necessary to give the difference in growth rate of
smokers and non-smokers among boys, for they are much like those
of the college men, as noted by Dr. Seaver.
With all this evidence before us we cannot help coming back to
our first question, and that is, how did such an article happen to be
published in a careful and influential magazine? And we can arrive
only at the same conclusion,?that the editor printed it as a bit
of humor, and that the writer himself was so callous and indifferent
to ethical considerations, that he really did not care what its effect
might be upon his juvenile readers and upon the uninformed among
his adult readers.
