Politics, Efficiency, and Retardation
======================================

By Felix Arnold, Pd.D., Ph.D.,
New York, N. Y.
After all the statistics on retardation and repeating have been
gathered, after the most complete schemes of organization, classification, and promotion have been devised, in the final analysis all will
be of little avail unless we have the following,?(1) scientific supervision of class work, (2) proper methods of instruction and discipline,
(3) graded and standardised courses of study, (4) selection, appointment, and promotion of school officials on the basis of merit, and
(5) sufficient money to equip and supply schools and classrooms.
In factory management scientific supervision has become an estab;
lished fact, of which the value is now measured in terms of dollars
and cents,1 but in the schools, supervision hangs like a yellow cloud
over the classroom and shuts out many of the sources of sweetness
and light. Where education stalks along the dark and crooked
ways of political preferment, nothing else can be expected. If all
the officials were scholars, less harm would be done, but too often
the officials are not scholars, and the scholars are not officials. Efficiency then is not the title to preferment, and even if in the lower
strata civil service is in force and is flaunted before the public, at
the top the augurs smile and perhaps drown comment in the flowing
bowl.
There are one or two notions which animate retarded school
officials who owe their positions to political preferment. One such
notion is, "Run things quietly and smoothly;" the other is a misguided paternalism which neglects the children entirely, and looks
upon the school system as a place which is to provide easy berths
for young ladies and gentlemen who are properly connected. The
political appointee does not want any fuss. So long as there is no
agitation, there will be no investigation, there will be no sharp call
for standards, progress, results, and efficiency. It is better to let
things go as they are than to present and to uphold standards. A
standard implies definite knowledge, definite acquaintance with
lSee, among others, Emerson, H., Efficiency, and The Principles of Efficiency, Taylor,
F. W., The Principles of Scientific Management, Parkhurst, F. A., Methods of Scientific Management, Diemer, H., Factory Organization and Administration, (This book has an excellent
bibliography), Arnold, H. 2 he Complete Cost Keeper, and The Factory Manager and
Accountant.
(35)
36 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
research here and abroad, wide knowledge of the literature of the
subject, ability to collect facts and interpret them, stamina enough
to enforce proper classroom methods and humane treatment of
children. Now the political appointee has no such standards, in
fact, he looks with contempt upon anything which smells of the
university, the laboratory, or the library, grandiloquently stigmatises
the student as a theoriser spinning webs in cloud-cuckoo-land, and
loudly ridicules any suggestions which would tend to stir things up.
Moreover, good living and drinking usually give the political appointee a 'presence,' and enable him to swell majestically before lay
boards who are duly impressed with any statements which such
an imposing figure may offer.
A misguided paternalism is a second idol which tends to produce
retarded teachers and so retarded children. Your politician likes
to pose as a deity who is able to 'fix things up,' who is able to make
the teacher 'happy,' and who can promise his friends that Miss
So-and-so will not be bothered. The questions which are put to
the teacher are not, 'What work are you asked to do,' or, 'What
methods are you asked to follow,' or 'What results are you asked
to attain,' or, 'How are you supervised,' or, 'What instructions are
you given;' but instead, in a benevolent manner are asked, 'Are you
happy?' and, 'Do you like your school?' No doubt such hedonistic
tendencies should have a place in the school, but they should not be
the sole criterion of efficiency. Your political appointee hates work,
and is never so happy as when he or she is doing nothing, and is
not ' bothered' in so doing.
In many towns and cities the teachers and the principals of
the schools are selected by competitive examination, and appointed
from an eligible list. Their appointment is the result of merit.
But when the retention of their positions, and their periodical
increases in salary depend upon the approval of a superintendent
who is directly appointed by a political Board of Education, civil
service has somewhat the sound of a tinkling cymbal. Ambition
to improve is smothered at the outset. Study becomes the handmaid to politics, and the political club replaces the library, the
laboratory, and the lecture room. A principal has little to rouse him
to improve the condition of the children. Plans of organisation
which he may devise, improved methods which he may outline,
and schemes to advance children more rapidly and secure individual
attention to them will cause a stir among the teachers, may result in
their being 'unhappy,' and will at once receive stern disapproval from
the superintendent, who wants things to run smoothly. It is
easier to let the class sit quietly while the 'next boy' reads, than to
POLITICS AND RETARDATION. 37
classify the children in groups and prepare sufficient busy work to
keep the rest of the class busy. The teacher will be 'happier' the
old way, and 'things will run smoothly.' The principal who does
not stir things up is the 'successful manager,' and becomes the model,
which sooner or later the newcomer is bound to follow if he wishes
to get ahead.
The idea of paternalism also tends to handicap the principal
who wishes to improve the condition of the children. Your young
lady who is well connected, who wishes to attend dances and parties,
who has little time to prepare charts, lists, drawings, busy work, and
the like,?such a one is bothered exceedingly if these are asked for.
She does not' like her prinicpal' and lets every one know this. Again
the higher deity steps in to 'fix' matters. The principal is held in
check. The school again runs smoothly, but at the same time there
is no thorough group work, individual attention to the children is
not attempted, and about a third or a half of the class receive any
sort of instruction. The rest are 'so stupid,' (said rather coquettishly), 'some may get ahead,' and 'really everything (a word which
is seldom worked out in detail) has been tried to get them ahead.'
What holds for this aspect of instruction, holds in other lines. Graded
work, check tests, careful classification of pupils in the classroom,
etc., if these require extra effort, are sure to make teacher unhappy,
cause her not to like to teach, and must go to the scrap heap with
other ideas and ideals.
When the superintendent is directly elected by a board of education it is a question whether he is really in a position which will enable
him to make a scientific course of study. At the outset of his career
he may be animated by high ideals, and may be determined to secure
high standards, but his environment is against it. His origin is a
political one. If he was a student, he must become a 'good mixer,'
he must be able to hold pleasant converse with leaders of the church,
the club, and society, he has little time to study, to do research work,
or to apply modern standards. He can not afford to be looked upon
as an agitator, or perhaps as a socialist or anarchist (and this would
happen if he attempted things which are considered axiomatic in
the academic world), he must run things smoothly, and so he slowly
degenerates. Among his own kind, in his political' crowd' he usually
is looked upon as a shining light; but the light is that which academic
analysis will show to come from decaying ideals. The course of
study, like other things which relate to the welfare of the children,
must not be disturbed. Things must go on in the old way. No stir
must be made, for this would demand an intensive knowledge,
which the political appointee has not. One who might attempt to
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
establish modern standards and progressive methods would be subjected to a spiritual auto da fe which would effect results much like
the inquisition of old.
Until the superintendent is selected solely according to merit,
determined by fixed standards, until the top of the school system is
freed from even the most remote kind of political control, retarded
school officials will interfere with effective classroom work, and will
in great measure produce retarded courses of study, and retarded
children. Furthermore, the superintendent should hold office during
good behavior. Until we can read announcements like those given
out by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,?"A public examination of persons wishing to obtain the certificate of approval of the
Massachusetts Board of Education for the position of superintendent
of schools,"?until such notices become a part of the civil service
system there is little hope for a progress sufficient to meet the
advance of the times. Education must continue to hobble along,
losing ground continually, a reproach to the community, and a scorn
and a derision to the bystanders.
