Measuring Efficiency of Instruction
====================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1913, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VII, No. 6 November 15, 1913
 :Author:  William E. Grady,
Principal Public School 64, Manhattan, New York, N. Y.

If the ethical problem of education is to promote such an
organization of society as will enable each individual to do the work
for which he is best fitted, the essential requirements are not only
a diversified curriculum to insure accurate adjustment of the process to individual needs and capacities, but also the development of
standards and scales of measurement such as will enable us to measure the success of the instruction process in terms of the individual.
While it is probably impossible at this time to outline a specific
method for measuring the effectiveness of our work, it is not difficult
to indicate several important factors, many of them at present
ignored, which are fundamental to the establishment of any such
standards.

Assuming in spite of the present confusion of ideals, that we had
a definitely formulated aim which could stand the test of scientific
criticism, and which would be not only broad enough to be true to
the splendid variety of human nature, but also specific enough to
make it a proper measure of the intensive and vital individuality of
each pupil, it would still be difficult if not impossible at present to
measure the effectiveness of the educational process, because we do
not measure in terms of physical endowment and native mental
capacity the pupils for whom such an aim must be realized.
For example, at present pupils entering the first year classes
are grouped and instructed on the assumption that because they
have reached the chronological age of six years, they must be alike
as regards mental maturity despite the wide variations in nationality, physical and mental endowments, and specialized environmental
experiences. Within the last few years we have witnessed partial
attempts to insure homogeneity of the pupil groups under instruction by the elimination of the blind, the deaf, the tubercular, and the
mentally deficient. The day should speedily come when all children on admission to school will be subjected to a thorough examination, inclusive not only of the child's learning but also of his physical condition and native mental ability.
Inasmuch as there are well-established norms of stature, weight,
^thoracic and cranial capacity, acuity of vision and hearing, we ought
to know at the initial stage of the pupil's school career in what
respects he is subnormal, normal or super-normal in order that such
knowledge may be the fundamental basis of pedagogical endeavor.
"Biometry and bio-statistics lift the child out of a general class and
present him to the teacher's eyes as a living individual."

Great as is the need of sizing up our incoming pupil in physical
terms, still greater is the need of testing his mental capacity upon
his admission to school. The assumption that as regards mentality
children are all the same or all about alike finds no basis in fact.
As soon as we apply tests of native ability, whether they be those of
Binet and Simon, or the more eclectic scales that are being developed
rapidly, we discover an astounding variation in native ability, a
fact which must receive explicit recognition in any attempt to measure the effectiveness of our work. You cannot garner souls from the
four corners of the earth without reaping a few of the supremely
talented of god-like vision, a bulk of mediocrity, constituting what
one writer calls "the ballast of civilization," and lastly a harvest of
thorns and thistles, of moral, mental and physical debris.
An application of the Binet scale to the children in the schools
of Vineland, New Jersey, showed that of 1547 so-called average
pupils, 616 were from one to six years retarded, 582 were normal,
and 349 were from one to four years better than normal. Can it
be doubted that if our first year group were subjected to testing,
a corresponding variation in ability would appear?

Without amplifying the discussion it may be sufficient to state
that until we recognize the problem of individuality, and at the very
outset of our work determine the physical and mental equipment of
each pupil, we are in no position to measure with any degree of
accuracy the work expended in bringing the pupil group up to a
given standard, much less decide whether the teacher, the pupil,
the method, or the curriculum is the cause of our failure to reach
desired results. However, it is apparent that the evaluation of work
costing $40,000,000 a year can hardly be postponed until such
educational aims have been formulated and until pupils have been
scientifically classified. Modes of valuation, the establishment of
standards and scales of measurement are a present need. It is
interesting therefore to refer briefly to two recent attempts to measure the effectiveness of the teaching in our city schools
In his recent attempt to pass judgment upon the quality of
instruction in the schools of our city, Professor McMurry consciously rejected the customary modes of judging the efficiency of
instruction in terms of examinations of pupils in subject matter.
He claims that under average conditions, tests or examination are
of little positive value as sole standards for judging efficiency for
several reasons. In the first place such testing depends too much
upon accidental conditions such as recency of review, freedom from
embarrassment or excitement. In the second place, such tests tend to
over-emphasize the value of a retentive memory and a fund of
information rather than reasoning ability and correct methods of
study. In the third place, certain higher effects of instruction as
distinguished from the mere accumulation of information or habits
of study cannot be measured by the average tests. Finally such
tests do little beyond revealing the present status, and standards
for judging the effectiveness of instruction should be so chosen as
to suggest the direction that further progress might take.
Rejecting therefore the customary mode of testing as a means of
determining the effectiveness of the instruction process, he assumes
as a fundamental thesis that a curriculum is good to the extent
to which it contains problems mental, moral, aesthetic, and economic
that are socially vital and yet within the pupil's appreciation, and
that the method of presenting the curriculum is good to the extent
to which the method exemplifies ways of solving problems found
most effective by the world's intelligent workers.

Because of their universality, Professor McMurry states that
the following four factors were considered worthy of acceptance as
standards for judging the efficiency of instruction:?

1. Motive:

Inasmuch as a man's aims or motives in terms of their quality,
their variety and their intensity determine his character, one of the
primary responsibilities of instruction is to develop motives, to lead
the pupil to want, to know, to do, and to be. Instruction cannot
rest satisfied with cold facts alone. Its quality is to be measured
partly in terms of its provision for growth in motive.

2. Initiative:

In the world at large, perhaps the most highly valued quality of
character is the power of initiative, the ability to act as a leader not
only in one's own affairs but in the affairs of others. Children can
act largely under the influence of a dominating personality called the
teacher, but in the last analysis they must be self directing. It
follows therefore that the school should consciously aim to direct the
power of self direction. To the extent to which the instruction process
requires that as children progress through the grades, they bear
increasingly the responsibility for decision as to the origination and
the execution of work, just to that extent is the work characterized
by initiative.

3. Judgment or consideration of values:

Inasmuch as life's situations constantly thrust considerations
of worth to the foreground of both adult and pupil experience, school
instruction should consciously aim to develop the same critical
attitude that life's situations demand. In other words, effective
instruction should result in the development of sound judgment.
There should be fewer recitations in history, geography, literature or
any other subject, in which the varying values of facts and tasks are
not distinguished.

4. Organization of thought:

Inasmuch as a factor of special importance in daily life is the
organization of ideas, a fundamental aim of instruction should be
so to group and relate the material presented that the pupil will be
possessed of definite, conceptual systems of thought which will be the
basis of ample, organized expression.

No intelligent critic of the teaching process can deny the
superlative value of these descriptive, subjective standards as partial
measures of the efficiency of instruction and as a strong reminder of
the defects of the traditional mode of testing by means of examinations that tend to put a premium on memoriter instruction. But
does not the fact that the application of such criteria led Professor
McMurry to conclude that the working theory of our schools seemed
to be directed systematically away from such standards, indicate
the need of supplementing them in every way possible? Inasmuch
as definite, concrete expression of knowledge such as the best type of
the traditional tests demand, is also a very real index of the effectiveness of instruction, we still face the question: What means shall
we adopt to stimulate motive, to spur initiative, to test judgment
and to measure organization of thought?

The use of the Courtis tests in arithmetic illustrates a very
recent and interesting attempt to solve this problem. The application of the test was an attempt to supplement such subjective
standards as Professor McMurry proposes, by definite objective
scales of measurement which enable one to judge the extent of the
pupil's accomplishment and the effectiveness of the teacher's work.
On the basis of tests covering 10,000 pupils in seventy schools in ten
different states, Prof. Courtis has devised eight arithmetical tests
involving:

1. Copying of numbers during a time span of one minute.
2, 3, 4, 5. Combinations in addition, subtraction, multiplication
and division during periods of one minute each.
6. Computations involving the four fundamental operations
during a period of twelve minutes.

7, 8. Problem groups in one of which operations are merely
indicated; in the other of which the work is carried to completion
during spans of six minutes each.

Extending his investigations to 52 schools, 913 classes and
33,000 pupils, he concluded that the application of these uniform
tests to all grades revealed the following:

(a) That grade grouping as an index of arithmetical attainment has very little significance.
(b) That there is great variation in the abilities of the pupils in
any given grade. He concludes that testing 4B grades as at present
organized will reveal the following,?

45 per cent of the grade will exceed the average of the grade.
35 per cent of the grade will exceed the average of the next

higher (grade 5A).

25 per cent of the grade will exceed the average of grade 5B.
15 per cent of the grade will exceed the average of grade 6A.
10 per cent of the grade will exceed the average of grade 6B.
5 per cent of the grade will exceed the average of grade 7A.

In like manner

35 per cent of the grade will fall below the 4A average.
25 per cent of the grade will fall below the 3B average.
15 per cent of the grade will fall below the 3A average.
10 per cent of the grade will fall below the 2B average.
5 per cent of the grade will fall below the 2A average.

(c) That accuracy has been sacrificed for speed.
(d) That the proficiency obtained in abstract work which is as
high or higher than that ordinarily obtained, has been obtained at
the expense of reasoning ability.

The vital importance of Mr. Courtis' work lies in the fact that
on the basis of extended investigation, he has developed a certain
measuring scale of proficiency that is applicable not only to individual
pupils but also to a school or to a system. Despite the fact that
such standards are tentative, that the problems employed and the
conclusions drawn with reference to reasoning ability should be
subjected to critical analysis, the fact remains that were such standards generally adopted they would undoubtedly do much to place
arithmetical instruction on a sounder basis. The supervisor, the
teacher, and the pupil would work more intelligently and more
effectively if such terms as rapidity and accuracy found in most
courses of study, were reduced to the degree of definiteness indicated
by the Courtis tests.

The following table with Mr. Courtis' interpretation will serve
to indicate more clearly what is meant:

STANDARD SCORES.

Test No.
Grade 3. .
" 4. .
" 5. .
" 6. .
" 7. .
" 8. .
" 9. .
No. 1
Copying
58
72
86
99
110
117
120
(1 min.)
No. 2
Addition
26
34
42
50
58
63
65
(1)
No. 3
Subtraction
19
25
31
38
44
49
50
(1)
No. 4
Mult.
No. 5
Div.
16
23
30
37
44
49
50
(1)
No. 6
Compt.
Ats. Rts.
5.0 2.7
7.0 3.3
9.0 4.9
11.0 6.6
13.0 8.3
14.4 10.0
15.0 11.0
(12)
No. 7
Problems
no operat'n
Ats. Ilts.
2.7 2.1
3.7 3.0
4.8 4.0
5.8 5.0
6.8 6.0
7.8 7.0
8.6 7.8
(6)
No. 8
Problems
operation
Ats. Rts.
2.0 1.1
2.6 1.7
3.1 2.2
3.7 2.8
4.2 3.4
4.8 4.0
5.0 4.3
(6)

"Translating this table into words: At the end of a year's work
an eighth-grade child should be able to copy figures in pencil on
paper at the rate of 117 figures per minute; to write answers to
multiplication combinations at the rate of 49 answers per minute;
to read simple one-step problems of approximately 30 words in
length and decide upon the operation to be used in their solution at
the rate of 8 examples a minute with an accuracy of 90 per cent;
to work abstract examples of approximately 10 figures (twice as
many for addition) at the rate of 14.4 examples in 10 minutes with
an accuracy of 70 per cent; to solve two-step problems of approximately 10 figures at the rate of 5 in 6 minutes with an accuracy of
75 per cent. At the present time 70 per cent of the eighth-grade
children cannot meet these standards. But it must be borne in
mind that 3 per cent of the fifth-grade children can, and that experience has shown that individual care and a very little well-managed
drill produces marked changes in the ability of most children."
To state that in a certain grade, in a minute's time so many
addition combinations should be recognized with a certain degree
of accuracy, or referring to another field of work which has been
recently investigated, to say that as a result of penmanship instruction, so many letters should be written in a certain time with a certain degree of form and legibility, is to insure not only increased
intelligent effort on part of the teacher, but also increased selfmotived attainment on the part of the pupil.
MEASURING EFFICIENCY OF INSTRUCTION. 151
Why should not our school system test the value of the qualitative and quantitative standards that have been developed as a
result of recent investigations? If Ayres, Thorndike, Wilson, Freeman and Starch have worked out certain standards in penmanship,
Hillegas and Courtis, standards in English composition, and Buckingham a scale of measurement in spelling, why should not the work
receive cordial acceptance by our supervisory staff? To the extent
that these results are valid we should make use of them; to the
extent that they are defective we should reject them on the basis
of carefully scrutinized classroom practice.

In short, we have reached a stage in educational practice where
there is a definite realization of the need of defining standards of
attainment in each school subject, and also the degree of proficiency
to be attained at any stage of the effort. For example, it is recognized that we should know not only the amount of arithmetic or
penmanship a pupil should be master of at the close of an eight year
course, but also the amount and quality of his attainments at any
given year during the course. Effective instruction is partially
dependent upon the establishment and use of definite standards of
attainment which will enable us to determine the amount of change
our instruction has effected. The establishment of standards such
as are contemplated, involves due consideration of the capacity of
the pupil and also the demands of the life into which he will probably go. While the study of school conditions will tend to fix certain maximum standards to be attained in such subjects as the
"three R's," due regard for each individual's native capacity
and his prospective vocational life will determine the degree of
proficiency that it may be desirable for him to attempt to attain.
Moreover, such investigation as well as the application of the results
is fundamentally the work of the administrators of our city schools,
rather than the work of university professors or postgraduate students remote from contact with the teaching situation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.
-------------

For general survey of situation, see
Twelfth Herbartian Year Book, I, Chicago University
Press; article by Professor Bobbitt.
Bulletin No. 116, The Measurement of Educational Processes and Products, by Dr L. P. Ayres, Division of Education
of the Russell Sage Foundation, New York City.
Scientific Management in Education, by Dr J. M. Rice,
New York: Hinds, Noble & Eldredge.
For point of view concerning need of application of standards of
physique, see
152 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Pedagogical Anthropology, by Maria Montessori. New
York: Stokes & Co.
Outline of Individual Study, by George E.. Partridge.
New York: Sturgis & Walton.
Bibliography on Educational Hygiene and Physical Education, by Wood and Reesor. New York: Teachers College.
For Binet Scale, see
Manual of Mental and Physical Tests, G. M. Whipple.
Baltimore: Warwick & York.
For criticism of scale, see
Bulletin No. 107, by Ayres, Russell Sage Foundation.
For results of application of scale, see
The Psychological Clinic, Vols. V, VI, and VII.
For discussion of standardization in various school subjects, see
Bulletin 1913, No. 13, issued by U. S. Bureau of Education, Repor: on Standards and Tests for Measuring the Efficiency of Schools or Systems of Schools, by G. D. Strayer,
Chairman.
Educational Administration, IV, by Strayer and Thorndike, N. Y., Macmillian. Contains summary of work in penmanship, arithmetic and English composition by Thorndike,
Stone and Hillegas.
Reports of McMurry and Courtis issued by the Committee
of School Inquiry and reprinted by the World Book Co.,
Yonkers, New York.
Bulletin No. 2 entitled "Second Annual Accounting," by
Professor Courtis, issued by the Department of Cooperative
Research, 82 Elliot St., Detroit, Michigan. Also address by
Professor Courtis entitled "Better Teaching in Arithmetic."
The same department also publishes standard tests in English
composition.
Measurement of Hand-Writing, by Daniel Starch, Journal
of Educational Psychology, Oct., 1913.
For Ayres' Scale of Penmanship, see
Bulletin No. 113, issued by the Russell Sage Foundation.
Spelling Ability, by Buckingham. Teachers College, New
York.
For Ayres' investigation dealing with vocabulary used in average
correspondence, see
Bulletin E, No. 126, issued by the Russell Sage Foundation.
