Diplomas in Psychological Medicine
====================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.

Four of the leading medical schools in Great Britain,?those connected with
the universities of Edinburgh, Durham, Manchester, and Leeds,?have already
made provision for granting diplomas in psychological medicine, and other
universities are seriously considering the subject. "Psychological medicine,"
as the phrase is employed in English journals, seems to include what we know as
clinical psychology, together with a good deal of psychiatry. Resident medical
officers in English institutions for the feebleminded are being required to have
had a training in psychology, and in making appointments of medical officers
in insane asylums prefer ence is being given to candidates who have had a similar
psychological training.

Department of Agriculture issues Warning against Non-scientific Diet Systems.
The U. S. Department of Agriculture has recently had called to its attention, by letters from people all over the country, serious misstatements as to the
effects of foods or certain diets recommended by self-styled "experts in dietetics".
As a result of these letters, the department specialists have secured the literature and recommendations of a number of these people and have made a careful
study of the things they recommend as diets. The Department has issued the
following statement covering this matter:

"In view of the wide spread of literature and advice of so-called 'diet
experts,' it seems desirable to warn people against adopting the dietary recommendations of those without real scientific standing in the community. Some
of the advocates of freak diets are sincere but are themselves deluded; while
others are fakers, who seek to make monetary gain by advising peculiar systems
of diet. Neither class can offer trustworthy advice. In most of the recommendations of these self-established 'experts,' there is hardly a shadow of reason,
though they may seem plausible. One of their methods of reasoning is to use
isolated and often unrelated facts of science as evidence that their peculiar system
is of value. That is, they generally start out with a certain idea, and then strive
to prove that they are right by seeking data which seem to establish their theory;
but they completely ignore statements in current and historical scientific literature which would negative their contentions. In other words, they completely
overlook or do not see the importance of discoveries by scientists which go counter
to what they want to believe. It would be easy, following this same system of
taking isolated facts away from their context, to produce just as much of the
same kind of evidence that these 'food experts' are wrong as they adduce to
prove that they are right. In neither case, however, would the method lead to
real scientific conclusions.

"Many of these so-called diet systems lay great emphasis on raw foods.
Now there is no objection to anyone's eating raw food if he likes it, or finds after
experiment that it agrees with him, provided it is of good quality, free from
contamination, and wholesome. The truth of the matter is, however, that
man's chances of health are best when he eats with moderation a diet made up
of clean, wholesome, ordinary foods, well prepared in the usual ways. Such
a diet will include some articles to be cooked and others to be eaten raw, such
as bread, cereals, fruits, vegetables, meat, fish, milk, butter, cheese, eggs, etc.
These articles should be of good quality, free from dirt (visible and invisible)
and adulteration, and well prepared.

"As a general proposition, raw food is not cleaner than cooked foods.
Proper cooking sterilizes foods, and so renders innocuous pathogenic bacteria
and other organisms possibly harmful. Raw foods have to be very carefully
washed and cleaned before eating, and as a general rule simple washing, while
it will get rid of most of the dirt, will not remove all the bacteria, insect eggs,
spores of fungi, etc., that may adhere to them. If the systems of pseudoreasoning followed by some of these diet experts were logical, it would be possible to draw the conclusion that no one should eat lettuce or other salads, or
raw vegetables and fruits. This would not be warranted by science.

"In some of the literature circulated by the advocates of raw food, their
correspondents are urged not to eat animal foods because they say meat is filled
with bacteria. This is not true. The surface of meat is not sterile, but the
interior is, except in rare cases. We do not eat raw meat, except dried beef,
or something similar, but cause it to be cooked, and this sterilizes it. In most
cases where people have suffered, or think that they suffer, from eating meat
or any other normal article of diet, the trouble lies not with the actual article
but either in the imagination of the consumer or in the fact that the food has not
been kept clean, or properly prepared and properly handled after it is cooked.
"In many cases, people on beginning a radically new diet, whether it has
direct curative value or not, gain or think they gain a benefit. Any marked
change in diet or cooking would produce the same effect, because change itself
is often a benefit. The man or woman undertakes the new diet feeling convinced
that it will help some real or fancied ailment, and expects results so strongly that
imagination supplies them. Some of the cases so benefited are simply transient
forms of digestive disturbances. Most of these feelings of discomfort quickly
pass by themselves, if we do not dwell upon them and worry about them; but
if the person tries a new diet, he is very apt to attribute all improvement to that
diet, whether it has any direct bearing on the case or not. In cases of serious
digestive disturbances, sufferers should consult a physician of known ability and
known standing in their community. To submit such cases for treatment by
mail is as foolish as it would be for a man having a complicated and highly
specialized business trouble to ask someone who had never seen his factory,
and knew nothing about the business except the data he could supply in answer
to a set of questions, to supply him with a positive remedy at long-distance.
"Much of the advice on diet which has passed from individual to individual,
and much of the supposed scientific advice now being sold for a price by some of
the food advisers, is really little more than folk lore. A great many of the statements which are used as arguments by the experts for their diets have been
traced by the Government specialists, and found to come from works on diet
written so long ago as to be no longer considered of value except to the student
of the history of dietetics, or else they have been separated from qualifying
statements which would make the interpretation given them by the commercial
users wholly unwarranted.

"These circulars of misinformation about diet find their prey principally
among people who are always fancying that they have some complaint. If
people remain in good physical condition year after year, and observe no marked
change in weight, seem in good health and spirits, and are eating any simple
and normal mixed diet, they have no need to worry about their food.

"People can expect to be lighter in weight in summer than in winter. As
a person grows older he should begin to cut down the amount he eats, and
depend on a less complex and simpler diet. It is often said that when a person
passes forty, he begins to need a different diet. The reason given is that he does
not exercise so energetically as he did, and consequently does not need the same
amount and kind of food that was required to keep up his energy for more active
physical work." In concluding their remarks upon food, the government dieticians offer the following sensible advice to the public:
"If you like raw food better than anything else, eat it. If you like bread
and milk twice a day, eat it. The main thing, as one grows older, is to eat in
moderation and then, as always, to see that what you eat is clean and that the
cooked food you eat is originally in good condition and that it is well cooked.
If you eat raw vegetables and fruits and raw milk, take precautions to see that
they are clean before they enter your system. If something really disagrees
with you, and the fault lies actually with the article rather than with the method
by which it has been kept or cooked, stop eating that kind of food. If you experience serious discomfort which persists, consult the best physician you can discover.
"Be wary of people who offer to give you advice or to cure you without
ever seeing you. Finally, bear in mind that each human body has individual
characteristics, and that a diet which admirably suits one man who lives in a
certain location and does a certain kind of work may not be adapted to another
individual living in a different climate and doing a different kind of work."
Fire Protection in Public Schools.

Americans spend one dollar per inhabitant per year in building new school
houses, and let those school houses burn down at the rate of more than one for
every school day in the year.

These facts were discovered some months ago by the Division of Education
of the Russell Sage Foundation, and its officers promptly took up a study of fire
protection in public schools. They found that the methods of such protection
are comparatively cheap, simple, and easily applied. Any city which resolves
that daily school attendance shall not mean daily danger of death, can readily
put in motion measures which will make all its school buildings panic proof, all
its new buildings fire pi oof, and all its old buildings fire retarding.
The whole matter is so important and its solution so simple, that the Foundation has published and is distributing at the nominal cost of ten cents, a pamphlet
which tells in pictures and in terse sentences the magnitude of the danger with
its appropriate remedy. A map shows that only two states, Ohio and Massachusetts, have good fire laws, fifteen have fair to poor fire laws, and in thirty-one
states school children are absolutely unprotected by law from the risk of death
by fire.
