Your Child Today and Tomorrow
===============================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
 :Author:  Sidonie Matzner Gruenberg. Phila.:
J. B. Lippincott Company, 1913. Pp. 234. Illus.

Mrs. Gruenberg does not assume to have made any original contributions
to our knowledge of children. "In my efforts," she says, "to learn something
about the nature of the child, as a member of child-study groups, and in my own
studies, I have found a large mass of material?accumulated by investigators
into the psychology and biology of childhood?which could be of great practical
use to all concerned with the bringing up of children. In this little book I have
tried to present some of this material in a form that will make it available for
those who lack the time, or the special training, or the opportunity to work it
out for themselves." And with this motive she has achieved an eminent success.
Her book is fluent, clear, and engaging, like the conversation of well bred people.
It holds the attention, but never grips or fatigues it.

One could wish that Mrs. Gruenberg had included, perhaps in an appendix,
an account of this "large mass of material" which she has consulted. Some of
her readers will hardly be satisfied with her echo, however pleasing, of the masters
of child study to whom she alludes. Only once does she give references, and that
is in chapter XII, "The Stork or the Truth," where she mentions more than
twenty books and pamphlets dealing with sex knowledge for the child. It may
with reason be objected that here is a situation in which books can be of the
least use, and in which every parent has to think out his own way and choose his
own time for conveying such information.

In chapter I Mrs. Gruenberg urges the need of child study. "Our instincts
cannot be relied upon," she says, "when it comes to understanding the child's
mind, the meaning of his various activities, and how best to guide his mental
and moral development. . . . Each child is different from every other child in
the whole world . . . the experts do not know your child; they have studied
the problems of childhood, and their results you can use in learning to know your
child. Your problem is always an individual problem." And the particular
problem which interests her is the development of personality, the flowering of
instincts, and their grouping to form a well-balanced character. Of the physical
care of the child she has little to say, and still less about education in any of its
formal aspects.

When she considers the subject of punishment in chapter II, Mrs. Gruenberg
ventures upon rather insecure ground. "Never punish in anger," she says, and
"we must allow every trace of anger to disappear." Here we may remind her
that children are no less individual than she made them out to be in the preceding
chapter, and that there are youngsters upon whom the blaze of justifiable wrath
has a most salutary effect. And pray why shouldn't children learn in due season
that human actions may be looked at in more than one way, and that what is
amusing enough from their side of the question, may be expected to incur the
anger of grown-ups with all manner of uncomfortable consequences? It is part
of their initiation into the perplexities of life.

A very delightfully written chapter is devoted to the child's imagination,
and another to "The Lies Children Tell." It is characteristic of Mrs. Gruenberg's
method that she dutifully accepts the conclusions of the leaders in child study,
and hands them on to us uncritically. Later in the volume, when discussing
"Children's Ideals and Ambitions," she misses an opportunity to make a criticism
of value. She observes, "An interesting point that has been brought out by
studies is the fact that degrading ideals are practically wanting in children."
In her chapter on lies she has admitted, "with some children lying is caused by
their aesthetic instincts. It is much easier for them to describe a situation as
they feel it should be, than to describe it as it actually was." Yet Mrs. Gruenberg,
following in the footsteps of many a trained psychologist, accepts as literally
true the account which children give of their ideals! Here it is that grown-ups
are so much more naif than the youngsters. In the first place it must be remembered that it is generally easier for a child to lie in response to a direct question
which concerns anything as subjective as his ideals,?anything which cannot be
proved or disproved by appealing to facts. In the second place, even if it were
not as easy as it is, he would still be under temptation to give the answer most
acceptable to the questioner (or least acceptable, if he were in perverse mood).
As an instance,?one little girl who has been intimately known to the reviewer,
cherished the ambition to become a ballet dancer. Yet when asked what she
intended to be, she invariably said "a trained nurse," and reaped the sympathy
and approbation of her elders, who would have frowned upon dancing as the
embodiment of all that is sinful.

It is in her stories of children's sayings and doings that Mrs. Gruenberg
shines. There are not too many of them; they are fresh and chosen with the
utmost discretion and taste. The same thing may be said of the pictures. Like
the stories, they show real youngsters in natural and unforced episodes, and
contribute much to the pleasure the book cannot help giving to everyone who
cares about children.
A. T.
