Elimination From a Different Angle
===================================

By G. W. Gayler,
Superintendent of Schools, Canton, III.
During the last few years many statistical studies of elimination
have been made, all pointing to the fact that a very large percentage
of the pupils who enter school drop out before finishing the eight
elementary grades, and a still larger percentage never finish the high
school. In this discussion we have heard little concerning specific
and helpful plans to hold children in school. The plans given below
were developed in part at several different places but they have
been more fully matured and carried out in Canton than in any of
the other towns.
Large Percentage of Gam in Upper Grades.
The following table gives the enrolment of our schools by grades
for the month of September for each of the three school years, 1910,
1911, 1912:
Grades 1910 1911 1912
First  303 328 346
Second  265 257 267
Third  281 272 260
Fourth  234 309 286
Fifth  223 207 261
Sixth  165 201 209
Seventh  120 163 165
Eighth  107 120 159
High School  203 255 283
Shepley  23 (counted above)
Total   1924 2112 2236
This table shows that there has been a gain in the last two years
in almost every grade, but that the big gains have been made in the
upper grades of the elementary school and in the high school. The
average percentage of gain for the whole system during these years
has been 16 per cent. The gain in the first six grades has been only
10 per cent, while the gain in the last six grades has been 47.4 per cent.
This shows that the high percentage of gain has been in the seventh
(11)
12 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and eighth grades and in the high school where a very large majority
of the children are over fourteen years of age.
In two years the gain in the high school has been 39.5 per
cent. In the same time the eighth grade has increased 48.6 per
cent, the seventh grade 37.5 per cent, and the sixth grade 26.6 per
cent. The figures indicate that boys and girls above the legal age
when they could drop out, are remaining in school, and that a greater
effort than ever before is being made to have all the children of all
the people get the maximum benefit of the schools. This does not
mean that the problem has been solved, but it does mean that earnest
efforts are being put forth and that these efforts are in a degree bear-
ing fruit. We feel that the means used to hold children in school
have been helpful but that only a start has been made along this
line, and that this work should be given a great deal more attention
than it has received in the past.
How did this come about?
How did this gain come about? In the first place a study of
school conditions, statistical in its nature, was made and discussed
in principals' and teachers' meetings. This study brought before
the teaching group, as nothing else could, the actual condition with
regard to elimination,?the problem to be solved. For years many
of us have been contented to teach the children who come to school
without much thought about the ones who did not come?the ones
who had dropped by the wayside. For years many have not seen
the problem of the eliminated child in its seriousness. When the
whole matter was brought before them, the teachers as a body
enlisted in the fight to save boys and girls for the upper grades and
the high school. The missionary spirit of the teachers of the schools
and the personal effort as a result of that spirit has had much to
do with results.
Elimination due to Failure in Work.
Our investigation showed that a very large percentage of those
who dropped out of school were of the class who failed in work.
The overgrown boys and girls when held back will be eliminated
sooner or later. One of the problems is to prevent failures whenever
possible. Attempts at prevention, to be effective, must commence
the first month of the school year. Within the first two months
the teacher should know rather definitely who can carry the work
of the grade without extra effort, and who can not do so without
some personal attention. In questionable cases it has been the
plan to give all children the chance to go on and in all cases to give
individual help whenever it was possible to do so.
ELIMINATION. 13
Change of Spirit of School.
Here is where the spirit of the school counts. Formerly in
many schools it was considered that a teacher did not do her work
well, that her room was not up to standard, unless there were the
usual number of failures, varying from one-quarter to one-third of
the class. This has been in a large degree changed, and now we
have the understanding that if more than 15 per cent of a class fail
there must be something wrong and an investigation must follow.
Two months before the end of the school year each teacher
makes out a list of probable failures together with the cause of such
failures and how each can be prevented. This list is gone over
with the principal of the building, or the superintendent of schools,
and each individual pupil failing in work is discussed, and if pos-
sible some way is found to help him make the grade.
Basis of Promotion.
Instead of making promotions on the amount and quality of
work done and on this alone, all promotions are made after taking
into consideration four points,?age of child, heredity and environ-
ment, ability to do the work, amount and quality of work done.
After promotions are made, it is the privilege of the superintendent
to reconsider any case that may come to him and if in his judgment
it is best for the child to be sent to an advanced grade, this action
is taken, always however with the definite understanding that he
assumes all the responsibility for the act. This method of handling
promotions together with the new spirit of the teaching force has
greatly reduced the number of failures. In many cases the failures
have been reduced to one-third of the number failing in previous
years. At the same time the grades of the children and the quality
of the work done have been raised.
Acquaintance with High School.
A lack of knowledge of what is done in the higher grades and
in the high school together with a nervousness about the change
from a small ward building to a central school, larger and more
complex in its structure, has something to do with elimination. In
order to give pupils some idea of the building and the work that is
done, the High School each year entertains all the children in the
grades above the fifth. This is done on an afternoon of a regular
school day, and the children of the different rooms are brought to
the high school building by the regular room teacher. The grades
are assembled in the High School assembly room, where they listen
14 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to a program consisting of music by the High School Orchestra,
the High School Chorus, and the High School Boys' Quartette.
Each of the literary societies presents a selection representing the
work it does. The principal gives a talk on the work done in the
High School, and upon the value of a high school education. One
of the ward principals also presents the value of remaining in school.
After a short interesting program of this kind, the children accom-
panied by their teachers and under the direction of high school
pupils, are shown through all the different departments of the school.
Especial attention is given to the science department, the manual
training department, the printing department, the domestic science
room, and the commercial department. In each of these depart-
ments students are at work illustrating the things done. In this
way all departments are visited and the children become somewhat
acquainted with the work offered. Probably for the first time they
have had the opportunity of going through the building and becom-
ing familiar with it. Whenever possible these same boys and girls
with their parents are invited to a basket-ball game at night. The
high school gymnasium and the high school grounds should be the
center of school athletic activities so that the children will get the
habit of coming there. All of this has its effect in holding children
in school.
Talks about Value of Remaining.
Before the close of school in the spring each teacher is asked
to talk to the children concerning the value of remaining in school.
She encourages the children to talk about the school and gets all
the reasons why they can not or will not remain in school. This
free discussion sometimes brings out criticisms of the school which
are vital and which should be considered by the teachers. The
superintendent visits many of the rooms and talks on the same
subject, explaining and emphasizing the work of the upper grades
and the high school. These personal talks instruct children and
parents as to the advantages offered and they also show the value
of many things not clearly understood before. Our experience is
that our plan is worth all the time and energy it takes and that
it has a tendency to stop elimination.
Letters sent to Individuals.
During the month of August just before school commences a
little leaflet entitled "Does It Pay to Attend School?" is mailed to
every sixth, seventh, and eighth grade pupil enrolled the previous
ELIMINATION. 15
year. It is also sent to many high school pupils. This is a direct
appeal and in many cases there is no doubt that it has accomplished
good. This leaflet brings home to pupils the value of an education
in dollars and cents as well as the value of an education from the
standpoint of an intellectual life.
In order to convey some idea of the contents of the leaflet,
I am giving below four short selected paragraphs from it:
"1. Are you thinking of continuing at work and of staying
out of school? Do you realize that only the weightiest of reasons
should cause one to leave school? Never has individual training
been so important, and sacrifice so wise a course to follow, as to-day.
Every line of work is calling for men with power to think. Condi-
tions of life make it necessary to choose wisely what you do and
whom you follow.
"2. Statistics show that a young person having a high school
education has many times as many chances for success as the per-
son without that training. The financial value of an education
has been estimated in the following way: A day laborer without
an education earns on an average $1.50 per day for 300 days in
the year during a period of 40 years. The earnings of his life
amount to ?18,000. One thousand is a fair average for the annual
earnings of an educated man during a period of 40 years. The
difference between the $40,000 and the $18,000 or $22,000 repre-
sents the value in future earning power of the time a boy spends in
school. According to these figures the value in future earning power
of a day in school is over $10.
"3. Again, the young man who has been brought to under-
stand the writings and views of big men, has a power to enjoy what
he reads and hears, for he has power to understand. You may feel
that history has only to do with the past. Not so. It makes it
possible to understand the present and often suggests plans in deal-
ing with to-day's problems. Appreciation of other men and their
successes is very necessary to the understanding of what things
will succeed to-day. Appreciation means intelligent enjoyment.
"4. It pays in earning power to remain in school. It pays
because of the greater power of mind that is developed. It pays
because of training secured in dealing with organized groups of boys
and girls. It pays in richness and fullness of life. It pays in
strength and stability of character. From every point of view it
pays."
16 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Checking up Children.
After school begins in the fall every child enrolled the previous
year must be accounted for. If a child can not be found, the fact
is reported to the office and the truant officer is called upon to
locate him and find out why he is not in school. This method
checks every child who has attended the public schools.
In addition to all this our course of study has been undergoing
a gradual change which makes it seem more practical to these boys
and girls who see but little in Latin, History, Literature, and Mathe-
matics, but who see much practical value in Domestic Science,
Manual Training, Printing, Stenography, Typewriting, and Book-
keeping. This change of the course has just begun and it is our
hope to place nearly every subject in the course in a new setting
so that boys and girls can see that it is worth while to remain to
master them.
