What is Sanity?
===============

By Alice Groff,
Philadelphia, Pa.
Insanity is a word of very simple content as to its derivation,
and means merely want of health. We apply it exclusively to the
mind, and to a very special and extreme condition of mental ill
health. But the truth is that insanity exists in all degrees, from
inhibition by a "feeling-bias," which prevents the acceptance of a
fact, to inability to distinguish between fact and a figment of the
imagination. These minor degrees of insanity are not generally
accepted as such, but the evolution of psychological science is bring-
ing us more and more fully to the realization of the truth that such
they really are.
Mind?or brain if you choose?may be conceived as an organ
of the human body whose chief function it is to reason. What does
it mean to reason? To reason is to make a comparison of the resem-
blances and differences among all the available facts bearing upon
the subject under consideration, and to adjust these resemblances
and differences into a judgment which may be experimentally and
practically applied to life; always holding the mind plastic, however,
for the admission of any new fact which may be revealed by science,
and for the consequent necessity of a new comparison, a new adj ust-
ment, a new judgment, all following upon the admission of the new
fact. Reason is a living thing, a growing thing, an evolving thing,?
in a word, reason is a function of life, and the mind capable of it is
a perfectly sane mind.
Logic is not reason, though to the untrained mind they may
appear to be the same thing. Logic and reason are farther apart
than the poles, as science is demonstrating to us more fully every
day. Reason is the living thing, a function of life, while logic is the
dead thing mechanically constructed from it. Reason starts with
an impartial consideration of all the available facts. Logic sets
out with a premise, defining a fixed point of aim, and proceeds to
manufacture a chain of evidence, keeping the fixed point always
in view and ignoring any fact which would divert the mind from the
end aimed at. Thus logic shows itself to be an artificial thing, a
manufactured thing, a thing without life and incapable of the pro-
cesses of life. The stupidest mind can use logic when it has learned
(166)
WHAT IS SANITY? 167
its parrot lesson of the way to construct a path to any fixed end:
a machine could be invented to use logic. Very few minds on the
contrary can reason, because very few minds can grasp a large
number of facts; very few minds are free from "feeling-bias" in
making the comparison of resemblances and differences among facts;
very few minds are capable of a judgment which is a perfect adjust-
ment of these resemblances and differences on a large scale.
It would seem that the power to reason supremely well, either
actual or potential, is the indubitable characteristic of the completely
sane mind, and that the mind which cannot reason freely is insane
in the degree of this inability. Such a mind may have but one point
of insuperable "feeling-bias," one prejudice, one idee fixe, which
inhibits the freedom of its reasoning processes, or it may have many;
and these inhibitions may cover the ground all the way from inability
to accept a new scientifically demonstrated fact, to inability to dis-
tinguish between fact and a figment of the imagination.
Such a mind is insane, therefore, to the extent of the number
and degree of intensity of these inhibitions. There are minds of a
low order of intelligence, because of ignorance of the higher scientific
facts of life,?minds of what is called the "common-sense type,"?
which have not had the education and varied experience that give
broad knowledge, but which nevertheless are perfectly sane minds.
They are minds which reason freely within the range of the facts
they possess, minds which are always plastic to the admission of
new facts that may come within their ken. There are on the other
hand minds of almost cosmic intelligence, which are unable to reason
freely because of an insuperable "feeling-bias," or prejudice, utterly
unable to coordinate fully in any reasoning processes the enormous
number of facts they have knowledge of,?minds which are insane
to the degree and intensity of this inability.
Max Stirner's mind was one which might be called cosmically
insane. His "feeling-bias" in favor of his own ego inhibited any
coordination with all the other facts of life. Herbert Spencer is an
example of a mind starting mature life with a wonderful reasoning
power among an enormous number of facts, a mind which however
permitted "feeling-bias" to control it to such an extent that free
reasoning processes became greatly inhibited in his later years.
Nietzsche with a marvellous genius of imagination was always
more or less insane, the insanity which finally drove him altogether
out of himself being simply a multiplication and intensification of
the "feeling-biases" which inhibited his reasoning faculty, to the
point of ultimately destroying his ability to distinguish between a
fact and a figment of his own imagination. Tolstoi also, in spite
168 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of wonderful imaginative powers and marvellous intellectual versa-
tility, was insane in the sense that he was unable to reason freely.
His reasoning processes were enormously inhibited by his "feeling-
bias" in the direction of the doctrine of non-resistance.
Great thinkers, that is to say, great originators of new ideas,
are often very defective reasoners. This is why genius is so often
allied to insanity. Great scientific discoverers are often wretched
interpreters of the relational value to life and even of the synthetic
value to science, of their own discoveries; and this would seem to
be owing not to their specialized greatness, but to the fact that
they had not had set before them, from the dawn of intelligence as
an object of the highest aspiration in life, the ideal of free reasoning,
the determination to allow nothing to inhibit the living function of
mind.
Our first duty in education then would seem to be to train the
growing mind into the ability to reason freely, to ward youth off
the rock of the idee fixe or "feeling-bias" or prejudice, which might
inhibit reasoning processes. I would not be understood as repudiat-
ing logic in such an education as a method of training, any more
than any other form of mathematics. We must needs use logic in
presenting any one subject, if for no better reason than to fix the
psychological center of attention for the time being, until all the
available facts bearing upon the subject are covered by the mind.
But logic, as we have seen, is not reason. An insane mind may be
brilliantly logical along lines which do not conflict with its inhibi-
tions, while a completely sane mind may be unable to use logic
because of ignorance of facts pertaining to the subject under consid-
eration.
It will thus be seen that the possession of supreme reasoning
power indicates a certain quality of mind which may be called sanity;
while the power to use logic may or may not be a faculty of a mind
whether sane or insane, this power depending upon a certain kind
of training.
Modern neurological science calls insanity "conflict," meaning
by this that the mind in attempting to exercise its natural faculty
of reasoning, brings the freely coordinating ideas into conflict with
whatever invincibly inhibiting "feeling-bias" or prejudice the mind
may possess. Out of this theory there has been developed a neuro-
logical or psychiatrical therapeutic called the Freudian method,
after Dr. Sigmund Freud of Berlin, Germany, who originated it.
This method is based upon the observation that if the individual
in whose mind there exists this sort of conflict, can be brought to a
consciousness and an acknowledgment of the inhibiting "feeling-
WHAT IS SANITYf 169
bias" or prejudice, he can be cured in the sense of having his mind
restored to free reasoning processes upon this one point at least.
As the mind entertaining this "feeling-bias" is nearly or quite
unconscious of it, this therapeutic is obliged to use the hypnoidal
treatment in order to bring out into consciousness and hence to the
possibility of recognition and acknowledgment, this inhibitive
element.
The Freudian method should receive due welcome and support
as a powerful remedial agency for the physically normal mind
infected with inhibitions; but much more confidently should we
depend upon an infinitely more efficacious preventive agency,?the
education of the young child in a way which will prevent the planting
of any inhibition to the perfect freedom of the reasoning processes,
and which wall thus do away, in the physically normal mind at least,
with insanity in all its forms.
