Children with Mental Defects Distinguished from Mentally Defective Children
============================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1913, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VII, No. 7 December 15, 1913

By Lightner Witmer, Ph.D., \J
University of Pennsylvania.
A few weeks ago I saw at a college preparatory school a boy
eighteen years of age. This school has a four years course, of high
school grade. The boy was in the second year of this course, excepting that he was not taking the prescribed foreign languages. He
had done so poorly in Latin the year before, that the school authorities had decided it would be inexpedient to attempt to teach him
a foreign language. When I asked the head of the educational
department to rate the boy, he told me that he was by no means
the worst boy in the school, and that every year they had boys of
an inferior grade of mentality and scholarship. He could not assign
his rank more closely than to say he was among the poorest 25
per cent.
This school is one of the best military academies and preparatory schools which I have ever visited, and has shown its progressive modern spirit by taking into its employ, this year, a trained
man as consulting psychologist. The psychologist, who had already
tested this boy and most of the other boys in the school, asserted
that the closest rating he could give the boy was to place him
among the worst 20 per cent.
I think we may therefore assume that this boy is a normal boy.
In every other respect than in school progress, his behavior has
always been that of a normal boy; and yet four years ago when
this boy was first brought to me for examination, he could not read
without many gross errors a single sentence in a child's first reader,
such as is employed with children of the first school year. His
errors, however, were of a kind which did not show deficient intelligence. He might read a sentence like "I saw the hen," as "I saw
the duck." He might even read it, "I was the boy." Intelligent
substitutions characterized much of his reading. Where such sub(173)
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
J)
/yi
'/W1 -vv0VyK
--tepW^H fi.'Ottv^ W
MtcUi^^fd^v . ?
_ 1/1^^ * ^Ct/l^^"<-)ri-- *
2&Jb .YlWoo^ ?j&W>~ ^ Qax
Orix^>U ^S^LcJs^- ^yLtr-lr0^ -^f^r-_ f~
*AZ&'*fig. i
FIG. 1
CHILDREN WITH MENTAL DEFECTS. 175
stitutions could not be made, owing to the words being somewhat
more difficult, the word which he gave would often have not the
slightest resemblance to the word on the printed page, or to any
English word. Naturally he was unable to read for himself, for
pleasure or profit. He liked being read to by the hour, and enjoyed
books of history, etc., such as a boy of his age might be expected
to choose for his own reading. During the previous year he had
been in the fifth grade, i.e. the fifth school year. At fourteen he
should have been in the eighth or at least the seventh school year.
His school standing, therefore, showed two or three years of retardation. In fact he had not progressed in reading beyond the first
school year, and at fourteen years was at the educational stage of
many a child of seven. His spelling was as deficient as his reading.
Figures 1 and 2 exhibit the character of his work. The first specimen is a portion of a letter written June 27, 1909, from Nova Scotia,
where my summer school was located. He had entered the school
June 1st, so that the specimen shows about what he was able to
produce in the shape of a letter at the time of his admission to the
school. As it is scarcely possible to make out his meaning without
knowing what he intended to say, I give this portion of his letter
as it should have been written.
"C , Nova Scotia, June 27, '09.
"My Dear Mother:
"Please excuse the blot on the paper. I am going to go in
swimming today with Dr Witmer and the two other boys. We
have been in before. And will you ask B  to get together
all the sixth grade school books and send to C , Nova Scotia,
in care of Miss R at the Larder Cottage. Please do for your
son's sake. Write soon and tell me how B , J , C ,
father and yourself are."
The second specimen was produced July 19th, after a month
and a half of training. A number of sentences had been given him
to study the day before. He was supposed to have learned the
spelling of each word and the position of the words in the sentence.
He was given the words at dictation, and also the sentences as
units were dictated to him, each word and sentence being given
once. One of these sentences was "We are going for nuts when
they are ripe." What he actually put down on the paper is shown
in figure 2 on the following page.
I frequently see children?but not usually so old as this boy?
who are deficient in written work, the deficiency being due to inade176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
quate school training. Careful examination showed that the deficiency in this case was due to a language defect, psychologically
a defect of memory. The two parts or phases of memory were
involved. There was both a weakness in retaining new impressions
and a weakness in the recall of impressions which had been received
and partially retained. The examination and history of this case
clearly demonstrated that we had to do with a case of congenital
amnesia, limited however to the language sphere, hence properly
called congenital visual asphasia or word blindness.
Further examination revealed an equal amount of articulatory
?aphasia. It was oftentimes very difficult to understand what he
said. I thought at first that coming from the South he was shows&qJ- S&Z-#
"A/ns~?
,. . . _ '^%eyu&?ol.
LpCho^^/yi^aA>liiy/^
JL o
jpb*ir>CjLAs.
6n?/C/O/t'?<>0<>^^
y J v
^urc^zX//OM//Tu^Tjer
FIG. 2
CHILDREN WITH MENTAL DEFECTS. 177
ing the effects of imitating his negro caretakers, but in many respects
his articulate language was worse than even a negro would employ.
Moreover he was word deaf, as well as word blind, and as he had
no definite trouble in the motor area, having satisfactory coordination for a boy of his age, and good muscular control, I would assume
that the auditory aphasia or word deafness was primary and the
articulatory aphasia a resultant.
In other words the case was one of a specific language defect,
involving all three of the modes of language,?a general amnesia
verbalis, or aphasia. This defect was not associated with any other
mental or physical defect, excepting that the boy was somewhat
small for his age, although not unusually small; that he had adenoids
which were removed with considerable improvement to his health
but no noticeable effect upon his language defect; and that he was
somewhat lazy or languorous, but probably no more than we have
a right to expect of a southern boy,?certainly no more than his
older brother has shown, who has succeeded in getting into college.
The boy undoubtedly has a neuropathic inheritance, which manifested itself in frequent migrainous headaches, but the tendency
to these headaches was overcome through careful hygienic procedure
during the two years and three months he remained in my professional care.
Our educational problem was exactly similar to that of teaching a boy to sing who happens to have no ear for music. There
can be no doubt that there are many otherwise normal persons who
are totally tone-deaf. This in technical terms is congenital amusia.
It is a mental defect. There is a much larger number of persons
who are partially tone-deaf. Fortunately this particular mental
defect does not interfere with a successful career in life, excepting
that the tone-deaf are necessarily excluded from a musical career.
But were society so organized that success in life in every sphere
of activity were dependent upon a good enough ear to turn a tune,
many persons who are now doing useful work in the world would
have to be relegated to the class of imbeciles.
Congenital aphasia is a more serious defect to the individual,
because of its social and industrial importance, perhaps also because
a certain measure of language development is essential for accurate
thinking. I do not believe that a case of congenital aphasia can
ever do intellectual work of a high order, but I do believe that congenital aphasics can have useful and successful careers and pass
muster as entirely normal persons. Owing to the social and intellectual significance of language, it is important to teach a congenital
aphasic to read and write, although it is not of importance to teach
178 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
a congenital amusic to sing. The latter procedure would be a waste
of time and effort; the former procedure is necessary, especially
if the child be otherwise intelligent enough to take his place as a
fairly efficient adult in society.
Aphasia and amusia were first studied in the adult. They
appear as the mental symptoms of a brain lesion, an injury to the
local cerebral centres of language and music. Congenital aphasia
and amusia, however, must not be supposed necessarily to be caused
by a brain lesion, an injury to the child's brain in the early years
of life, at birth, or during uterine life. While it is doubtless true
that brain injuries may produce aphasia and amusia in children,
and if such injuries occur during uterine life the condition may
properly be described as congenital, nevertheless I believe we must
consider that congenital aphasia and amusia do not rest upon a
pathological condition of the brain, but are indicative of a tendency
to biological variation, appearing in the affected children restrictedly
as a variation of the functional activities of language and music.
Congenital aphasia and amusia are to be explained in biological
terms, in somewhat the same manner as we should undertake to
explain left-handedness in about two per cent of the race.
I have given two examples of congenital mental defects,?congenital amusia and congenital aphasia, the latter serious so far as
its consequences are concerned, the former a matter of indifference
except as it may interfere with the happiness of the individual in
expressing himself through music and song. There is another mental
defect of this class, a congenital inability to acquire mathematics.
This also is a defect of memory. I have not as yet been able to
study individual cases as I have with aphasia. To prove that
a child is congenitally defective in mathematics, expert training
must be employed and the child must show himself unable to progress except moderately, despite this training. For example, the
congenital aphasic with the consideration of whose mental condition I began this paper, was recently examined by me and found
to be aphasic still. I was able to demonstrate some considerable
reduction in word deafness, but the word blindness appears to be
about the same as it was four and a half years ago. The very persevering and intensive methods of education have largely had the
result of teaching the boy to read and write, to understand spoken
language, and to articulate, despite the persistence of the mental
defect. So far as social and intellectual importance is concerned,
the mathematical memory stands in my opinion intermediate
between the language and musical memories. I have not yet
arrived at a fixed conviction as to whether it is of importance to
CHILDREN WITH MENTAL DEFECTS. 179
endeavor to train a child lacking mathematical ability in mathematical subjects. I am convinced, however, that the mathematical
faculty is sufficiently lacking in many cases, to warrant exempting
high school and college pupils from taking these subjects, certainly
as they are at present taught.
These three defects are all of them defects of memory and
involve one mental function only. There are varieties of mental
defects very different from these, some of them of great interest
and importance. I pass over such obvious mental defects as sensory and motor defects due to infantile paralysis or other causes,
and proceed to a group of mental defects of great interest to the
psychologist and educator, affecting those activities which the
modern psychologist calls instincts or congenital traits. These are
group activities. To designate them, certain names have been
employed, such as the sex instinct, curiosity, imitation, obstinacy,
vanity, jealousy, conscientiousness, appropriativeness, lying, sociability, shyness, and many others. It is part of our inheritance, it is
human, to possess these instincts or congenital traits. We ought
to assume that the typical child or adult is possessed of all of them
in some degree. In the well-balanced individual, i.e. the normal
mind, they probably all serve a valuable orthogenic purpose,?in
other words they are mental assets. In other individuals, they
represent mental defects, as in the child who lies, or steals, or in
the adolescent who indulges himself in what is commonly called
"immoral" conduct. Intrinsically, however, they are not mental
defects, for it is human, it is normal, for the child of a certain age
to lie and steal, and for the adolescent to feel, even to yield to, the
promptings of desire. These instincts or traits are present in different individuals in different amounts. Where an instinct becomes
excessive, we are in my opinion justified in considering it a defect.
The problem of training the child is very often the problem of curbing excessive instincts. Moreover, in the course of individual
development, the instincts diminish in intensity of action and are
inhibited and controlled by the growth of an intellectual and moral
will. Stealing and lying are always mental defects in an otherwise
normal child of fourteen to sixteen years, but are not necessarily
mental defects in a child of from six to ten years. The unscientific
mind inclines to regard certain instincts as good and others as bad.
The love of truth is as much an instinct as the love of lying. The
love of truth we look upon as an asset, lying as a defect. As a
matter of fact, both may be assets and both may be defects. An
exaggerated love of truth, over-concientiousness, "the New England
conscience," is a mental defect as much as is excessive lying. Lying
180 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
often is inspired by the instinct to tell a good story, and those who
unduly and too early curb the child's imagination, even though it
overflow at times into direct and palpable lies, may be helping to
destroy a valuable asset of the child's consciousness, one which
may later constitute the foundation for a literary or otherwise
artistic career. I do not assert that all traits of character must
be assets if present in due measure. I do say that we must be
extremely careful how we evaluate the instincts. Imitation is an
asset of the greatest value, but it is often excessive, especially in
children, leading to extreme suggestibility and consequent emotional
and intellectual instability. Vanity, which the child is usually
asked to eradicate as a fault, is often a mental asset to the child.
I have known many children to make their first and most pronounced
step forward in consequence of a judicious appeal to their vanity.
If I have been able to make my meaning clear, it will be seen
that I regard the child, for that matter the adult also, as composed
of a number of traits, some of them assets if they favor normal
mental development and success in adult life; some of them defects
if they provoke retardation, arrested development, delinquency,
and crime. There is no so-called normal person who does not
possess some defects along with his assets. The type of child in
whom I am especially interested and for whom I organized and
am directing the work of the Psychological Clinic, is the child who
possesses so many and such severe mental defects as seriously to
interfere with normal development in the home and in the school,
and to prognosticate his arrival at adult age arrested in mental
and moral development. Because a child has one or a few
mental defects, we must not characterize him as a mentally defective child, any more than we consider a child who has an eye
defect, such as astigmatism and hyperopia, as physically defective.
Of course he is not physically perfect, nor is any child physically
perfect. By the same token, no child is mentally perfect. In fact,
the child of perfect mind and body would be a rarer specimen,?
shall I say a greater monstrosity??than the idiot, the lunatic, or
the criminal.
Undoubtedly there are children whom we can properly designate mentally defective children. The line can not be sharply drawn
between children with mental defects and mentally defective children. The defective are those who have so many and such severe
mental defects that they are unable to overcome these defects as
a result of expert training, and must therefore reach adult age
arrested in mental and moral development, industrially incapable
of earning even a modest livelihood, and socially a menace oftenCHILDREN WITH MENTAL DEFECTS. 181
times to themselves and their families, and always to society, either
by virtue of their own behavior or their retained capacity to reproduce their kind. The feebleminded child is a mentally defective
child, but let us avoid supposing that he is feebleminded because
he possesses "a mental defect." This terminology is a relic of an
outworn and unanalytic psychology, which looked upon the mind
as an undivided entity, a unit. It is unscientific to say that a child
has a defective mind. We may say that he has a defective mentality,
or that he has defective mental processes, or that he has a large
number of mental defects. Where we shall draw the line between
the child whom we shall call a normal child with mental defects,
and a subnormal or feebleminded child who is mentally defective,
is a problem which can not be solved wholly within the realm of
psychology. No Binet-Simon tests, nor any other tests, will inform
us as to what children we shall consider feebleminded. We define
the feebleminded child as a result of social considerations. He is
the child who for his own good and for the good of society should
be segregated for life. After we have arrived at the social definition
of feeblemindedness, we may employ our tests to inform us as to
the mental status of a suspected case. A casual glance is all that
is needed to assure us of the mental and physical status of some
feebleminded children. But there will always be large numbers
of children in the border zone between the socially normal child
and the socially feebleminded child, and with such children the
refinement of clinical methods and the application of intensive
methods of observation and training will furnish us with psychological data which will enable us to arrive at a secure social classification. A strictly scientific nomenclature will dispense with the
term "mentally defective," as failing to characterize with sufficient
definiteness the class of children under consideration. What characterizes "mentally defective" children is not that they are
mentally defective, for other children, in fact all children, are mentally defective, but that they are so defective mentally as to be
socially unfit. For the term "mentally defective," I would therefore propose substituting the term "socially unfit," or "socially
defective."
