Retardation in Nebraska
========================

By William Henry Stephenson Morton,
Superintendent of Schools, Asliland, Neb.
II.
From the preceding discussion it is evident that if our pupils
advanced regularly through the grades, reaching the upper grades
by the time they were thirteen years old, there would not be much
elimination in any but the higher grammar grades. But we have
seen from table III that many of these older pupils are in the lower
grades; and as their tendency is to drop out at thirteen or fourteen,
many of them leave before they finish the elementary school.
Since it is evident that many of the pupils are repeating their
work, it is well to inquire in which grades it is occurring. Dr.
Ayres assumes that most of the repetition occurs in the grades up
to the fifth, and that there is none in the sixth, seventh, or eighth.
Blan finds this to be entirely wrong. lie says,15 "It was
found, upon careful examination of the individual records of 3865
grammar grade pupils in five city school systems, that the grade
distribution of non-promotions increases from the first grade till
the eighth, the seventh grades in all five cities recording the
highest percentage of retention." "The assumption then," he con-
tinues, that "very few pupils who reach the upper grades fail of
promotion and repeat the work of the grade is wrong. The facts
demonstrate that the retarding force in the grammar grades is
certainly no less than in the primary."
Professor Keyes10 in his investigation found the greatest num-
ber of arrests to be in the third, fourth, and fifth grades; although
contrary to Ayres, he finds them occurring in every grade. The
683 cases of arrest studied by Keyes are distributed through the
grades as follows:
TABLE XIII.
REPEATERS SHOWN BY GRADE AND SEX FOR A SCHOOL OF NINE GRADES.
Grades
Total
Boys.
45
42
54
65
52
35
38
26
16
373
Girls.
47
23
39
52
53
42
r16
;27
11
310
Total.
92
65
93
117
105
77
54
53
27
683
15 Blan, Louis B. : The Incidence of Retardation, p. 10.
18 Keyes, Charles H.: Progress Through the Grades of City Schools, p. 17.
(222)
RETARDATION IN NEBRASKA. 223
Is it not altogether probable that the pupil who repeats in the
primary grades will do the same in the later grades likewise ? It
seems that for the same pupil retardation becomes all the more
probable as he advances from grade to grade.
An investigation was made in the Ashland schools this year
to determine in what grade the most repeating was done, with a
view to finding out what grades were causing the most trouble to
pupils passing through them. The following percentage for each
grade was found by taking the total number of persons who had
passed through any grade and multiplying it by two; this gave
the total number of semesters that should have been spent in the
grades by all pupils. The total number of semesters' work that
was repeated in the grades was divided by the total number of
semesters the pupil should have spent. For example, there were
197 who passed through the second grade; this multiplied by two
gives 394, the total number of semesters that should have been
spent in this grade. It was found that there had been 92 semesters
of work repeated in this grade by all pupils. This divided by 394
gives 23 per cent for the second grade.
TABLE XIV.
PERCENT OF REPETITION FOR THE VARIOUS GRADES OF THE ASHLAND SCHOOL
BASED ON THE TOTAL NUMBER OF SEMESTERS THAT SHOULD HAVE
BEEN SPENT IN THE GRADE.
Grade.
Percent.
20
23
15.2
16.4
13
1.2
11.5
The data for the above table were obtained with considerable
difficulty, for there were no definite records of the pupils on file.
Each pupil was asked how old he was when he started to school,
his present age, and in what grade he had repeated. Often the
other pupils would help him out, or at times the teacher would
remember, and in some cases the parents were consulted. Realiz-
ing that the data may not be quite correct, and recognizing that
the number of cases studied was rather small, the results are yet
worthy of notice.
The Ashland school seems to show a large per cent of non-
promotions in the second to the fifth and in the seventh grades.
The table would indicate that if the pupil succeeds in getting into
the sixth grade he is almost sure of making that grade, for pro-
motion is surest here. This is the same condition that Blan found
to exist. The seventh grade proves to be another sifting place; but
224: THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
it is a well known fact that if a pupil gets into the eighth grade,
he will almost surely finish. The thought of finishing seizes him
here, and he is carried over the goal by the combined forces of his
own efforts and those of his environment.
Although many valid causes may be given for retardation,
yet it appears that a great deal of it is due to the "lock-step" sys-
tem of grading and promotion.
As was stated before, every class has its bright pupils, its
average pupils, and its dull pupils. The school grade is not static.
The individuality of the child soon begins to show and readjust-
ment must take place. Some are promoted to more advanced
grades, some are demoted to lower grades, while others are left
to repeat the work of the grade. This problem is a large one and
many extensive studies have been conducted upon it.
The old type of ungraded school has had its day. It flourished
at a time when universal education was not popular. It most
certainly had one feature that is not found in the graded school,
that is, the instruction was individualistic. But as soon as we
began to educate the masses, it became necessary from our adminis-
trative standpoint to teach them in groups. It soon became evident
that this plan was economical, so it has remained as a chief char-
acteristic of our educational system. It is due to this that the
individual is lost sight of in the mass. In a sense he is left to
sink or swim, and too often our school machinery forces him to
sink.
It must be conceded that the graded school has been a potent
factor in levelling distinctions of social rank. The boy (or girl)
from the humblest home may be the brightest in his class. He
is allowed to compete on equal grounds with the child from the home
of plenty. His station in life makes no difference; it is worth
against worth; and when the child from the home of limited means
outstrips his more fortunate brother and receives his well earned
honors, we see social forces working at their best. It is this aspect
of the class or graded plan that gives it vitality.
It is with the hope that all of the best in the graded scheme
can be retained and much of the value of the old individualistic
plan added to it, that the various investigations have been
carried on.
The aim of the public school must be the development of the
fullest, soundest mental, moral and physical life of which the
particular individual is capable. Every child must be given a
chance to become all that he is capable of becoming. He must
be made as efficient as possible.
We have noted above that there exists in all our schools a
RETARDATION IN NEBRASKA. 225
great variation in the mentality of the members of any class,
variation both above and below the average. Since this is known
to be the case, we must provide for the exceptions. It is planned
that the school may meet all conditions that might be classed as
average, and it is for this class that it is doing the most, but it is
not right that it stop here.
To be sure, much study and investigation, and considerable
money and effort are being expended on the sub-normal class to
raise them to a plane with the normal or average child. This is
all well and good as far as it goes, but the work is not general
enough. Too many schools give no attention whatever to this class,
but let them drift along as best they may, eventually to sink and
be lost in the undercurrent. Too often our schools tend to react
harmfully upon certain children, generally of the sub-normal class.
The teacher finds the pupil hard to deal with; he is slow, and
always demanding her time. She becomes disgusted and decides
that the boy had better not be in school, and soon, probably uncon-
sciously, she is doing the things that tend to drive him away from
school rather than to hold him. It is certainly unfortunate that
this is the case, for it is from this class that the criminal comes.
Society must in turn suffer for what it has positively done or wil-
fully neglected.
But what are our schools doing for the exceptionally bright
pupil ? We are glad to note that some few schools are doing
excellent work for them, but in the main they are being overlooked,
and no time is provided for them at all. It certainly ought to be
as important for society to see to it that her gifted children as well
as her deficient class, are developed to their fullest capacity, and
yet we are spending many times more money and effort on the
dullard than on the gifted pupil. The school certainly ought to be
a place where the genius could go and find food for his thought
and work for his hands. It always has been and always will be
that society is led by men and women from the gifted classes, and
we must see that the bright child is liberated.
If we look at him in most of our schools to-day, especially in
Nebraska, we will find no special provision for him. We are
under the "lock-step" regime and every pupil is taught to mark
time. The same assignments and books are given to our gifted
children as to our deficient. We are safe in saying that the "lock-
step" system is not meeting the demands of these three classes of
pupils as we find them in our schools.
Professor W. Franklin Jones summarizes twelve criticisms
against the "lock-step" system as follows :17
17 The Psychological Clinic, Vol. V, No. 3, p. 81.
226 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
"I. It loses the individual in the mass.
'II. It does not classify students so that treatment may be
readily modified to fit abilities.
"III. It puts the emphasis upon the weak rather than upon
the strong.
"IV. It fails to work the strong students up to their rea-
sonable limits.
"V. It does not make promotion feasible.
"VI. It does not facilitate well adjusted assignments of
work.
"VII. It fails to emphasize the individual inequalities.
"VIII. It gives inadequate opportunity to regain loss due
to absence.
"IX. It fosters failure among the less capable students.
"X. It is responsible for much elimination from school.
"XI. It easily works beyond a safe limit, the slow but
persistent student who is given to worry.
"XII. It stands in the way of shortening the elementary
school period for competent students."
There is at least one other criticism that can reasonably be
lodged against this system,?that it tends to work the child most
of his time in those subjects where he is weakest, and in the ones
he dislikes most. For when the teacher finds him failing in a
subject, she is sure to require him to do extra work in it, and often
he is compelled to travel over an entire grade again to get a little
more arithmetic, or grammar, or geography.
The criticisms above are all well taken and go to show that
there are enough conditions within our schools themselves to cause
all our retardation, not to mention the holding back of the student
who could and would move rapidly.
It almost appears as if our pupils were being made to fit the
schools, and not our schools the pupils. This must be changed.
The individual must be freed. When our teachers awaken to the
fact that they are teaching, in a sense, as many schools as they
have pupils, we shall be in a position to do something. The pupils
of our schools are like the different instruments of an orchestra.
Every instrument is different from every other, and no two can
be played upon alike if we would get harmony from them.
If the teacher would get the best work from the child, she
must see him in all his aspects: socially, physically, morally, and
mentally, for he is always presenting these four aspects of his
nature. The four fields are open for adjustment. We must
look to his social conditions,?the home, the street, the school
associates, and so on. His physical welfare must be carefully
RETARDATION IN NEBRASKA. 227
scrutinized. The school must come to his rescue with medical
inspection. Iiis mental and moral development must be planned
for daily, and results tabulated.
The problem is a large one and much time and study is needed
to adjust the school to the individual. There have already been
many plans evolved with the purpose in view of overcoming some
of the evils of the present "lock-step" system, and to free the
individual. Some of these are known as the Cambridge Plan,
Elizabeth Plan, Denver Plan, St. Louis Plan, Double Tillage
System, Peview Back System, Departmental Plan, and there are
many others. This is all pointing in a hopeful direction, and
shows that the school men and women are awake to the needs of
this problem, and that efforts are being made to solve it.
The great problem then that is now facing us is "how to
adjust our programs and policies so as to free progress through
the grades for all the children of all the people."18 We must use
wisely what information and knowledge we now have upon the
problem, and set about immediately to ascertain accurately those
facts and truths that lie deeply hidden beneath our school
machinery.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
(Note: An excellent bibliography on retardation will be found in The
Psychological Clinic, Vol. V, pages 117-119, at the end of Dr. W. Franklin
Jones's article on "Grading and Promotion." The following additional refer-
ences have been gathered by Mr. Morton. Editor.)
1. Aley, Robert J.:?Care of Exceptional Children in the Grades. Proc.
N. E. A., 1910, pp. 881-886.
2. Baciie, James A.:?Delinquency and the Responsibility toward it. Proc.
N. E. A., 1909, pp. 1001-1005.
3. Baciiman, F. P.:?Elimination and Repetition. Ed. Rev., 1910, p. 48.
4. Balliet, T. M.Discussion. Proc. N. E. A., 1910, p. 800.
5. Brumbaugh, Martin G.:?Means of improving the Efficiency of the
Grammar School. Proc. N. E. A., 1900, p. 108.
6. Carr, J. W.:?Discussion. Proc. N. E. A., 1910, pp. 798-800.
7. Dyer, F. B.:?What Consideration should be given to the Sub-Normal
Pupils? A Discussion. Proc. N. E. A., 1910, pp. 167-168.
8. Editorial:?The Lock-step again. Nation, Vol. XXXV, pp. 298-299.
9. Ellis, E. Caswell:?The Percentage of Boys who leave the High School
and the Reasons therefor. Proc. N. E. A., 1903, pp. 792-798.
10. Elson, William:?School Records, their Defects and Improvements Ed
Rev., Vol. XXXIX, pp. 216-227.
11. Falkner, R. P.:?Retardation; Its Significance and Measurement Ed
Rev., Vol. XXXVIII, pp. 122-132.
12. Fitzpatrick, F. A.:?Departmental Teaching in Grammar Schools. Ed.
Rev., Vol. VII, pp. 439-447.
13. Frazier, C. R.:?At what should the Ungraded School aim? And for what
should it provide? Proc. 1ST. E. A., 1907, p. 316.
14. Gasling. T. Warrington:?The Classification of Pupils. Ed Rev, Vol.
XXXIX, pp. 394-400.
15. Gossett, J. O.:?Retardation in the Schools of Stockton, Cal. The Psy.
Clin., Vol. IV, pp. 79-82.
? Keyes, Chas. H.: Progress Through the Grades of City Schools, p. 69.
228 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
10. Greenwood, J. M.:?Retardation of Pupils in their Studies. Ed. Rev.,
1909, p. 342.
17. Greenwood, J. M.:?Progress of Pupils through Elementary and High
School. Education, Vol. XXIX, p. 270.
18. Groszman, M. P. E.:?What Consideration should be given to the Sub-
normal Pupil? Proc. N. E. A., 1910, pp. 100-107.
19. Gulick, L. H., and Ayres, L. P.:?Medical Inspection of Schools. N. Y.:
Charities Pub. Com., 1908.
20. Harris, W. T.:?Class Intervals in Graded Schools. Proc. N. E. A., pp.
332-340.
21. Harris, W. T.:?How the School strengthens the Individuality of the
Pupil. Ed. Rev., Vol. XXVI, p. 228.
22. Jones, W. Franklin:?An Experimental-critical Study of the Problem
of Grading and Promotion, The Psy. Clin., Vol. V, pp. 03-90, 99-120.
23. Keyes, C. H.:?Progress through the Grades of City Schools. Teachers
College, Columbia University, N. Y., 1911.
24. Kirk, J. R.:?Should the School furnish Better Training for the Non-
average Child? Proc. N. E. A., 1907, p.. 221.
25. Kirkpatrick, V. E.:?Emancipating the Individual. Education, Vol. XXX,
pp. 1375-1380.
20. Law, Frederick H.:?Age at which Children leave School. Ed. Rev., Vol.
XX, pp. 40-49.
27. Luckey, G. W. A.:?Can we eliminate the School Laggard? Proc. 1ST. E. A.,
1911, pp. 1040-1051.
28. Maxwell, W. M.:?Reports of the New York City Schools, 1907, pp. 133-
144; 1905, pp. 114-115, 420-434; 1903, pp. 110-117, 243-200.
29. Montgomery, Louise:?The Soil in which Repeaters grow. The Survey,
Vol. XXIII, pp. 77-81.
30. Moore, Margaret Brown:?Inefficiency of Modern Schools. Ed. Rev., Vol.
XXXVIII, pp. 302-307.
31. Parker, Frank W.:?Departmental Instruction. Ed. Rev., Vol. VI, pp.
431-442.
32. Parkinson, W. D.:?Individuality and Social Adjustment as Means and
Ends in Education. Education, Vol. XXIX, pp. 10-24, 104-112.
33. Payne, I. D.:?Retardation in the Schools of Palo Alto, Cal. Tiie Psy.
Clin., Vol. V, pp. 139-149.
34. Shearer, W. J.:?School Children in Lock-step. World's Work, Vol. XIV,
pp. 9254-9255.
35. Smith, Payson:?Admitting that our Schools are Defective, who is Re-
sponsible for the Present Condition? Proc. N. E. A., 1907, p. 200.
30. Strayer, G. D.:?Age and Grade Census of Schools and Colleges. U. S.
Bureau of Education, Bui. No. V, 1911.
37. Swift, Edgar James:?Juvenile Delinquency and Juvenile Control. Psy.
Bui., No. VI, pp. 27-29.
38. Van Sickle, James H.:?Provision for Gifted Children in Public Schools.
Proc. N. E. A., 1910, p. 155.
39. Van Sickle, James H.:?Grading and Promotion with Reference to the
Individual Needs of Pupils. Proc. N. E. A., 1898, pp. 434-442.
40. Witmer, Ligiitner:?The Study and Treatment of Retardation; A Field
of Applied Psychology. Psy. Bui., Vol. VI, p. 121.
