How a Psychological Clinic can help a Special Class
====================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1913, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VII, No. 5 October 15, 1913

By Arthur Holmes, Ph.D.,
Dean of the General Faculty, Pennsylvania State College.
A psychologist and a set of Binet-Simon tests do not constitute a
psychological clinic; much less a medical inspector and a stethoscope;
still less a school principal and a special class teacher. The essentials
are rooms, instruments, social workers, clinical assistants, psychol-
ogists, plus the immense item of specialized experience, all set down
in the midst of and closely connected with a host of other clinics and
child-helping agencies. A psychological clinic is an inter-clinic.
Socially it acts as a clearing house for special children. The nature
of its function and the method of its operations make it a most
necessary adjunct to the urban public school. Its business is to
sort children and to sort them scientifically; or putting it more tech-
nically, to diagnose or to classify children according to their mental
and moral capacities; and what is vitally to the point, to do that
classifying scientifically, i.e. by accurate measurements and by
a consideration of underlying causes.*
To illustrate more specifically I present a brief description of a
few cases showing how one clinic helped a special class. The clinic
was the Psychological Clinic conducted by Dr. Lightner Witmer at
the University of Pennsylvania. The special class was taught by
Miss Bertha F. Thompson under the able supervision of Dr. James
E. Bryan in Camden, New Jersey.
The report suffers from several disabilities. First, the clinic
and class were in two separate organizations. This alone militates
against the highest efficiency. Secondly, they were in different
localities,?in different states, in fact,?necessitating a ferryboat
trip for each child. Thirdly and chiefly, since all the children
* For a further discussion of the work of a psychological clinic see Holmes, A. The Conserva-
tion of the Child. Phila.: Lippincott & Co., 1913.
(117)
118 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
examined were all placed in a special class prior to their visits to the
clinic, the most important function of the clinic, that of making
the first classification, was prevented or delayed.
Nevertheless the results are valuable in that they show what
was done and suggest what might be done. They come from real
children, in a real special class in a city school system. To this
extent they represent conditions and not theories. In some cases
what was not done is just as illuminating as what was done.
Two thoughts the reader is asked to keep constantly in mind
during this article. First, no criticism whatever is intended against
the Camden schools. Circumstances redounding in every way
to their credit decreed that their special class be chosen as the one
to illustrate the need of school clinics. The very fact that the
pupils were brought to a clinic shows their progressiveness. The
superintendent, Dr. Bryan, as is well known, is a pioneer student
in the field of retardation. Miss Thompson, the special class teacher,
was quick to see and ready to take advantage of the University
clinic for helping her charges. The school board generously permitted
her to take time from her teaching in order to bring the children to
the clinic. In every way this school system and its administrators
are thoroughly progressive, efficient, and active to their utmost.
The second thought springs from the very facts just mentioned,?
that there was open-eyed perception of an opportunity, that therewas
ready co-operation, that there was trained and specialized knowledge
of needs and yet that five out of nine special class pupils in one year
were institutional cases, that several others could not receive the
full benefit of the advice given at the University clinic, that time
and money were thereby wasted and possible good rendered impos-
sible,?all of this, I say, argues profoundly for the establishment of
fully equipped school clinics. Therefore I ask the reader not to
be misled into thinking he is reading a criticism of any school; nor
is he studying an inductive treatise proving abstractly that a school
clinic is a good institution. He is being presented with a few facts,
thoroughly typical, all true, and each and every one of them so
charged with tragic significance that it alone is sufficient for the
foundation of a school clinic, for here every fact is a human being.
With these preliminary cautions, we will take up the nine cases
brought to the clinic in one year, and try to show the essential points
in each case that demonstrated the need of a school clinic.
The first five children are and were always institutional cases.
They present, therefore, uniquely the raison d'etre of a school clinic.
They should never have entered a public school, much less should
they have consumed the time and attention they did there.
HOW A PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC CAN HELP. 119
Heston, Case 325, is an example of how a clinic can effect all
the items above enumerated. At the same time his case suggests
what could have been done had he been taken to a clinic at six years
of age instead of eleven. Luckily only one year was wasted with
him in the regular classes. He was then transferred to a special
class and two months after, because his teacher knew of the Psycho-
logical Clinic, he was brought there and his case diagnosed as middle
grade imbecility. At the same time she received information as
to the proper institution in which to place the child and the best
method of placing him. Had there been a social worker in a school
clinic this could have been done quickly and efficiently. As it was the
teacher and school administrators gave time from their legitimate
work to interest influential people in the matter and the boy was
listed for a splendid school for the feebleminded in his home state.
Jabez, Case 355, is typical of what is being done in many special
classes. This boy, eight years old when he entered school, was placed
in a special class one month afterward and remained there about a
year before he was brought to the clinic. His teacher described
him on his entrance to school as a very stout boy with club foot,
carious teeth, open mouth, a stolid, dull expression. He was unable
to read or write, impudent, sneaky, vile-spoken, swearing, suffering
frequent attacks of epileptic fits. Adenoids were diagnosed by the
school physician and some improvement followed upon their removal.
At the clinic he was pronounced an institutional case, unfit to
be in school with normal children, and incapable of ever using for
good the little reading or writing he could acquire. He could,
however, learn a trade and work under supervision at it. He was
recommended to an institution for epileptics. On the strength of
such recommendation his mother consented and at last accounts
(November 15, 1911) papers were made out for his admission. The
clinic thus saved the principal, teachers, parents, other pupils and
society unknown trouble by a speedy and authoritative decision
regarding the mental, physical, social and pedagogical problem
involved. If the clinic had been connected with the school it could
have followed up the case through its social worker until the boy was
safely deposited with the state asylum officers.
Beza, Case 339, was a girl who began her schooling at seven.
She was an epileptic. Her parents knew it, the neighbors knew,
teachers knew, her fellow pupils had sad and frequent ocular demon-
strations of it. But what could anyone or all of them do? None
of them knew anything practically about epilepsy. They couldn't
tell how eating much meat or candy or how school study affected
the malady. All they knew was that a child must be "educated",
120 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and so they dropped this forlorn bit of neurotic humanity into the
hopper and turned the crank for two years. At the end of that time
the fits were very frequent, the muscular control poor, the child could
not handle a pencil or do number work, but could manage to read
some words in the second reader. She told lies, swore, pilfered and
mutilated the work of other children. How much society owed her
in damages through neglect and injury is not known. At any rate
the school did the best it could.
When Beza grew too troublesome for a regular class she was
turned over to the special teacher. There in about two more years
she was taught to sew, weave mats, make baskets, to read in the
fourth reader and write a little. Her physical condition improved,
but her epileptic seizures continued.
Then she was brought to the clinic and her real improvement
began. Her teeth were cleaned and filled and the epilepsy given the
proper medical attention. Under such care she rapidly improved in
general health and changed wonderfully in disposition and character.
The teacher was told that the ordinary school was useless for her
and the only proper place for the girl was an institution for epileptics.
Accordingly she was entered in a state colony where at last report
she continued her improvement in general health and appearance,
and in weaving, sewing, embroidery, and housework. She is merely
another example of years spent in school without adequate return
to herself or to society and with the inevitable dependency at the
end. One important thing the clinic did. It saved society from the
burden of supporting this girl's epileptic, feebleminded, or insane
offspring.
Mathilda, Case 165, a girl of fifteen, had encumbered several
public schools from her sixth year. She came to this special class
a stout girl with defective speech and eyesight; a very nervous child,
with a shuffling gait, dull, stupid, seldom smiling or laughing, unsocial
but morally "good" according to school standards. At fourteen
she could not read or do number work and was not good at manual
exercises.
The clinic diagnosis pronounced her a cretinoid case, rapidly
becoming a permanent invalid with a kidney affliction, poor eyesight,
carious teeth, in need of orthopedic attention and thyroid treatment
and permanent care in an institution.
She was kept on thyroid for five months. Special braces were
made for her and glasses were recommended. Her general improve-
ment was pronounced. She became more erect, walked rapidly,
learned to run and jump, lost much of her nervousness, learned to
read and write rapidly, improved in number work, seldom stuttered
HOW A PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC CAN HELP. 121
and became sociable. Then because there was no means in the
school of following up the work and securing cooperation at home,
the thyroid was neglected, the improvement came to a standstill,
and later ill health supervened.
This case presents a clear example of the necessity for having
a completely equipped clinic in the public school system. It will be
noticed that this girl had been in public schools from six to fourteen.
How many hours, days and months of teachers' good time she con-
sumed is not recorded; how many others suffered on account of her
is unknown. We do know that at fourteen she was unlettered and
unlearned, and her schooling practically came to naught. All those
years she needed a thorough clinic examination; all those years
should have been spent and if a school clinic had existed, would have
been spent in health-giving treatment and orthogenic training.
At last when her real trouble was discovered by a clinic, she was
too old to profit completely by it. There was no school machinery
to follow up, nor to place her in a proper institution.
Rochelle, Case 356, was a boy twelve years old when he finished
his six years' school career in regular classes and entered the special
class able to read dime novels and to write, but wholly deficient in
arithmetic. He was pale, thin, choreic, with adenoids and enlarged
tonsils, and carious teeth; impudent, sly, violent of temper and poor
in memory; poorly born and spoiled in the breeding.
At the clinic, after a year's special class work, besides his
other defects, a weak heart was discovered. The general appearance
of the boy was not at all prepossessing. His face wore a dogged,
stolid, unintelligent expression; his forehead was plowed with
longitudinal furrows; his body was emaciated, with marked scoliosis
in the thoracic region and with stooping shoulders. His head was
dolichocephalic with a low and rather narrow forehead. His eyes
were deep set, but his vision was good; his nose was fairly well
developed, thick at the bridge with small nostrils; his upper lip was
short. His skin was not smooth and was marred in places with
acne, especially on the forehead. His ears were not well developed,
especially the lobes and helices. His teeth were in a very bad con-
dition with marked malocclusion of the jaws. The heart beat was
accentuated on the second sound and a decided mitral regurgitation
could be heard. Nervousness, sullenness and irritability seemed to
be his chief temperamental characteristics. He was very annoying
in the school room, talked incessantly in a clumsy and poorly articu-
lated manner on account of his teeth, and complained continually
that people "picked" at him.
All indications pointed to feeblemindedness and his teacher
122 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
was informed of this diagnosis. On account of parental objection
and other obstacles it was impossible to place him in a proper insti-
tution. He was treated for chorea, his teeth were filled and his
physical condition improved. In spite of this, he remained unreliable,
sly, impudent, and advanced only to third-grade mental work where
he ceased to make further progress. His manual work was good
and he liked his physical exercises. He is clearly an institutional
case, but because of lax laws still remains in his wretched home,
whence he will eventually go forth a vagabond or a criminal to in-
crease his kind in the earth and to revenge himself without malice
upon the society that is so ignorantly neglecting him.
Four more cases are now presented. They illustrate different
ways in which the clinic can aid the special class teacher. It must
always be remembered throughout these descriptions that the Uni-
versity clinic was laboring under a handicap. The most effectual
act of a school clinic, namely the preliminary classification of a
child and the prescription of his pedagogical training, was already
attempted in these cases before they reached the University clinic.
That is, they had been classified by the usual school methods in
vogue for all children and trained by the usual methods first in regular
grades and later in the special class. If a clinic classification had
been made at the very beginning of these pupils' careers?say,
when they first fell behind?altogether different results would
certainly have followed. Some of our illustrative cases suffer there-
fore by the necessity of substituting "it might have been" for
descriptions of positive results. This is especially true where some
of the children had grown too old before they came to the clinic.
Gowan, Case 168, is not so much an example of what a clinic can
do as what a state should do for children isolated from a section of
the world by a lack of a special sense. Such children are in a sense
institutional cases, but not permanently so. They can be trained
to do well in the world, but to do that special institutions are neces-
sary.
This boy Gowan was wholly deaf. At nine he entered public
school. There he met no one who could tell his parents that a deaf
boy could be taught to speak and read lips, and furthermore that
unless he received such training he would be wofully handicapped in
life, while with it not only a useful but a highly successful career
was possible. After four years of class work he was transferred to
the special class. His face wore a dull and stupid expression; his
teeth were very irregular, and his whole demeanor childish for a
boy of thirteen years. He was wholly unable to talk vocally.
About a year and a half later he was brought to the clinic and
HOW A PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC CAN HELP. 123
referred to the proper hospital departments, where his ears and eyes
were examined and orthodontic work undertaken. This last was
completed and the boy learned to talk fairly distinctly and to read
the lips of others who spoke to him daily. In other respects his
progress was great. He began to play outdoor games, did fine
manual work, learned reading, writing, and arithmetic very rapidly
and when last heard from was developing into a healthy, happy boy.
Still, because no institution for the deaf was found for this boy
and largely because people in general and even educators in general
are not familiar with the enormous advantages accruing to deaf
children through lip reading, this otherwise bright boy must suffer
through all his life. There are men carrying on large business affairs
in America today who were born deaf, or have become totally deaf,
but who learned to talk and to read lips and can therefore communi-
cate directly with anyone without awakening a suspicion of their
defect. All this clinic experts know. They know too its import-
ance and how to impress parents with it, and lastly how best to
secure such education for any child. In this case of the deaf boy
Gowan, there was a peculiar opportunity, one partially taken and
nobly carried out by the school administrators as far as circumstances
permitted. Failure was due to dearth of school organization, the
lack of a clinic fully equipped, and not to absence of earnestness or
zeal on the part of school teachers.
Wistar, Case 326, illustrates both what a clinic can do and also
what a social worker, tactful and experienced, might do in the home.
This boy ten years of age, suffered from physical defects and a weak
mother. The school clinic might help both; one directly and the
other through a social worker.
Wistar began his quest for education at five years of age. For
four years he plodded along in a regular grade without much intellec-
tual improvement. Then he entered the special class, a thin, pale,
choreic boy partially deaf, suffering from adenoids and rheumatism,
irritable, impudent, rebellious to the point of throwing books at the
teacher, with no interest in study, unable to acquire more than the
rudiments of the three R's.
In the special class he improved somewhat. He was circumcised,
treated for rheumatism, his adenoids were removed, and his ears
treated for deafness. The results were good. He began to learn,
especially to write, but retained his violent temper, delighted to
injure other people, to tear up pupils' work and to lie.
A year afterward he came to the clinic. He was still thin and
badly nourished. His eyes were treated and glasses fitted, and
treatment recommended for his general physical improvement.
124 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
He was considered a borderland case, one wavering between upgrade
and downgrade, his future destination depending upon environment,
treatment, and training. He had in him the making of a good
citizen or a criminal. Unfortunately his home was calculated to
turn him toward the latter course, and the school could not care for
him more than five hours a day, five days a week. At last accounts
he was learning very rapidly to read, write, and do number work, and
was visibly endeavoring to control his temper. He was still physically
weak; there was not much cooperation at home with the school
authorities and his future was not bright. A social worker from a
school clinic with its staff of specialists might have impressed the
mother and saved the boy.
Cowes, Case 357, is an example of wasted years through nobody's
fault in particular but to society's blame. He started early to school
for a free education. From six years to twelve he labored?or rather
was labored with,?according to approved methods. He learned
to do simple arithmetic, write a little, but could not read. His
physical constitution was weak. He was small, pale, thin, choreic,
full of nervous action, but weak in musculature; pampered at home
with much candy and petty license. As a result he was impudent,
sly, morose, inclined to small brutalities, and easily influenced by
other boys. Such was Cowes upon entrance to a special class. After
two years training there he was able to do fourth grade arithmetic,
to read out of a primer, and to do excellent manual work.
Then he came to the clinic. His physical defects were diagnosed
and treatment recommended. He had carious teeth, indigestion,
a weak heart, and hydrocele. The last his father refused to have
treated, averring that he would outgrow it. Still his other treatments
had their effect. He grew more cheerful, lost his former brutality,
became less sly, more self-reliant and respectful, did excellent work
in arithmetic, learned to read fairly well in the second reader, loved
manual training and physical exercises.
The sad part is that all these improvements came so late. He
was then fourteen and ready to leave school, fourteen years being
the legal age for him to begin life as a wage earner. Yet anyone
who saw the change wrought in this boy by a clinic examination and
two years of special training could not help speculating upon the
chance he had lost forever to become a sturdy and intelligent citizen
instead of one always bordering on pauperism by reason of unpre-
paredness for work.
Sallie, Case 3Ifi, is another case of long schooling and slow
progress, who happily found help in the clinic. She first came at
the age of thirteen after nearly two years of experience in a special
HOW A PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC CAN HELP. 125
class preceded by four years in the grades where she learned to read
the third grade reader and do first grade number work.
When she came to the clinic first she was very small for her age,
a pale anemic child with bad teeth, poor eyesight, enlarged adenoids
and tonsils, was dull and sleepy, had spells of stubbornness heart-
breaking to a teacher, but possessed an excellent moral character
otherwise.
By clinic advice and assistance glasses were fitted to her eyes,
her teeth were treated, and the nervous and intestinal troubles
received the proper medication. The results were gratifying to all.
The girl took an interest in her work especially sewing, physical
exercise, singing and games and her disposition was much improved.
Her powers of doing mental work had so increased that she was
returned to the regular third grade, which of course was very low
for one of her age.
What was accomplished in this girl's case was but a small
indication of what might have been done by a school clinic when she
was six or seven years old. Her disabilities were chiefly physical
and removable. Had the school possessed means of treating them,
the waste of time, money, and human life could have been avoided.
Because it did not possess this means, Sallie, typical of many more,
must be handicapped for life.
Finally to sum up these illustrative cases,?five of them were
children who should have been sent early to institutions for life-
long care and training. No attempt should have been made to
perform the impossible task of educating them in a public school,
or to make them self-supporting, or to put upon them the mental
stamp of public approval, or to release them to prey upon society
through an inevitable degenerate posterity. The years of trying
effort made for them were wasted years and the results were worse
than nil.
Another case was temporarily an institutional case. That is,
the deaf boy should have been trained in a school for the deaf.
Another child, Wistar, was very materially helped by his special
class and helped especially in those matters affected by a clinic.
He was left wavering in the balance because the school had no
machinery to protect him from a weak mother. The last two cases
were helped materially both by the special class and by the clinic.
These nine children spent an aggregate of forty-seven years in school
at a cost of over $1056.00, passed through about a total of thirty-six
grades in reading, writing and arithmetic, an average of one and one-
third years' school progress for each pupil, none beyond the fourth
grade, and yet not one pupil was really ready for self-support in the
126 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
world. Compare this with the record of one normal pupil at fourteen
years of age, with eight years in school, costing $176.00, with a total
of twenty-four grades in the three subjects and many more in other
subjects, and ready to enter high school or to begin his work in the
world.
Possibly in all this matter, we have overlooked two great classes
helped by an authoritative diagnosis. These were the teachers
and the school administrators. After the clinic diagnosis they were
satisfied about each child. They could proceed with assurance.
Henceforth they worked with the authority of specialists behind
their efforts. With this they met parents' objections, influenced
public institutions and secured the interest of friends. By means
of it they coordinated and focussed their efforts upon essentials
and made every iota of their work count for good. If a clinic could
be organized within every urban school system already almost
supplied with the essential parts of such an organization, it would
bring the most profitable administrative and pedagogical results
and that with no additional expenditure of energy or money.
