Whistling at Work? A Crime?
============================

By Herbert F. Clark,
Principal Olive Special School, Los Angeles, Cal.
Not long ago the principal of one of the largest schools in a
neighboring city went into his sloyd room where thirty boys were
busily at work, and amid the din of saw and hammer his ear
detected the merry whistle of a happy boy. He turned to the teacher
in charge of the room and asked him if he allowed the boys to whistle
while working. The teacher pondered a moment. "Well," he re-
plied, " I hadn't really noticed it. Perhaps I had better tell him to
stop." "Yes, I would," said the principal, "We can't have them
whistling in school." So the noise was forthwith stopped, and the
good old standard was maintained.
There are extremely interesting principles involved in this epi-
sode. The head of that school represents in a striking way a certain
type of educational procedure. He stands for the notion that any
indication of happiness in school is a crime. The sacred walls of the
school room must not be polluted with the vile sound of whistling.
He does not ask himself the questions?What harm was that boy
doing by giving vent to a wholesome sentiment with his lips while
busily engaged upon some piece of furniture for his home? What
particular quality does the sound of whistling possess that dis-
tinguishes it from the sound of hammer and saw, and makes it a
fit subject for rebuke? Is it inconsistent? W^hen has it been incon-
sistent to whistle while at work? Is it disorderly? Then whom does
it disturb? Why should not all the boys whistle? What harm could
it do? I know a sloyd room where the boys sing while at work.
Yes, they all sing if they want to, and why not? Shouldn't heart
and hand go together in the work of the world? It is absurd to repress
the finest emotions while the declared aim of education is expression.
What is the sloyd room but a place for concrete expression? The
normal boy is a veritable storehouse of potential emotions. Restrict
their wholesome expression, and they are apt to break out in unwhole-
some ways. It seems to me that the slo^d room is the place of all
places where the boy should be encouraged to give the fullest and
freest expression of the best that is in him. Herein lies the efficacy
of manual work as a part of our educational procedure. There are
unhappy moments enough in the life of the average boy, and if
(17)
18 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
perchance he bubbles over with joy in his school work, it isn't a bad
omen for the kind of work he is doing or the attitude he is taking
toward it.
The question naturally arises,?How far in sloyd or other
school work can the spontaneous expression of joy take place without
interfering with the quality of the school work as a whole? It has
been demonstrated in the special schools of this city, those schools
which take care of the truants and so-called 'incorrigibles,' that
considerable freedom can be given boys in method and in conduct
without seriously impeding the progress of their work. Indeed they
do more work, perhaps not quite so good in quality, but certainly
done with a more wholesome attitude, than in the regular schools
from which they come. In the special schools, if a boy feels like
whistling he whistles, if he feels like singing he sings, if he feels like
boxing he boxes, provided some other boy will 'call his bluff'.
Through it all there is required of him a certain amount of school
work each day and this work he must do. The result is that the boys
soon learn to get their work done amid considerable confusion, which
in itself isn't a bad lesson to learn. There is hardly any place in real
life, excepting at funerals, where people walk on tiptoes and one can
hear the clock tick. The notion that we must have absolute quiet
in order to be able to concentrate our minds, is a relic of a past age.
Real life is busy and bustling, and fortunate is he who can go about
his own work and be so absorbed in it that he can whistle a merry
tune and be heard above the noise of his fellows. That is just what
the boy in our story was doing, and for that he was rebuked. What
we teachers need to do is to drop the flimsy mask of false dignity and
regard the boy as a boy and not as an automaton. We need to
realize that growth of mind comes through wholesome expression and
not through repression, and that wide latitude should be given each
child in the kind of emotion he may express. We need to remember
that a child cannot really be happy unless he is expressing his happi-
ness in some emotional form. To inhibit the expression is to destroy
the emotion in the child, and this is an educational sin.
Of course it takes a stronger teacher to manage a group of children
where this wider freedom is given. Any policeman can control a
large group of people without disorder, but he cannot arouse their
interest and lead them into new fields of mental activity. The teacher
needs a broadening of his educational vision, so that he can discern
wholesome motives in the conduct of his pupils and so direct them
that these motives shall be dominant. He needs the power to use
school facilities as means in dealing with his children. To-day he
may think best to ignore the regular school program altogether.
WHISTLING AT WORK. 19
To-morrow he may reverse its operation, but always he will have the
happiness and welfare of his group of children at heart. He utilizes
the emotional tides of his class as well as of the individuals, in order
that their expression may have in it the spirit of the group and of
spontaneous endeavor. That whistling boy is a perfect type of joy-
ous expression, and our educational aim should be to increase his
land a thousand-fold.
