Clinical Psychology Adversely Criticized
=========================================

By R. H. Sylvester, Ph.D.
University of Iowa.
From visits to a number of clinics and other places where mental
retardation or deficiency is receiving attention, from interviews with
physicians and psychologists who are not working in the field, and
from current journals and newspapers, criticisms have been gathered
of clinical psychology in its present status. The adverse criticisms
may be reduced to the following:?(1) Mental tests are being overemphasized. (2) Clinical psychology is too much limited to diagnosis.
(3) The work is not of much practical value, for little can be done to
improve the mentality of the retarded and the defective. (4) Clinical
psychology is usually based on the wrong kind of psychology. (5)
The field should be cared for by the medical profession.
With very few exceptions, clinical psychologists must plead
guilty to the charge of over-emphasizing mental tests. Much effort
is being directed toward devising, refining, and standardizing testing
devices with the apparent purpose of making them automatically
measure intelligence in finely calibrated units. The futility of
attempting this beyond certain limits is obvious when one remembers
that psychology has not yet worked out all of the principles underlying the tests, and that standards of normal mentality are vague
and indefinite. The Binet scale, the form board, and many of the
tests adapted from the experimental laboratory are of great value
in the clinic, but some of the effort spent in attempting to perfect
and refine them is wasted. By giving more attention to the subjective study of children, examiners could reach a higher efficiency and
make better diagnoses.
This over-emphasis on tests and mental measurements is due
to reasons which may be enumerated as follows:?(a) Most psychologists have worked considerably in laboratory psychology, so they
find in tests an adaptation of the methods and procedure in which
they have been trained. (6) The inexperienced examiner has to
depend on tests because he is not skilled in the interpretation of his
direct observations of the child, (c) The experienced examiner can
make the best use of assistants by having much of their work with
his cases reported in terms of test results, id) In case records, test
(182)
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY ADVERSELY CRITICIZED 183
results are especially valuable, and for the comparison of individuals
with the normal they are a necessity, (e) Because most tests yield
quantitative results, they offer an attractive field for research.
(f) People who bring children to be examined are best satisfied with
diagnoses which are corroborated by the results of tests. (g) Educators, applied sociologists, and those of the general public who are
interested, seem to expect the clinical psychologist to state his results
in terms of tests and measurements. These are causes for the o eremphasis of tests but certainly they do not fully justify it. Considering them in order, it must be said of the first that the examiner
who relies on tests in the clinic as he would in laboratory experimentation evidently forgets that results from the latter are usually rounded
out by introspection which cannot be secured from a child. As to
the necessity for the inexperienced examiner's depending on tests,
he must free himself from this dependence as quickly as possible,
and he must take care that his interest does not become centered
in the tests instead of in the child. To reasons (c) and (d), there can
be no objections, for tests made by assistants economize the examiner's
time and help him to understand the case, and at the same time they
give quantitative material for permanent records and for comparison
with normal standards. In regard to their claim upon research,
tests are worthy of the most serious studies, provided the investigators set their goal beyond mere measurement and standardization.
Certain parts of the field will undoubtedly have to be worked in a
not too intensive way before research can get a proper grasp on the
more fundamental problems of diagnosis. The expectation of
parents and others that mental diagnosis be made by means of
devices as exact as an acid test, in some cases justifies an attempt
to express conclusions in terms of test results. But the examiner
himself must constantly remember that most tests are functional
tests, and as such they deal with complexes that are only partially
analyzable. Physicians rely comparatively little on functional
tests.1 The nearest approach to testing functional capacity would
be by means of an extensive and well balanced team of tests, but no
scheme approximating completeness has been proposed.2 However,
the single tests and teams of tests which have been devised are of
great value. The caution is against over-reliance upon them.
The second of the criticisms enumerated is that clinical psychologists fail to go beyond diagnosis. With this criticism is usually
included the query, "Of what value would a physician's services
1 Jour. Am. Med. Assoc. LIX : 451; Am. Jour. Med. Sc. CXLV : 330.
2 Some of the best mental test teams are those of Binet and Simon, L'Annie Psychologique,
1911 :145; Thorndike, Science, XXXVII : 133; Abelson, Brit, Jour. Psych. IV : 268.
184 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
be if he merely diagnosed your case without treating it?" This
usually comes from persons who have casually visited a clinic or read
of the work. They have the notion that cases are merely examined
and disposed of by an opinion expressed in the form of a diagnosis.
In caring for either the physically or the mentally ill, the important
thing of course is to know what is the matter with them. Treatment
depends on diagnosis and often is the easier problem.
It is unfortunate that some psychologists do not concern themselves with treatment. An extreme instance recently came to my
notice. A mother at considerable expense and effort took her child
to a specialist in mental defects of children. He made a careful
examination and gave his diagnosis, but when asked for advice as
to what to do for the child he stated flatly that he did not allow himself to intrude into the field of therapeutics. It must be admitted
that clinical psychology is in some ways back where medicine was
about fifty years ago. The story is told of a Scotch physician of
that time who after showing a visitor through his hospital said, "We
diagnose, and diagnose, and diagnose." "And," inquired the visitor,
"after that?" "We confirm our diagnosis." Every diagnosis is
more or less a prognosis, and stating that a child is retarded because
of physical condition or of faulty school management is telling what
must be changed in order to remedy the defect. Most psychological
clinics go as far into treatment as they can, giving suggestions and
directions which are as truly perscriptions as are those which the
physician gives to his patient to have filled by the druggist. The
great majority of cases are requested to return for re-examination
after the prescribed treatment has been applied, some of them reporting many times and continuing pedagogical and other treatment
under direction for months. On October 1, 1912, 228 of the 482
cases handled by the Psychological Clinic of the University of
Pennsylvania during the previous twelve months were still under
observation. A few of them had been carried for more than a year.
In addition the Clinic had in residence at schools from six to
eight children who were being studied and taught. The report
for the present year will show even more extended directing and
following up of cases. Certainly this clinic is doing much more than
diagnosis, and some others are working on the same plan. More
therapeutics is desirable, but clinical psychology should be given
credit for having done remarkably well in this direction considering
the short time it has been in the field.
Another criticism from those not fully acquainted with what
is being done, is that clinical psychology is neither practical nor
necessary; that medical treatment does all that can be done for
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY ADVERSELY CRITICIZED 185
retarded and defective children. For those who raise this point,
the concept of retarded children includes only children who have
adenoids, faulty vision, or other purely physical defect, and their
notion of defectives includes only unimprovable imbeciles and idiots.
They fail to recognize the great number of cases where there is some
peculiarity which causes ordinary school methods to go awry or
home and school training to fail, or where there is a remediable bad
habit or learning attitude. After the case has been analyzed and
the defect or peculiarity discovered, these children can often be
restored to normal condition with surprising rapidity. Where the
defect is an incurable one, its identification may make possible the
building up of other capacities which render it less conspicuous. Even
the cases sent to institutions for the feeble minded are not entirely
hopeless. When the kind of work that Dr. Fernald is carrying on
at Waverly becomes more general, the pessimistic attitude toward
this field will be modified. Through his effective use of Seguin
devices the children are introduced into industrial work and made efficient to a degree that one would believe them by no means capable
of attaining. Progress will perhaps lead to specialized institutions
such as the one which Berlin is to have for a psychopathic type of
children.3 Psychology and pedagogy have before them a work of
much promise with these trainable defectives who are remediably
retarded, and the work has already been well begun. Of the five
criticisms discussed in this paper, the one on the impracticability
of clinical psychology is the least valid.
Psychology as a science follows for the most part the rule of
proceeding from the known to the unknown. In regular university
courses emphasis is placed on the simpler mental processes with
experimentation on those which are the most tangible, while study
of the more complex and vague processes tends to go little beyond
where it can be anchored to establish facts. The fourth of the
criticisms against clinical psychology objects to its being so largely
based on this kind of general psychology. Those who raise the
objection do not approach the subject from the laboratory angle.
One group takes its view-point from the psychology of Freud,
Bleuler, and Jung which postulates a subconscious and attempts to
build up a psychology largely from mental pathology. Another
group does not accept Freud or the subconscious (subterranean
psychology, as Dr. Lloyd, one of this latter group, has wittily
dubbed it), but they believe that much of laboratory psychology is
impractical and they choose to approach mental pathology directly,
handling it in terms of its own manifestations. Dr. Burr has stated
? Jour. Am. Med. Assoc. LIX : 130.
186 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
it in rather radical terms, "I have not yet been convinced that the
study of formal psychology throws any light on psychiatry."4 A
part of the present difficulty lies in the exaggerated notion of the
differences among these view-points. Most examiners who follow
the orthodox laboratory psychology do not believe in a subconscious,
but in examining certain peculiar types of children they use methods
of analysis involving much of the Freudian procedure. And they do
not take time to drag in so much of formal psychology and laboratory
procedure as is generally supposed. Likewise, the psycho-analysists
would not presume to explain mere dulness and stupidity in terms of
dissociations, repressions, and conflicts. The three view-points
are not mutually exclusive in practical work at present, but most
examiners confine themselves too narrowly to one of them. It is
likely that the most serviceable psychology in the clinic is that
which builds upon scientific facts experimentally demonstrable, and
which also takes cognizance of the necessity of working in realms
which laboratory procedure does not enter, and deriving all the help
it can from Freudian and direct pathological methods. The examiner
whose training has been largely in the experimental laboratory will
do well to read some of the articles written from other view-points.
The last of the five objections holds that mental retardation
and deficiency in children should be treated by the medical profession.
At present few physicians are prepared for this work. Their medical
school training has scarcely touched it,5 and the field is of small
extent as compared with their general practice of medicine. Obviously the work must be attended to by specialists, and the real
question is as to whether the best specialist has given his major
attention to medicine or to psychology. The opinion of many
physicians is expressed in a recent article in which the employment
of a consulting psychologist in a hospital for the insane calls forth the
exclamation, "Could anything be more monstrous or preposterous?"6
Is it any the less unthinkable for one who knows little of psychology
to deal with mental deviation? Ignorance of the subject causes
many physicians to minimize its difficulties. For instance a writer
states with assurance that Binet tests are unnecessary because
"feeblemindedness is so easily detected."
Of course the clinical psychologist who has not a medical
education cannot work alone. He must work in cooperation with
medical clinics which attend to the physical examinations and
treatments. Whether the future specialist in mental retardation
4 Jour. Am. Med. Assoc. LX : 1054.
'Science, XXXII:65^; Boston Med. and Surg. Jour. LVIII:911; Jour. Am. Med. Assoc.
LVIII : 909.
? Jour. Am. Med. Assoc. LX : 1058.
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY ADVERSELY CRITICIZED 187
and deficiency in children must have completed courses in pedagogy,
psychology, and medicine, or whether he can make himself more
efficient by specializing in a limited field, is a question still to be
decided. In general the medical profession is giving the psychologist
every chance to prove his worth. Surgery and dentistry have come
to be dignified professions. Even the reliable chiropodist is welcomed
because he does a work which "medical practice has always assumed
was beneath its dignity, so left to anybody and everybody."7 Certainly the psychologist will in time be fully endorsed if he proves
that he can be entrusted with duties for which the physician has not
time adequately to prepare.
Were it within the scope of this paper, a list of favorable observations on clinical psychology could be given, which would be far more
impressive than these five adverse criticisms. Suffice it to say that
steady progress is being made both in the amount of work done and
in its quality. Although psychological examination of school children
has extended rapidly, the demand for it is more urgent than ever.8
London has recently appointed a director of clinical psychology for
the city schools. Psychological examinations in connection with
juvenile courts are well established, and consulting psychologists
seem to be rendering valuable service in hospitals for the insane.
Another call for applied psychology comes from penal institutions.
An Indiana reformatory has recently called from a university a
professor of psychology, and other reformatories in the east have
employed psychologists for some time. As yet we have only a vague
notion as to how many criminals are mentally defective, and examiners
will have to attain considerably higher skill before an estimate of the
approximate number can be made. There is of late a general
interest in the problem of the defectives who are mingling in society.
An Australian physician observes, "A lot of our street loafers are
defectives,"9 and he urges that this dangerous element in society
be not neglected. At the present moment there is an insistent
call for better psychological examinations at immigrant stations.
Those who are attempting to do the work are asking for better
facilities and more help. Dr. Knox calls attention to the difficulties
of detecting morons, and to the fact that examiners must have rather
definite notions of the normal Italian, Greek, or Pole, in order to
recognize the defectives.10
Dr. Knight mentions several difficulties, especially the shortness
of the examinations and the confused state of mind in which one
7 Med. Times, Jan., 1913, p. 22.
8 Archiv. of Pediatrics, XXX : 197; Jour, of Ed. Psych. IV : 61.
* Australian Med. Jour., Apr. IS, 1918, p. 995.
10 Jour. AV}- M&d. Assoc. LIX : 105.
188 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
finds the immigrants.11 Dr. Wilson shows still further how much a
normal foreigner may differ from our ordinary concept of normality,
and he shows the serious limitations of our tests.12 Dr. Goddard's
results from testing a few immigrants indicate the possibilities of
the work.13 Some of the medical journals have been carrying on
propaganda through editorials against feebleminded immigrants.
It is shown that a large percentage of the children in the special
backward classes of the New York Public Schools are foreign born
or of foreign parentage, and that the number of aliens who find their
way into institutions for the neuropathic, the feebleminded, and the
insane is very great. The New York Chamber of Commerce last
year transmitted to Congress a resolution asking that taxpayers be
protected against the importation of the feebleminded. These
calls for applied psychology are of interest, because they have been
evoked largely by the visible results of what has been accomplished
through the application of psychology to retarded and defective
children. There is convincing evidence that clinical psychology is
worth while, and there is every assurance that the objections urged
against it can be satisfactorily met.
11 Jour. Am. Med. Assoc. LIX: 106.
12 Boston Med. Jour. CLXVIII : 226.
13 The Training School Bulletin, IX : 95.
