On Some of the Latent Causes of Insanity
=========================================

THE JOURNAL
OP
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
A2TD
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
APRIL 1, 1854.
J
Akt. I ?
*
The entire universe, according to transcendental speculations, is a
unity in which all the parts are related and mutually dependent. A
remark of Feuchtesleben' may he quoted as an illustration of one
department of this mutual dependence: " Could we penetrate into
the secret foundations of human events, we should frequently find the
misfortunes of one man caused by the intestines of another, whom the
former endeavoured to inspire with sympathy in his fate at a moment
when the frame of mind of the latter was affected by impeded secretion.
An hour later and his fortune would have been made." But his for-
tune not being made?what then ? His future course might be like
that of Hamlet?
" and he, repulsed,
Fell into sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness ; and by this declension
Into the madness wherein now he raves."
And thus through events, in a direct series, from the impeded intestinal
action of one man we pursue another to an asylum.
We propose to trace the origin and progress of some of these
" sympathies" between mind and matter, and man and man, and
investigate their relations to insanity; but the sympathies we shall
* Lecons Cliniques de Medecine Mentale, par M. Fahet, Paris, 1854.
KO. XXYI.
1G0 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. .
investigate will not be so obvious and potent as the preceding. We
shall endeavour to get below the surface, and detect some of those
with more hidden springs ; or, disentangling the chaos of facts which lie
to our hands, try to catch hold of a link " of that electric chain with
which we are darkly bound."
In whatever way or from whatever point we view the reciprocal
influence of body and mind, and of organisms on organisms, we are
finally brought to the physiology and pathology of the nervous
system. Analyzing the phenomena as they present themselves in
man in relation to that system, we are as inevitably led to the
cerebrum as the instrument of the mind, and the medium of communi-
cation between it and matter. Struggle as we will, to free us from the
Material which clothes the Immaterial, we always find ourselves at
the same point, and cannot help but acknowledge how inextricably
bound up are all our mental operations with that wonderfully con-
structed but most perishable apparatus. It is true that, in the pride
of intellect, philosophers have despised the teachings of physiology
and medicine, or, in the vanity of ignorance, have wholly rejected
them; it is equally true, too, that the moralist has vainly denied to
the material organism all control over man's volitions; it is equally
J ? true that the legislator and the judge have contemned that?to them
-?maudlin doctrine, which teaches that man is irresponsible for his
acts, on the ground of uncontrollable automatic operation of the
material instrument, if so be that he knows and is conscious that his
acts are evil; it is equally true that the untaught man of action has
worked in utter ignorance that he used an instrument at all. But the
practical experience of the psychiatrician is, nevertheless, opposed to
tbe conclusion of the philosopher, the moralist, the legislator, the
judge, and the untaught man of action. That experience is worth
folios of hypotheses, for it teaches us the humiliating truth, how
utterly dependent are the highest flights of the imagination, and the
deepest conclusions of the intellect, on the working of the material
instrument, and on its right relations to external agencies.
" Man Is but man, inconstant still and various;
There's no to-morrow in liim like to-day;
Perhaps the atoms whirling in his brain
Make him think honestly this present hour;
The next a swarm of base ungrateful thoughts
May mount aloft."
Before particularizing the sympathetic influences we .propose to
discuss, it will be well to indicate in outline the anatomical and
physiological position of their recipient?the cerebrum. All mental
phenomena depend upon alterations in the functional activity of the
ON SOME OP THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 1G1
latter; a cessation of "this activity, as in profound sleep, is coincident
with an abolition of mental action, Now the cerebrum is made up
essentially of a series of ganglia, or, in other words, of concentrated
and connected masses of gray nervous matter, and it is with the
dynamical changes which go on in these centres that mental pheno-
mena are coincident. All the sympathetic influences, therefore, which
we have to consider, must reach these ganglia, and induce those
requisite dynamical changes without which mental phenomena are
never manifested.
If these primary considerations be granted, it follows that we must
inquire carefully, in the first place, into the laws of action of the
cerebral ganglia. This task has, indeed, been often undertaken. Every
available means of research has been put in operation; the eye of the
microscopist has penetrated, to their ultimate organization and disclosed
the caudate vesicle, nucleus, or cell; the scalpel of the anatomist has
traced their connexions with each other fibre by fibre; the test-tube
and scales of the chemist have demonstrated their bio-chemical com-
position ; the researches of the pathologist have shown how often
morbid changes in structure or in chemical composition accompany
morbid changes in functional activity; and, we must add, how often
they do not. But, with all this admirable industry and skilful inquiry,
we as yet know nothing of those intimate changes in the instrument,
with which mental operations are coincident. Is it possible we can
ever attain to a knowledge of them ? The answer must be in the
negative. If we know not the nature of the dynamical changes which
occur in brute matter, coincidently with chemical, electrical, and
magnetic phenomena, how much less can we know those which occur
in organized matter ? It is clear that we can only in the latter, as in
the former, study the dynamical changes through the phenomena.
Vivisections, physiological experiments, and pathological observations,
have been rendered available to a large extent in determining the
functions of less complicated and less important ganglia than the
cerebral; but, as to the latter, they have been of little avail, nay, have
led experimental physiologists into errors which the philosophical
physiologists have escaped. Thus Dr. M. Hall, finding that by
pricking, tearing, irritating with chemical iriitants, and otherwise
mechanically acting upon the spinal chain of ganglia, and its con-
tinuation into the encephalon, as far as the tubercula quadragemina,
he could excite the motor machinery into action, he came to the con-
clusion that the part of the great central axis, so responsive to mecha-
nical irritants, was a distinct portion of it; and he drew a sharp line of
demarcation between that tract and the cerebrum beyond, not only as
to structure, but also as to function. Yet nothing could be more-
N 2
162 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
fallacious. In the application of his mechanical irritants to the
central ganglia, he could only imitate artificially those stimuli which
naturally reach the gray masses and excite their functional activity;
he therefore imitated those only which act upon the ganglia through
the nerve-fibrils running to them from the skin, mucous surface, and
tissues in general?or the nerves of what is termed common sensation,
?and that in a very rude and imperfect way. All impressions
reaching the central axis from special apparatuses, as those commu-
nicated through the senses of taste, smell, hearing, and vision, are,
in fact, altogether inimitable by the methods ordinarily adopted by
vivisectors. The nearest approach to natural stimulus from these
sources is perhaps obtainable by electricity or galvanism ; but even
with regard to these means it is very doubtful, indeed, whether any such
dynamical changes could be induced by them in the cerebral ganglia,
as are consequent upon impressions reaching them through the natural
channel of communication from without.
Nor is there more hope from pathological research. Many a time
and oft has it been alleged that the most careful dissection of the
cerebra of the insane has revealed no change whatever in the gray
matter; and many a time and oft has the hasty induction been made, ^
that therefore we must not look for the seat of insanity in the
encephalon, and that any morbid changes which may have been
observed, must be considered rather as the effect than the cause of
deranged functions. A careful consideration, however, of the essential
nature of insanity, must inevitably lead to the conclusion, that in the
cases which come strictly under the term, none other than a dynamical
change, analogous to that of health, can be expected. A manifest
structural change in the instrument of mind can only happen co-
incidently with abolition of the mental faculties; whereas, in true
insanity, the faculties remain, and are perverted. When the functional
changes which induce insanity have passed into structural alteration,
and the intimate tissue is so compressed by congestion or effusion, or
so changed by disintegration, or imperfect nutrition, that it ceases to >.
fulfil its functions, we have loss of mind, not disorder merely. That
this is the common termination of many cases which end fatally, is
simply a truism; the knowledge that the disorder of the intellect has
so ended in structural change and in abolition, helps us nothing in the
comprehension of the changes which occur during insanity itself, for
we know nothing of the dynamical relations of the material instrument
to the immaterial power.
Is there, then, no method, it may be asked, by which a better
knowledge of the condition of the cerebrum in insanity may be
obtained, and by which we may especially learn the laws of action of j?
ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 163
those influences which, under the term sympathies, have so large a
share in the causation and cure of cerebral disorder ? We think there
is a method available to these ends, and we shall now proceed to trace
it out by the way of synthesis and analysis.
The propositions from which we can start with safety, are two,
namely, 1, that the cerebrum is the organ of the mind; and, 2, that it
is organised matter subject to the laws which regulate organised
matter. If we trace its relations through general and comparative
anatomy, we arrive at the conclusion, that it is constituted of ganglia,
subject to the same laws of action as the ganglia of the spinal cord.
This principle is based mainly on two great facts, namely, 1, that the
cranium being homologically nothing more than the development of
four vertebrae, the contained centres correspond to the central axis con-
tained within the vertebrae, and consequently that, like the spinal
ganglia, the cerebral are functionally subject to the laws of automatic,
spontaneous, or reflex action. Physiological researches have now
almost established this proposition, for the doctrine of " unconscious
cerebration," recently propounded by an eminent neurologist, is none
other than a development of this doctrine of reflex cerebral function.
It is true that that lucid thinker connects sensation with the sensory
ganglia as a necessary element in their functional activity; but it is
obvious that with unconscious reflex action above these, in the hemi-
spherical gray matter, and with unconscious reflex action below them
in the spinal gray matter, this apparent exception will ultimately cease
to be exceptional, and the great and fertile principle will be adopted,
that the instrument of mind itself, like other portions of the nervous
system, may act independently of mind, but automatically, adaptively,
and as if regulated by conscious mind.
The importance of thus placing the cerebrum dynamically, in the
same category with other portions of the nervous system, becomes
more obvious, when we find, on tracing that system to its elementary
constituents, that we must place it dynamically, in the same category
with other living matter. After we have traced the analogue of the
spinal cord of the vertebrata through the ganglionic chain of the
articulata, we have still to push our analogies lower and lower, until we
come to animals with a single ganglion, or multiplication of it, endowed
with the simplest attributes in relation to external influences, but
nevertheless presenting the same dynamical functions as the highest,
inasmuch as within its more limited sphere of action that simple
ganglion acts just as automatically, adaptively, and as if regulated by
conscious mind. The transition, anatomically, from these lowest
forms to those organisms in which no trace of nervous system can be
found, is not difficult to follow; but it may appear startling to endow
1G4 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
the latter, physiologically, with powers which are usually thought to
be the special endownieut of nervous tissue. Yet to no other conclu-
sion can we come, if we look at the functional dynamics of the simplest
microscopical cell, for in this as in the series of ganglia, from the
highest to the lowest, we still find the common principle of action,
namely, ultimate adaptive action within the narrow world in which
they act, as if regulated by conscious mind. We are thus, therefore,
brought by our analysis to the ultimate cell, as the prime type of that
system of dynamics which has its highest elaboration and development
in the human brain.
How, then, does the cell manifest its adaptive and quasi-reasoning
powers? In two ways?First, in evolution and development; secondly, in
actual life. The natural history of the infusoria, is a grand illustration
of the latter; the embryonic, or primordial cell of the human organism,
of the former. To the contemplative mind, nothing is more wonderful
amongst all the properties of vitalized matter than the successive
series of vital processes, which, commencing in the primordial germ,
are continually unfolded, each more complex than its predecessor, each
giving rise to more marvellously constructed instruments, and more
wisely adapted actions than the other, until the human brain is elabo-
rated with the full perfection of the mature intellect, and the human
form developed in all its beauty and glory. The instinctive life of the
infusoria is an impressive illustration of what living matter is capable.
According to botanists, they are Algoe; yet they are nothing more
than simple cells, having their walls strengthened by silica. If these
cells, in so low a step of the scale of organism, present such remarkable
endowments, why should he attribute less of the adaptiveness and
unconscious mind manifested by their acts to the cells of the gray
matter of the nervous system in man, and the higher vertebrata ?
When writers speak and think of the brain as mere matter, they are
little aware with what rare and wonderful powers the most insignificant
and microscopic cell is endowed.
Cell-life in vegetables is a social life. The cells have a separate
existence and division of labour. " The great object which I have kept
in view throughout," Mr. Quekett observes,* "has been that of
endeavouring to impress on you the fact, that each cell of a plant
should be considered as having an independent or individual existence;
that in one situation it may secrete colouring matter, in another,
starch, gum, sugar, oil, &c., and in another the material for the repro-
duction of its species." Thus, certain cells, or classes of cells, have
functions assigned to them, in the scheme of vegetable life. In the
* Lectures on Histology, p. 113.
ON SOAEE OE THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 1G5
scheme of animal life, the special organ of adaptation to definite ends
?the gray ganglionic matter?is divided into parts having special
functions assigned to each; their laws of action being writ (to use the
words of Prochaska) in the nervous pulp, or, in other words, the cells
of the ganglia, have special functions assigned to them.
Now it is in the greater multiplicity of these special adaptations,
that the higher organisms excel the lower; it is therefore in this ex-
ceeding multiplicity of functions that the human cerebrum excels all
other cerebra. But every individual is one?a unity. Hence the
necessity of intimate union, and of common action in these specialities.
They all require to be co-ordinated. In the co-ordination of all the
dynamical processes to a common end?namely, the well-being of the
whole as a unit?we have that view of the processes known as Life, and
those mutual influences developed termed sympathies. " Thus, turning'
to what is physiologically classified as the vegetative system, we see that
the stomach, lungs, heart, liver, skin, and the rest, must work in con-
cert." We quote from a very able essay in the Westminster Review.*
" If one of them does too much or too little?that is, if the co-ordi-
nation be imperfect, the life is disturbed; and if one of them ceases to
act?that is, if the co-ordination be destroyed, the life is destroyed. So,
likewise, is it with the animal system. Its component parts, the limbs,
juices, and instruments of attack and defence, must perform their seve-
ral offices in proper sequence; and farther, must conjointly minister to
the periodic demands of the viscera, that these may, hi turn, supply
blood."
It is the nervous system which is the grand medium of communica-
tion between every part of the organism. The function of that system
is, therefore, emphatically internuncial, as John Hunter most happily
termed it. But the nervous system is also the great co-ordinating appa-
ratus. It is, therefore, more especially the seat and source of all those
adaptations and combinations of machinery by which the organism is
maintained hi being, preserved, and reproduced. In the motor system, we
see how strength thus results from the co-ordination of action; " for
it is produced by the simultaneous contraction of many muscles and
many fibres of each muscle ; and the strength is great hi proportion to
the number of these acthig together that is, in proportion to the
co-ordination. Swiftness, also, depending partly on strength, but
requiring also the rapid alternation of movements, equally comes under
the expression. So, too, is it with agility; the power of a chamois to
spring from crag to crag implies accurate co-ordination in the move-
ments of many different muscles, and a due subordination of them to
* The "Westminster Review, New Series, vol. i. (April, 1852) p. 472.
1GG ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
the perceptions. The definition similarly includes Instinct, which con-
sists in the uniform succession of certain actions, or series of actions,
after certain sensations, or groups of sensations; and that which sur-
prises us in instinct is the accuracy with which these compound
actions respond to these compound sensations?that is, \j\\Q*complcteness
of their co-ordination. Thus, likewise, it is with Intelligence, even in
its highest manifestations. That which we call rationality is the power
to combine or co-ordinate a great number and a great variety of com-
plex actions for the achievement of a desired result."
Now, if from extraneous causes, the co-ordinating apparatus be so
altered that this uniform succession of certain actions, or series of
actions, with their corresponding sensations, or groups of sensations, be
interrupted, and a link in the chain be pushed out of its proper posi-
tion or severed, disorder will take the place of order, and there will be
abolition, perversion, or irregularity of the entire series of processes.
If, then, this condition arises in the co-ordinating apparatus of the intel-
lect, of the feelings, of the emotions, of the appetites, of the instincts,
we have various manifestations of disorder of the mind. If, on the
other hand, it take place in the co-ordinating apparatus of the muscular
system, we have the various manifestations of disorder in the motor
portion of the nervous system, grouped under the term motor
neuroses.
It is thus, therefore, of primary importance in the investigation and
cure of disorders of the mind, to trace the morbid phenomena up to
the broken or strained link in the series, and determine accurately the
exact relation of the breach in the continuity of the series to the imme-
diate antecedents, or the cause. That cause is often none other than
that influence of one series upon another which is termed sympathy;
and we shall now proceed to illustrate by practical applications the
method of investigation to be followed in determining the origin, na-
ture, and relation of these sympathies, in reference to the etiology and
treatment of insanity.
Stood Sympathies.?The lowest organic process is growth; in the
cell it involves, two processes?accretion and disintegration, nutrition
and removal, repair and waste. This process is therefore the essence of
life; so soon as the one ceases the other is extinct. The entire co-ordi-
nating apparatus of the organism will therefore be directed to three
great ends?namely, 1, supply of material; 2, supply of oxygen ; 3, com-
bination of material and oxygen in nutrition. Now the blood is the
medium by which these three processes are perfected, and is the great
agent, therefore, by which the co-ordinating processes are put in opera-
tion. Hence it is that the blood acts so incessantly in the co-ordinating
apparatus?the nervous system. But if the blood be so changed in its
ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 107
composition that it develops violent or irregular action in the nervous
system, what will result ? Let us examine a little more closely.
We will suppose that the supply of nutrient material has been wholly-
suspended for a certain period, or, in other words, that hunger has been
experienced. If nutrient material be supplied, and the appetite ap-
peased, the chain of sympathies is completed, and the end is gained.
But if food be not supplied, in a while disorder begins. The entire
machines of the organism are co-ordinated to one great end, and are
gradually involved in the sole business of seeking food, to the neglect of
then* proper functions. The actions become impulsive and instinctive;
the higher powers are in abeyance, or are perverted; and the man be-
comes a mere animal. He becomes this the more emphatically in pro-
portion as the restraining power of the latter over the appetites and
instincts was originally small, and vice versa. Histories of shipwrecks
and marches illustrate this state of things. It is the same when an
insufficient supply of water is sent to the blood, and thirst is experienced.
Major Mitchell made three expeditions into the interior of Australia,
taking with him " convicts on leave." His party was sometimes ex-
posed to extreme privation, especially of water, and he remarked that it
was the worst characters that had the least control over their appetites
under these circumstances. " It was a standing order," he says,
" which I insisted upon being observed, that no man should quit the
line of march to drink, without my permission. There was one, not-
withstanding, who never could, in cases of extremity, resist the tempta-
tion of water, and ivho would rush to it, regardless of consequences.
Now this man continued to be an irreclaimable character, and in six
years after had lost all the advantages he gained by his services on this
occasion."*
We are inclined to think that this general blood-sympathy will throw
light on the origin, nature, and treatment, of those cases of mania
which commence with, or during their course exhibit, absolute ano-
rexia. In the treatment of ordinary cases of mania at home, such is
the terror and disgust inspired, and such is the carelessness and igno-
rance displayed, that the patient is not supplied with necessary food
and drink. The poor sufferer is himself unable, perhaps, to indicate
his desires and wants, or it may be that the condition of that portion
of the sensorium in which the sensations are felt, is not capable of
transmitting the impressions to the consciousness, although it can
draw the rest of the co-ordinating apparatus into the chain of morbid
actions; and so it happens, that because food and drink are not asked
* Three Expeditions into tlie Interior of Australia, &c. By Major Mitchell.
Second Edition, vol. i. p. 58.
1G8 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
for, they are not given. Often have we been struck with the weak,
hoarse voice, the clammy tongue, cleaving to the mouth, the haggard
look of the poor maniac under these circumstances ; often, too, by
touching their hidden sympathy, we have been able to re-construct
for a moment, the broken chain of co-ordinations, and so far awake the
sufferer to ordinary consciousness, that he has greedily gulped down
the cooling draught of water presented to' him. In many cases, in-
deed, of this kind, the sole remedies are kindness, food, and drink.
Certain articles of diet are necessai-y to the proper action of the
nutrient apparatus. If these be wanting in the blood, the desire arises
for them. Hence spring what are termed longings ; hence, also, de-
praved appetite for food. Fresh vegetable food is one of these. The
case of a furious maniac came under our notice, whose history well
illustrates the value of attending to the philosophy of this kind of
blood-sympathy. For many weeks he was destructively maniacal,
partly against persons, but only from sudden bursts of irritation;
principally against things, so that not a chair or a window escaped his
violence. He broke 200 squares of glass in a very short time. What was
remarkable in his case was this, that he ate ravenously of his food all
the time, but however well-fed he would not let a blade of grass, or a
weed, or a green thing grow in the airing-court in which he walked.
If his hands were restrained, he knelt down and tore up the weeds
with his teeth. Noting this instinctive appetite, we directed that he
should be supplied with uncooked carrots, celery, &c.,. ad libitum, be-
lieving that it was an indication of a morbid condition of the blood,?
probably an exciting cause of this maniacal state. The result justified
our deduction ; and as hopeless a case as it has been our lot to witness,
was perfectly restored to health and sanity. Other illustrations of
these modifications of the natural appetite from blood-sympathies, are
presented in cases of chlorosis in young females, of pregnancy in
others, and by negroes labouring under that kind of appetite which
leads them to eat earth, and in which there is obviously ar condition of
the blood almost identical with that of chlorosis. Ben Jonson, in his
play of the "Magnetic Lady," gives a summary of the desideranda in
cases of this kind:?
"She can cranch
A sack of small coal, eat your lime and hair,
Soap, ashes, loam, and has a dainty spice
Of the green sickness."*
jBulimia, Polydipsia, and Pica in all its varieties, may therefore be
excited by a morbid condition of the blood awaking abnormal actions
in the co-ordinating apparatus. Perhaps, also, to this class of phenomena
* Act i., scene i.
ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 1G9
may be referred that still more lamentable form of depraved appetite,
well-known to the psychological physician as oinomania, the most
characteristic symptom of which is an irresistible craving for nervine
stimuli, but more especially the alcoholic.
These results of morbid blood-sympathies are comparatively normal
if we take into consideration another group, namely, those characterized
by an appetite for what is horrible and disgusting. Some insane
persons eat excrement greedily, others any garbage. Lycantliropia
belongs to this class of depraved appetites?consisting essentially in an
appetite for raw flesh. However these may originate?that is to say,
whether from disordered action in the nervous system, arising idio-
pathically, or whether excited by blood diseases, or whether induced by
the sympathies of certain viscera (to be presently described), there is.
this characteristic,?that the morbid appetites developed in these forms
of insanity are manifested in lower animals as their normal appetites.
This is a most important characteristic, and is, indeed, common to
numerous aberrations of the instincts and emotions in the human
being. How the latter originate is, indeed, a mystery; but they
show this much, that there are, in the depths of man's nature, hid
away and covered over, if the expression may be used, natural sources
of mental phenomena, which are the proper characteristics of brutes.
It is as if, in man's mental frame, as in his physical, there may be a
retrograde manifestation of organs and uses; as if the brute instincts
may appear in him, according to the same law that there is sometimes
found a divided lip, or a two-horned uterus?monstrosities of mental deve-
lopment, analogous to the corporeal. The manifestation in idiots of
these lower series of co-ordinate acts, is by no means unusual. An
idiot girl is delivered, when alone, of a child, and like the females of
lower animals, she tears the umbilical cord with her teeth. Dr. Corsellis
mentions in his Report for 1851, of the West York Lunatic Asylum,
at Wakefield, the admission of a congenital idiot boy, aged 12, said to
have been left in a cottage by some gipsies.. He is thus described:?
" He is unable to speak, and in appearance and habits partakes more
of the brute than the human species, expressing pleasure or disappro-
bation by a wild cry, or by flapping his arms to and fro like the wings
of a bird, and being destitute even of such intelligence as would enable
him to be destructive or mischievous. A peculiarity marking the case
of this singular child is, that he ruminates his food. When eating,
liis food is bolted or rapidly swallowed, without mastication. As soon
as the meal is finished, the ruminating process commences. A portion
of food is raised from the stomach, sometimes by a visible effort, but
not always accompanied by eructation; the morsel is then deliberately
chewed and re-swallowed. Afterwards, a fresh portion is raised in a
similar manner, and the process continues for a quarter of an hour or
170 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
longer. During rumination, lie remains quiet and completely absorbed
in the act. If the morsel brought from the stomach is large, he divides
it into two portions, retaining one in the fingers, until the other has
been masticated and re-swallowed. The regurgitated food has an acid
reaction."
Several points of retrogression are illustrated here ; perhaps the
instinctive motions indicating pleasure and pain, and the development
of the ruminant instinct?a thing necessary, probably, for the nutrition
of this idiot, as he would be liable to be neglected in feeding?are the
most interesting.
The Visceral Sympathies.?There are two groups of the viscera, if
they be classed with reference to their relations to the co-ordinating
apparatus. We place together in the one the organs which receive
and commingle the oxydizable and oxydizing matter?the blood; the
organs which circulate it; the organs which depurate it. These are,
respectively, the lungs, stomach, spleen, and small intestines ; the heart
and vascular system; the liver, kidneys, large intestine, and skin. Their
sympathies all concern the individual. The organs of reproduction of
the species constitute another group; their sympathies are a class to
themselves ; they all concentrate on the union of the two sexes, and on
the offspring resulting from that union. In short, they do not concern -
the individual.
In considering these extensive sympathies, psychologists have hardly
discriminated between those which are purely dynamical, those which
are functional, and those which are structural or organic. Thus, the
uterus and ovaria act upon the stomach, mammas, kidneys, or intes-
tines, and induce various important functional changes as they act
through the spinal cord by a direct physical influence on that centre of
impressions and actions. It is not so when the ovaria act upon the
encephalon, and bring various reproductive and parental instincts into
operation; for the new world of thought and feeling thus opened out
seems to depend upon a different chain of causation. So it is also with
the viscera; since they appear to have a similar double action on the
cerebrum. Let us examine these more in detail.
The sympathies of the heart and lungs are two-fold. First, they
co-ordinate the internuncial apparatus for the development of the con-
servative operations of the organisms, in so far as they are directed
towards the due oxygenation and circulation of the blood. Any at-
tempt to stop the ingress of air to the lungs, is resisted with the con-
centrated energies of the whole system; any arrest of the flow of blood
through the heart excites unutterable distress. This profound impli-
cation of the instinct for existence, and of the instinctive feeling of
horror for its cessation, is more or less developed to the consciousness
ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 171
whenever the functions of these viscera are interrupted by structural
or functional disease. Hence the indescribable anguish and restless-
ness experienced in certain diseases of the heart and lungs ; and hence
the connexion between the latter and hypochondria. The morbid con-
dition of the heart need not necessarily be structural; any change in
the innervation of that organ, sufficient to excite morbid sensations, will
act upon the co-ordinating apparatus, and excite the instinct into
action. Perhaps in cases of mania, melancholia, and hypochondriasis
connected with structural and functional derangement of the heart,
the series of consequences and antecedents is probably something of
this kind:?Enfeebling influences, of a mental origin, act upon the ner-
vous system and through it upon the heart; its innervation thus
becoming deranged it reacts upon the nervous system, which in its
turn reacts upon it; and so by alternating influences various cerebral and
cardiac diseases are induced. Excessive study, exhaustive amatory in-
dulgence ; strong emotions, especially those that are painful, as anxiety,
grief, terror, fear, and the like, are well-known to have a direct influence
on the heart and lungs. It is now also becoming more certain that,
contrarily, the doctrine first advanced by Nassein 1817 is well-founded,
and that the heart has a most important influence on the cerebrum
in exciting functional disorder therein.
The remarks applicable to the heart and lungs are applicable to the
entire group of viscera, in which the sympathies concern the welfare of
the individual; for in the diseases of all it is the instinctive love of
life and fear of injury and death which, in the first instance at least, is
morbidly developed. From this, as from a common root or stem, spring
certain forms of monomania and certain monomaniacal illusions and
delusions.
A hypochondriacal patient may remain all his life with no further
mental disorder than the groundless anxiety for his health which de-
vours him, and the morbid attention to one or other of the organs in
which he feels uneasiness, that characterizes the affection. But he may
easily pass into other stages. The instinct itself may be absolutely
perverted, just as we have seen the appetites are perverted, and then a
suicidal impulse is developed. Or the disorder may extend from the
more simple instinct of conservation, acting irrespective of external
agencies to the instinct of self-defence, of which the idea of something
injurious to the organism acting upon it from without is the basis.
This will again present modifications,?e. g.; the sufferer may suspect
that his ailments are induced by poison, or by other secret arts, or by
mysterious agents, as electricity, witchcraft, diabolical agency, or the
anger of the Deity. He may connect some individual with this notion,
and the instinct may then become homicidal; he may simply feel
172 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
instinctive horror for his position, and groan helplessly in profound
melancholia. He may refuse incessantly the food offered him, fearing
to he poisoned, or watch the live-long night against his imaginary
enemies. Constant anxiety, anorexia, and sleeplessness do their work,
and at last the entire intellect gives way, and complete mania is esta-
blished. Now we do not intend by any means to insist that in no case
do these symptoms spring from idiopathic cerebral disease; on the
contrary, Ave think it certain that instances of that kind are constantly
met with in practice: all that we iirge here is this,?that morbid in-
nervation and disordered functions of the heart, lungs, and other viscera,
have a dynamical effect on the instinct of self-preservation ; that a play of
affinities between the cerebrum and viscera is thereby established; that
from the morbid development of this instinct other charges in subor-
dinate instincts radiate as from a common centre, and that finally the
whole of the co-ordinating apparatus is involved in the chain of morbid
causation. In many instances, morbid innervation may predominate ;
in many there may be simply disordered functions ; and it will be right
to discriminate in practice as to the two.
Morbid functional sympathies arising from the viscera all act by
quickly changing the composition of the blood. It is in this they
specially differ from morbid innervation, which acts directly on the
cerebrum. In disease of the lungs, there is imperfect oxygenation of
the blood; in diseases of the liver, kidneys, and large intestines there
is imperfect depuration. As to the connexion between cerebral disease
of every kind and renal disorder, no experienced practitioner can have
any doubt: it is even more obvious than the influence of disordered
hepatic function. Popular opinion certainly accords with pathological
research as to the influence of functional derangement of the liver in
the mental characteristics.
? ****** Yffi meum
Fervens difficili bile tumet jecur,
Tunc nec mens mihi nec color
Certa sede manet."
Hoe. Carm.
>
There is much difference of opinion as to the extent and nature of
the connexion between disease of the colon and insanity. Esquirol
first distinctly observed that displacement of the transverse colon
such that it assumed a vertical position descending perpendicularly
into the pelvis behind the os pubis, was a noticeable feature in the
pathological anatomy of the insane; he found it in 33 out of 168
bodies of individuals labouring under melancholia. Bergmann published
the dissections of 13 cases, in which very considerable contractions
OX SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 173
were found in the colon.* In some it was likewise displaced nearly in
the manner described by Esquirol. In combination with this state
of the colon, (we quote Dr. Prichard's summary,) Bergmann found
the following morbid phenomena:?plethora of the abdomen and the
encephalon; hemorrhoidal disease; tumefaction of the spleen, liver,
and uterus ; distention of vessels in the brain. The mental phenomena
in such instances are chimerical ideas. The patient thinks he has
animals in his entrails, as frogs or serpents: perhaps to this class of
cases belong those in which the patient has a conviction that he is
without stomach or bowels at all. Guislain confirmed these researches,
and attempted to account for the anatomical phenomena by attributing
them to inflammation. The question for us to consider, however, is,
what relation,do they bear to mental disorder ? Now on this point it
has been forgotten that the colon is a depurating viscus, and that there
is an undoubted connexion between the presence of large quantities of
offensive fsecal gases and insanity, so that the disease may act on the
cerebrum by preventing effective depuration of the blood.
Direct visceral sympathies do, however, constitute a large and im-
portant group, and to this the disease of the colon just noted may
belong. Nothing is more common than to connect gastro-intestinal
and hepatic irritation with mental derangement. The right theory, or
such a theory as modern neurology supplies, is hardly comprehended.
Close observers of diseases of the nervous system, cannot fail to have
seen how frequently paroxysmal diseases, sleeplessness, mental irritation,
and mania are connected with obscure irritation of the gastro-intestinal
mucous membrane. Epilepsy and mania have been traced to intestinal
entozoa; there is no more common cause of sleeplessness, than irritation
of the gastro-mucous membrane, by an excess of acid in the fluids ; and
indeed, no better anodyne than a tumbler of cold water to dilute the
acid, or an alkali to neutralize it. We have seen sound sleep come on
in a few minutes, after hours of restlessness, as if induced by magic by
this simple but potent remedy, much more potent, indeed, than any
narcotic. In like manner, the copious evacuations of offensive accumu-
lations in the intestinal canal, has been followed by the happiest
results. So also the ablution of a hot and irritable skin, or a soothing
application to an eruptive disorder, has induced repose of the stimulated
cerebrum, when other and apparently more suitable means have failed.
They who have "witnessed the results of simple means like these,
judiciously applied, can readily understand how easily the homoeopathic
physician will persuade his patient that the infinitesimal dose was the
medicinal agent, and not the vehicle or the adjuvants. Chronic disease
of these surfaces is no unfrequent exciting cause of mental disorder.
* Prichard's Treatise on Insanity, p. 231.
174 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
The dynamical sympathies of the reproductive organs constitute a
group of singular interest and importance in every way. They are
separated by a distinct characteristic from the merely visceral, and thus
the study of them is much facilitated, for while the latter involve the
instinct of self-preservation, the sympathies of the reproductive organs
override it, and co-ordinate the internuncial apparatus to quite different
ends. They can be traced also, without difficulty, directly to the
influence of the reproductive organs; for these are subject to periodic
activity and repose, or can be wholly removed by vivisections or other-
wise altered. For the same reasons, observation and experiment can be
brought to bear upon adefinition of the precisedegree and extent to which
the organs themselves react upon the nervous system, and enable us to
determine exactly what instincts, emotions, and intellectual operations
are subject to their sympathetic influence.
We do not propose to go over the well-beaten ground of the
psychology of physical love; our task is a much less ambitious one,
but not less important. What is wanted, is, to fix the connexion
between these organic sympathies and certain forms of mental derange-
ment. Now they appear differently in the two sexes. In the female
more obviously, more variously, than in the male. It is in the lower
animals, in which there is a periodical ntsus and repose, that we can
best determine the influence of those sympathies, and we accordingly
find that, in the entire scheme of animated creation, the instinct to
fight and use the natural weapons of offence and defence, (supplied to
him almost exclusively,) is developed in the male animal by functional
activity of the reproductive system. Fishes, birds, mammals, the timid
and the bold, all display this characteristic during the reproductive
viscus.
" Omne adeo genus in terns hominumque ferarumque
Et genus sequoreum, pecudes, pictae volucres
In furias ignemque ruunt. Amor omnibus idem."
Vie gil: Geory., 242.
The difference between the animal at the season of reproduction and
at the time when the instinct is in abeyance, constitutes one of
the most striking illustrations of the power of a distant organ over the
cerebral functions. In the vertebrata it is not more obvious than
in the invertebrata, but it is more curious as a phrenological fact.
It cannot be supposed that, during the manifestation of this and con-
nected periodic instincts there is an increase or diminution of the
phrenological organ in the cerebrum in proportion as the organs of
reproduction are active or inactive; to what then must we attribute
the change ? No other explanation includes all the facts, than the
hypothesis that there is an appropriate molecular organization of the
k
ON , SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 175
cerebrum, which co-ordinates to the intended end, to be put into
action by an appropriate stimulus. The latter being applied the
former becomes active; just as a bar of iron continues magnetic so
long as a magnetic current passes through it. That the stimulus is
requisite to the co-ordination, is proved by the results which follow
removal of the organs necessary to reproduction. The unmanly ex-
pression and manner of the effeminate male is due to the want of the
stimulus; on the other hand, in viragos the transformation from the
feminine to the masculine temper and manner seems due to the
shrinking of the ovaria, and probably to the change in the nature of
the stimulus which they give to the system consequent on that
shrinking. That this pathological condition occurs in the ovaria of
the female gallinacece, when they assume the feathers of the cock-bird,
has been shown by dissections.
Vanity in men and women as to personal appearance, is often seen
to be developed as a symptom of insanity. The Adonis of the lunatic
asylum cultivates the natural ornaments of his sex with sedulous care.
Hence the attention devoted to the whiskers, moustache, beard, and
hair. A similar characteristic in the female is well-known to popular
writers.
"For never did this maid?whate'er
The ambition of the hour?forget
Her sex's pride in being fair ;
Nor that adornment, tasteful, rare,
Which makes the mighty magnet, set
In woman's form, more mighty yet."
Perverted, it constitutes, indeed, part of the popular idea of insanity
in the female. It is, we need hardly say, always bizarre, absurd, and
eccentric in its effects. "Who, accustomed to the insane of the gentler
sex, has not witnessed over and over again, manifestations of this
foible in strangely decorated bonnets, odd caps, curiously quaint or-
naments, and the like ? The manufacture of these ornaments out of
the most unpromising materials, is a not less curious development of
(as we think) an instinct m insanity. It is in the female that the
instinct for making up materials is most manifested. This is seen
even in lower animals. That the preference for ornaments and for
feminine work belongs not unfrequently to this class of instincts, is
known by its absence in the virago ; on the other hand, the ornaments
of the male birds of almost every family, and of the males of many
animals, far exceed those of the female, and are demonstrably dependent
upon the development of the testes.
We ought not to omit one effect of these distant and singular
sympathies, namely, the remarkable loss of appetite for food when the
amatory impulse is urgent. It is observed in lower animals as well as in
NO. XXVI. O
176 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
man. Stags, and others of the class, are scarcely ever seen to eat
during the whole rutting season. " It is a physical observation," says
Fielding, in ' Joseph Andrews,' " that love, like other sweet things, is
no whetter of the stomach." This anorexia is sometimes developed
in a remarkable degree in hysterical girls; Ann Moore, the " fasting
woman" of Tutbury, was one of numerous examples that might be
mentioned. It is not improbable that various morbid appetites may
be only perversions of this instinct for food, induced by ovarian
influence, as when the females of lower animals?sows, cats, &c.,?eat
their offspring.
Monomaniacal cunning in the human female is another instinct
morbidly developed by ovarian sympathies. The same influence
which makes the male of lower animals quarrelsome during the
season of procreation, makes the female cunning and cautious. The
skill displayed in the choice of a secret place for the eggs or young,
and the finesse practised to lure or scare away the destroyer, are
wonderful displays of instinct. The lioness may be mentioned as one
illustration of many, for, ferocious as she is, she places no reliance upon
her strength to defend her young; but when she fears that the retreat
where she has hid them may be discovered by her footprints, she effaces
them with her tail. Klepto-mania, or the impulse to steal (acquire
cunningly), appears to be related to the monomaniacal cunning we have
just mentioned. Like the latter, the former is generally observed in
females, and most frequently during a period of ovarian or uterine
activity. These two will occur, indeed, in the same patient, and then
the criminal results of the combination are very remarkable; but
cunning is more frequent in the hysterical, theft in the pregnant or
parturient woman. Both are very compatible with that modesty which
is a great charm in the sex, and which being itself a sexual charac-
teristic, may be developed concurrently with others of the class.
From time to time these monomaniacal impulses are seen in pubescent
lads; some of these have been indeed the most successful travelling
illuminati of the itinerant mesmerizer or electro-biologist. The curious
forms which cunning of this kind assumes are very interesting, if
in compared with the habits and practices of lower animals. In this, as
the other instincts, a lower stratum appears to " crop out" in the insane.
There is another faculty under the control of the reproductive organs,
of which we ought to say something,?the instinct for musical sounds
and rhythmical cadences which the action of the ovaria and testes
excite in a great variety of animals, as well in the articulata as the
Vertebrata. The voice is exclusively developed in the males of some
animals; in others it is feeble and unmusical in the female; rich, full-
toned and melodious in the opposite sex. The horse and horned cattle,
<1
4
ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 177
the gallinaceae, and all singing birds, afford ample illustrations of this
connexion. In man the instinct is manifested in the rhythmical and
harmonious collocation of words and cadences, from the " woeful ballad
made to a mistress' eyebrow" to the highest and grandest poesy. An
illustration of this amatory instinctive development of the musical
faculty, is related in the biography of Paganini. It was love that first
made manifest his magical power on the violin; the history is thus
given by himself:?
" I was playing at the court of Lucca to the princess (Napoleon's
favourite sister) and another fascinating creature, that must be name-
less, who, I flatter myself, felt a penchant for me, and was never
absent from my performance. On my own side I had long been her.
admirer. Our mutual fondness gradually became stronger and stronger;
but we were forced to conceal it, and by this means its strength and
fervour were greatly enhanced. One day, I promised to surprise her,
at the next concert, with a musical joke, which should convey an
allusion to our attachment; and I accordingly gave notice at court
that I should bring forward a musical novelty, under the title of a
Love Scene. The whole world was on tiptoe ; and, on the evening
appointed, I made my appearance, violin in hand. I had previously
robbed it of the two middle strings, so that none but the E and Gr
remained, the first string being designed to play the maiden's part, and
the lowest the youth's. I began with a species of dialogue, in
which I attempted to introduce some events analogous to transient
bickerings, and reconciliations between the lovers. Now my strings
growled, and then sighed; and anon, lisped, hesitated, joked, and joyed,
till at last they sported with merry jubilee. Shortly both souls joined
once more in harmony, and the appeased lovers' quarrels led to a
Pas de deux, which terminated in a brilliant Coda. This brilliant
fantasia of music was greeted with loud applause. The lady, to whom
every scene referred, rewarded me by looks of delight, and full of
sweetness ; and the princess was charmed into such amiable condescen-
sion, that she loaded me Avith encomiums; asking me whether, since I
could produce so much with two strings, it would not be possible to
gratify them by playing only on one. I yielded instant assent. The
idea tickled my fancy; and, as the emperor's birth-day was at hand, I
composed a sonata for the G- string, which I entitled ' Napoleon,' and
played before the court with so much effect, that a cantabile, given by
Cimarosa, fell without producing any impression upon the hearers.
This is the genuine and original cause of my predilection for the Gf
string."*
Responsive Sympathies.?By this term we mean to imply that
large group of sympathies which are called into operation by sensorial
* " The Music OF Natuke ; or, an Attempt to prove that what is passionate and
pleasing in the art of Singing, Speaking, and Performing upon Musical Instruments
is derived from the Sounds of the Animated World." By Win. Gardiner. Lon-
don ; 1833. Pp. 222.
o 2
178 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
stimuli derived from without, in which there is some hidden cerebral
mechanism that responds to the stimulus ; and which, hi so responding,
puts the whole nervous system into co-ordinate action. The entire group
of the instincts, emotions, and passions, when developed by sensorial
stimuli, or external impressions, become responsive sympathies; but
there is a less obvious, but not less important class, which belongs to
conceptions and ideas of memory, and to cerebral changes induced by
circumstances of which memory retains no trace.
"We have seen how uniformly and constantly there are developments
in cerebral organization correspondent to the varied stimuli which the
organism can receive under any circumstances within the limits of its
powers. Some of these developments are natural, and have existed hi
the species ah origine; some are acquired, and are only recent; many
seem to belong (as we have seen) to a lower grade of development; as
if the cerebral organization of some antecedent existence had been
transmitted from a lower life, to reappear and be awakened into action by
external impressions when the higher developments are in abeyance.
Many, too, we must add, seem to belong, on the other hand, to a
higher stage of existence; so that when an appropriate stimulus falls,
as it were, haphazard upon the material development, a strange and
transient gleam of mysterious consciousness flashes across the mind?
an idea?a notion?a vision,?as of something known aforetime,
appearing, for a moment, from the depths of the intellect, yet leaving
an indefinite but ineffaceable impression. In this way it is that the
thoughts become rife?
"With airy images and shapes which dwell
Still unimpaired, though old, in the soul's haunted cell."
Perhaps we have something of this kind in the retention by domesti-
cated animals of certain instincts of their wild state ; or in the re-appear-
ance of such instincts when the domesticated animal has again become
wild. The dog, for example, retains the instinctive act of turning himself
round and round, and scratching his bed-mat or bedding before he goes
to rest?a useless movement under the circumstances. So also several
varieties of dogs retain the instinct of concealing their food in the
ground?a wild instinct. The wild horses of South America are de-
scendants of the domestic breed. In them we see the full development
of gregarious instincts, which are hardly apparent in the stock from
which they have sprung. So also there appear to be in civilized man
traces of those ideas which occupied the mind of his uncivilized ances-
tor, when " wild in woods the noble savage ran." Sir S. H. Bonny-
castle observes, in his work on Canada, " The best specimen of an
Indian missionary I am acquainted with in Upper Canada forgot all his
instruction, all his acquired feelings and habits, when he witnessed
?
ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 179
with me the war-dance of heathen and perfectly savage warriors.
He had been carefully educated from a boy, was modest, intelligent,
and well-bred, yet he grinned with delight at this exhibition of
untutored nature." Who has not felt the wild excitement which
comes over the feelings, when wandering free over hill and mountain
in the full enjoyment of health ? The external stimulus of a trackless
siu-face, the feeling of freedom from social restraint, the fresh breezes,
and all the change from town to country existence, touch chords of
enjoyment deeply hidden in the soul, and render us competent to under-
stand how it is that the Indian or back-woodsman flees before advanc-
ing civilization. In Hue's Travels in Tartary and Thibet, we find an
interesting illustration of the existence of dormant sympathies, trans-
mitted from pre-existent ancestorial modes of life, of this kind.
" Among the Lamas who came to recreate for awhile at Tcliogortan
we remarked, " says M. Hue, " especially a number of Tartar Mongols,
who, bringing with them small tents, set them up in the valley along
the stream, or upon the sides of the most picturesque hills. There
they passed whole days, revelhng in the delight of the independent
life of the nomades, forgetting for a while the constraint and confine-
ment of the Lamanesque life, in the enjoyment of the free life of the
tent. You saw them running and frolicking about the prairie like
children, or wrestling and exercising in the other sports which recalled
the days and the land of their boyhood. The reaction with many of
these men became so strong that even fixity of tent was insupportable,
and they would take it down, and set it up again in some other place,
three or four times a day; or even they would abandon it altogether,
and taking their kitchen utensils and their pails of water, and their
provisions on their shoulders, would go, singing and dancing as they
went, to boil their tea on the summit of some mountain, from which
they would not descend until nightfall."
We mignt multiply illustrations of this kind to an indefinite extent,
and trace the springs of action of nations as well as individuals to sym-
pathies deeply writ in the organism, but latent and dormant until the
stimulus is applied. We could point out the connexion between these
and great social changes, in periods of revolutionary disturbance. It is
then that society is agitated to its lowest depths, and dormant instincts,
hitherto pressed down by the weight of law and order, spring forth
when that weight is taken off and their appropriate stimuli applied, to
the astonishment of a wondering world. This branch of psychology
is not, however, our present theme. We have now to consider not social
but mental disorder, and to say something of
The Sympathies as curative Agents in Insanity. The proposition we
have to state on this point may be readily gathered from the preceding
remarks. The treatment of insanity in its entirety consists in the
ISO ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
application or removal of the stimuli to the sympathies. Of those
which are purely corporeal, we have already indicated the relations; we
have, therefore, to treat only of the mental. A right knowledge of the
uses of these sympathies constitutes the only sound basis of the moral
treatment of insanity. Therapeutically, we may consider them in their
threefold aspect of the instinctive, the emotional, the intelligential.
Now, as to the two former, the rule is this : the manifestation of them
in one individual excites them in another. If we would excite anger,
we must he angry; if we would excite attack, we must attack; if we
would excite pleasant friendliness, Ave must greet friendlily, and show
kindliness in actions. How often do we see the magic effect on the
insane of a sunny, kindly smile!??
/
" Like moonlight o'er a troubled sea,
Brightening the storm it cannot calm."
Undoubtedly, a gentle winning demeanour towards the violent and
sullen, is of very potent curative influence. One of such a temperament
(Byron) knew its influence well:?
" It is in vain that we would coldly gaze
On such as smile upon us ; the heart must
Leap kindly back to kindness."
The non-restraint system of treating the maniacally violent is founded
wholly on this psychology of the instincts and emotions. Personal
restraint in the sane excites resistance?how much more in the insane,
in whom the disposition to attack and resist is morbidly excited. It
is very worthy note, however, that when personal restraint is necessary
(as surely it must be in some cases of maniacal violence), that restraint
must be applied in accordance with this principle. Is it not question-
able, then, whether the use of persons for this purpose be so advisable
as the use of things ? We doubt, indeed, whether the attendant can
himself remain perfectly free from emotion when his corporeal energies
are called forth to resist the struggles of a violent maniac, so potent
and ever active are the stimuli to these instinctive emotions.
The same principle of applying or removing these stimuli is appli-
cable to other instincts and emotions morbidly developed. In a case of
suspecting melancholia, a really frank and truthful manner and mode
of treatment will alone gain the confidence of the patient. The slightest
attempt at deception is not only quickly perceived by the morbidly
developed instinct, but it immediately excites that morbid develop-
ment more fully. When the suicidal impulse is the special character-
istic, arguments addressed to the judgment will fail, when the perverted
or abolished instinct of love of life may be restored by any means which
tend to excite it. Thus it will happen that when the patient urgently
(
(
ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 181
desires certain means of self-destruction, the impulse may be checked
by suggesting to him the choice of other means; e. g., a razor being
desired by the monomaniac to cut his throat, if arsenic be suggested
to him as an equally effective means, with an explanation of the anguish
it inflicts, he would shudder at the idea of self-destruction, since the
contemplation of the pain, and of death by other means than that upon
which his "fixed idea" dwells, rouses the dormant instinct of love of
life and ease. It is from the same causation that a half successful
attempt at suicide sometimes cures the patient, or checks the progress
of the disorder. An illustration of this kind is mentioned by Dr.
Burrows, in his " Commentaries." It is true that he attributes the
cure to "fever," but it is obvious that it was only feverishiess from
which the patient suffered; and this must be considered as wholly
inadequate to the cure of suicidal insanity.?
"A gentleman, aged forty-five, in a state of melancholia, with a
strong propensity to suicide, was walking with his keeper on Battersea
Bridge. By a sudden effort, he broke away and jumped into the
Thames. It was on a Sunday, and as many boats Avere passing in the
river, assistance was immediately given; but he resisted so much, that
it was only by main force he was taken out of the water and conveyed
to his residence. Having some distance to go in his wet clothes,
he caught a violent cold, followed by rigors and a smart fever. For
this, I prescribed suitable remedies ; but I took no notice, nor made
any inquiry of him respecting his late rash attempt to destroy himself.
During the fever, he was quite docile and collected. When it had
subsided, I reasoned with him on the subject. He confessed himself
horror-struck on the reflection of the act he had committed, and
entreated I never would again mention it. In fact, his mind was
entirely free from all delusion; and in a fortnight he returned home
cured, and has remained well ten years."
Dr. Burrows quotes this case as an illustration of the curative effects
of "fever," with the object of supporting a theory of the relations of
the cerebral circulation to mental disorder. That insane patients have
recovered after attacks of fever is certain, but the order of events is
doubtful; it may le that the functional changes in the circulation
within the cerebrum begin the cure in some, but in others-(as the
suicidal forms), it may be that the vis conservatrix, having been roused
by the fever into action, has extended its influence to the instinct of
love of life, and restored it to orderly impulses.
The case just quoted may serve, as well as another, to illustrate that
part of the moral treatment of insanity, which consists in the removal
of stimuli. In a vast majority of cases of destructive insanity, from
impulse, the impulse is developed by the presence of the object to be
destroyed (when it is a thing or another than the self), and of the
182 ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY.
means adopted to the destruction desired. These constitute the
stimuli of the instinct. In Dr. Burrows's case, the flowing river
excited the paroxysm; indeed, it is a well-known practical point in the
construction of asylums, to avoid a site within reach or view of a river
or of water. A case equally illustrative of the general principle, once
came under our own notice. A female, aged about 35, delivered three
months ago of her third child, consulted us about the "temptations"
to which she was exposed. She explained that they came on in an
instant, as quick as lightning, and after continuing for a moment
would pass off. When nursing her infant she is tempted, in this
instantaneous manner, to dash it to the ground,, trample on it, and
destroy it. She is also tempted to destroy herself, sometimes hi one
way, sometimes in another. Going through a passage to the house,
for example, she is suddenly tempted to dash her head against the wall,
or if she see a knife on the table when the child is in her arms, she
feels a sudden desire to seize the knife and cut the child's throat.
When other instincts are roused, of which the stimuli are less sen-
sational and more intelhgential, the connexion between cause and effect
is not so obvious, but can nevertheless be traced by a careful analysis.
The most remarkable instance of moral insanity we ever met with,
was in a young girl, who combined cunning with the impulse to suicide,
cruelty, and destruction of life. She was of very simple manners ; and
being modest in her demeanour and language, never gave an indication
of the latent devil within her; but when at all under the influence
of cerebral excitement, she would snatch at or pinch any one
passing her, or kick at those near her?without, however, betraying
the slightest change of gesture. By pressing blandishments she would
persuade some old and feeble person to go into a corner, or other con-
venient spot, out of hearing of those around her, and then changing her
manner, endeavour to get them to deny their Saviour, on pain of the
most terrible vengeance. When she succeeded (as she did occasionally),
she would dance about and seem delighted with the idea, which she
loudly expressed, that the object of her cruelty would now be sure to
go to hell. It was quite unsafe to leave her alone with a child or a
feeble patient, as she would immediately most cunningly plot their
destruction; and it was believed that she had succeeded in one instance,
?if not two. She often attempted suicide. It always appeared that
to be left alone was the great stimulus to her suicidal or homicidal
attempts, and that the chain of effects began with the impulse to secrecy
and cunning.
The instincts and emotions in relation with love of offspring or of the
opposite sex are easily amenable to stimuli. Hence it is that chil-
dren are such admirable curative agents in an asylum; hence the ad-
ON SOME OF THE LATENT CAUSES OF INSANITY. 183
vantage of balls and concerts. Very often we have noticed in a class
of patients, not uncommon in asylums, namely, young females in a
state of amentia with dirty habits, and displaying an utter neglect of
the person, that the first awakening of the dormant intellect has been
due to the presentation of some trifling ornament of the hair or person,
or to some other means by which the instinct for personal adornment
lias been awakened. This has proved the key note to the disordered
chords of the imagination, and with the progress of this development
from maniacal finery to rational neatness and good taste in dress,
other faculties have been pari passu evolved.
The intellectual sympathies are very various; sometimes they are
known from the previous habits and thoughts of the insane; some-
times they are accidentally discovered by the chance application of the
appropriate stimulus. Of the latter there is an illustration in Crabbe's
tale of Edward Shore.?"A harmless wretch beyond a cure;" he wan-
ders abroad, and "that gentle maid whom once the youth had loved"
pities him.
<c Kindly she chides his boyish flights, while he
Will, for a moment, fixed and pensive be;
And as she trembling speaks, his lively eyes
Explore her looks, he listens to her sighs ;
Charmed by her voice, th' harmonious sounds invade
His clouded mind, and for a time persuade ;
Like a pleased infant, who has newly caught
From the maternal glance a gleam of thought;
He stands enrapt, the half-known voice to hear,
And starts, half conscious, at the falling tear."
In developing a large class of this group of sympathies, the imitative
instinct may be brought into beneficial operation. If a patient be
placed amongst others actively engaged in various occupations, the
desire will sooner or later arise to imitate them, and that employment
will probably be selected which in days of mental health and vigour
has been a favourite or habitual pursuit. Thus it is that industrial
employments have so happy an influence on the insane ; thus also we
comprehend how music may arouse some long-forgotten thoughts
and wake up mental life again. Perhaps country life and rural scenes
exercise a secret beneficial influence rather than a visible effect, by their
revival of those sympathies with nature which are rarely absent from the
most uncongenial soul, but which are often the root of many noble and
pleasant aspirations, and deeply felt by those predisposed to cerebral
disease.
" There is a pleasure in the pathless woods,
There is a rapture on the lonely shore,
There is society where none intrudes
By the deep sea, and music in its roar.
The character of the emotions which these impressions excite, is proof
] 84 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES.
of their innate instinctive origin. It was in his " interviews" with nature
that Byron experienced the pleasure he so well describes; he stole
forth to them?
" To mingle with the Universe, and feel
"VVliat I can ne'er express, yet cannot all conceal."
If, while these soothing, gentle stimuli be presented to the mind, it be
drawn at once from those of the cares of business, and the anxieties of
worldly affairs, moral treatment is of essential advantage, and under
these circumstances the asylum is emphatically and truly a retreat.
