Jtfttscellaneous lottos.
=========================

Six Lectures on Materia Medica, and its relations to the Animal Economy. De-
livered before the Royal College of Physicians in 1853. By John Spurges.
M.D., E.ll.C.P.S. Churchill. 1853.
Among the able works that have recently issued from the English press on
the subject of Materia Medica, there is, to our apprehension, no one to equal
in importance the volume before us. Dr. Spurgin lias evidently devoted much
time and labour to the composition of these lectures, and the result is, that
he has produced one of the most philosophical essays on the subject of Materia
Medica existing in the English language. We regret that our want of space
prevents our placing before our readers an analysis of the volume. We would
particularly direct the attention of our readers to Dr. Spurgin's views respect-
ing the modus operandi of various medicinal agents of known efficacy, and to
the chapter appropriated to the investigation of the microscopic character of
the blood. The work reflects great credit upon its learned author, and it should
find a place in the library of every medical man anxious to keep pace with the
progress of medical science.
Clinical Lectures on Pulmonary Consumption. By Theopiiiltjs Thompson,
M.D., E.B.S., Physician to the Hospital for Consumption, &c. &c. London:
J. Churchill. 1854.
It is refreshing to take up a volume like the one before us, after perusing the
many ad captanduni works that are yearly published in this country on the sub-
ject of consumption. The author of this work lias for many years, in fact
since its foundation, taken an active part in the establishment of the Brompton
Consumptive Hospital. Prior to the erection of this institution, Dr. Thomp-
son had for many years devoted much time to the investigation ol pulmonary
affections, and the volume now under review may be considered a resume of
his practical knowledge of the treatment of this class of aflections. There
are many points of psychological interest in Dr. Thompson's work which we
had marked for quotation. We refer particularly to his observations on the
" Mental Condition of the Dying," to the chapter on " Hysterical Conditions
Simulating Consumption," and " On the Influence of Mental Depression as
the cause of Phthisis." Whilst directing the attention of the psychological
physician especially to these portions of Dr. Thompson's volume, we would,
158 APPOINTMENTS.
at the same time, observe tliat the whole work should be carefully studied by
all medical men who take an interest in the advancement of our knowledge of
the treatment of this dire disease. Dr. Thompson writes like a man who has
derived his knowledge of this class of affections at the bed-side of the patient.
The work is replete with sound, sensible, practical remarks on the nature and
treatment of consumption, and reflects great credit upon the industry, talent,
observation, and sagacity of its learned, amiable, and intelligent author. In the
next number of our Journal, we hope to place before our readers those parts
of Dr. Thompson's volume that relate to psychological phenomena.
Hufeland's Art of Prolonging Life. Edited by Erasmus Wilson, E.B.S.
Mr. Erasmus "Wilson is entitled to the thanks of the public and profession
for this reprint of a work of known ability and reputation.
On IAthotrity and Lithotomy. By William Coulson, Esq., Surgeon to St.
Mary's Hospital. lVol,8vo. London: Churchill. 1853.
This volume fully sustains the high surgical character and reputation of its
distinguished author. It should be in the library of every practical surgeon.
Turkey and the Turks. By the Bev. Archibald Boyd, A.M., Incumbent
of Christ Church, Cheltenham. 1853.
This is a lecture delivered to the members of the Church of England Beading
Association, and is published at their request, and for the benefit of the Asso-
ciation. We have been much delighted with this charming and intellectual
lecture. It is a detailed narrative of a summer tour made this year, 1853, by the
author in the East. Mr. Boyd appears to have visited all the points of interest
associated with the present unhappy struggle going on in that portion of the
globe. His descriptions of the scenery, people, and towns of the East are faithful
and graphic; but not more so than we should have expected from the well-
known eloquence and literary and classical ability of its accomplished author.
Ilighley's Library of Science and Art. Yol. 1. The Microscope in its Special
Application to Vegetable Anatomy and Physiology. Highley, 1'leet-
street. 1853.
Mr. Higiiley is entitled to the commendation of the scientific world for the
publication of this valuable series of useful and philosophical works. The
volume before us, on the " Microscope," is Avritten with great care. The
author is evidently practically acquainted with his subject, and writes with
the skill of a practised hand. In these days of agricultural and botanical pro-
gress, this volume should be carefully studied by all interested in such scien-
tific inquiries.
