Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity
===================================

The common law (which is ours, except so far as we have modified it by the
statutes) has adopted two widely different rules on the subject of insanity ; one
having relation to civil affairs, and the other referring entirely to criminal cases.
By the first, a man whose mind is deranged, his intellects having become in-
sufficient to conduct the common business of life, his property will be taken
from him, and trustees appointed to take care and manage his estate. By the
second, strange as it may seem, the same man, who has been adjudged incapable
of conducting his own concerns on account of insanity, may be held responsible
for criminal acts, provided he possesses a mind capable of distinguishing right
from wrong. In legal effect there are, therefore, two kinds of unsoundness of
mind?an unsoundness which is partial, and destroys one's capacity for civil
affairs, and an unsoundness which is total, and utterly destroys the moral re-
sponsibility, so that the deranged is no longer a reasonable and accountable being.
In contemplation of law, partial insanity simply reduces a man to the condition
of a child, a minor under age, who cannot be compelled to fulfil his contracts,
but who is still answerable for crimes committed. His position is similar to
that of the habitual drunkard?he is deprived of the management of his pro-
perty, because manifestly disqualified by his habits to take care of it judiciously;
and similar, also, to that of the man whose mind frills into decay by reason of
advanced age, and the apparent failure of the mental power.
According to the early writers, to excuse a man from the consequences of
his act, he must have been, at the period when he committed the offence, wholly
incapable of distinguishing between good and evil, or comprehending the nature
of what he was doing. If he be but partially insane, the law does not excuse
him, but holds him to a rigid accountability: making it necessary for him to
show that, at the time the deed was committed, he was absolutely incapable of
distinguishing between right and -wrong. As Lord Hale, one of the sages of
the law, expresses it, if he possess as great understanding as ordinarily a child
of fourteen years hath, he may be guilty of treason or felony. It is we'll known
to most of our readers, that the principles of what is termed the common law
are ascertained from the decisions of the courts: our own first, and those of
England secondly, by way of illustration. The reason of this is found in the
fact that we hold our laws, like our literature and language, in common with
that country, having derived them thence with our very being. For as the
statesmen of the revolution contended, the men who first emigrated to this
country brought with them the rights of freemen, and the laws and privileges
of their own country. Instead of coming forth a loose, disjointed and confused
congregation of reckless men, like the Spanish into Mexico and Peru, impatient
of control, and thirsting for gold, they came forth freely and soberly, a well-
appointed community. In place of an arbitrary government of undefined civil
and military powers, they brought with them charters of liberty, civil officers,
an organized government, and a society firmly knit together, wearing as a
garment the common law of England. When, therefore, we quote the de-
cisions of the English courts, they are not referred to as binding precedents,
and authority to which we must yield obedience, but rather as the historical
evidence of what the law was, or still continues to be. They are, as Coke
termed, the witnesses of the law, to whose testimony on the subject of insanity
we will now briefly refer.
In the case of Edward Arnold, indicted and tried at the Surrey Assizes, in
England, for shooting at Lord Onslow, in 1721, the court, in charging the jury,
used these words:?"It is not every kind of frantic humour, or something unac-
countable in a man's actions, that points him out to be such a madman as is to
be exempted from punishment; it must be a man that is totally deprived of his
MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE OF INSANITY. 4G9
understanding and memory, and doth not know what he is doing, no more than
an infant, than a brute, or a wild beast: such an one is never the object of
punishment." Upon this charge it is scarcely necessary to say the jury found
the prisoner guilty, and he received the sentence of death, though there was no
question of his partial insanity. It is worthy of remark, that at the period of
this trial, the accused, in such cases, were not allowed to come into court with
counsel, except upon the special grace and favour of the court. In the case of
Earl Eerrers, tried and convicted of the murder of John Johnson, in 1760, the
same rule was enforced. On this occasion the highest solemnities of the law
were observed. George II. issued a special commission to his Chancellor, Henly,
reciting that the King considering justice an excellent virtue, and pleasing to the
Most High, and concluded with making him Lord High Steward, with authority
to preside in the august court thus organized. Upon the trial, the Solicitor-
General, quoting the law as laid down by Hale (whom he terms the wise judge
and great lawyer), says, that the result of his whole reasoning stands thus:?
" If there be a total, permanent want of reason, it will acquit the prisoner. If
there be a total temporary want of it when the offence was committed, it will
acquit the prisoner; but if there be only a partial degree of insanity, mixed
with a partial degree of reason ; not a full and complete use of reason, but a
competent use of it, sufficient to have restrained those passions which produced
the crime; if there be thought and design; a faculty to distinguish the nature
of actions, to discern the difference between moral good and evil; then, upon
the fact of the offence proved, the judgment of the law must take place."
The case of James Hadfield, quite as interesting as the one first-mentioned,
was tried in 1800. The indictment was for shooting at the king, &c., in a
crowded theatre, j ust as he entered the box, and the audience was rising to
cheer him. The rule as to responsibility for crime, was substantially the same
as quoted above: though Mr. Erskine commented upon the rule insisted on by
the Attorney-General, that to protect a man from criminal responsibility, there
must be a total deprivation of memory and understanding. He admits it the
very language of Coke and Hale, but contends it cannot be applied in a literal
sense, for in that case such a thing as insanity seldom if ever occurred.
It appeared on the trial that the prisoner had been a soldier, and wounded in
battle by a blow upon the head, breaking the skull and injuring the brain; that
immediately after the wound was received, he became crazy, and continued so
occasionally up to the time of his attempt to kill the king: his insanity being
intermittent. Prior to liis receiving the wound, the witnesses proved him brave
and loyal, and the jury acquitted him on the ground of insanity.
It has been sometimes said that the law does not understand, or knows no
distinction between different kinds of insanity. This is not strictly true, as is
proved by the case of John Bellingham, tried for the murder of the Right
Honourable Spencer Percival, before Chief Justice Mansfield, in 1812. The
rule as laid down in that case, exempts the prisoner from responsibility,
provided he is found deprived of all power of reasoning, so as not to be able
to distinguish whether it was right or wrong to commit the most wicked
transaction. But this, he adds, must be proved; and the jury must find it as
a fact beyond all doubt, that at the time he committed the act with which he
stood'charged he did not consider murder was a crime against the laws of
God and nature. There was no other proof of insanity which would excuse
murder or any other crime. ? .
After speaking of other kinds of insanity, the judge then goes on to say
"There was a "third species of insanity, in which the patient fancied the
existence of injury, and sought an opportunity of gratifying revenge by some
hostile act. If such a person were capable, in other respects, of distinguishing
right from wrong, there was no excuse ior any act of atrocity, which he
might commit under this description of derangement.
470 MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE OF INSANITY.
On the trial of Hadfield, mentioned above, it was contended by Mr. Erskine,
on behalf of the prisoner, and may be assumed as admitted by the court, that
where the prisoner laboured under a delusion connected directly with the
subject-matter of the transaction for which he stands indicted, he cannot be
convicted of crime, even though he be not deprived of all power of reasoning.
This distinction, however, when examined, fades away into the original colour,
and leaves to the jury still the same simple inquiry, whether the party charged
with the offence knew that the very act lie committed was criminal.
Having referred to a few of the leading cases on the subject of insanity,
enough to show what the law now is, and how far it enforces human responsi-
bility, we arrive at the point where we have a right, and are bound to speak
for ourselves. With a proper estimate of history, we cannot be indifferent to
the past, and those various influences out of which have arisen our present
social relations. We go back to the sources of civilization with pleasure, and
trace with delight the increasing and expanding volume as it emerges from
the wild and mountainous regions of romance, and opens on the unobstructed
plains of history. We listen to its many voices, and make ourselves ac-
quainted with its wisdom. We go out of ourselves and the present time, to
learn thoughts of those who have preceded us. We gather instruction from
their deeds, and a wise forecast from their folly. It is thus we trace the
progress of opinions, and the slow, though constant and firm, advance in the
tone and temper of law?that high and sublime march of the people, in which
there are few hasty changes, and no magnificent studies, but a modest and
steady progression, keeping time with the music of intelligent thought. It is
not a romance, nor an epic poem; it is no picture of the imagination, nor
republic of Utopia; but a system of principles that sprung up out of the
national mind, and adapted themselves to every condition and circumstance of
life. Elexible in their nature, and always closely surrounding us, we are
generally unmindful of their presence till the very moment we need pro-
tection, so easily and naturally do we wear them as an armour of defence.
Like our political institutions, they come down to us from the past,
associated with the events and scenes of history: imperfect in particulars, but
in the main breathing the earnest and manly spirit of times when men stood
upon their rights, maintained the claims of the citizen against the sovereign,
and established the law upon the rough and rugged field of battle. They
come to us dressed in the style of an early day, but with a universal and
catholic authority, comprehending the past, present, and future. They com-
mand respect and elicit our regard in infancy and childhood, long before we
are able to understand them or appreciate their excellence. It is thus the
common law becomes a part of the common mind, intimately blending itself
with the thoughts, and entering into the judgments of each individual: so
that it is not, perhaps, too much to say, that 011 general subjects the common
opinion of the law is the highest and best evidence of what that law is.
There is a strange and wonderful interest attaching itself to every descrip-
tion of insanity. The subtile relation existing between the material and
immaterial man, that intimate association of mind with body, acting and
reacting sympathetically upoii each other, is at all times a subject of
interesting and curious speculation. But when examined in connexion with
derangement of the mental powers, it becomes a mystery passing the keii of
human knowledge, around which the light of science sheds no illumination,
and gives token of 110 discovery. O11 other subjects, investigation repays us
with a fixed and satisfactory result; we congratulate ourselves with the
discovery of truth, and the establishment of those general principles upon
which the sciences are based. It is a pleasure that springs out of certainty
and system, and a harmony that rises from many voices mingling in unison.
MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE OF INSANITY. 471
But on this subject we have 110 system: it is all mysterious and uncertain,
complex and wonderful, as are the operations of the human mind. For though
we are able to understand many of the influences that operate remotely to
induce insanity;?though we can speak of the phenomena that attend it, and
sometimes point out the causes that seem to have produced it;?though we can
trace its stages through disappointment, melancholy, wakefulness, and a sad
brooding over real or imaginary wrong, observe the freaks of fancy, the odd
conceits and strange devices that occasionally denote the source of madness;?
though we can sometimes discover and pronounce upon the subject around
which the brittle thread of reason was broken;?our skill is at fault, and fails
us when we attempt to classify the causes, or speak with accuracy of a
general origin of mental disease. Each case is so peculiar, it furnishes a law
for itself.
In the tragedy of Hamlet it has long been a question among critics whether
the great master intends to portray actual or assumed madness. Soon after
seeing his father's ghost, we find him swearing his friend, Horatio, to silence
and secrecy, intimating his intention " to put an antic disposition on," the
better to cover his proceedings. Directly we hear him lamenting his feebleness
and want of spirit in such a style as convinces us of the deep melancholy that
has settled on his mind, and darkened his prospects. He is called to a mighty
work, and feels himself incompetent to the task. His nature is noble; he has
been accustomed to believe in the sincerity of his companions, and to trust the
integrity of the king. He has been surrounded from infancy with flatterers,
and those who have courted him as the heir-apparent to the throne. He has
yielded himself to the protestations of friendship, and to the soft, winning
accents of tenderness and love. The gaieties of life have thrown a charm
around him, and his youth has passed away like the sweet influences of spring,
the bloom and beauty of the year. He has not known disappointment,
nor anticipated danger; the smooth currcnt of his being has flowed like a
river.
From such a life he is suddenly aroused to new thoughts. The death of his
father was not natural?there was a strangeness about the circumstances, a
solemn show of grief, a haste to close over the grave, and a grasping of the
crown, that threw a shadow and a doubt over him that wore it. There are no
witnesses to the deed?the act was done in silence. No eye saw it, and no
tongue has spoken of it. But it was a bloody deed, and cries for vengeance.
The ghost of the murdered man cannot rest in his grave, but wakes to walk
the earth at night, and whisper of the foul treason; how he was cut off in the
blossom of his sin, and sent to his account with all his imperfections on his
head. " Unhousel'd, disappointed, unaneard." The manner of the murder is
known, and Hamlet is commissioned to avenge the most foul and unnatural
crime. Henceforth he is a new man ; the pleasures of life pall on his taste, and
the objects that have occupied his attention have been changed, as by the
touch of magic, into the veriest baubles. His deep spirit has been stirred
within him, and one great passion controls and masters every thought. His
mind is unnaturally active, but his purposes are weak, and dispose him to
meditation. He believes, and yet he doubts, and so devises a scheme to catch
the conscience of the king, and assure himself that he is not beguiled by the
devil ? for he is still uncertain about the character of the fearful and dread
apparition. In this state of suspense, everything becomes suspicious and
questionable. The world is not what it used to be. Hamlet contemplates
suicide, and runs over in his mind the prospects of a future life, the sleep
of death, the dread of something after death, the clouds and darkness that
hang over the undiscovered future : he then glances at the evils of the present
life, and multiplies them, and magnifies
L
472 MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE! OF INSANITY.
" The scorns of time,
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes."
By and by, in his interview with his mother, lie undertakes to speak to her
of her crimes, grows warm with the theme, utters words of burning sarcasm,
bitter hatred, terrible and scathing rebuke. When in the very height of his
passion and fiery denunciation, his father's ghost again appears, charging him
" Do not forget?this visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose."
The mother observes his manner as he listens to the strange visitor, and
questions him, that he bends his eye on vacancy, and holds discourse with the
incorporeal air, and calls his vision the very coinage of his brain, an ecstasy.
To this he indignantly replies?
" Ecstasy!
My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,
And makes as healthful music ; it is not madness
That I have utter'd ; bring me to the test,
And I the matter will re-word, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul,
That not your trespass, but my madness speaks."
He is by turns desponding and energetic. When alone, he seems to question
the source of his information, and wonders whether he is not acting under the
instigation of some dark and mysterious agency. When in the presence of his
mother or the king, no doubt any longer lingers about his mind. The enormity
of the crime alone impresses him; his speech becomes impassioned, and he
grows impatient of delay; but his stonily zeal seems to vent itself in vigorous
and violent language, and resolution dies the moment he is left alone. In
speech, like all madmen of his mind and temperament, he is perfectly terrible,
but in action as weak and unsteady as a child. There is method in his mad-
ness, and he appears to act with a preconceived design ; but for all that there
is a fickleness and irresolution about him, and a wildness that casts suspicion
over his whole character, and leaves us at times in doubt whether we are listen-
ing to the insane ravings of a madman possessed of a strange and mysterious
plot, or following the course of an injured prince who seeks redress of a wrong
beyond the power of the law, and justice upon the head that wears the crown.
We had intended to inquire somewhat carefully into the nature of insanity,
the condition of mind, and real ability of the insane. But our limits on this
occasion forbid us to do more than simply refer to the subject; and point out
the fact that, among the insane there are but few, not more, perhaps, than one
in a hundred, who are totally insane, so that a jury might with propriety pro-
nounce them incapable of distinguishing between right and wrong. Most of
those confined in our asylums are what we commonly call monomaniacs?their
insanity being connected with particular subjects. They are insane on religious
questions, on money matters, love affairs, and schemes of speculation: from
sickness, disease of the brain, loss of friends, and a thousand other causes, some
of which we are acquainted with, while others escape observation.
At present we confine our attention to the legal and moral responsibilities
of the insane. And here, if we mistake not, had no rule ever been adopted,
and the question were now for the first time presented, whether the law should
make any distinction in its treatment of the insane, between what is termed
partial and total insanity, there would, we apprehend, be but one opinion. The
impossibility of drawing the line between them would alone be sufficient to
demonstrate its impolicy, if not injustice. Besides, on a matter of so much
MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE OF INSANITY. 473
moment and practical importance, a rule that is to be enforced ought to be
clearly drawn, so that the distinction need not be left to the jury to make,
according as their prejudices or the circumstances of the case may incline.
The language of the law should be clear and definite, such as may not be mis-
understood by judge or jury. As the ride now stands, the administration of it is
exceedingly difficult; it is plain enough theoretically, but practically, infinitely
difficult to be applied. The witness shows the conduct of the prisoner to be
insane ; the judge declares that if he be so insane as not to know what is right,
he cannot be convicted of crime. Here the jury take the case with almost
legislative powers, and set themselves to inquire about the prisoner's capacity
to distinguish between good and evil, an inquiry, where insanity is shown, in-
volving difficulties to the jury and dangers to the citizens, to which neither
should be subjected under wise and just laws.
Now, under the old principle, as laid down by the early writers, it is quite
possible that the law be rigidly enforced while the most monstrous injustice is
perpetrated; and this fact alone demonstrates the propriety of such an amend-
ment as will for ever render it impossible to commit so grievous a wrong in
the sacred name of justice. Under the present decisions of our courts, they
are understood to hold that an individual may be insane in respect to money
affairs, and still capable of committing the crime of murder or arson, and so
of all monomaniacs. On the immediate subject of their delusion, they are not
considered moral agents ; on all others they are held to a strict accountability.
The man we saw at the asylum at Utica, who considered himself the great
financial agent of the state, controlling the operations of Wall Street, ana the
slightest transactions in the market, coining gold and silver, and sending them
forth as a convenient currency for the accommodation of the community?that
man, under the legal rule, would not, perhaps, be deemed capable of theft or
robbery. The particular nature of his delusion would render it impossible.
Not so in reference to other subjects. True, it is thought by some that such
an unsoundness destroys the idea of moral responsibility. The law, however,
is more rigid and stoical; it holds there maybe insanity and a moral sense
still remaining in the mind with a responsible judgment, and makes the cir-
cumstances oi each particular case determine whether the moral sense be
entirely destroyed, or only affected by the moral unsoundness. If the indi-
vidual labour under a single delusion that will not yield to evidence, and
remain otherwise sane, the philosophy of the law, as at present expounded,
assumes that, upon questions in which the delusive ideas are not necessarily
involved, they will have no influence upon the mind; so that if there remain
the bare knowledge of right and wrong, the person is capable of committing
crime, no matter how strange and absurd may be the action of his passions.
The man Mr. Erskine mentioned in the liadlield trial, who believed himself
the Christ, evidently could distinguish right and wrong. His standing a
severe cross-examination so long, baffling the utmost skill of counsel, as well
as his complaints against the committee of his estate, showed his sense of
justice, and that lie appreciated, to some extent, his own rights and relations
to others. Bat for all that, who wo aid think of holding him capable of crime ?
He really believes himself the Saviour of mankind, and as such, empowered to
forgive sins. Shall such a man be punished for the dreamy speculations and
uncertain action of a shattered intellect ? It would be a monstrous doctrine
to maintain, and still more monstrous to enforce. And yet, under the rule, the
jury must either make the law what the justice of the case requires, and thereby
liberally construe the oath they take, to render a verdict according to the
evidence, into a general obligation to do what is right in the particular case; or,
they must find the unfortunate man gailty of a crime at which nature shudders.
The true rule, it should seem, would hold, that if a man be insane, the law
ought to regard him as an infant, incapable of crime. It should not be a
L
474 MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE OF INSANITY.
question whether he knows right from wrong, but whether he be sane or not;
for if he be a monomaniac, he should not be punished, even though a jury be
able to say, upon their oath, that he knew the act he performed was wrong.
The association of ideas in the mind of the insane is too subtle for our com-
prehension, and the mystery of his motive too profound for our investigation.
We assume to punish guilt, because we understand what constitutes crime in
the case of a sane man; possessing, as we do, his thoughts and feelings, with
enough of his motives to enable us to pronounce upon his conduct. But in
respect to the insane, who knows the operations of his mind, or what dark
power reigns over him ? Who can enter into his spirit, or explore the laby-
rinth of his inconceivable thoughts ? What can become so like him as to take
upon himself the very feelings of insanity, and understand him as we under-
stand each other ? We are none of us able to do so. Would it not then be
modest in us to waive a principle of law implying such knowledge ?
In children, we frequently discover (or think we do) a knowledge of right
and wrong, long before any man of sane judgment would think of holding
them responsible for crime. The moral sense seems to grow with the facul-
ties. It is at first feeble, its existence barely appearing to our observation.
Gradually it becomes stronger, as the mind itself approaches the stature of
manhood, so that the time when it assumes the guidance of conduct, and the
child becomes capable of contracting guilt, is always doubtful and difficult to
fix, depending, as it does, so directly upon the mental growth, the complete
and harmonious development of each attribute and quality of mind. The
moral sense?what is it indeed in any case but the simple judgment of a mind
in which the intellect and sentiments unite in healthy activity ? As we speak
of it sometimes, a stranger to the common phraseology would think us talking
of some imaginary being above and beyond us, when, in reality, wc mean to
discuss simply the mind's capacity of feeling and acting rightly; a capacity
depending equally upon the natural action of the passions, and the perfect use
of reason. This is our reasoning when we speak of children; why should we
not apply the same principles, and allow ourselves to be governed by an equal
sense of justice, when we come into the presence of reason-bereft and
strangely-afflicted children of misfortune??American Review, vol. viii. pp.
269?275. New York.
