Upon the Morbid Desire to Kill
================================

BY DON EAIMTJNDO D. Y. CORREA.
[We select the following for several reasons?because it is by a
Spaniard, and because it seems to us as bringing prominently for-
ward several points in aid of the settlement (if ever it can be settled)
of this question. Witness a late case, where the jury acquitted a
seduced female of the crime of murder, on the score of insanity, and
the next moment the judge gave her a free discharge, because he could
see no proof of insanity. The article itself purports to be taken from
the Gac. De Madrid, and may be found in the Medical Times and
Gazette of January 29th, 1853, and we can hardly gather from it
what portion of it belongs to the author or to the translator.?
American Journal of Insanity for Oct., 1853.]
The author commences with a eulogy on Esquirol's work on Homicidal
Monomania, 1837, and quotes examples from Pinel, Marc, Gall, and Mende.
These show the existence of a partial delirium, whether in the form of a
fixed idea or an excited sensibility, extravagance in the passions, or error
in judgment. In every instance there has been disturbance of the mind,
and hence the words addressed by an advocate to Dr. Marc, upon the
occasion of a trial of simple barbarity. " If monomania be a disease,
its cure is upon the scaffold." The following bit of legal bloodtliirstiness
also merits being handed to posterity: " Your so-called homicidal
monomania is an hypothesis, a modern and convenient invention to
shield the guilty, and to withdraw them from the power of the law."
The author proceeds to say, that from the works of Magendie and
other physiologists, he can prove that there are certain powers in man,
which drive him in a definite direction, without his possessing a will
sufficiently strong to offer opposition. These powers, which can be
reduced to four, reside in the corpora striata, the cerebellum, the
crura cerebri, and the medulla oblongata. Injuries to these parts in
animals, cause different involuntary movements, and the author con-
cludes therefrom that there are in man different impulses stronger than
the will. Governed by these impulses, the homicidal maniac commits
his crime.
156 UPON THE MORBID DESIRE TO KILL.
A man who commits murder upon a false idea, with powerful im-
pulse, should be considered as suffering from disease in the same part
of the brain. Now we cannot see the application of Magendie or
Flourens' experiments in the elucidation of psychical disturbance, nor
comprehend why, upon division of the crura cerebri, the injured and
dizzy animal rolls over and over. We have before complained with
justice of the gross ignorance of morbid anatomy displayed by the
generality of "mental physicians" in all countries, and we think it
hard to refute statements made upon no foundation whatever. The
examination of the bodies of criminal lunatics does not confirm in any
one point the loose assertions of Dr. Haimundo. Neither the corpora
striata nor the crura cerebri are often found in an abnormal condition; the
cerebellum is for the most part natural in structure; the medulla
oblongata unaltered, except that the membranes covering it become
thickened, when other parts of the encephalic coverings have under-
gone a similar change. We have no ground whatever for asserting
that these parts are essentially the seat of morbid actions during life.
The cause of insanity is to be sought for in a source deeper that that
supposed by those philosophers of a somewhat materialistic school.
The author endeavours for judicial purposes to found a differential
diagnosis between the maniac and the responsible culprit, both of
whom have committed murder.
Homicidal Monomania.
The person is one of weak constitution,
of nervous excitable temperament, irre-
proachable character, working in busi-
ness for the immediate necessaries of
life.
The monomaniac is alone.
The maniac kills without interest or
passion, without motive, making that
man an offering who may be unfortunate
enough to meet him.
The maniac disdains to fly, and often
gives himself up to justice; he often
details the particulars of his act, and
seeks punishment more than pardon.
Criminal Mukdek.
The criminals are mostly persons of
strong constitution, sanguineous or cho-
leric temperament, bad education, given
to idle courses, and occupied in immoral
pursuits.
The criminal is rarely alone; has
usually accomplices to share the booty.
The criminal has a motive ; has some
passion to gratify, and selects his object
accordingly.
The criminal withdraws from observa-
tion ; tries to mislead the judge ; to cast
suspicion on others, and to do his best to
avoid punishment.
We doubt if these aphorisms will stand their gound as unerring
tests in this difficult question. The records of the criminal depart-
ment of Betlilem Hospital would point to many an inmate imprisoned
for murder, whose constitution was good and frame powerful and
muscular. Many a criminal has had sufficient nerve to take life alone,
unassisted by others; even the last who forfeited his life in the metro-
polis fell under this class. Should we be justified in asserting that he
was mad, because he was alone in his wife's chamber when he cut her
throat ?
Again, the maniac mostly takes life, not by chance or hazard, but in
obedience to a fixed, though erroneous idea, sometimes in sudden pas-
sion. Who can at all times either discover or appreciate motives ?
MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES. 157
Jealousy, hatred, or revenge, carefully guarded from public notice,
would, but for the Law, impel many a ruffian to gratify his passion at
the cost of another's life.
The maniac does not always disdain to fly, and can even argue cle-
verly in his own defence. But what can be said of that class of
offenders whose lowly-organised and ill-directed minds are equally under
the influence of both fear and evil passions ? Place them under
restraint, they behave respectfully and with decency, give them liberty
and passion soon regains the mastery. Can any aphorisms comprehend
the anomalies of this class ? We believe not. Each case must be
determined by circumstances elicited at the trial, and by the opinions
of those in whom the responsibility of the judgment rests.
