On The Weight and Specific Gravity of The Brain In Insanity
============================================================


:Author: David  Skae,
 1VI.D , PHYSICIAN TO ROYAL EDINBURGH LUNATIC
ASYLUM.

Dr Skae commenced by remarking on the obscurity in which the
pathology of insanity was involved, notwithstanding the careful exami-
nations of the brain in those affected with the disease which have
been earned on for many years in our principal asylums.

Such morbid appearances a sthickening and opacity of the arachnoid,
serous effusions into the subarachnoid tissue, arachnoid sac and ven-
tricles, increased or diminished vascularity of brain and membranes,
were found very frequently in persons dying of other diseases and
without any mental affection; while, on the other hand, cases were
not unfrequently met with of patients who had exhibited during life,
for many months or even years, all the symptoms of raving madness,
and in whose brains the appearances described above were altogether
wanting, and nothing abdnormal could be detected .A solitary exception
to this general statement had been adduced in the special form of disease
called general paralysis, where a peculiar softening of the grey matter was
found, not indicated by any change appreciable to the eye, but by layers
of the grey matter stripping off readily with the membranes, to which
it often adhered; by the readiness with which it was broken up by a
stream of water ; and by an increase in the size of the nucleated cells of
which the grey matter is principally composed. It must be inferred,
therefore, that such appearances, though frequent concomitants, did
not constitute the essential pathological conditions of the disease.
Indeed, the analogy of the symptoms to those produced by poisons
which are known to enter the blood, the suddenness of the invasion
in some cases, and the suddenness of the cure in others?even occa-
sionally of long standing; the remarkable remissions, and the tem-
porary restoration to perfect sanity, might well lead us to doubt
whether morbid changes in the structure of the brain would ever be
discovered, and uo look upon insanity as a disease of the blood, or
due to some peculiar orgasm of the nervous centres not to be recognised
after death.

It had occurred to Dr Skae some years ago, that it might be useful
to collect the weights of the brain, cerebrum and cerebellum; to
measure the depth of the grey matter; to endeavour to determine the
degree of hardness or softness of the cerebral substance; to ascertain
by?what length of a column of water it could be broken up ; and, more
lately, to take the specific gravity of the grey and white substance of
different parts of the brain. In this communication, however, he would
confine himself to the weight and specific gravity of the brain, leaving
the other items of his investigation till such time as his data accumu-
lated, to enable him to present them in a satisfactory form.
His observations on the weights of the brain were compared, in
elaborate tables, with the data collected in the Royal Infirmary of
Edinburgh, by the late Dr John Reid and Dr Peacock, and his
experiments on the specific gravity with those published by Dr Sankey
in the Med.-Chirurg. Rev. for January 1853, and made in the Royal
London Fever Hospital. The weights used were avoirdupois.

Weights.?One hundred and seventy-two cases were examined, of
whom eighty-three were males and eighty-nine females. In only one
instance did the encephalon exceed GO ounces in the insane, while in
several of the sane it amounted to G2 ounces and upwards ; the heaviest
brain in the one series being GO oz. 8 dr., and the heaviest in the other
being G2 oz. 12 dr. With two exceptions, the superiority in weight
was among the brains of the sane in each of the quinquennial or
decennial periods into which they were classified. Dr S. could not
venture to say whether this justified the inference that persons having
large brains were less frequently the subjects of mental derangement
than others, but the fact was a striking one when contrasted with the
results derived from a comparison of the average weight of the entire
number of cases, where it appeared that the average weight was
increased in persons dying insane. The average weight in the insane,
from fifteen to ninety years of age, being 50 oz. 4 dr., and in the sane
49 oz. 14 dr. The same results were derived from a comparison of the
weights of the brains of females. On taking the average of all the
cases, the weight of the brain in the insane was 44 oz. 7 dr., and in the
sane 44 oz. 5 dr. The presumption that the absolute weight of the
brain is increased in the insane was greatly strengthened by the fact,
that in many cases of insanity the absolute size of the brain must be
materially diminished by the large quantity of serous effusion generally
met with. The cerebellum, however, appeared to be the chief agent
in determining this increase in weight, for on comparing the weights
of the cerebra in the two series of cases the difference was inconsiderable,
and indeed, in the case of the females, in favour of the sane; while on
comparing the weight of the cerebellum with the pons and medulla in
the two classes, it would be found that there is almost a uniform pre-
ponderance in the weights of those of the insane. The average weight
in all the cases of the insane males exceeds that of the sane by four
drachms, and the females by three drachms. The same fact was very
clearly brought out on comparing the ratio between the cerebellum
(with the pons and medulla) and the cerebrum at the different ages
distinguished in the tables.

On arranging the weights of the brain according to the form of
disease under which the patients laboured, and taking the average,
the diseases stood in the following series: mania, monomania, demen-
tia, and general paralysis. The weight being greatest in mania, and
least in general paralysis. On comparing the average weights of the
cerebella, however, the series stands thus: general paralysis, mania,
monomania, and denfentia; the cases of general paralysis presenting
the highest average. The increase of the relative weight of the cere-
bellum to the cerebrum appearing to bear a constant relation to the
form of the disease, and to be greatest in the more protracted and
gravest cases. In acute mania, a disease of comparatively short dura-
tion, there was the smallest amount of increase in the relative weight
f the cerebellum, and in general paralysis the greatest increase took
place.

Specific Gravity.?The elaborate tables exhibited went to show
that the specific gravity in the cases of insanity was almost uniformly
higher, and this applied to both the grey and white matters. As
regards the white matter, the mean of all the cases was 1041*1 in the
sane, and 1012'4 in the insane, showing an increase in the specific
gravity in cases of insanity. These results were corroborative of those
obtained by Dr Sankey, at the London Fever Hospital, who found
that in all the cases complicated with cerebral symptoms of a grave
character preceding death, the specific gravity was high, the average
being 1043.

Dr Skae found that in most of those cases where the specific
gravity of the grey matter was considerably below the mean, the pa-
tients had died of phthisis, and in other instances of exhaustion occur-
ring at an advanced age. In a few exceptional cases, either the symp-
toms immediately preceding death were of a grave character, or the
morbid appearances found in the membranes indicated chronic inflam-
matory action.
The number of observations with regard to the cerebellum was too
few to warrant more than a presumption that the specific gravity of
the cerebellum was higher than that of the cerebrum.

In the different forms of mental disease, and taking the average in
all the cases of each kind, the lowest specific gravity of the grey mat-
ter occurred in cases of dementia," where, however, it was still *003
above the average in the sane. The next highest specific gravity
occurred in cases of melancholia and monomania; the next in general
paralysis; the next in mania; and the highest in epilepsy. Of the
white matter, the lowest average specific gravity occurred in cases of
mania; the next in dementia; the next highest in general paralysis ;
the next in monomania; and the highest in epilepsy.

Dr Skae apologized for the meagreness of the facts presented to the
Society, but they were all which he had been able to collect in the
hospital under his charge. The inferences from them appeared to him
of sufficient interest to warrant the hope that more extended observa-
tions of a similar kind might lead to satisfactory and important de-
ductions.

In answer to queries from the President and Dr Bennett, Dr.
Skae said that a common scalpel was the instrument employed to
separate the white from the grey matter; and that the specific gravi-
ties were obtained according to the plan proposed by Dr Sankey, viz.,
by means of saline solutions of different strengths. The precaution
must be taken to remove the piece of brain as soon as possible, and
not to allow it to soak in the fluid .?(Communicated to the Medico-
Ghirurgical Society of Edinburgh.)
