 On A Substance Presenting the Chemical Reaction of Cellulose, Pound in the Brain and Spinal Cord of Man
=========================================================================================================

It is well known that Carl Schmidtf was tlie first to discover in tlie Ascidian
the presence of a principle previously known to exist only in plants, viz. cellulose,
and to show that it was a constituent of the animal tissue. The researches of
Kolliker and Lowig, j of Scliacht,? and of Huxley || have established this im-
portant fact. The occurrence of this substance, however, was limited to a
comparatively very low class of the Invertcbrata; and the further discovery
made by Gottlieb, in Euglena viridis, viz., that this infusorium contains par amy-
Ion, a body isomerous with starch, also had reference only to a creature in the
lowest class of the animal kingdom.^]" Nothing of the kind, on the other hand,
lias been known as existing in the vertebrata, and it is only since the discovery
by C. Bernard?that the liver produces sugar?that we have had reason to
* By Rudolph Virchow. (Sept. 4, 1853.) Virchow s Archiv. B. VI. H. 1.
p. 135.
.1 TT7* TVil^rP! 1 R1K -r\ ?1
"f Zur Vergleichenden Anat. tl. WirDeiios. xmeic, i.oiii, p. oi.
+ Ann. d. Sci. Nat., 1846, p. 193.
? Mull. Archiv., 1851, p. 176.
|| Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci., vol. i. p. 22. 1853.
IT The pertinacity with which German naturalists cling to the animal nature of
Euglena, we must confess, is very surprising to us, who are equally satisfied that
it is as much a subject of the vegetable kingdom as the motile zoospores of any
Alga, such as Volt ox, Hydrodctyon, Protococcus, &c.
CELLULOSE GRANULES IN THE BRAIN. 285
suppose tliat substances belonging to the amylum series may also have a repre-
sentative.
From histological considerations, it bad strnck me tbat the umbibcal cord of
man presented a great resemblance in structure to the cellulose tissue of the
Ascidians (Wurzb. Verb. 1851. Bd. II., p. 161, note), and I was only the more
confirmed in this notion by Scliacht's observations, so that I have since directed
my researches with care to the subject. But in many instances this was in
vain, as, for instance, in the ova of Amphibia and fishes, the remarkable vitelline
plates of which I described, (Zcitsch. f. wiss. Zoologie. 1852. Bd. IV., p. 240.)
I was more fortunate when, a short time since, I directed my attention to the
so-termed corpora amylucea of the brain, upon the precise nature of which, con-
trasted with the other kinds of amyloid bodies in man, I had not previously
arrived at any accurate notion. (Wurzb. Verb. 1851. Bd. II., p. 51.) It was
now apparent that these bodies assumed a pale-blue tinge upon the application
of iodine, and upon the subsequent addition of sulphuric acid, presented the
beautiful violet colour which is known as belonging to cellulose; and which in
the present instance appears the more intense from the contrast with the sur-
rounding yellow or brown nitrogenous substance.
I have repeated this experiment so often, and with so many precautions, that
I regard the result as quite certain. Not only have I instituted comparative
researches in different human bodies, and in the most various localities, but I
have also noticed the action of the reagents under all possible conditions. The
experiment is best made in the mode adopted by Mulder and Harting, with vege-
table cellulose (vide Molescliott, " Physiologic des Stoffwechsels," p. 103), viz.,
by causing the action of diluted sulphuric acid to follow that of a watery solu-
tion of iodine. The iodine solution should not be too strong, for the observation
may then be impeded by its precipitation; and, on the other hand, care must
be taken that the iodine exerts due action upon the substance. Owing to the
volatility of the iodine, and its great affinity for animal substances, its action is
usually very unequal, so that the border of the object and not the centre may
be penetrated by it; or, perhaps, of spots in closc contiguity, one will contain
iodine and the other not. It is, consequently, always advisable to repeat the
application of the iodine several times, but to avoidthe addition of too much.
Upon the subsequent addition of sulphuric acid, if the action have been too
powerful, the result is a perfectly opaque, red-brown colour. The most certain
results are obtained if the sulphuric acid be allowed to act very slowly. In
fact, I have procured the most beautiful objects in allowing a preparation covered
with the glass to remain undisturbed with a drop of sulphuric acid in contact
?with the edge of the covering-glass for from twelve to twenty-four hours. Under
these circumstances, the most beautiful light violet-blue was occasionally pre-
sented. Lastly, I would just intimate that accidental mixtures of starch or
cellulose may readily happen, seeing that vers- light fibres or minute particles
from the cloths with which the object and covering-glasses have been cleaned,
may very easily be left upon them, which would afterwards exhibit the same
reaction as the above. , n ... .... - .
Every precaution having been taken, the lolloping results will be obtained:?
1. The corpora amylucea (Purkinje) are chemically different from the concentric-
Spherical corpuscles of which the brain-sand is composed,and with which they have
hitherto usually been confounded. The organic matrix of the brain-sand
granules is obviously nitrogenous: it is coloured of a deep yellow by iodine
and sulphuric acid. This is true not only of the sabulous matter in the pineal
gland and choroid plexuses, but also ol that of the Pacchionian gianulations
and of the dura mater, as well as of the dentate plates in the spinal arachnoid.
till these parts I liavCj 111 c^cnero!} no^lieie obtained tlie blue iCcietioiij
except in a few spots in the pineal gland. It w ould, tlieiefoic, for the future,
280 CELLULOSE GRANULES IN THE BRAIN.
be convenient to restrict the name of ct corpora amylacea" to the bodies con-
taining cellulose.
2. These bodies exist, so far as I have at present found, only in the substance
of the ependyma ventriculorum and its prolongations. In this I includc especially
the lining of the cerebral ventricle's and the transparent substance in the
spinal cord described by Kolliker, as the substantia grisia centralis (Mikrosk.
Anat. Bd. II. 1, p. 413). With respect to the cerebral ventricles, I have already
repeatedly stated, that I fmd them to be lined throughout with a membrane
belonging to the connective tissue class, upon which rests an epithelium.
This membrane contains very fine cellular elements, and a matrix sometimes of
more dense, sometimes of softer consistence, and is continued on the internal
aspect without any special boundary between the nervous elements. In the deeper
layers of this membrane, and in immediate contiguity with the nerve fibres,
the cellulose corpuscles are found most abundantly, and they are also especiallv
numerous where the ependyma is very thick. They are consequently very
abundant on the fornix, septum lucidum, and in the stria cornea in the "fourth
ventricle. In the spinal cord, the substance corresponding to the ependyma
lies in the middle, in the grey substance, in the situation where the spinal
canal exists in the foetus. It there forms evidently a rudiment of the oblite-
rated canal, such as is presented in the obliteration of the posterior eornu of the
lateral ventricle, which is so frequently met with. In a transverse section of
the cord, it is easily recognised as a gelatinous, somewhat resistant substance,
which may be readily isolated. Its cells are much larger and more perfect
than those of the cerebral ependyma. This ependyma spinale forms a continuous
gelatinous filament, which extends to the ftlum terminate, and might, therefore,
perhaps, be most suitably described as the central ependymal filament. Iu it
the cellulose granules are also found, though, as it would seem, more abundantly
in the upper than in the lower portion. In other situations I have sought for
these bodies in vain, and in particular I have been unable to find them in the
external cortical layer of the cerebrum, or anywhere in the interior of the
cerebral substance.
3. Since, from the experiment of CI. Bernard, who produced saccharine
urine by wounding the floor of the fourth ventricle in the rabbit, there ap-
peared to be reason to conclude that the existence of cellulose was connected
with that phenomenon. I sought for it also in rabbits, but in vain: I found
in that situation both in the fourth, and the third, and in the lateral ventricles,
a very beautiful tessellated epithelium with very long vibratile cilia, but no
cellulose.
4. The cellulosc granules, therefore, appear to be everywhere connected
with the existence of the ependyma substance of a certain thickness, and might
perhaps be regarded as a constituent of it. They occur of excessively minute
size, so that the nuclei of the ependyma scarcely correspond with them. Can they
be formed out of the latter? The larger they are, the more distinctly laminated
do they appear. But there is never any indication in tliem of a nitrogenous
admixture, recognisable by a yellow colour. The centre only is usually of a
darker blue, and consequently perhaps more dense than the cortical lamina?.
5. As to an introduction of these bodies from without, such a supposition is
the less probable because a similar substance is nowhere else known. We are
acquainted with a series of varieties of vegetable cellulose, but the substance
now in question appears to be distinguished above all by its slight power of
resistance to reagents, seeing that concentrated acids and alkalies attack it more
powerfully than is usually the case with the cellulose of plants.
6. In the child I have as yet sought for it in vain, so that, like the "brain-
sand," it appears to arise in a later state of development, and probably may
have a certain pathological import.
Since writing the above, Professor Virchow has repeated and confirmed his
CELLULOSE GRANULES IN THE BRAIN, 287
observations, and ascertained in addition that similar bodies also occnr in the
higher nerves of sense. He found them most abundantly in the soft grey
interstitial substance of the olfactory nerve, less frequently in the acoustic,
although the observations of Meissner (Zeitsch. f. rat. Med., N. F., Bd. III.,
pp. 358, 363), would indicate a proportionately great disposition to their for-
mation in that situation, llokitansky appears to have seen them in the optic
nerve, and from an oral communication the author has learned that Kolliker
has found them in the retina.
Having already stated that the ependyma is continued without special
limitation among the nervous elements, the author goes on to observe that it is
now apparent that there is a continuous extension of the same substance in
the interior of the higher nerves of sense. From a series of pathological
observations, he concludes that a soft matrix referable mainly to connective-
tissue substance, everywhere pervades and connects the nervous elements in
the centres, and that the epenclyma is only a free superficial expansion of it
over the nervous elements. The opinion, that the epithelium of the cerebral
ventricles rests immediately upon the nervous elements, appears to have
arisen from a confusion of this interstitial substance with the true nerve-
substance.
The isolation of the corpora amylacea in larger quantity, in order that they
should be subjected to chemical analysis, the author has not yet succeeded in
effecting. Nevertheless it seems impossible to entertain any doubt as to their
cellulose nature. No other substance is known which affords the same
reaction; and although the author has examined the most various animal
tissues, and has accurately investigated, particularly, the concentric corpuscles
occurring elsewhere, as in the thymus in tumours, &c., nothing of the same
kind has presented itself.?{Sept. 25, 1853.)
An abstract of the above observations also appears in the 'Comptes
Hcndus,' for the 26th Sept., 1853, p. 492, but containing nothing additional.
Being desirous of verifying the above observations, I have examined the
brains of one or two individuals; and, as my results differ in some respects
from those of Professor Virchow, I will here briefly state them, leaving a
more detailed account of the matter to a future opportunity, my observations
at present having been too scanty to justify the expression of any settled
opinion. The first case I examined was that of a young man who died of the
consecutive fever of cholera, after an illness of five or six days, during the
whole of which period, the renal secretion was completely suppressed. What
I noticed in this case was :?
1. The enormous abundance of the corpora amylacea in certain situations,
as the ependyma ventriculorum, particularly on the septum lucidum, and more
especially also on the choroid plexuses, upon gently scraping the surface of which
a fluid was obtained containing these bodies in the most surprising quantity.
2. That they existed in immense abundance in the oFactory bulbs and in the
superficial parts of the brain, both cortical and medullary, contiguous to the
tract of the olfactory nerves. But scarcely any part of the cerebrum and
cerebellum, could be examined, at all events towards the surface, without
meeting with some or more; and they occurred abundantly in the very middle of
the cerebellum. Their distribution, however, was very irregular, inasmuch as
they abounded in some spots and were nearly, if not altogether wanting, in
others. I could find none in the corpora striata, where tliev seemed to be
replaced by " brain-sand," ol which more will be said afterwards.
3. The cerebral substance in immediate contiguity with the corpora
amylacea appeared quite natural.
4. The corpuscles were starch and not ccllulose, and possessed all the
structural, chemical, and optical properties of starch, as it occurs in plants, as
?he following few details will show :?
2*0. XXYI. X
288 CELLULOSE GRANULES IN THE BRAIN.
Tliey were of all sizes, from less than a blood-disc up to l-500th inch or
more?generally more or less ovate, but many irregular in outline, and
apparently flattened, as all the larger kinds of starch I believe are. Many of
the larger ones showed the appearance which, in starch, has been erroneously
described as indicative of a laminated structure; whilst in others this ap-
pearance under any mode of illumination certainly did not exist. The point
that would correspond with the so-called nucleus of a starch-grain was, unlike
that of most kinds of starch, central, and consequently the laminated marking
was concentric to the grain, which is rarely the case in the starch of plants.
This apparent lamination depends, as I believe, upon the same circumstances
as in other starch (vide Trans. Micr. Soc., Quart. Journ., vol. i., p. 58), that
is to say, upon the corrugation of a thin sacculus. That this was the case I
satisfied myself by the use of sulphuric acid and of Scliultz' solution (chloride
of zinc and iodine), in the mode described in my paper above quoted. By
these means, but more readily and conveniently by far by the latter, the
corpora amylacea could be seen to unfold into empty, flaccid, thin-walled,
blue sacculi, six to eight times larger than the original grain. Their structure
thus appearing to be identical with that of starch, the identity of their
chemical composition was rendered evident with equal facility. Simple watery
solution of iodine coloured them deep blue, which ultimately became perfectly
black and opaque. They were soluble after swelling and expanding in strong
sulphuric acid, and by heat; and, moreover, they acted upon polarized light in
the same way as starch does. Some of the smaller grains exhibited a distinct
and sharply-defined black cross, of which the lines crossed at angles of 45? in
the middle of the grain, but in the majority, there was only a single dark line
in the long diameter of the grain, and which seemed always to correspond
with an irregular fissure of liilus, as it might be termed, in the same direction,
which was presented in a great many of the grains, and seemed to be the
indication of a partial inrolling of them, as in the starch of the horse-chestnut.
This longitudinal fissure was not unfrequently crossed by a shorter one at right
angles. When the covering-glass was closely pressed, the grains were easily
crushed, breaking up in radiating cracks around the margin; and sometimes,
when thus compressed, a concentric annulation would become evident, which
was before inapparent.
In the corpora, striata, as I have mentioned above, I could find few or no
starch-grains, but here an appearance presented itself which seems to be con-
nected with their formation. Many particles of sabulous matter or crystalline
corpuscles of the ordinary " brain-sand," were met with, all of which, instead of
lying like the starch-grains, in the midst of unaltered nerve-substance, were
lodged in irregular masses of what appeared a fibrinous or immature connective
tissue-substance; and, in this instance, upon the addition of iodine, each mass
of crystals was found to be immediately surrounded by an irregular thickness
of a transparent matter, which was turned not blue, but a light purplish pink
by that reagent?a substance, in fact, closely resembling in that respect the
very early condition of the cellulose wall; for instance, in Hydrodictyon,?an
immature form, as it may be termed, of cellulose.
In a second case, that of an old man?dead of chronic dysentery, and who
died comatose?I found the ventricles distended with about three ounces of
clear fluid. The surface of the ependyma throughout all the continuous
cavities was studded like shagreen with minute transparent granulations, which
on microscopic examination appeared finely granular and homogeneous, or
sometimes faintly filbrillated. In this case there were, I think, no corpora
amylacea in the ependyma (at least I found none), nor in the, central substance
of the brain : a few were met with in the peripheral portions, especially on the
summits of the hemispheres, and still more in the much-dcvoloped Pacchionian
granulations, and there commingled with other concentrically-laminated bodies,
STATE OF LUNACY IN PARIS. 289
which formed botryoidal masses imbedded in a stroma of immature connective
tissue : these bodies, which might, to distinguish them, be termed the " clialce-
donic corpuscles," were rendered yellow by iodine. In this case also, I did not
notice the quasi cellulose-deposit around the particles of " brain-sand," but in
several instances I saw minute amylaceous particles (coloured blue by iodine),
contained in cells which they only partially occupied.?Geo. Busk, (Erom No.
7 of the Quarterly Microscopical Journal.)
Note.?In the " Comptes Rendus," No. 23, (Dec. 5, 1853,) are some further
observations on the "Animal Substance analogous to Vegetable Cellulose," by R.
Virchow, in which he announces the discovery of corpuscles presenting the same
reaction as the corpora amylacea of the brain, in the Malpighian corpuscles of
diseased human spleens?in the condition termed " waxy spleen" (Wachsmilz).
