The Plea of Insanity in Criminal Cases
========================================

Aet. II.
Ik the History of Medical Jurisprudence, we find no chapter more
perplexing than that which regards the plea of insanity in criminal
cases. Our courts of justice, whether civil or criminal, demand that
the evidence shall on all occasions, be clear, conclusive, and indisputable.
But, unhappily, the human mind, when affected by disease, cannot in
every case have its morbid features unveiled in open court. When the
plea of insanity, therefore, is raised, there is often considerable difficulty
in bringing forward a sufficient amount of demonstrative proof to
satisfy the minds of unprofessional men, that the malady actually
exists. The law presumes every man to be in his sound senses?and,
therefore, responsible for his actions, until the contrary be shown. It is
important for the interests of society, that the ends of justice should
not be evaded by any fictitious plea. Hence the judges of the land
always receive the plea of insanity with great caution; and lawyers
accustomed to deal, for the most part, with demonstrative evidence,
listen with impatience to medical testimony, which cannot be reduced
to the same description of proof which they require to establish
ordinary matters of fact. "We want facts" they exclaim, "not
opinionsbut the truth is, the most self-evident facts of medical
science can only be viewed through the medium of opinion, which tact,
knowledge, and experience bring within the range of certainty. If a
man be suffering under some obscure organic disease of the heart or
lungs, the prognosis of the physician is the expression of liis opinion: but
at the same time, his opinion carries with it?provided he be regarded as
an authority?as much weight as if he could demonstrate the certainty
* Croonian Lectures on Medical Testimony and Evidence in Cases of Lunacy.
Ly Thomas Mayo, M.D., "Medical Times and Gazette," Nos. 180, 181, 182.
Unsoundness of Mind considered in Relation to the Question of Responsibility
for Criminal Acts. By Samuel Knaggs. London: Churchill. 1854.
(
THE PLEA. OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 185
of the impending fact with mathematical precision. Why then should
the opinions of those medical men who have made the study of insanity
a speciality, not be received as valid evidence ? If a man, through the
negligence of a public servant, or a railway company, meet with a
severe bodily injury, for which he seeks compensation in a court of
justice, the most eminent physicians and surgeons are examined, and
their opinions are received as valid evidence concerning the nature,
extent, and consequences of the injuries inflicted. When, however, the
plea of insanity is at issue, their evidence is very often received with
marked disrespect;?nay, not very long ago, upon the trial of Oxford,
the Lord Chief Justice Denman is reported to have said:?
" There might be cases in which medical evidence as to physical
symptoms was of the utmost consequence ; but as to moral insanity,
he, for his own part, could not admit that medical men had at all
more means of forming an opinion on a case, than were possessed by
gentlemen accustomed to the affairs of life, and bringing to the subject
a Avide experience."
This was equivalent to declaring that the opinions of Pinel, Esquirol,
and Prichard, upon the difficult and perplexing subject of moral
insanity, might any day be superseded by that of half-a-dozen members
of the Carlton Club.
The directions which the learned judges have given to juries, in
summing up the evidence of different state trials, indicate a fervent
desire to lean to the side of humanity?but a great difficulty in deter-
mining what amount of insanity should render a man irresponsible for his
actions. It is now almost inconceivable that so humane and enlightened
& judge as Lord Chief Justice Hale, should, in drawing a distinction
between total and partial insanity, have laid it down as the law that
prisoners should be acquitted only in cases where a total and permanent
want of reason was proved to exist. Under the head of total insanity,
he distinguished between " that species which is fixed and permanent
and lunacy which comes by periods or fits." It would appear that
the superstition of a lunatic becoming deranged through the influence
of the moon whence the ignorant derivation of the word lunatic?at
that time prevailed in the minds even of learned men; hence, when the
moon was declining into its third quartei, there was supposed to be
a remission of the insane symptoms, followed by a lucid interval.
" Crimes committed," says Judge Hale, by lunatics, in such their
distempers, are under the same judgment as those committed by men
partially insane. The person who is absolutely mad for a day, killing
a man in that distemper, is equally not guilty as if he were mad with-
out intermission. But such persons as have then* lucid intervals have
usually in those intervals at least a competent use of reason; and
\
'180 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES.
crimes committed by them are of the same nature, and punished in the
same manner, as if they had no such defect."
Hence arose another difliculy. What constitutes a lucid interval ?
How are we to measure its completeness or its duration ? There may be
a cessation of symptoms ; the lunatic may become tranquil, and appear
to act reasonably: there may be a calm on the surface of the waters,
while below, the current may be flowing as disturbed as ever, although
unobserved. Who can determine whether this state of mental tranquillity
be real, profound, and enduring, or only, perhaps,an apparent lull, a hush,
an intermission of the storm ? And, above all, how can any human
sagacity penetrate, during this so-called lucid interval, into the secret
depths of the mind, in order to ascertain whether the motives?the
actual springs of action?are perfectly sane, or perverted by silent
delusions ? It is comparatively easy to establish the existence of
insanity,?but very difficult, if indeed it be even possible, to discover
the precise time when the mind casts off the cloud which over-shadowed
it, and recovers its perfect serenity. In the case of Arnold, who was
indicted at Kingston-upon-Thames, before Mr. Justice Tracey, in the
year 1724, for felony, in wilfully shooting at and wounding Lord
Onslow, it was clearly shown that the man had been habitually insane ;
but because he had formed a regular design, and prepared the proper
means for carrying his object into execution, and had, upon the morning
of the day he committed the offence, acted with apparent rationality?
inasmuch as he was capable of distinguishing the sort of shot he
wanted for the purpose, which was larger than the ordinary size?it
Avas contended that the act was perpetrated during a lucid interval;
and the jury found him guilty. His insanity was so clearly proved,
that his brothers and sisters were, in the course of the trial, severely
censured for not having taken care of him, and for not adopting means
for his being cured. It was shown that he had not only been long
subjected to aural and visual illusions, but he was habitually under a
variety of delusions ; imagining, among other extravagances, that Lord
Onslow was in his bosom, constantly persecuting him, and preventing
him from eating, drinking, sleeping, or being at rest. But notwith-
standing all this, the lucid interval was presumed to have been estab-
lished ; and Mr. Justice Tracey, in charging the jury, laid it down as
the law, that a man to be exempted from punishment under the plea
of insanity, " must be a man that is totally deprived of his under-
standing and memory, and does not know what he is doing any more
than an infant, than a brute, or a wild beast."*
* State Trials, vol. xvi. Trial of Edward Arnold for Shooting at Lord Onslow,
p. 766.
THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 187
Upon the trial of James Hadfield, for high treason, in the year
1800, the Hon. Thomas Erskine, afterwards the renowned Lord Chan-
cellor, in a speech remarkable alike for force of reasoning and beauty of
language, analyzed and exposed the fallacy of the views which had
been propounded both by Chief Justice Hale, and Mr. Justice Tracey;
indeed, no medico-legal authority, enlightened by the most recent views
of mental pathology, could explain in more clear and precise terms the
true psychological principles which should guide our diagnosis in such
cases.
"If" (said Lord Erskine) "a total deprivation of memory was
intended by these great lawyers to be taken in the literal sense of the
word?if it was meant that to protect a man from punishment, he
must be in such a state of prostrated intellect as not to know his
name, nor his condition, nor his relation towards others?that if a
husband, he should not know he was married; or if a father, could not
remember he had children; nor know the road to his house or his
property in it, then no such madness ever existed in this world."
He then proceeded to argue truly, that,
" It is idiocy alone which places a man in this helpless condition,
where, from an original mal-organization there is the human frame
alone, without the human capacity, and which indeed meets the very
definition of Lord Hale himself, when referring to Fitzlierbert, he
says, 1 Idiocy, or fatuity, a nativitate vel dementia naturalis, is such
a one as described by Fitzherbert: who knows not how to tell twenty
shillings, nor knows his own age, or who was his father.'" "But in
all the cases which have filled Westminster Hall with the most com-
plicated considerations," continued Mr.' Erskine, "the lunatics and
other insane persons who have been the subjects of them, have not
only had memory, in my sense of the expression, they have not only
had the most perfect knowledge and recollection of all the relations
they stood in towards others, and of the acts and circumstances of their
lives, hut have in general been remarkable for subtlety and acuteness.
Defects in their reasonings have seldom been traceable?the disease
consisting in the delusive sources of thought; all their deductions
within the scope of their malady being founded upon the immovable
assumption of matters as realities, eithei without any foundation
whatsoever, or so distorted and disfigured by fancy, as to be almost
nearly the same thing as their creation. It is tiue, indeed, that in
some perhaps in many cases the human mind is stormed in its
citadel and laid prostrate under the stroke of phrensy; these unhappy
sufferers, however, are not so much considered by physicians maniacs,
as to be in a state of delirium, from fever. There, indeed, all the
ideas are overwhelmed, for reason is not merely disturbed, but driven
wholly from the seat. Such unhappy patients are unconscious, there-
fore, except at short intervals, even of external objects; or are at least
wholly incapable of considering their relations. Such persons, and
such persons alone (except idiots) are wholly deprived of their un
188 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES.
derstanding, in the Attorney General's seeming sense of that
expression. But these cases are not only extremely rare, but never
can become the subjects of judicial difficulty. In other cases reason
is not driven from her seat, but distraction sits down upon it along
with her, holds her trembling upon it, and frightens her from her
propriety"*
This is truthfully, powerfully, and eloquently enforced; but still, per-
sons who are not conversant with the phenomena of insanity, find it
difficult to recognise that etat mixte, which has been so well described
by Moreau as a form of insanity, in which reason appears to co-exist
with madness,f a state which Shakespeare has so admirably portrayed,
both in Hamlet and in King Lear.
" 0 matter and impertinency mixed,
Reason in Madness."
Lear, Act iv., sc. vi.
That sagacious and enlightened lawyer, Erskine, unreservedly admitted
that " insane persons often reason with a subtlety which puts in the shade
the ordinary conception of mankind." But he argued, although
these conclusions may be just, and frequently performed?"The
premises from which they reason, when within the range of their
malady, are uniformly false?not false from any defect of knowledge
or judgment, but because a delusive image, the inseparable companion
of real insanity, is thrust upon the subjugated understanding, incapable
of resistance, because unconscious of attack." He therefore was led
into the error of contending that " delusion," unaccompanied by
frenzy or raving madness, should be regarded as the true test of
insanity. This test was sanctioned by the authority of Sir John Nicholl,
who in the case of Dew v. Clark, observed?" The true criterion, the
true test of the absence or presence of insanity, I take to be the
absence or presence of what, used in a certain sense, is comprisable in a
single term, namely, delusion." Furthermore, the same learned judge
added, " in the absence of anything in the nature of delusion,
understood as above, the supposed lunatic is, in my judgment, not
properly or essentially insane." The fallacy of this test was, however,
aftewards conceded by Mr. Erskine himself, who, in defending a young-
woman indicted for murder, and acquitted on the ground of insanity,
fully admitted that she did not labour under any delusion whatever.
" The facts and circumstances which overpowered her understanding,"
he observes, " were strictly true : She was cast off by a Mr. Errington,
with whom she had lived, and his marrying, or taking under his
* State Trials, vol. xxvii. Trial of James Hadfield for High Treason, p. 1313.
+ Psychological Journal, 'Article "Mixed Insanity?Reason and Madness,"
vol. iii., p. 490.
THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 189
protection, another woman, excited her grief and jealousy to such a
pitch, that she could no longer control her actions. She accordingly,
having procured a pistol, deliberately went to his house, where she shot
him. She did not," he repeated, "act under a delusion that he had
deserted her when he had not done so, but she took revenge upon him
for his actual desertion of her." Every person who has made the
study of insanity a speciality, now knows, that the disease may exist
without any fixed or permanent delusion; although, when such delu-
sions do exist, they are to be considered, according to their nature, as
evidence of a state of mental derangement.
The next test of insanity?which was referred to at the trial of Arnold
and of Bellingham, and which, indeed, has more frequently been
appealed to than any other, from the time of Lord Chief Justice Hale
down to the late decision of the twelve judges, in answer to the queries
suggested by the trial of McNaughten,?affects the powers of moral
discernment. Had the person, at the time of committing the offence,
the knowledge of good and evil ? was he capable of distinguishing
right from wrong P In the case of Bellingham, the Attorney General
(Sir Vicary Gribbs) declared, " upon the authority of the established
law, in all times, which law has never been questioned, that although
a man be incapable of conducting his own affairs, he may still be
answerable for his criminal acts, if he possess a mind capable of dis-
tinguishing right from wrong." In his charge to the jury, Lord
Mansfield?before whom the case was tried?reiterated the same view.
" The single question," he said was, "whether, when he committed the
offence charged upon him, he had sufficient understanding to distinguish
good from evil, right from wrong; and that murder was a crime, not
only against the law of Grod, but against the law of the country." In
his work on Crimes and Misdemeanours, Russell adopted this doctrine;
and Hay, in his Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity, points to that fact
as indicating the little progress made in this department of science.
" This opinion," he observes, " was delivered scarcely a dozen years
after the absurdity of its principles had been so happily exposed, in a
few words, by Mr. Erskine, on the trial of Hadfield. What a comment
on the progress of improvement in the Medical Jurisprudence of
Insanity!"* It is curious to find that, notwithstanding the light
that has been thrown upon different species of insanity?especially upon
moral insanity, homicidal insanity, and impulsive by the highest
authorities in his department of medical science, that the twelve
judges should still have adhered to what we should consider an obsolete
dogma. They declare that " the jury ought, in all cases, to be told
* A Treatise on the Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity. By J. Ray, M.D.
With an Introductory Essay, by D. Spelian, M.D. London; 1839, Pp. 29.
190 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES.
that every man should be considered of sane mind until the contrary
be clearly proved in evidence. That before a plea of insanity should
be allowed, undoubted evidence ought to be adduced that the accused
was of unsound mind, and that, at the time he committed the act, he
was not conscious of right or wrong. Every person was supposed to
know what the law was, and therefore nothing could justify a wrong
act, except it was clearly proved that the party did not know right
from wrong. If that was not satisfactorily proved, the accused was
liable to punishment. If the delusion under which a person laboured
were only partial, the party accused was equally liable with a person of
sane mind." Such is the present state of the law; yet there is no fact
better established than that insane persons, criminal lunatics in par-
ticular, are frequently perfectly conscious of the distinction between
good and evil, right and wrong, and even the consequences which will
attend their committing certain acts; but, notwithstanding all this,
they are unable, from their state of mental infirmity or aberration, to
control their morbid propensities.
This brief retrospect, showing how improgressive are the principles
which govern our learned judges in dealing with the plea of insanity
in criminal cases, and what little sympathy and coincidence exists
between legal and medical views on the subject, we have thought a
befitting introduction to our notice of Dr. Mayo's Cronian Lectures
on Medical Testimony and Evidence in cases of Lunacy, and a Irocliure
recently published by Mr. Knaggs, entitled "Unsoundness of Mind
considered in Relation to the Question of Responsibility for Criminal
Acts." The report of the lectures of Dr. Mayo, in the medical journal
before us, we presume to be considerably curtailed; they are three in
number. In the first, he discusses the subject of insanity in its relation
to medical proof under its essential element, delirium, as indicated by
inconsecutive, incoherent trains of thought, and by certain delusions
over which the patient has no control; in the second, he dwells upon
the destructive orgasm or tendency in its relation to moral insanity
especially; and in the third, he considers idiocy in its relation to
civil actions, and the distinctions which may be drawn between un-
soundness of mind and insanity. The work of Mr. Knagg is condensed
into seven chapters.?I. The Introduction.?II. On Mind.?III. Sound
and Unsound.?IV. Punishment in Reference to Crime and Lunacy.?
Y. Unsound Mind as a Responsible Condition.?YI. Unsound Mind as
an Irresponsible Condition.?VII. The concluding Chapter containing
" practical suggestions." Upon the cjiiestio vexcitci, what should be
esteemed the true test of insanity as regards the responsibility or non-
responsibility of the criminal lunatic, neither author appears able to
lay down any practical rule for our guidance. Dr. Mayo, indeed,
THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 191
suggests that insane persons may be divided into two classes, the
responsible and the irresponsible, and he suggests that " the responsible
insane should undergo some lower degree of punishment than that
inflicted on similar delinquents being of unsound mind." But a man, it
is obvious, must, in the eye of the law, be held either sane or insane ; if
sane, the usual sentence upon conviction is, of course, passed: but if
insane, why should the unfortunate person be subjected to any degree
of secondary punishment P " The position of many persons under
capital charges," continues Dr. Mayo, " is at present anomalous.
They are acquitted in defiance of the law, as laid down by the judges
respecting McNaugliten's case, because the punishment appertaining
to the offence would be too severe; and then, instead of being consigned
to confinement in a gaol as a secondary punishment, they are consigned
to it in an asylum as a plea simply of detention. This becomes a
scene of severe virtual punishment to some of them ; of gratification to
vanity, and idleness to others; those, meanwhile, to whom it is a
grievance, as they do not regard it in the light of a punishment, derive
from it none of the preventive effects of punishment or future conduct;
while the public, for the same reason, find it equally unproductive of
good, as an example to persons of actually diseased mind, or to that
large class of persons who are drifting into disease under uncontrolled
eccentricity." We confess it is new to us that, in any case, the plea of
insanity has ever been admitted because " the punishment appertaining
to any particular offence would be too severe;" and we certainly should
object to asylums, which ought to be regarded as hospitals for the
cure of mental disease, being converted into supernumerary gaols; in
all the cases that ever have occurred, when the plea of insanity has
been raised, the only question for the judge and jury to decide, has
been whether the accused was sane or insane; responsible or irre-
sponsible for his actions. And the whole difficulty hinges upon how
this is to be determined ? It is proposed by Dr. Mayo, that the alleged
criminal lunatic should be examined as to his state of mind in the
presence of the judge and jury, which would, he assumes, " facilitate
an understanding between law and medicine in the most Protean form
the most untractable subject of investigation which is brought before
either: and in doing this, give full weight and value to the deductive
reasoning of lawyers, while we support the claim of the medical pro-
fession to aid them in the work of decision or inquiry. In criminal
cases, a grand jury has no authority by law to ignore a bill of murder
on the ground of insanity, but if a man be found insane upon arraign-
ment, he is not tried, because he is incapable of adducing evidence in
self-defence; if, however, the trial proceeds, counsel does take advantage
of the presence of the prisoner at the bar, to point out, as Dr. Mayo
NO. XXTI. P
mmm
1 92 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES.
suggests, any personal peculiarity or appearance that may support the
plea of insanity. Thus, upon the trial of Hadfield, the attention of the
jury was called to the wounds of the head which he had received while
serving in the army. " When the court," said Mr. Erskine, " put the
prisoner under my protection, I thought it my duty to bring Mr. Cline to
inspect him. in Newgate; and it will appear by the evidence of that
excellent and conscientious person, who is known to be one of the
first anatomists in the world, that from this wound one of two things
must have happened; either that, by the immediate operation of
surgery, the displaced part of the skull must have been taken away, or
been forced inward on the brain. The second stroke also speaks for
itself; you may now see its effects here Mr. Erskine placed his hand
on the head of the prisoner, showing to the court the injuries he
described, and then added, "he was cut across all the nerves which
give sensibility and animation to the body, and his head hung down
almost dissevered, until, by the aid of surgery, it was placed in the
position you now see it; but thus almost destroyed, he still recollected
his duty, and continued to maintain the glory of his country, when a
?sword divided the membrane of the neck where it terminates in the
head; yet he still kept his place, though his helmet had been thrown
off by the blow which I secondly described, when, by another sword,
he was cut into the very brain?you may now see it uncovered." The
learned counsel added, " There the disease is, from its very nature, in-
curable ; and so when a man like the prisoner has become insane from
violence to the brain, which permanently affects its structure, however
such a man may appear occasionally to others, his disease is immov-
able ; and if the prisoner, therefore, were to live a thousand years, he
never could recover from the consequence of that day." There can be
no doubt that the presence of the unfortunate man in the midst of this
scene, must have strikingly affected the whole court; but we are not
prepared to affirm that it would have been expedient for him to have
been personally examined and cross-questioned at the bar by any
medical men. This practice, if introduced into our courts, whether
civil or criminal, would lead to very painful exhibitions; and the jury,
being unacquainted professionally with the phenomena of insanity,
would be little able to appreciate the value of the evidence. A sane
man ingeniously cross-examined by medical men, assuming the functions
of barristers, might be made to appear in open court insane enough;
and, on the contrary, a lunatic may summon up sufficient energy of
mind to answer questions with marvellous lucidity, whereby the jury
again would be misled. But the most fatal objection to adopting the
suggestion of Dr. Mayo is, that no man upon trial for his life is bound
to convict himself: the humanity of the English law protects him as
THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 193
muclx as possible from being- a witness, under any criminal indictment,
against himself. Far more humane and efficient is the present system.
The physician who has made the study of insanity a speciality, and
who has attained eminence in this branch of the profession, is desired
to visit the alleged lunatic. This he may do repeatedly; and when he
has satisfied himself as to his state of mind, his evidence is delivered in
court. This is, in our estimation, a far better and more satisfactory
mode of proceeding than the one suggested by Dr. Mayo; we have
more frequent opportunities of testing the sanity of the prisoner, and
discharging more satisfactorily to our own mind one of the gravest
responsibilities which can devolve upon us.
In the lectures before us, Dr. Mayo tells us that he has accepted the
terms which are laid down by Acts of Parliament as expressing the condi-
tions on which abnormal states of mind are imputable ; and with respect
to their meaning, while he does not consider them virtually synonymous,
or as having the same force, he has endeavoured to adopt that which
the law may be presumed to intend, and which expresses real not verbal
differences. It is to be regretted, as Dr. Mayo appears himself to inti-
mate, that he did not take a larger basis for his division of insanity,
and one more consonant with what he designates " the entire patho-
logy of the mind;" he would not, in that case, have repudiated, as he
appears to do, the forms of " impulsive," " instinctive," and " moral
insanity."
"With respect to eccentricity and atrocity of vice," says Dr. Mayo,
" I may observe, that the theory of either moral or impulsive in-
sanity is liable, for anything that Dr. Prichard has suggested, to
occasion the sudden outbreaks of the brutal character?a character
under rapid devlopment at present in the country?to find refuge under
this plea. Such was the application of it which some years ago pro-
tected the honourable Mr. Tucket from the penal consequences of a
great crime. That gentleman put to death by a pistol-shot the marker
of a shooting gallery. The act was sudden, and there was no appear-
ance of motive; but it was not performed under any semblance of deli-
rium. Mr. Tucket was eccentric; and he was blaze. He fancied that
he desired to be hanged : at the gallows he would probably have
thought differently, and he was reckless and brutal enough to give him-
self a chance of this fate at the expense of the life of a fellow-creature.
I have noticed him since in the criminal department of Bethlem, insou-
ciant, and indifferent enough, but certainly not insane in any sense of
the word.that would not entirely disintegrate its meaning; neither,
when we proceed to consider the sense which the law inteuds to give to
the expression of the certificate, ' unsoundness, shall we find this
epithet at all more appropriate to Mr. Tucket s case, which was simply-
one of brutal recklessness."
Now, with great deference to Dr. Mayo, whose opinions we respect,
p 2
194 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES.
it appears to us that no man in liis sound senses would commit a
murder for the salce of being hanged; and from our recollection of this
case, it came clearly under the head of homicidal and impulsive mania.
There may have existed in the mind of this unfortunate person a desire
to commit murder, and a desire to he hanged; for it is notorious that
homicidal is very frequently, if not generally, complicated with suicidal
mania. Many such cases are on record. We also, contrary to the
opinion of Dr. Mayo, believe that the court was right in deciding that
Captain Johnson, who, cruelly wounded and murdered, upon several suc-
cessive days, many of his ship's crew, was also insane when he com-
mitted those outrageous acts; and it seems to us to militate as an
argument against Dr. Mayo's suggestion of the alleged lunatic being
examined in the presence of the judge and jury, that if, as he conjec-
tures, such a course had been adopted in the case of this man, instead
of being treated as a lunatic, he would not have escaped punishment,
in other words, he would have been found guilty and hanged; but no
"shades of psychological distinctions" can, in our opinion, justify the
infliction even of secondary punishment upon a lunatic. He must be
treated as a person who is either sane or insane, as being morally
responsible for his actions or morally irresponsible: there can be no
intermediate condition. It appears that Dr. Mayo would not allow
persons guilty, like Tucket and Johnson, of " brutal recklessness" to
escape under the plea of impulsive or moral insanity; and he suggests,
" whether a state of the human mind is not conceivable which shall be
distinguished entirely from insanity as implying no delirium,?from
unsoundness as implying 110 incapacity for the conduct of person and
property,?and which shall bear the same relation to the moral sense
as idiocy bears to the intellectual sense, involving an entire absence
or imperfect development of the former, as idiocy does of the lat-
ter ? A complete practical division of, or system of abnormal mind,
would comprehend such a head, and the distinction would involve none
of the mischief which T have imputed to the doctrines of moral in-
sanity. That mischief is contained in one short expression?impunity
afforded to crime. No such impunity is implied in the hypothesis
which avowedly represents the abnormal state as a mode of wickedness
consisting in the non-development or absence of the moral sense. For,
from being thus constituted to remove the fear of punishment, would
be to denude him of the sole preventive of crime afforded him by Pro-
vidence." This hypothesis is put very ingeniously by Dr. Mayo; but
may it not fairly be argued, that to punish a man for a connatural
defect of mind would be as unjust as it would be to punish an' idiot for
being incapable of using the reflective faculties P If there be, in the
original constitution of the mind, an entire absence of so important
THE TLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 105
an element as the moral sense, which is the true arbitrator between
right and wrong, and the basis, according to many ethical writers, of
all good and virtuous actions, such a person is as much to be pitied as
any congenital cripple, who might as well be punished for not using
limbs which Nature has, contrary to her usual custom, denied to him.
It is clear that a person so afflicted ought to be protected; for this
defect in his mental organization takes from him the power of distin-
guishing right from wrong, and reasoning correctly on the consequences
of his actions. Hence he may become predisposed to commit those
motiveless and impulsive outrages which Pmel, Esquirol, and Prichard
have very properly described as arising from that species of the disease
designated moral insanity. We have not time to pursue this interest-
ing subject further; the existence or non-existence of a moral sense, as
a distinct and original faculty of the human mind, would lead to a dis-
quisition upon the views of Cudworth, Locke, Hutcheson, Price, and
other ethical authors, which would far exceed our limits. Suffice to
say, that if we recognise, as Dr. Mayo seems to do, the existence of a
moral sense in the natural constitution of the human mind, its non-
development or absence would subject the mind to a state of irrationality
which has a strong claim upon our sympathies, and which should de-
mand for a person so afflicted the same consideration as if he became
insane from any other cause.
In Dr. Mayo's third lecture, he discusses the meaning of the expres-
sion, "unsoundness of mind," as used in our medical certificates of
lunacy, in contradistinction to insanity and idiocy. " Unsoundness of
Mind," he tells us, "is the term which applies to a person of whom
neither insane delusion, nor inconsecutiveness, nor incoherency can be
predicated?but who may nevertheless be brought before a physician as
requiring precautions in reference to the management of his property
and person. The man in question is not in his dotage?he talks with
sufficient fluency and without anything remarkable in the sequence of
his thoughts. But on every subject of business his mind goes into
a state of confusion, of which he is not conscious. He is unable to
appreciate value, and though fond of property, will purchase and part
with it at absurd prices. He can believe anything that is told him,
however improbable, and if he takes a dislike can invent or believe any
fiction that falls in with his feelings of resentment. I may add,
that his conversation being on the whole continuous and coherent, there
is never flighty character in it, and often some deficiency of articula-
tion." We recognise readily the truthfulness of this portrait, which
introduces to us a class of patients whom it is extremely difficult to
deal with?requiring, as they do, protection rather than confinement;
a species of surveillance which shall not remind them that they are
196 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES.
considered insane persons?but which shall at the same time be suffi-
ciently stringent to prevent their injuring themselves or others. The first
example which Dr. Mayo has selected to illustrate this form of insanity
?is that that of the late Mrs. Gumming?but as we propose at some
future time discussing at some length this important case in all its
medico-psychological relations, we abstain for the present making any
remarks upon the interpretation which Dr. Mayo gives to the incidents
he has referred to.
The same theoretical difficulties which appear to have occurred to
Dr. Mayo in the course of "his Croonian Lectures, have obviously em-
barrassed Mr. Knagg's speculations, who has, we fear, not succeeded in
throwing any new light 011 the subject?nor could this be expected, as
he appears to have argued only within the same circle as his prede-
cessors. He, too, refers to the cases of Hadfield, McNaughten,
Laurence, Touchet, &c., and finds himself equally at a loss to deter-
mine what test should be adopted to justify a criminal lunatic being
released from responsibility. The decision of the twelve Judges?that
" nothing could justify a wrong act, except it was clearly proved that
the party did not know wright from wrong," Mr. Knaggs repudiates.
"A full consciousness," he observes, "of the illegality of wrongfulness
of the act may exist in a man's mind, and yet he may be fairly acquitted
on the ground of insanity ; thus the incendiary Martin admitted, that
he knew he was doing wrong according to the law of man, when he set
fire to York Cathedral; he was conscious that the act was illegal, but
said he had the command of God to do it." Moreover, " not unfrequently
do we find existing in the lunatic criminal, not only a consciousness of
right and wrong, but even a knowledge of the consequences of the act;
and strange to say, perhaps this latter perception constitutes the only
motive for the commission of the deed. Thus, in the case of Hadfield,
he kneAV that in firing at the king he was doing what was contrary to
law, and that the punishment of death was attached to the crime of
assassination, but the motive for the crime was that he might be put
to death by others ; he would not take his own life." Many years ago,
we ourselves went over this ground, and as a proof, that in many cases
of insanity, the patient appears perfectly competent to perform a cor-
rect process of reasoning, and is fully aware, not only of the distinction
between right and wrong, but of his legal responsibility ; we cited the
two following anecdotes:?An intriguing, unruly, vicious madman, was
detected with a piece of iron, which he had contrived to shape like a
dagger; into this iron he firmly fixed a handle. The weapon was
taken away from him. He immediately became excessively abusive,
and was placed under restraint. After this, he was more violent, and
uttered the most revolting imprecations. In a fit of fury, he exclaimed
THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 197
to the attendant, " I'll murder you yet; I am a madman, and tliey
cannot hang me for it." When Martin set fire to York Minster, a
conversation took place among the inmates of a neighbouring lunatic
asylum relating to this circumstance. The question discussed was
whether Martin would suffer the extreme penalty of the law for the
crime. Various were the opinions expressed. In the midst of the
conversation, one patient, as mad as the rest, exclaimed " He (Martin)
will not he hanged,?of course he will escape." For what reason?"
asked several voices. " They cannot hang him," replied the lunatic,
" because he is mad?he is one of ourselvesAny person who has
had the charge of insane patients, and lived among them, whether in a
public or private asylum, will bear testimony to many of them
conducting themselves very rationally; nay, they will often converse
upon the subject of their own malady, and ridicule their own insane
actions. Not one of his tests, therefore, referred to at the com-
mencement of this article, and propounded by the most learned of our
judges, has been found to hold good; indeed it is well observed by
Dr. Mayo, in one of the lectures before us, that there is a remarkable
discrepancy between the theory and practice of the law. " The
position of many persons under capital charges," observes the doctor, " is
at present anomalous; they are even acquitted in defiance of the law."
Thus it would appear?and we fully concur with Mr. Knaggs in this
remark?" That any attempt by fixed rules, either legal or medical,
to distinguish between those mental conditions which should be
accountable, and those which should not, must either fail in its appli-
cation or be productive of evil." With this admission, we are some-
what surprised to find Mr. Ivnaggs suggest a new test, which is quite
as unavailable as any other. " The best test of the responsibility of
the criminal on the plea of insanity is, not whether he be conscious of
right and wrong,?or have a knowledge of the consequences of his
act,?but whether he be capable of controlling his actions?not alone
in homicidal cases, but wherever the plea is raised."?(pp. 69?77).
Were it possible to solve this problem, there would be an end of the
difficulty; but Mr. Ivnaggs himself admits that the crime may be
proved; but?we quote his own words,?" We have no means of
ascertaining the actual state of mind of the person at the time of his
committing the act."?(p. 76.) What then becomes of the proposed
test ?
We have compared attentively Chapter IV., entitled, "Unsound
Mind, as a Responsible Condition," with Chapter V. " Unsound Mind
as an Irresponsible Condinion." But we confess we cannot discover
* The Plea of Insanity in Criminal Cases, By Forbes Winslow, M.D, London:
1843.
198 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES.
any criterion for determining the amount of mental unsoundness which
shall place one criminal lunatic in a responsible?another in an
irresponsible condition. We return, as we have just observed in
reference to Dr. Mayo's proposal for inflicting secondary punishments
in such cases, to the pith of the question. Was the man arraigned
upon a criminal charge, when he committed the alleged offence, in a
sound or unsound state of mind? Was he sane or insane? We
cannot, upon a truely conjectural theory, allow assumed " shades of
psychological distinctions"?as Dr. Mayo expresses it?to exculpate
one lunatic and exonerate another. Who shall presume to determine
where, in a mind confessedly unsound, responsibility shall end, and
irresponsibility begin ? We may invent supposititious cases in support
of any hypothesis, but when we come to deal with the stern
realities which are brought forward in our criminal courts, when we
are put into the witness-box as physicians, conversant with the
general and special phenomena of insanity, and are called upon to state
the views we entertain and the conclusions we have arrived at from
experience, these speculative and shadowy distinctions disappear and
become merged in the general fact, that when the accused committed
the crime libelled against him he was in a state of unsound mind.
This to us is sufficient; we cannot probe deeper. When the life of a
human being is at stake we will not split straws respecting the
abnormal conditions of mental faculties, the specific range of which we
know little of in health, and less of in disease. We, therefore, after
carefully reviewing Mr. Knagg's arguments, return to the point from
which we started, which may be thus expressed:?No medico-psycho-
logical rule or formula can be laid down for determining when a man,
already of unsound mind, loses the power of controlling his actions:
urged by an insane impulse, he may at any moment, like Toucliet or
McNaughten, commit an outrage ; but it is impossible for us to deter-
mine at what precise moment the insane impulse either took possession
of his mind or became irresistible; we can adjudicate only upon overt
acts. The all-seeing eye of Heaven can alone penetrate into the secrets
of the human heart. We cannot watch the course of a man's silent
thoughts, nor can we weigh the evil passions which may be slumbering in
his breast; but if, as medical jurists, we believe him to be of unsound mind,
assuredly the plea of his insanity should be allowed to prevail in his
defence.
We know from our own experience how perplexing it is in some
cases to draw a satisfactory diagnosis, and how careful we ought to be
in weighing every collateral circumstance which can throw any light
upon the motives which may have actuated a criminal lunatic. So
conscious, indeed, does Mr. Knaggs appear to be of the difficulty of
THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 199
determining the question of responsibility or irresponsibility, that in
the chapter of "Practical Suggestions," he proposes that the opinion
of a single physician, however emiment in the profession, should not
be relied upon ; but that a jury of medical practitioners, selected from
amongst those who have had experience in the observation or treat-
ment of the insane, should be empannelled, and that upon their
verdict the fate of the prisoner should depend. But this verdict,
continues Mr. Knaggs, should not be founded upon the fact that the
prisoner is of unsound mind, " but upon the condition of a sufficient
degree of unsoundness in their judgment being present to constitute a
plea as to irresponsibility. Such a jury should consist of three or
more, with a foreman, also medical, to collect their verdict; then sup-
posing, in the course of an ordinary trial, that the plea of insanity was
raised, the decision upon this ground would rest with the empannelled
medical jury, and in the event of their rejecting the plea upon hearing
the evidence, the common jury would proceed as usual to their ver-
dict ; but if the panel was of opinion that the evidence of unsoundness
was sufficient to constitute irresponsibility, the decision should be held to
be final, and a verdict of 'not guilty,' on the ground of insanity, recorded
by the judge."?(p. 84.) This appears to be a very ingenious sugges-
tion, albeit, somewhat utopian; but if one experienced physician cannot
solve the psychological problem upon which their verdict is to depend,
we are afraid the wisdom of three would be equally unsuccessful: nay,
we cannot understand by what scale these degrees of mental unsound-
ness are to be measured; therefore we should infinitely prefer the
verdict, resting as it at present does, upon the general fact,?whether
the prisoner was or was not of unsound mind or insane when he
committed the act ? This is the question for the judge and the jury
to determine; and instead of a medical jury being empannelled to
express their opinion in the form of a verdict?the plan at present
adopted?that of calling in the evidence of the most eminent men in
this department of the profession is by far the best. There may
occasionally be an unseemly difference and collision of opinions
among specialists, but even this tends to the elucidation of the actual
truth ; and the prisoner, if insane, has an advantage which ne would
not possess were his fate dependent upon the verdict of a small compact
]ury of three or four medical men. It is clearly more just?more for
the benefit of the prisoner, and more satisfactory to the public?that the
opinions of many physicians of eminence should be received in evidence.
We must, however, now conclude. The Croonian Lectures, by Dr.
Mayo, will, we hope, be published in a more complete form; we have
selected passages for criticism rather than for praise, or we might
have given many interesting extracts which would show that these
200 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES.
lectures will be a valuable contribution to the literature of medical
jurisprudence. Insanity ever lias, and ever will be a perplexing subject
even to the most profound psychologists. The most eminent authors
have failed to give any satisfactory definition of the disease. It is a
popular notion that every man is a little mad, and we confess we have
been much amused in reading the following description of the great
lexicographer, Dr. Johnson, whose eccentricities grouped together are
exceedingly striking. The portrait is admirably drawn :?
" There was" (says Mr. Knaggs) " an old man well known in London
during the last century, who was of an ungainly appearance, and subject
to occasional attacks of hereditary melancholy ; so inconsistent was he
in his habits that sometimes he practised great abstemiousness, and at
other times devoured huge meals with brutish slovenliness and voracity;
sometimes he would persist in drinking nothing stronger than water,
but occasionally drank wine by tumblers full: his income was far from
large, and not of a certain amount, yet he kept a set of old men and
women about his house, whose bickerings and disagreements now
and then drove him out of doors; he was in general very loquacious,
but had been known to sit in company and drink a dozen cups of tea
without speaking a syllable; when not engaged discoursing, it was his
custom to keep muttering to himself; in walking, he performed strange
gesticulations with his limbs, and would not go in at a door unless he
could effect his entry in a certain preconceived number of steps, and
so as to introduce himself on a particular foot, turning back and re-
commencing until he succeeded as he desired; there was a row of posts
near his house which he would not pass without touching singly, and
if he had omitted one in the series, he retraced his steps to remedy the
, j: neglect; he hoarded up orange skins for some mysterious purpose
which he would never divulge; he suffered remorse of conscience for
having taken milk in his coffee on Good Friday; he believed in ghosts
and went ghost hunting in Coclc-lane; and he maintained he had
heard his mother calling upon him by name in the other world. Yet
Dr. Johnson was so far from insane, that his judgment commanded
respect and admiration everywhere, and, by the common consent of
eminent contemporaries, he was the most vigorous thinker and the
greatest sage of his time." (p. 46.)
We regret we have not space for further extracts. We have found
Mr. Knagg's work extremely interesting; every page may be taken
as a text for a running commentary, and ere long we may have
occasion a?-ain to return to it.
