Lettsomian Lectures
====================

No. II.
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
Delivered before the Medical Society of London, April 7, 1852.
By FORBES WINSLOW, M.D., D.C.L.
The purport of this lecture is the Medical Treatment of
Insanity. It may be surmised that I have selected this sub-
ject with the view of submitting for your consideration, and
through you to the profession, the particulars of a mode of treat-
ing the diversified morbid affections of the mind, original in its
conception, invariably successful in its results, and based upon
my own peculiar views as to the pathology of the disease. I am
anxious, in limine, to disabuse your minds of these ideas. I lay
no claim to any exclusive or specific mode of treating insanity.
I possess no panacea, I have discovered no infallible medicine, no
elixir, no drug that will
" Purge tlie mind of its thick-coming fancies,"
disperse the creations of the morbid imagination, restore the
intellect to its just equilibrium, invigorate the judgment, give
impetus and power to the paralysed volition, overpower the
suicidal and homicidal impulse, elevate the depressed emotions,
revivify the lost affections, or
" Cliase away tlie furrow'd lines of anxious thought."
I should indeed be thankful if it were in my power to recom-
mend to my professional brethren, any specific and uniformly
efficacious course of medical treatment, likely to be followed by
such happy results. Other motives and different feelings have
influenced me in bringing this important and much-neglected
matter before the profession, and have induced me to make it
one of the " Lettsomian Lectures/' which I have the privilege of
delivering before this Society.
In considering the present aspects of the medical profession, I
have been impressed by the conviction, that, as philosophers in
?' ? ~
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 205
search of truth, we have hitherto paid too little attention to the
study of the science of therapeutics. Extraordinary talents,
enlarged capacities, high attainments, profound knowledge, great
power of continuous and laborious scientific investigation, indo-
mitable and unflagging industry, united to habits of close and
accurate reasoning, are devotedly and zealously engaged in the
study of the different branches of our noble science. I ask, whether
the great, the original, and truth-loving minds among us have
investigated, in a manner proportionate to its vast importance,
that section of our art which specially and exclusively relates to the
modus operandi of medicines, and their therapeutic influence in
the actual cure of disease ? I feel reluctant to breathe a word,
or to utter a syllable, which could in the slightest degree be sup-
posed to convey the impression that I undervalued and under-
estimated those essential and interesting departments of the
science of medicine, to the investigation of which so many highly-
gifted men are devoting their talents and knowledge. The micro-
scope has done much to enlarge the boundaries of science; it is
an invaluable instrument in the hands of the scientific, experi-
enced, and cautious philosopher, and the insight which it has
afforded, and the light which it has reflected upon the minute
anatomy of tissue, and into the nature of organic and patholo-
gical products and elements, have undoubtedly advanced consi-
derably the science which we cultivate. The results so obtained
have led to, and will ultimately be productive of, most important
practical advantages. I say so much in this stage of my inquiry,
to guard myself against the imputation of thinking lightly of
these minute inquiries into the intimate nature of organic struc-
ture. I would not say a word to discourage the commendable
zeal, industry, and patience of the microscopist, who toils
" From night to morn, from morn to dewy eve,"
in investigating the phenomena of matter, and who applies well-
ascertained data to assist him in the elucidation of that mysterious
and subtle principle which gives motion, animation, and intelli-
gence to the grosser particles of our material organization.
Admitting the great utility of the microscope, I would, placing
my interrogatory in a suggestive form, ask, whether we have not,
in these profound, intellectual, and necessary investigations,
occasionally overlooked the great and ostensible vocation of the
206 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
physician ? The erudite anatomist?the learned physiologist?
the accurate stethoscopist?the profound analytical chemist?the
zealous microscopist, capable of accurately delineating the minute
anatomy of tissue, or the physical character, weight, and quality
of each essential organic element constituting its structure?
will not, without the patient study of the phenomena of disease,
and careful investigation of the moclus operandi of the agents of
the materia medica in certain morbid conditions of the system,
make either a good or a successful physician. Have we not
neglected the science of therapeutics ? Have we devoted a suffi-
cient degree of attention to the study of the specific action of
medicine, under given conditions of bodily disease ? Have we
endeavoured to discover the most speedy mode of arresting the
disorganizing process, assuaging suffering, prolonging the duration
of life, and averting death, by the persevering administration of
physical curative agents ? It is
" The wise physician, skilled our wounds to lieal,"
who is represented by the bard of ancient days
"As more tlian armies to the public weal."
Having in my previous lecture dwelt at considerable length
upon the importance of watching the influence of the morale
upon the physique, and having directed your attention to the
invaluable mental remedies which the physician has at his com-
mand in the treatment of disease?in fact, to the subject of
MOEAL therapeutics,?I may be considered to be deviating
from my original position, by bringing specially under your
notice the subject of the medical, in juxtaposition to the moral,
treatment of insanity. I hope, before I conclude, to satisfactorily
establish that in urging this matter upon your serious attention,
I am advocating no views in the remotest degree inconsistent or
adverse to those propounded in my former lecture; or any that
will militate against a legitimate use of moral means in the cure
of the disordered affections of the mind.
It must be confessed that but little attention has been paid, by
those possessing great opportunities for observation and practice,
to the exhibition and action of physical remedial agents in the
treatment of those abnormal conditions of nervous structure
implicating the healthy action of the thinking principle. To
what cause is this inexcusable apathy to be attributed ? The
\
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. ' 207
neglect of the use of curative agents, on the part of those intrusted
with the care of the insane, has not altogether arisen from an
indisposition to make, by a persevering exhibition of appropriate
medicine, an effort to re-establish the normal action of the brain
and mind; but it is in the main the result?the necessary and
inevitable consequence?of other causes, to which I shall refer.
The doctrine promulgated by writers of celebrity?by men referred
to and reverenced as our authorities and guides in this special
department of medicine?that for the cure of insanity moral
treatment is entitled to the highest rank, and to be deserving of
the first consideration, has naturally tended to discountenance
the administration of physical remedies in the treatment of
insanity. We have been taught that medical ought to be sub-
sidiary to moral means; and that any suggestion to remove a
morbid mental impression by the aid of medicine, would indicate,
on the part of the person making such a proposition, an in-
excusable amount of ignorance, mental obtuseness, and obliquity!
A recent writer 011 the subject of insanity exclaims, " When one
man thinks himself a king, another a cobbler, and another that he
can govern the world with his little finger, can physic make him
think otherwise?"* Again: another author, in a work written
to instruct the profession as to the treatment of the disorders
of the mind, preposterously repudiates the idea of administering'
medicine for the cure of insanity, whilst the real nature of the
mind remains unknown ! He observes: " To prescribe for the
mind, whilst its nature remains a mystery, is to prescribe for a
phantom! As well might the mechanic attempt to regulate the
multifarious operations dependent upon the agency of steam, by
abstract discussion upon its nature, or to repair a fractured
wheel, by directing his attention to the power that gave it
motion, as for us to expect a successful result from remedies
applied to an object the true nature and character of which we
are wholly ignorant of; or of which, at least, we can only judge
in its developments."f Alas! can we conceive more fatally
paralyzing doctrines?opinions so antagonistic to all right
views of the science of pathology, and ^ so extremely detri-
mental to the advancement of therapeutics so disheartening
to those who feel anxious to bring the powerful agents of the
* Dr E. Willis on Mental Derangement.
f "Practical Notes on Insanity," by F. B. Steward, M.D., p. 37.
NO. XXVI. Q
208 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
materia medica .to bear upon the treatment of this distressing
form of disease.
Among the causes which have unfortunately given force and
longevity to the idea that the administration of physical agents
is of little or no avail in the treatment of the disorders of the
mind, one holding the most prominent rank is the unphilosophical
hypotheses which have been broached with the view of explaining
the phenomena of insanity. To this source much of the fallacy,
false induction, bad logic, and the neglect in reference to the use
of remedial measures may be traced. Insanity has been con-
sidered to be a spiritual malady?a functional disease; to be an
affection of the immaterial essence; to be a disorder of the soul, and
not simply the result of a derangement of the material instrument
of mind interfering with the healthy action of its manifestations.
The brain has been supposed to be intact; not a fibre disturbed,
not a vesicle altered, not a vessel overloaded: the encephalon
has been imagined, in the severest forms of disturbed mind,
to exist in all its integrity, so ridiculously absurd, so wildly
unphilosophical, have been the notions entertained in reference to
the proximate cause of insanity. This spiritual doctrine has
naturally led to the conclusion?false in theory and destructive
in practice?that for the alleviation and cure of the spiritual,
malady, spiritual remedies were the most important and essential.
The clergyman instead of the physician was therefore sum-
moned to the bed-side of the insane, and the bible and prayer-
book displaced the physical remedies prescribed for the cure of
\ the cerebral disorder.
In the earlier periods of the history of medicine, insanity was
attributed to Divine wrath, demoniacal, Satanic, or malignant
influence. It is a continuance in a belief of views somewhat
analogous to these, but in a modified, less offensive, and different
form, even in the present enlightened age, which has operated so
disadvantageously in retarding the progress of cerebral pathology
and therapeutic science. It may be said that a spiritual patho-
logist is a phenomenon?that the belief in the theory of insanity
being an affection of the immaterial principle, is but an historical
curiosity, a reminiscence of the dark ages. Alas! such is not the
fact. I appeal to those whom I have the honour of addressing,
whether a disposition does not exist among a considerable
section of the profession to repudiate the idea of morbid action
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 209
"being invariably the result of some abnormal state of the organic
tissue.
The common phrase, "functional disease," is but another desig-
nation for the spiritual hypothesis?it is but a phantom of the
mind?a pathological enigma, having no actual existence apart
from the active imagination which gave it birth. When we assert
that the " functional" or " spiritual" theory will not bear the test of
serious examination?that it is at variance with all a priori and
a \posteriori reasoning?that it stands in direct opposition to
positive, well-recognised, undeniable data, we are met by the
interrogatory, Can you demonstrate to us the specific character
of the change induced in the nervous matter which it is
alleged gives rise to mental derangement? and do not the
scalpel and microscope of the morbid anatomist in vain en-
deavour to ascertain, in many cases of positive, violent, and
unequivocal insanity, any appreciable structural lesion in the
nervous matter, in its investing membranes, or organs in close
association with the brain, sufficient to account satisfactorily for
the morbid phenomena exhibited during life ? One would really
infer, from the reasoning and assertions of those who take these
spiritual views, and who repudiate the idea of insanity ever being
the result of a physical change in the condition of some portion
of the brain or its appendages, that the encephalon has no specific
functions allotted to it; that it is altogether a useless and super-
numerary organ; that it was created for no wise purposes; and
that, as far as the phenomena of mind were concerned, we
could have done as well without as with the brain! If this
organ be not the material instrument of mind?if it be not the
media through which the spiritual portion of our nature manifests
its powers?the centre of sensation?the source of volition?the
seat of the passions?
" Tlie dome of thought,?the palace of tlie soul"?
I ask what are its functions, its specific uses and operations ??
for what object was this most exquisitely organized and compli-
cated structure formed ??why does it receive so large a pro-
portion of the blood, and why is it so caiefully protected from
injury? These interrogatories naturally arise in the mind, when
we hear so unphilosophical and so unphysiological a theory
propounded with reference to the possibility of the mind being
Q 2
210 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
subject to disease apart from all derangement of the material
organs with which it is so closely and indissolubly associated.
Can we conceive a more preposterous notion than that sanctioned
by high authority, and which inculcates that the spiritual principle
admits of being distorted, deluded, depressed, exaggerated, per-
verted, exalted, independently of any form of bodily disease, or
modification of nervous matter?
Is it necessary that I should, in this advanced age of the science
of physiology, stop to argue the question as to whether the brain
be or be not the material organ of the mind? Unless we admit
this fact, how many curious psychological and pathological pheno-
mena must for ever remain mysteriously inexplicable ? In
infancy, when the brain is only partially developed, and but im-
perfectly organized, the mental faculties are obscurely manifested.
As the infant approaches childhood, and the brain expands in
volume, and the convolutions become more complex in character,
the capacities of the mind become enlarged. In the middle period
of life, when the brain is supposed to have attained its highest and
perfect state of organization, we recognise the mind exercising its
most elevated attributes. As we descend in the scale, we dis-
cover, in a ratio to the encroachment of age and the advancement
of decrepitude, a proportionate diminution of mental vigour and
astuteness; the faculty of attention and the powers of observation
are less acute, the memory is incapable of retaining impressions, the
judgment is often weakened, the temper capricious,?in fact, all the
faculties of the understanding become (as a general rule) impaired.
This mental decay slowly progresses until the
"Evening twilight of our existence,"
when we fall into the
" Sere and yellow leaf."
That rapid association of ideas and sense of the ludicrous which
were wont to " set the table in a roar," are no longer manifested;
the brilliant repartee, the gorgeous imagery, the poetic fancy
which captivated, and the glowing and impassioned eloquence
which enchanted, no longer exercise, like a magic spell, their
influence over us. The mind at this period is incapable of any
intellectual improvement: it feeds upon the past. The recol-
lection of former scenes, however, in which it played a conspicuous
part, continues vivid. In the evening, there is no memory of the
occurrences of the morning; the brain appears to be incapable of
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 211
receiving new impressions; ideas obtain no permanent hold of the
mind, the intellect thus realizing the beautiful description re-
corded by Locke, who says, when speaking of the decay of the
mind in old age,?" Ideas often die before us, and our minds
represent to us those tombs to which we are approaching, where,
though the brass and marble remain, yet the inscriptions are
effaced by time, and the imagery moulders away."
Having considered this spiritual theory of insanity in an cl
priovi point of view, what are the deductions which we are
justified in making, looking at the vexata quesiio a posteriori ?
It has been frequently urged by those who discard the material
hypothesis or explanation of the phenomena of deranged mind,
that if insanity were the effect of brain disease, not only should
we invariably find after death morbid changes in this organ, but
we should detect some peculiar and specific alterations in the
nervous matter, entirely distinct in their character from the
ordinary lesions of structure detected in the more obvious diseases
of the encephalon. With reference to the first position, I need
only refer to the recorded opinions of all the great cerebral patho-
logists, from the great Morgagni down to modern writers, to
establish beyond all question, cavil, or dispute, that in the great
majority of cases of death after attacks of insanity, the brain,
some of its important organic elements, or its investing mem-
branes, are found in an abnormal morbid state. It is true that ^
Esquirol somewhat encouraged the doctrine of the spiritualists,
by asserting that in many instances of insanity no change in the
nervous matter could be detected after the most careful scrutiny;
but that high authority was known to have materially altered his
views upon this point at a more advanced period of his life; and
his later pathological investigations tended, I think, conclusively
to establish that the nervous matter was always found modified
in its structure after death from insanity. To this subject I have
paid much attention, and have patiently endeavoured to ascertain
what are the acknowledged opinions of those who have had op-
portunities of arriving at safe results, and whose names entitle
everything which they have recorded to our profound deference
and respect. I have carefully, scrupulously, and zealously ana-
lyzed no less than 10,000 cases of the various shades and degrees
of insanity, related by Esquirol, Pinel, Foville, Georget, Guislain,
?Calmiel, Flourens, Bell, Haslam, Prichard, Solly, Burrows, Bail-
212 ON THE MEDICAL TKEATMENT OF INSANITY.
larger, Boismont, Abercrombie, Bennett, and other British, Ame-
rican, and continental authorities; and as the result of these
pathological researches, I have no hesitation in declaring that I
feel, as the natural effect of the influence of these well-ascertained
data upon my own mind, amazed that there ever could have
existed a shadow of a doubt as to the physical origin of insanity.
The statistical facts to which I refer are not yet sufficiently ma-
tured and arranged to submit to the profession; but I may say
that they satisfy my own mind, beyond all suspicion, of the
material cause of mental derangement. I do not maintain that
I am in a position to describe the peculiar and specific alterations
which some allege to give origin to that derangement of the
action of thought to which we apply the term insanity. Admitting
such a discovery to be beyond the range of finite intelligence, it
does not in the slightest degree militate against the material view
just propounded. We find the functions of the eye, lungs, heart,
stomach, liver, all deranged in a most marked manner, as the con-
sequence, not of one peculiar specific affection of these organs, but
of a variety of diseases essentially different in their pathological
character, and only resembling each other in producing an altered
action of the organic function of the part. Why should an
important organ like the brain be exempt from the influence
of the vital laws regulating the morbid action of other structures ?
and why should those who advocate the material origin of insanity
be taunted and twitted because they are unable to discover an
affection of the nervous matter sui generis in its character, and
invariably discoverable in the brain in cases of death from
mental aberration ?
How often does death occur from apoplexy, convulsive disease,
affections of the heart, stomach, from catalepsy, chorea, pro-
tracted hysteria, without evidencing any morbid condition of the
structure, supposed to be implicated in the morbid process, appre-
ciable to the eye of the pathologist; yet we are not sufficiently
bold to maintain that catalepsy, apoplexy, epilepsy, disease of the
heart, violent convulsions, severe gastric derangement sufficient
to impede all nutrition, and persistent hysteria in all its Protean
forms, can ever be viewed as strictly functional in their character,
and capable of existing apart from any disease or abnormal state
of the material tissue. But are we satisfied that in the cases
of apparently functional disorder recorded by authorities of
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 213
character and repute, the brain was accurately and scienti-
fically examined?that the microscope aided the senses of the
pathologist in his investigation? Was the brain, in all cases
cited for the purpose of establishing that this organ was entirely
free from all abnormal change, carefully macerated, weighed, and
the different layers of the grey portion of the convoluted surface
zealously scrutinized, in order to ascertain whether any change
had taken place in its delicate structure ? Was the chemical
composition of the brain ascertained ? Was the vesicular neurine
minutely examined by means of a high microscopic power?
Was it ascertained whether the blood was deprived of any of its
essential and important constituents, and, as a consequence of
such vitiated state, interfering with the healthy nervous nutrition ?
Were the blood-vessels of the brain removed and examined, with
the view of ascertaining their calibre and condition of their coats?
Was the state of the bones of the cranium, as well as the fora-
mina, ascertained ?
The spiritualists point with exultation to the cases recorded by
Abercrombie and others, of extensive organic alterations having
been found in the brain, which during life had not in the slightest
degree, apparently, impaired or interfered with the normal action
of mind; but if we carefully and scientifically investigate these
instances, so often pompously and triumphantly paraded, I think
we shall be compelled to admit they do not constitute data
entitled to any weight in the solution of the important question
at issue. It would be necessary for us to be informed upon good
and unquestionable authority, of the precise character and locality
of these alleged organic alterations?whether they were limited
to the medullary, or extended to the cineritious portions of the
cerebral matter; whether they were of slow or of sudden pro-
duction ; and also, whether the mind of the person having so
great a degree of alleged disorganization discoverable in the brain
after death, was carefully examined, and the actual condition of
the mental powers satisfactorily ascertained. Positive, glaring,
appreciable lunacy might, I readily admit, have been non-
existent during life?the party need not necessarily have been
insane, or guilty of any overt act of violence or extravagance
sufficient to excite observation or compel restraint; but, never-
theless, the mind, in its general operations, might have been
considerably impaired and debilitated, these affections having
\
214 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
escaped notice, and not have been made matter of record. I am
much disposed to consider that if the history of the cases nar-
rated, of extensive disorganization of the brain without obviously
implicating the faculties of the mind, were carefully and minutely
examined, it would have been found in every case that the intel-
lect more or less suffered, although occasionally not to the
extent of recognisable, positive, and clearly-dejined insanity.
Without a knowledge of all these important particulars, the data
referred to are, in a purely scientific point of view, entitled to but
little consideration. I can imagine that considerable lesion of
structure might exist, if confined to the medullary portion of the
brain, without obviously or palpably deranging the intellectual
operations; but no morbid change can exist in the hemi-
spherical ganglia without involving to some extent the opera-
tions of the mind.
In considering this matter, we should not forget that the brain
can accommodate itself to a considerable amount of actual loss of
structure and organic disease, if the morbid changes be of slow
and progressive growth. Again, it is necessary to ascertain
whether, in these instances, both hemispheres of the brain were
involved in the disease; for as the brain is a dual organ, it is
possible for considerable structural disease to exist in one hemi-
sphere, the opposite side remaining intact, without obviously
interfering with the healthy action of the intellectual faculties.
Again, it has been urged that insanity must, in many cases, be a
functional and not an organic disease, because it has occasionally
been cured by moral remedies alone; that a delusion has been
dissipated by a joke, and an apparently fixed morbid idea has
been dispersed by an ingeniously-contrived stratagem. Such
illustrations of remarkable cures are undoubtedly upon record;
but they no more establish that the disorder was spiritual and
functional in its character, than the fact of a paroxysm of gout
being overpowered by.a sudden mental shock, an attack of con-
vulsions arrested by calling into exercise the passion of fear,
would justify us in concluding that the diseases referred to were
functional and spiritual affections, having no relation to any
morbid condition of the"physical part supposed to be their seat.
Considering the subject practically, let us for a moment ask
ourselves the question, what have been the consequences of the
general belief in the spiritual and functional character of this
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 215
disease ? The lamentable effect has undoubtedly been, to dis-
courage and discountenance the use of remedial measures;
and the effect upon the public mind has, alas! been, to create
the false impression that mental affections were not curable
maladies, and that it was not in the power of the physician, by
means of medicine, to administer to their relief. As the result
of a too general belief in this sophistry?this dangerous fallacy?
a vast amount of mental disease, particularly in its early and
premonitory stage, is left to take its own uninterrupted course,
until the unhappy sufferer has been placed beyond the reach of
all curative agents. Why should the man who is conscious of
the approach of mental infirmity?who feels his power of atten-
tion flagging, his volition becoming weakened, his affections
perverted, and horrible fancies displacing healthy mental impres-
sions?seek the aid of medicine, or fly to the physician for
assistance, if he is ta/ught to believe that the dark cloud which is
gradually enshrouding his faculties is either the effect of a
malignant spirit, the result of demoniacal influence, the conse-
quence of the curse of the Almighty, or a disease entailed upon
him as the punishment for his sins? "Madness/' says Dr Bur-
rows, "is one of the curses imposed by the wrath of the Almighty
on his people for their sins, and deliverance from it is not the
least of the miracles performed by our Saviour"! I quote this
passage to show what are the prevailing notions of the cause of
insanity among the first authorities in this country.* Why should
the relations and friends of those so unhappily afflicted seek the
aid of medicine, when men of position and repute both publicly
and privately propound such doctrines, and as a consequence
discourage all physical treatment? Great and awful is the
responsibility of those who thus thoughtlessly weaken the
confidence of the public in the efficacy of physical curative agents
in the treatment of insanity. "I was told," said a lady, "that
medicine was of no avail in the affections of the- mind. X went
to the clergyman for assistance, but could obtain none. I have
struggled for weeks heroically against the disposition to suicide,
with the prayer-book in one hand, and the open razor in the
other. Five times have I felt its keen edge at my throat, but a
voice within me suddenly commanded me to drop the murderous
instrument; and yet at other times the same voice urged me
* "Commentaries 011 Insanity," by Dr Burrows.
216 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
desperately on to self-destruction. I knew I was ill?seriously
ill?bodily ill; yet no one pointed out to me the right remedy
for my horrible impulse, or recommended me to place myself in
the hands of the physician." Such was the statement of a
patient who voluntarily subjected herself to medical treatment,
and was happily restored to health.
? It is the prevalent opinion, even among persons otherwise well
educated and intelligent, that the desire of self-destruction is in
the majority of cases a mental act, unconnected with a disturbed
condition of the bodily function, and incurable by any process of
medical treatment; that the mental depression which is so gene-
rally associated with the suicidal tendency is an affection of the
mind per se, the physical organization having no direct connexion
with what is termed the spiritual impulse. This metaphysical
view of the matter is fraught with much mischief, and, I have no
doubt, has led to the sacrifice of many valuable lives. It is a
matter of the highest moment that the public mind should be un-
deceived upon this point. Right views on this subject ought to
be generally diffused. It is of consequence to establish the belief
that the suicidal idea is almost generally connected with a morbid
condition of the mind, and is often the only existing evidence of
such an affection; that it is, with a few exceptions, universally
associated with physical disorder, disturbing the healthy balance
of the understanding ; and that the bodily affection, which is, in
nine cases out of ten, the cause of the mental irregularity, is
easily curable by the judicious application of remedial means.
The tendency of the spiritual or metaphysical view of the ques-
tion is to create a distrust in remedial measures, and the poor
man who is struggling against an almost overpowering desire to
destroy himself is induced to neglect entirely his lamentable con-
dition, under the belief that he is literally ]:>laced beyond the reach
of curative agents, and that the only remedy for his mental
suffering is death!
If a person in this unhappy state of mind is induced to believe
that his mental despondency is but a consequence or effect of a
disturbed bodily condition, influencing, either directly or indi-
rectly, the natural and healthy operation of the brain and nervous
system, and giving rise to perverted ideas?that his malady is
curable, he may be induced to avail himself of the means which
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 217
science has placed at the disposal of the physician, and thus be
protected against his own insane impulses.
Where no disease is suspected, no remedy will be sought. Tell
a man who has attempted to destroy himself that he is perfectly
sane?that his judgment is sound?that his will is not perverted?
that the impulse which urges him to the commission of suicide is
not associated with any deviation from corporeal health?and
you inculcate ideas not only fallacious, but most pernicious in
their character and tendency. We might, with as much truth,
tell a person playing with a lighted taper at the edge of a barrel
of gunpowder, that his life is not in jeopardy, as to say to a
person disposed to suicide that he is in the perfect enjoyment of
health, and requires no moral or medical treatment. It may be
laid down as an indisputable axiom, that in every case of this
kind, bodily disease may, upon a careful examination, be detected.
I never yet saw a case where a desire to commit suicide was
present, in which there was not corporeal indisposition.
Having in the preceding portion of these observations endea-
voured to establish what I conceive to be an important and
necessary preliminary point, it is now my province to bring under
notice a sketch, a mere outline, of my own views as to the patho-
logy and medical treatment of insanity. Before referring to this
part of my subject, I would premise that no right estimate can be
entertained of the importance of these investigations unless we
apply to the study of the diseases of the brain, and the cure of its
disorders, the same enlarged and general principles which guide
us in the investigation and treatment of the affections of other
organic structures. An error of some magnitude has been com-
mitted by those who consider insanity to be a special, uniform,
specific, and peculiar malady, justifying us in placing those so
afflicted out of the ordiuary nosological scale and sphere of me-
dical practice. Again, it is necessary that we should, before
beino- able to appreciate the effect of medical treatment, entertain
just and enlightened views as to the curability of insanity. X
now speak from a somewhat enlarged experience, from much
anxious consideration of the matter, and I have no hesitation in
affirming that, if brought within the sphere of medical treatment
in the earlier stages, or even within a few months of the attack,
insanity, unless the result of severe physical injury to the head, or
connected with a peculiar conformation of chest and cranium, and
V
218 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
[ an hereditary diathesis, is as easily curable as any other form of
1 bodily disease for the treatment of which we apply the resources
of our art. Can there be a more lamentable error, or a more
dangerous, false, or unhappy doctrine than that urged by those
who maintain that the disordered affections of the mind are not
amenable to the recognised principles of medical science ?* I again
declare it to be my positive and deliberately formed opinion, that
there are few diseases of equal magnitude so susceptible of suc-
cessful medical treatment in the incipient form as those impli-
cating the normal action of thought. The existence of so vast an
amount of incurable insanity within the wards of our national and
private asylums, is a fact pregnant with important truths. In the
history of these unhappy persons?these lost and ruined minds?
we read, in many cases, recorded the sad, melancholy, and lament-
able results of either a total neglect of all efficient curative treat-
ment at a period when it might have arrested the onward advance
of the cerebral mischief, and maintained reason upon her seat; or
of the use of injudicious and unjustifiable measures of treatment
under mistaken notions of the nature and pathology of the disease.
In no class of affections is it so imperatively necessary to inculcate
the importance of early and prompt treatment, as in the disorders
of the brain affecting the manifestations of the mind. I do not
maintain that our curative agents are of no avail when the disease
has passed beyond what is designated the " curable stage. " My
experience irresistibly leads to the conclusion that we have often
in our power the means of curing insanity, even after it has been
of some years' duration, if we obtain a thorough appreciation of
the physical and mental aspects of the case, and perseveringly
* "You do not pretend to cure insanity!" exclaimed a gentleman of
considerable intelligence to me, whilst detailing the particulars of a dis-
tressing attack occurring in a member of kis own family; " for," ke con-
tinued, " I lieard Dr positively declare, in a public lecture, tkat ' he
lamented to he obliged to say, that in the cure of insanity, little or no cjood
resulted from medical treatment.' " Sad and fatal doctrine ! Whilst re-
cently visiting Betklekem Hospital, to see, at the request of tkeir friends,
two patients in tkat establishment, I lieard a foreigner who kad been
inspecting tke asylum observe to Dr Wood (the then resident medical
officer of tke establiskment), wkilst talking ot the medical treatment of
insanity, tkat it was quite a mistake to kave a portion of tke asylum set
apart for tke " incurable patients." " The word ' incurable,' in reference
to insanity," be continued, " should never be used. I would much prefer
pinning my faitk to the doctrine of tke foreign tkan to tkat of tke
English physician, who attempted to weaken our confidence in the cura-
buity of insanity by means of medicine.
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 219
and continuously apply remedial measures for its removal. I
cannot, however, dwell too strongly upon the vital necessity of the
early and prompt exhibition of curative means in the incipient
stage of mental derangement:?
" Principiis obsta: sero mediciua paratur
Cum mala per longas convaluere moras."?Ovid.
It becomes necessary, before proceeding to the consideration of
the practical division of my subject, that I should briefly refer to
the morbid anatomy of the brain in insanity. It is not my
intention to cite the conflicting opinions of writers of repute in
reference to this section of pathology; neither shall I attempt to
reconcile the varied and contradictory statements of eminent
pathologists who have investigated this important subject.
With these prefatory observations, I will concisely submit to
you the conclusions to which I have arrived in relation to this
much-vexed question. I believe insanity (I am now referring to
persistent insanity, not those transient and evanescent forms of
disturbed mind occasionally witnessed) to be the result of a
specific morbid action of the hemispherical ganglia, ranging
from irritation, passive and active congestion, up to positive
and unmistakeoMe inflammatory action. This state of the
brain may be confined to one or two of the six layers composing
the hemispherical ganglia; but all the layers are generally more
or less implicated, in conjunction with the tubular fibres passing
from the hemispheres through the vesicular neurine. This
specific inflammation, from its incipient to the more advanced
stage, is often associated with great vital and nervous depression.
It is, like analogous inflammations of other structures, not often
accompanied by much constitutional or febrile disturbance, unless
it loses its specific features, and approximates in its character to
the inflammation of active cerebritis or meningitis. This state
of the hemispherical ganglia is frequently conjoined with active
sanguineous circulation or congestion, both of the substance of
the brain and its investing membranes. The morbid cerebral
pathological phenomena?viz. the opacity of the arachnoid, the
thickening of the dura mater, its adhesions to the cranium, the
depositions so often observed upon the convoluted surface of the
hemispheres, and on the meninges, the hypertrophy, scirrhus, the
cancerous affections, the induration, the depositions of bony
matter in the cerebral vessels and on the dura mater, the serous
220 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
fluids in and the ulcerations upon the surface of the ventricles,
the alterations in the size, consistence, colour, and chemical com-
position of the vesicular neurine and fibrous portion of the brain
?are all, in my opinion, the results, the sequelce, more or less, of
that specific inflammatory condition of the hemispherical ganglia
to which I have referred. It does not necessarily follow that the
fons et origo mali of insanity is invariably to be traced to the brain.
The preliminary morbid action is oft?n situated in the heart,
stomach, liver, bowels, uterus, lungs, or the kidneys, the brain
being only secondarily affected; nevertheless, in all cases inducing
actual insanity, the hemispherical ganglia are involved in the
morbid action. The most recent pathological doctrine propounded
to explain the phenomena of insanity?I refer to the views of a
recent writer*?that derangement of mind is the effect of "loss
of nervous tone," and that this loss of nervous tone is " caused
by a premature and abnormal exhaustibility of the vital powers
of the sensorium"?conveys to my mind no clear, definite, or
precise pathological idea. It is true that we often have, in these
affections of the brain and disorders of the mind, "loss of nervous
tone," and "exhaustion of vital power;" but, to my conception,
these are but the effects of a prior morbid condition of the
encephalon, the sequelce of specific inflammation of the hemi-
spherical ganglia. To argue that insanity is invariably and
exclusively the result of "loss of nervous tone," is to confound
cause and effect, the post hoc with the propter hoc; and would,
as regards therapeutical measures, act as an ignis fatuus, and
allure us as pathologists from the right and legitimate path. I
feel anxious that my views upon this important subject should
be clearly enunciated, and not open to misconception. I think
much mischief has arisen from a belief in the existence of active
ordinary cerebral inflammation in cases of insanity, for it has led
to the adoption of treatment most destructive to life, and has
seriously interfered with the permanent restoration of the reason-
ing powers. Nevertheless, insanity is occasionally complicated
with acute cerebral symptoms sufficient to justify us in the
cautious use of somewhat active measures for-its removal. We
must avoid the fatal error of a too rapid process of generalization,
and be careful of not looking to symptoms instead of to the
disease itself, and of permitting ingenious and well-constructed
* Dr H. Munro.
t
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 221
a priori theories of the nature of insanity to dazzle our imagina-
tions, and abstract the mind from the steady and patient inves-
tigation of pathological science, and individual cases of disease.
If we allow our judgment to be warped by the inflammatory
theory on the one side, (I am now speaking of ordinary, not of
specific inflammation,) and conclude that the excitement of mania
is to be subdued by copious depletion or the administration of
antiphlogistic measures,?or if, on the other hand, we adopt the
speculative opinions of those who believe that in every case of
insanity, irrespectively of its origin, its progress, or its character,
there exists " mere loss of nervous tone," caused by a "premature
abnormal exhaustibility of the vital powers of the sensorium,"?
how lamentably shall we be misled as to the real character of the
disease, and in the application of our therapeutic agents? These
circumscribed and partial views of the pathology of insanity,
often, alas! lead to serious solecisms in practice. In ninety per , /A'
cent, of the cases of acute mania, there is found in the brain and
its meninges a state of sanguineous congestion, particularly of the
hemispherical ganglia, combined with alterations in the grey
nervous matter. In forming an opinion of the actual pathological
condition of the cerebral substance, we should remember that,
particularly in public asylums, it is a rare occurrence for recent
cases to be admitted; that the acute and sub-acute active cerebral
conditions have subsided, and the disease has assumed a chronic
form, before the patient is examined and placed under treatment;
consequently many deductions recorded by pathologists have
been based upon the study of chronic, and not of acute, mania.
A large per-centage of the cases, before admission into our
national asylums, have passed through the primary and acute
stages, and have probably been subjected to medical treatment.
This fact must never be lost sight of in forming our opinion, not
only of the nature of the disease itself, but of the medical treat-
ment necessary for its cure. In private practice the acute forms
of insanity are often met with; but even with the advantages
which the physician in general practice can command, of investi-
gating the earlier stages of deranged mind, he often discovers
that the mental affection has been allowed to exist and slowly
progress for a considerable period, no treatment, either medical
or moral, having been adopted for its removal. In the incipient
forms of insanity, particularly when it manifests itself in plethoric
222 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
constitutions, has been sudden in its development, is the result
of physical causes, and is connected with the retrocession of gout,
or is rheumatic in its character, there can be no doubt the nature
of the change induced in the brain is more allied to that of in-
flammation than that of nervous exhaustion. The attacks from
the slow and insidious operation of moral causes are less likely to
be accompanied by active cerebral symptoms. In many instances
the maniacal excitement is asthenic or atonic in its character,
resembling the delirium of the last stages of typhus fever.
The most simple classification of insanity, the one I think best
adapted for useful and practical purposes, is its division into the
acute and chronic forms; the insanity ushered in by excitement
or by depression, into mania and melancholia?amentia, and
dementia. The minute divisions and subdivisions, the complicated
and confused classification taught by lecturers and found detailed
in books, may serve the ostentatious purpose of those desirous of
making a pompous display of scholastic and scientific lore, but I
think they have tended to bewilder and obscure the understanding,
and lead the student in search of practical truth from the inves-
tigation of the disease itself to the study of its symptoms, and
to the consideration of unessential points and shades of dif-
ference. Adhering to this division of the subject, each form should
be viewed in relation to its complications, as well as to its asso-
ciated diseases. Among the former are epilepsy, suicide,
homicide, paraplegia, hemiplegia, and general paralysis. The
associated diseases implicate the lungs, heart, liver, stomach,
bowels, kidney, bladder, uterus, and skin.
Before adverting to the preliminary examination of the patient
supposed to be insane, and suggesting rules for arriving at an
accurate prognosis in these cases, I would premise that those
inexperienced in the investigation of this class of cases would often
arrive at false and inaccurate conclusions, if they were not cogni-
zant of the fact, that the insane often describe sensations which
they have never in reality experienced, and call attention to
important symptoms which have no existence except in their own
morbid imaginations. A patient will assert that he has a racking
headache, or great pain and tenderness in the epigastric region,
both symptoms being the fanciful creations of his diseased mind.
This is particularly the case in the hysterical forms of insanity, in
which there always exists a disposition to pervert the truth, and
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 223
exaggerate the symptoms. Again, serious bodily disease may be
present, the patient not being sufficiently conscious to comprehend
the nature of the questions asked, or able to give intelligible
replies to the anxious interrogatories of the physician. Insanity
often masks, effectually obscures, other organic affections, the
greater malady overpowering the lesser disease. When Lear,
Kent, and the Fool, are standing alone upon the wild heath,
exposed to the merciless pelting of the pitiless tempest, Kent
feelingly implores the king to seek shelter from the " tyranny of
the open night," in an adjoining hovel. It is then that Lear
gives expression to the great psychological truth just enunci-
ated?
" Tliou tliink'st 'tis much, tliat tliis contentious storm
Invades us to the skin : so 'tis to thee;
But where the greater malady is fixed,
The lesser is scarce felt;
* * * * The tempest in my mind
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Save what beats there."
Disease of the brain may destroy all apparent consciousness of
pain, and keep in abeyance the outward and appreciable mani-
festations of other important indications of organic mischief.
Extensive disease of the stomach, lungs, kidneys, bowels, uterus,
and heart, has been known, during an attack of insanity, to progress
to a fearful extent, without any obvious or recognisable indication
of its existence. Insanity appears also occasionally to modify the
physiognomy and symptomatology of ordinary diseases, and to
give them peculiar and special characteristic features.
Again, it is necessary for the physician to watch the operation
of medicine in masking important diseases. The different forms
of narcotics, if given in heroic doses, often mislead us in our esti-
mate of the nature of bodily diseases not directly connected with
the mental affection. In the examination of these cases the most
essential preliminary matters of inquiry have relation to the age,
temperament, previous occupation, and condition in life of the
patient. It will be necessary to ascertain the character and
duration of the attack; whether it has resulted from moral or
physical causes; is of sudden, insidious, or of slow growth;
whether it has an hereditary origin, is the effect of a mental
shock, or of mechanical injury; whether it is the first attack, and,
if not, in what features it differs from previous paroxysms. It will
NO. XXVI. R
224 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
also be our duty to ascertain whether the insanity be complicated
with epilepsy, paraplegia, or hemiplegia, or with suicidal and
homicidal impulses. If any prior treatment has been adopted, we
must inform ourselves of its nature; and also ascertain whether
the patient has suffered from gout, heart disease, rheumatism,
cutaneous affections, or syphilis ? It is important to obtain accu-
rate information in relation to the condition of the uterine func-
tions, and to ascertain the state of the moral affections. We should
also inquire whether the patient has been suspected of habits of
self-abuse. Having obtained accurate information upon these essen-
tial points, our own personal observation will aid us in ascertaining
the character of the mental disturbance; the configuration of the
head, chest, and abdomen; the gait of the patient, the degree of sen-
sibility and volitional power manifested; the state of the retina,
the action of the pulse, the composition of urine, and tempera-
ture of the scalp and body generally ; the condition of the skin
and chylo-poietic viscera; the action of the heart, lungs, and
nature of any existing disease of the uterus. If a patient com-
plains of any local mischief, however imaginary it may appear to
be at the time, it is essentially necessary that we should clearly
satisfy our minds upon the point, before dismissing it as not
entitled to serious investigation. A patient once bitterly com-
plained of retention of urine; upon examination, the bladder, was
found to be distended, and the man had passed no urine for
twenty-four hours. I was about to introduce a catheter, when
the patient burst into a fit of laughter, and immediately emptied
his bladder. Esquirol relates a case of a merchant, who, whilst
suffering from melancholia, declared that some foreign body was
sticking in his throat. No notice was taken of this supposed
fanciful idea. The patient died, and an ulcer was discovered at
the upper third of the oesophagus. A patient complained of
devils being in his stomach and bowels, and declared that they
were acted upon by electric, magnetic agencies. After death he
was found to have scirrhus of the stomach, and chronic inflamma-
tion of the bowels. A patient refused to eat; he said he could
not swallow his food without great pain. As he had exhibited
other symptoms of a disposition to suicide, it was thought by
myself and others, that his obstinate refusal of food was, asso-
ciated with ideas of self-destruction. He died, and at the post-
mortem examination a stricture in the pylorus was discovered.
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 225
These illustrations, and they could easily be extended, will prove
the importance of paying minute attention to particular delusions,
with the view of ascertaining whether they have not an actual
physical origin.
The prognosis in cases of insanity will mainly depend upon the
duration of the attack, its character and origin, and the diathesis
of the patient. The prognosis is generally unfavourable if the
disease be hereditary?if the symptoms are similar in character to
those exhibited by other members of the family when insane.
Insanity, accompanied by acute excitement, is, ccderis paribus,
more easy of cure than when it has been of slow and gradual
growth, and is marked by great mental depression. The prognosis
is favourable in cases of puerperal mania; it is unfavourable
when there exists a want of symmetry between the two sides
of the head, with small anterior and large posterior cerebral
development. Any great inequality in the cranial conformation
would be a suspicious indication. The existence of any mal-
formation in the development of the chest is also an unfavourable
sign, and would induce us to give a guarded prognosis. Dr.
Darwin says, when a person becomes insane, who has a small
family of children to absorb his attention, his prospect of recovery
is but small, as it establishes that the maniacal hallucination is
more powerful than those ideas which ought to interest the
patient most. The prognosis is unfavourable when patients are
under the morbid delusion that they are poisoned, and constantly
complain of suffering internally from peculiar sensations. Re-
ligious delusions are more difficult to eradicate than other morbid
impressions. The age of the patient will materially guide us in
forming a correct prognosis. Hippocrates says the insane are not
curable after the fortieth year; Esquirol maintains the greater
portion recover between the ages of twenty and thirty; Haslam
between the ages of ten and twenty. As a principle, we may
conclude that the probability of recovery in any given case is
in proportion to the early age, physical condition, and duration
of the attack. When a patient has youth and a good constitu-
tion to aid him, and is advantageously placed, having at command
remedial measures, and is excluded from all irritating circum-
stances, the prognosis may be considered favourable. I have seen
patients after the advanced age of sixty and seventy recover; and
cases of cure are upon record, where insanity has existed for ten,
R 2
226 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
fifteen, and twenty years. In forming our prognosis, it is important
to ascertain the educational training of the patient. Has he been
in the habit of exercising great self-control ? Has his mind been
well disciplined ? Has he kept in abeyance the passions, or have
the emotions and impulses of his nature obtained the mastery
over him ? He who has been taught to practise self-denial and
self-control in early life is, caderis paribus, in a more favourable
position for recovery than he who has permitted himself to be
the willing and obedient slave of every wild passion and caprice.
Insanity, accompanied with criminal propensities, is said to be
incurable, because, as Ideler urges, such patients " cannot bear
the torments of their consciences, and relapse into the stupefaction
of insanity to flee from the consciousness of their guilt."* The
prognosis is unfavourable when the insanity is complicated with
organic disease of the heart and lungs, with deafness, and paralysis
in any of its forms.-J* Lesions of the motor power are very un-
favourable indications. Great impairment of mind, accompanied
with delusions of an exalted character, and associated with
paralysis, is generally incurable. Esquirol says, epilepsy, if
associated with insanity, places the patient beyond all prospect of
cure. I should be loth to adopt this sweeping condemnation. I
have seen attacks of epilepsy, combined with mental derangement,
recover; although, I admit, they constitute a difficult class of
cases to manage. Epileptic vertigo, the Petit-Mai of the French,
is generally more disastrous in its effects upon the powers of the
mind than other forms of epilepsy. The prognosis in these cases
is generally unfavourable.
In submitting for your consideration a few general principles
of medical treatment, I would premise, that, in a lecture like the
present, it would be impossible to develop, in anything like detail,
* "No disease of the imagination is so difficult of cure as tliat which is
complicated with guilt; fancy and conscience then are interchangeably
upon us, so often shift their places, that the illusions of the one are not
distinguished from the dictates of the other. If fancy presents images not
moral or religious, the mind drives them away when they give it pain;
but when melancholic notions take the form of duty, they lay hold of the
faculties without opposition, because we are afraid to exclude or banish
them: for this reason the superstitious are always melancholy, and the
melancholy always superstitious."?De. Johnson. Rasselcis.
t "Deafness is not of itself a symptoni of insanity, but it is often a con-
comitant, and their combination forms incurable insanity. The reason
probably is, that the same, cause which destroys the hearing, or affects the
auditory nerve, extends also to the brain itself."?Dii. Beigham.
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 227
the special and particular class of remedial agents adapted for all
forms of deranged mind. My time will only admit of gene-
ralizing this subject, and of directing attention to some of the
more prominent phases of insanity, and those which present to us
the greatest obstacles and difficulties in their management.
In regard to the treatment of acute mania, the important
and much litigated question among practitioners of all coun-
tries, is that relating to the propriety of depletion. Need I refer
to the conflicting and contradictory opinions entertained by emi-
nent writers on this important and much-vexed therapeutical
point ? Whilst some practitioners of great repute and enlarged
experience fearlessly recommend copious general depletion for the
treatment of insanity, and cite cases in which this practice has
been attended with the happiest results, others, equally eminent,
whose opinions are as much entitled to our respect, fearlessly
denounce the lancet as a most fatally dangerous weapon, and
shudder at the suggestion of abstracting, even locally, the
smallest quantity of blood! In avoiding Scylla, we must be cau-
tious of being impelled into Charybdis. The error consists in a
vain effort to discover a uniform mode of treatment, and attempt-
ing to propound some specific mode of procedure adapted to all
cases. He who maintains that bloodletting is never to be adopted
in the treatment of mania, without reference to its character, its
origin, the peculiar constitution of the patient, and the existence
of local physical morbid conditions, which may be materially
modifying the disease, and giving active development to morbid
impressions, is not a safe practitioner. Neither would I confide
in the judgment and practice of the physician who would, in every
case of violent maniacal excitement, attempt to tranquillize the
patient and subdue excitement by either general or local
depletion.
In attacks of insanity, when the symptoms are acute, the
patients young and plethoric, the habitual secretions suppressed,
the head hot and painful, the eyes intolerant of light, the con-
junctivae injected, the pupils contracted, the pulse rapid and hard,
and the paroxysm sudden in its development, one general bleed-
ing will often arrest the progress of the cerebral mischief, greatly
facilitate the operation of other remedies, and ultimately promote
recovery. In proportion as the symptoms of ordinary insanity
approach those of phrenitis, or meningitis, shall we be justified in
228 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
the use of general depletion. Although it is only occasionally, in
instances presenting peculiar characteristic features?cases oc-
curring in the higher ranks of life, where the patient has been in
the habit of living above par, and is of a sanguineous tem-
perament?that we are justified in having recourse to the lancet,
there is a large class of recent cases presenting themselves in the
.asylums for the insane, both public and private, in the treatment
of which we should be guilty of culpable and cruel negligence, if
we were to omit to relieve the cerebral symptoms by means of
the local abstraction of blood. It is, alas! the fashion and caprice
of the day to recklessly decry the application of cupping-glasses or
of leeches in the treatment of insanity, in consequence, I think, of
the slavish deference shown to the opinions of a few eminent
French pathologists, who have, by their indiscriminate denuncia-
tion of all depletion, frightened us into -submission, and com-
pelled us to do violence to our own judgment. The local abstrac-
tion of blood is, in the hands of the discreet and judicious
practitioner, a powerful curative agent; and yet it is the practice
of some men, and men, too, of position, to discard altogether the
remedy!
I will briefly refer to the kind of case in which the local ab-
straction of blood will be found most beneficial, if proper regard
be had to the temperament, constitutional condition, and the local
circumstances modifying the character of the attack. In in-
sanity, when the exacerbations occur at the menstrual period,
leeches to the vulva and thighs, with the use of the foot-bath
and the exhibition of aloetic purgatives, will be attended by
the most favourable results. In irregular and obstructed men-
struation, the local abstraction of blood will be very serviceable.
In suppressed haemorrhoids, leeches to the neighbourhood of the
sphincter ani will act beneficially by unloading the hemorrhoidal
vessels, and thus relieve the brain of undue excitement. In
cases of nymphomania, leeches to the vulva are indicated, and
have been known to produce great benefit. In cases of in-
termittent insanity, the paroxysm may often be cut short by
relieving the overloaded state of the vessels of the head by means
of cupping or the application of leeches. In some instances, I
have applied leeches to the Schneiderian membrane, particularly
for the treatment of insanity occurring in early life, and connected
with conduct evidently the effect of cerebral irritation. I have
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 229
\
?seen this mode of procedure of essential benefit in persons of
plethoric constitution and of sanguineous temperament. Occa-
sionally the insanity is found to be associated with active visceral
disease, or with hypertrophy and other affections of the heart.
Under these circumstances, when there exists great tenderness
over the region of any of the visceral organs, and we are satisfied,
by a careful stethoscopic examination, that hypertrophy of the
heart is present, leeches applied over the seat of the local mischief,
conjoined with other appropriate treatment, will materially aid us
in subduing the maniacal affection. In cases of illusions of hear-
ing, or of vision, it will often be necessary to apply leeches behind
the ears, or over the superciliary ridges. I have known this
practice entirely remove the morbid illusions which had been
embittering the patient's life.
But apart entirely from the local affections to which I have
referred, for the treatment of idiopathic insanity, apparently
without any complications, or modified by any of the associated
diseases, the careful and temperate local abstraction of blood,
when general depletion is inadmissible, will often materially
shorten the duration of an attack and restore the mind to a
healthy condition. I am anxious to record my favourable
opinion of this mode of treatment, because I have witnessed
so many sad results from an opposite timid and reprehensible
neglect of the means placed within our power for the treatment
of the varied forms and degrees of mental derangement. Sad
consequences have undoubtedly followed the indiscriminate use
of depletory measures. The presence of violent mental excitement
has occasionally led the practitioner to the conclusion that the
disease was of an active character; and in the attempt to allay
the undue cerebral excitement by means of antiphlogistic mea-
sures, the patient has sunk into incurable and hopeless dementia !
But whilst recognising an ctncemic class of case, where great
excitement is often associated with loss of nervous and vital
power, we must be cautious in permitting serious disease to be
creeping stealthily on in the delicate structure of the brain, no
effort being made to relieve the congested cerebral vessels or
inflamed nervous tissue, until serious disorganization has taken
place in the vesicular matter, and the patient is for ever lost. In
the treatment of acute mania, the remedy next in importance to
cautious depletion is that of prolonged hot baths. To Dr Brierre
cA>
230 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
de Boismont, of Paris, at whose excellent institution I first wit-
nessed the application of this remedial agent, the profession is
indebted for reviving a practice which had long fallen into dis-
repute. In the treatment of acute mania, the prolonged hot baths
will be found of the most essential service. Dr Brierre de Bois-
mont has recorded the history of sixty-one out of seventy-two cases
that were subjected to this mode of treatment. Three-fourths of
this number were cured in a week, and the remainder in a fort-
night. The patients remain from eight to ten and fifteen hours
in warm baths, whilst a current of cold water is continually
poured over the head; the temperature of these baths is from
82? to 86? Fahr.; the affusions 60? Falir. Among the therapeutic
effects of these baths, Dr B. de Boismont reckons a diminution
of the circulation and respiration, relaxation of the skin, allevia-
tion of thirst, the introduction of a considerable quantity of water
into the economy, an abundant discharge of limpid urine, a ten-
dency to sleep, a state of repose. This mode of treatment is said
to be inadmissible in cases of periodic intermittent mania, in in-
sanity beginning with great mental impairment, or associated
with epilepsy or general paralysis. The result of my own expe-
rience of this plan of treatment has produced a very favourable
impression upon my mind, and I think it is entitled to a fair
trial in all our asylums where recent cases are admitted.
In some forms of acute mania it is desirable, as a substitute for
depletion, to diminish the activity of the circulation by the exhi-
bition of nauseating* doses of the tartrate of antimony ; it may be
serviceably combined with the tinctures of digitalis and hyos-
cyamus. This remedy, however, requires close watching, as it
often has been known to suddenly reduce the vital powers to a
low ebb, and extinguish life. It will be found beneficial in pro-
portion to the recent character of the case and the positive
activity of the cerebral circulation. The tincture of digitalis was
formerly in great repute as an anti-maniacal remedy ; the expe-
rience of late years has not encouraged us in administering it
in the doses prescribed by some of the old writers ; nevertheless,
it is a useful agent, and occasionally proves a valuable auxiliary
in the hand of the practitioner who carefully observes its thera-
peutic operation.
For the cure of the acute forms of insanity, the douche bath
has been much lauded; but this remedy is now rarely used in
r(~h ? )-><-
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 231
British asylums. I have occasionally seen benefit derived from
its exhibition, but great caution is required in its use. A patient
has been subjected, whilst in a paroxysm of acute delirium, to
the douche bath, and has sunk almost immediately into incurable
idiocy! The physical shock has occasionally been known to
produce a good moral impression. For illustration : a patient
imagined himself emperor of the world, and would not allow any
one to address him by any other title. The immediate applica-
tion of the douche bath destroyed his idea of royal dignity, and
he was willing to admit that he had never been, nor was at any
time, a regal personage. A few hours subsequently the delusive
impression returned in all its original force ; the douche bath was
again had recourse to, and a second time the morbid impression
vanished; by a series of baths he was restored to sanity, and after
his complete recovery, when the particulars of his case were
placed before him, he observed, ' Why did you not whip me, and
beat this nonsense out of my head ? I wonder how you could have-
borne with my folly, or I have been guilty of such contemptible
arrogance and obstinacy/ As a substitute for the douche, the
shower bath is often used with great benefit, particularly in cer-
tain forms of melancholia, associated with nervous depression
and general debility. In cases of melancholia, or other kinds
of chronic insanity connected with a congested state of the
liver, the nitro-muriatic bath will occasionally do much good.
In a few instances I have noticed marked benefit from the use of
Bertolini's sedative bath, composed of henbane two pounds, and
equal parts of hemlock and cherry laurel leaves, well infused in a
sufficient quantity of hot water. But the simple hot bath, in
certain conditions of the nervous system, particularly in some
forms of suicidal mania, is of the utmost benefit, A warm bath
a short period before retiring to rest, bathing the head at the
same time with cold water, particularly if the scalp be unnaturally
hot, will often ensure a quiet and composed night, when no
description of sedative, however potent its chaiacter and dose,
would influence the system.
In the early stages of insanity, and throughout its whole course,
the bowels are often in an obstinately constipated condition.
The concentration of nervous energy in the brain interferes
with that supply which should proceed to other structures; con-
sequently there appears to be a want of healthy sensibility in the
232 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
mucous membrane of the bowels, and an interruption to the
peristaltic action of the intestinal canal. There is no class of
agents which acts so certainly and effectually, in relieving the mind
when under the influence of depressing emotion, as cathartics.
The ancients considered hellebore as a specific in certain forms of
melancholia. In the hands of modem practitioners, this drug has
not been found to merit the high encomiums which have been
passed upon it. It is important in every case of insanity, but
particularly in the acute stages of mental derangement, to act
powerfully upon the bowels by means of a succession of brisk
purgatives. The bowels are often found gorged with foecal
matter, and immediate relief often follows the administration of
two or three doses of calomel and colocynth, or of croton-oil. It
will often be necessary to assist the operation of the cathartics
by means of enemata In hysterical and some other forms of
insanity there is frequently a disposition on the part of the
patient resolutely to resist the calls of nature, and, knowing this
peculiarity, we must carefully watch the condition of the bowels,
otherwise serious mechanical obstructions may ensue, followed by
intractable diseases of the rectum.
Insanity is often associated with gastric and intestinal disease,
with an irritable condition of the mucous membrane of the
alimentary canal; and, in such cases, although it is important to
relieve the bowels and prevent them from being constipated, we
must bear in mind that the injudicious exhibition of irritating
drastic cathartics may aggravate the mental disease, by increasing
the gastric and intestinal irritation, and thus do permanent
and irremediable mischief. Much injury may arise from
the indiscriminate administration of cathartics. In insanity
associated with menstrual obstructions, it will be necessary to
exhibit the class of purgatives known to act specifically upon the
lower bowel; consequently aloetic cathartics, such as the com-
pound decoction of aloes, and the compound galbanum pill, are
found of most service. In plethoric conditions of the system,
when there is a marked determination of blood to the head, no
medicine will relieve so speedily as active doses of the compound
powder of jalap.
In the treatment of insanity, the class of medicines termed
sedative play an important part. If exhibited with judgment,
the most gratifying results often follow their continuous and
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 233
persevering administration. The sedative treatment of insanity
is a subject of itself, and I quite despair of touching even upon
the confines of the many interesting and important points involved
in the consideration of this division of my lecture. In insanity
unassociated with active cerebral circulation, congestion, or para-
lysis, or after the head symptoms have been relieved by the local
abstraction of blood and the administration of appropriate medi-
cine, the exhibition of sedatives will be followed by the most
beneficial results. In recent cases they are generally inadmis-
sible, except in delirium tremens and puerperal insanity, and
other forms of derangement analogous in their pathological cha-
racter and symptoms to these affections. In chronic insanity,
in melancholia unconnected with abdominal repletion, or visceral
disease, the persevering use of sedatives in various combinations
will often re-establish sanity, when no other course of treatment
would be successful in dispelling the illusive impressions, or
raising the drooping and desponding spirits. Battley's solution,
the tincture of opium, the meconite, acetate, and hydrochlorate
of morphia, the preparations of hyoscyamus, conium, stramonium,
camphor, hops, aconite, ether, chloroform, hydrocyanic acid,
hydrochloric ether, Indian hemp, are all of great and essential
service, if administered with judgment and sagacity. In suicidal
insanity, when local cerebral congestion is absent, and the general
health and secretions are in good condition, the meconite and
hydrochlorate of morphia often act like a charm, if uninterrup-
tedly and perseveringly given until the nervous system is com-
pletely under their influence. I have witnessed the most distressing
attacks of suicidal mania yield to this treatment, when every other J- ? ? - ?
mode of procedure had failed. I could cite the particulars of
numerous cases of this form of insanity radically cured by the
occasional local abstraction of blood from the head, the adminis-
tration of alteratives, the warm bath, and sedatives. In the
exhibition of this powerful curative agent, our success will often
depend upon a ready adaptation of the form of sedative to tlic
description of case vjlitch it nixay be deemed admisszbl6,
and a judicious admixture of various kinds of sedatives. I
do not think we pay sufficient attention to this fact. I have often
seen an apparently incurable and unmanageable case yield to a
combination of sedatives, which had resisted the operation of any
one or two when given separately. The extract of conium is often
J,
234 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
of service in cases of insanity combined with epilepsy; conjoined
with mineral tonics, conium is occasionally of benefit, particu-
larly in melancholia connected with chronic disease of the digestive
organs and with neuralgia. In cases of uterine irritation, I have
seen great good result from the combination of hops, camphor,
J'? and hyoscyamus. In illusions of vision, belladonna, commencing
with quarter-grain doses, will be found a useful remedy. In
insanity complicated with dysmenorrhea, the combination of
camphor with hyoscyamus, opium, or conium, may be given with
great advantage. The hydrochlorate of morphia, in union with
dilute hydrochloric acid, is said to be useful in cases where the
sedative treatment is desirable. I am often in the habit of
exhibiting sedatives and tonics in combination, particularly
conium with iron, opium with quinine, or with the infusion or
compound decoction of cinchona. In debility, with irritability
of the nervous system, accompanied by restlessness, Battley's
solution, with the preparations of cinchona, will often prove of
great benefit. The tincture of sumbul I have occasionally
administered, and I think with advantage, in paroxysmal 01*
convulsive forms of insanity. I have given it to the extent of one
or two drachms for a dose. In hysterical derangement, the tincture
of Indian hemp will occasionally allay the excitement, and
produce sleep more rapidly than any other form of sedative. The
valerianate of zinc has not answered the expectations of those
who have spoken so highly of its medicinal virtues. Tincture of
opium with camphor, and the tartrate of antimony, is an excellent
combination in cases of doubtful cerebral congestion. Tincture
of hops, in doses of from one to four drachms, may be neces-
sary, when no other formulae are admissible. As mild forms
of sedative, compound ipecacuanha powder, extract of lettuce,
and the syrup of poppies, are occasionally recommended; a good
substitute for Dover's powder is a pill composed of opium,
ipecacuanha, and soap. j
The more chronic forms of insanity, particularly melancholia,
are occasionally difficult of cure. Owing to the slow, obscure, and
insidious character of the disease, the mental affection has generally
been of some duration before the attention of the practitioner has.
been directed to its existence. As this form of derangement gene-
rally exhibits itself in trifling perversions of the affections and
propensities, leading to little acts of extravagance and irregu-
ON THE MEDICAL TKEATMENT OF INSANITY. 235
larity of conduct, associated with great depression, we often find
the attack has existed some years before a necessity has been
felt for any medical advice or treatment?perhaps a suicidal
propensity has manifested itself, this being the first apparent
overt act of insanity.
It is necessary, before suggesting any course of treatment in
melancholia, to ascertain whether any latent visceral disease be
present. Occasionally, the local irritation will be found either in
the liver, the stomach and bowels, or uterus. In the religious
and other forms of melancholia in females, the delusions are
often associated with uterine irritation; and under such circum-
stances, if actual physical derangement of an active character
exists in this organ, the best treatment will be, the application of
leeches to the neighbourhood of the uterus, combined with warm
hip-baths, sedatives, and mineral tonics. In cases of melancholia,
the digestive functions are often much deranged, the circulation,
languid, the skin cold and flaccid, the secretion vitiated. These
O ' 3
symptoms are often conjoined with a general loss of the vis vitce.
Such patients require generous diet, good air, gentle exercise, and
occasional stimuli. When dyspeptic symptoms are combined
with an inactive state of the bowels, I have often administered
the compound tincture of guaiacum with great benefit. It is im-
portant to watch the particular features in these cases, and to
improve the general health by the exhibition of mild alteratives
and vegetable tonics, with alkalies. I have occasionally adminis-
tered, with success, in this form of insanity, apparently associated
with an abnormal condition of the nutrition of the brain, cod-liver
oil, with preparations of iron.
My time will not admit of my submitting for your approval the
treatment best adapted for those forms of the mental disease
associated with an atrophied or softened condition of the nervous
matter. I think more is to be done for the cure of these cases
than the writings of medical men would lead the student to
suppose, particularly if the disease be seen and subjected to
treatment in the early stages. I have recorded the details of
several instances of cerebral disease, exhibiting all the legitimate
features of ramollissement, and yielding to the persevering ad-
ministration of the preparations of iron, phosphorus, zinc, and
strychnia, combined with generous living, and the occasional
application of a leech behind the ear, should indications of
/?n(H *
236 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
cerebral congestion be present.* I have also derived benefit
from the use of the milder forms of mercurials, associated with
cinchona. In cases of impairment of the mind, loss of memory,
defective power of attention, occasional paroxysms of mental
paralysis, unconnected with lesions of the motor power, I have
found a solution of the acetate of strychnine, and a solution of the
phosphate of strychnine, of great advantage.
In some chronic forms of insanity, in dementia, and persistent
monomania, connected, as it was supposed, with morbid thicken-
ing of the dura mater, and with interstitial infiltration of the
O '
membrane, as well as with exudations upon its surface, I have
occasionally had the head shaved, and have perseveringly rubbed
over the scalp a strong ointment of the iodide of potassium com-
bined with strychnine. In other instances I have kept the head
painted with the mixture of iodine. I have seen marked benefit
from this mode of treatment. When the mental symptoms are
supposed to be associated with effusions of serum, I have ordered
the iodine to be applied externally, at the same time exhibiting
minute doses of calomel, or mercury-witli-chalk, to slightly affect
the system: this, conjoined with occasional tonics, diuretics, and
stimuli to support the vital powers, is occasionally productive of
considerable benefit, in cases apparently placed quite beyond the
reach of improvement or cure.
I have briefly referred to two distressing and often unmanage-
able forms of insanity?viz., of suicidal mania, and of those
cases where the patient obstinately ref uses to take either food or
medicine. In insanity associated with suicidal tendencies, it is
important to ascertain whether any cerebral congestion exists.
If such be the case, a few leeches applied to the head, followed by
an active cathartic, will relieve the local irritation, and often
dissipate the idea of self-destruction. In the absence of any posi-
tive active cerebral symptoms, the prolonged hot bath, and the
persevering exhibition of some form of sedative, is the best treat-
ment to be adopted. I have seen the suicidal impulse removed
after the administration of a few doses of belladonna; but the
meconite and hydrochlorate of morphia, if given for a sufficient
length of time, will, in the great majority of cases, distinct from
actual incurable visceral or cerebral disease, effect a cure. Occa-
In 1830, twenty-four years ago, my first observations on " Kainollisse-
ment of the Brain" were published, in the Lancet.
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 237
sionally, the shower-bath, and counter-irritation in the vicinity of
the head, will aid us in re-establishing health. Cases sometimes
present themselves where the patient obstinately refuses to take
either food or medicine. This character of case gives much
anxiety. The refusal of food may be connected with the inten-
tion to destroy life, or it may be associated with and caused by
delusive impressions. I am inclined to believe, that, in the
majority of these cases, the symptom is the result of some
irritation existing in the great ganglionic centres remote
from the sensorium, affecting by direct action the organ of
thought. Upon examination, we often find, in these cases,
great gastric derangement, obstinate constipation, considerable
tenderness upon pressure in the epigastric region, hepatic
disease, the tongue foul, breath offensive, and other symptoms of
derangement of the chylopoietic viscera. The determination to
resist nourishment arises,- under such circumstances, from a
positive loathing of food?a want of all inclination for it. I
have seen cases where it has been deemed necessary, in order to
prolong life, to introduce food forcibly into the stomach, speedily
cured by the adoption of means calculated to improve the general
health and digestive organs. Mild alteratives, vegetable tonics,
blisters over the region of the stomach, if the patient complain
of pain in that region upon pressure, the warm and shower bath,
are the most successful remedies to adopt in cases connected
with obvious visceral derangement. Instances sometimes occur,
where the refusal of food is clearly traceable to the presence of
a delusion?an hallucination of taste, which makes everything
appear to the patient bitter, disgusting, and poisonous. The
unhappy patient often imagines that he is commanded, either
by good or evil spirits, not to eat. These patients must be treated
upon general principles, and the remedies be adapted to the
peculiar character of each individual case. Under such hallu-
cinations of taste, patients often swallow the most extraordinary
articles. The case of a lunatic is recorded, who imagined that his
stomach required to be strengthened with iron. He was seized
with inflammation of the oesophagus, of which he nearly died. He
then confessed that he had swallowed the blade of a knife. After
his death, there was found in his stomach seven oxidated lath
nails, each two inches and a half long; thirty-three nails, two
inches long; forty-nine smaller iron nails and rivets ? three pieces
c)t.- fr'tV
238 ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
of wound-up iron wire; an iron screw, an inch long; a brass
image of a saint; part of the blade of a knife; and other articles;
amounting in number to 100, and weighing about twenty ounces.
It will be necessary, in cases like those to which I have been
referring, to ascertain whether the determination not to eat is the
effect of such perversions or hallucinations of taste.
I can only in this lecture allude in general terms to the im-
portance, as a principle of treatment, of the administration of
tonic remedies, active exercise in the open air, and to good and
generous living. It is rarely necessary, in the treatment of
insanity, to deprive the patient of animal food. Individual cases
occasionally come under our notice, in which it is indispensable,
for a time, to enforce a farinaceous diet; but such is not often our
duty. Among paupers, insanity is frequently cured by the free
use of good animal food, and a generous supply of porter. Even
when we are satisfied of the necessity of local depletion, it will
often be requisite to give wine, and allow the patient a generous
diet.
There are many other essential points in connexion with this
important, this vast subject, which I am reluctantly compelled
to pass entirely over. When I had resolved to bring this matter
before the profession, I quite despaired, in the time allotted for
one lecture, of being able to skim even upon the surface of the
many deeply interesting points involved in the inquiry; but
feeling?deeply, earnestly feeling?that, in relation to my own
speciality, the subject of the medical treatment of insanity was of
the first moment, of the most vital importance, to the profession
as well as to the public, I did not hesitate in selecting this topic
for one of my lectures, feeling assured that you would kindly
make allowance for all imperfections, and generously appreciate
the difficulties I had to encounter in concentrating in one short
lecture a faint glimpse or shadow of a subject requiring for its
successful exposition nine or ten lectures, equal in length to the
one I have had the honour of reading this evening. I may have
formed an extravagant and exaggerated conception of this subject,
but I cannot close my eyes to the fatal consequences which have
so often ensued f rom a belief in the incurability of insanity by
medical means. In all grades of society we witness the per-
nicious, the fatal, the disastrous effects of this dogma. We see
it influencing the conduct of county magistrates in the architec-
ON THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF INSANITY. 239
tural proportions, medical organization and general arrangements
of our great national asylums. We also perceive the consequences
of the error operating in many of the private institutions for the
treatment of the insane, thereby degrading them into places
of detention, instead of conferring upon them the character
of HOSPITALS FOR THE CURE OF THE INSANE, under the
supervision of medical officers, well trained, by preliminary
education, for their important vocation, acquainted with the
philosophy of the human mind, and fitted by the character
of their heart, as well as by the vigour of their intellect, for the
right performance of the solemn and responsible duties entrusted
to them by the public and the legislature.
NO. XXVI.
