The Psychology of Monomaniacal Societies and Literature
========================================================

In a previous essay we gave a cursory consideration to a wide-spread
popular delusion, which had taken the form of demonology and divination, or "the black art." We then thought it probable that, as "one
fire puts out another burning," and similia similibus curantur, this
more recent absurdity would extinguish, or at least counteract, the
follies of mesmerism. In this idea we were mistaken; for, just as a
monomaniac converts all current ideas into food for the delusive ideas
which actuate him, and finds their corroboration in facts as widely
apart as possible, so the large group of monomaniacal visionaries con-
vert everything analogous to their purpose, and derive fresh impulses
from follies and delusions greater (if that be possible) than their own.
Thus we find that homoeopathy and hydropathy, like two drunken
strollers, mutually support each other; and thus, too, mesmerism finds
in modern necromancy, and in every delusion of sorcery and magic,
current in all ages and amongst all peoples, the strongest proof of the
verity of its doctrines/' We do not propose to treat these visionaries
Magie Magn^tique, ou Traitd historique et pratique de fascinations, de miroirg
cabalistiques, d'apports, de suspensions, de pactes, de talismans, de charme des
^ents, de convulsions, de possessions, d'envotitements, de sortileges, de magie de
a Parole, de correspondance sympathique, de n^cromancie, &c. Par L. A. Caliagnet,
auteur des Arcanes de la Vie Future D($voil<Js, &c. Paris, 1854,
NO. XXVII. T
302 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
with contempt, or to assail their doctrines with abuse. The greater
number deserve neither. The enthusiasm and moral courage the ma-
jority display, present, when considered abstractedly, something com-
mendable. Some of them, at least, are honest (albeit ignorant and
superstitious) seekers after truth; and are not to be confounded with
the knaves who prey upon their simple credulity. Their good qualities,
indeed, commend them to our sympathy; and being so commended,
we think we shall do them service if we endeavour to trace to their
origin the influences by which honest, pains-taking, and earnest in-
quirers into truth are led onward from one absurdity to another, each
greater than the last, until the climax is reached, and monomania,
insanity, or imbecility, tragically end the comedy.
What we find before us is just this. A very considerable number of
persons write books, read them, and associate themselves together,
whose object is the investigation of propositions and the promulgation
of doctrines which either shock our common sense by their absurdity,
or wound our religious feelings by their impiety, or excite our contempt
by their inanity. The absurdity, impiety, and inanity are so flagrant,
indeed, that it seems to be hardly necessary to state in so many words
these characteristics of the doctrines advanced; but, on the other hand,
the promulgators themselves entertain a widely different opinion of
their views and of their proceedings. In their own estimation they
are persecuted lights of the world, of whom the world is hardly worthy;
martyrs to science and to progress; unappreciated and incomprehended
investigators of the mysterious unknown in physics and psychology;
discoverers of new worlds of phenomena and forces. Why this dif-
ference ?
We believe the whole class of visionaries to be more or less affected
with monomania. They have eaten of " the insane root which takes
the reason prisoner." Not insane metaphorically, but practically and
pathologically; they are inoculated with a "fixed idea" by a process
of mental operations not dissimilar from those known under the term
electro-biological, or are actually insane.
We will first describe the symptoms of the case. As they show
themselves in the mass, the nature of the delusions of these mono-
maniacs is tolerably well shown by the titles of works published by
M. Cahagnet, according to the list on the paper cover of the work be-
fore us. First, we have the delusive ideas entertained as to the rela-
tions of the soul with the present and future world, indicated by?
" The Arcana of the Future Life Unveiled; a work containing un-
answerable proofs of the faculty possessed by magnetic somnambulists
of seeing the departed, and conversing with them."
M The Sanctuary of Spiritualism, a study of the human soul and its
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 303
relations to the universe, in reference to somnambulism and ecstasy;
showing to every person the means of entering into the ecstatic state
at will."
" The Light of the Bead, or studies, magnetic, philosophical, and spi-
ritualistic; dedicated to the liberal thinkers of the nineteenth century."
" Magnetic Spiritualistic Encyclopaedia, treating specially of psycho-
logical facts, magnetic magic, Swedenborgianism, necromancy, celestial
magic," &c..
The readers of these works, with other human beings, are gregarious;
they communicate to each other their ideas and discoveries?the means
being a society, and an organ of the society, or journal. This is?-
" The Spiritualistic Magnetiser, a Journal of the Spiritualistic
JSLagnetisers of Paris, treating of very curious facts of apparitions, of
possessions, of psychological questions."
The material forces, as distinguished from the spiritual, are not
neglected by the sect of whom M. Cahagnet seems to be the apostle;
for the " Od force" of Reichenbacli is believed in and discussed for
them by that writer.
" Odic Magnetic Letters of the Baron von Reichenbach, translated
from the German, with an estimate, by the author of the ' Arcana,' of
the phenomena of the fluidic currents which the three kingdoms
manifest."
It is always a weakness with these visionaries to believe that their
doctrines possess a practical application; they therefore laboriously
endeavour to demonstrate their usefulness. Hence books like the
following:?
" The Treatment of Disease by the Extatic, Adele Maginot. Studies
on the medicinal properties of 150 of the most common and best known
plants, with various methods of magnetization."
The "Magie Magnetique" is a work which is best described in the
author's own words:?
" It is the fruit of patient studies, of patient observation, and not
less patient experiments. It will teach little to the studious magne-
tiser, for it appears to be reserved for us in this age of darkness
(termed enlightened) to have no other duty than to go back to the past,
for the purpose of studying the labours of our fathers, and_ to appro-
priate them, as a proof of progress, and not as a simple heritage; and
to forget them sufficiently, that we may loudly ^exclaim, 'In no age
were discoveries so common as they are in ours.
These labours referred to is the farrago of superstitions and frauds,
"which M. Cahagnet catalogues on his title-page, and the facts of which
he receives as philosophical facts worthy of all credence, and clearly
proving the doctrines of magnetism. An alphabetical list of these
x 2
304 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
labourers comprises the most anomalous names?Gregory VII. precedes
Hermes, Isaac, Jambres, Jannes; Medea, Merlin, and Mesmer come
together, and are followed by Swedenborg, Trois Echelles, and Tubal-
Cain. Everything absurd unintelligible, and mysterious, is within
the domain of magnetism. The following is a portion of M. Cahagnet's
decalogue?a sort of catechism of the powers of the so-called science:
" Can the cataleptic condition be induced by magnetism ??Yes.
" Can the powers of a magnetic subject under your influence be dimi-
nished or increased threefold ??Yes.
" Can the effects of attraction be produced in this subject?as all
magnetisers declare they have produced?not only on living beings, but
on dead matter ??Yes.
" Can they cause the suspension of material bodies by the same effect
of attraction ??Yes.
" Can certain subjects in the magnetic state perform certain gym-
nastic movements, which are contrary to the laws of anatomy ??Yes.
" Can a being in that state attain to a height far beyond that of his
natural size ??Yes.
" Can he walk upon points of support contrary to the constitution
of his nature and the laws of equilibrium ??Yes.
" Can he induce on his person excessive local and general inflamma-
tions ??Yes.
" In this state can he, with his eyes closed, see either by the nape
of his neck, the plexus, the heels, at immeasurable distances, and hear
what is said there ??Yes.
" Can the so-called spirit, when separated from matter, form material
vehicles ? (des apports materiels.)?Yes.
" Can the lucid speak many languages previously unknown to him,
and acquire a knowledge of science of which he has always been
ignorant ??Yes.
" Can he in this state defy the action of fire or of poisons ??Yes.
" Can he enter into communion with the dead, speak to them, and
obtain useful knowledge from them ??Yes.
" Can the magnetiser beset his subject by sounds which he causes
him to hear at a distance P In like manner, from a distance, can he
exercise an attraction upon him ? produce before him ghosts or other
phantasms ? and compel him to do things contrary to his peace of
mind, to good morals, and to honour ??Yes.
" Can the magnetiser in this way render his victim idiotic and
imbecile, or even destroy him, without leaving any visible marks ?
?Yes.
" Can he communicate to him any particular disease, or deprive him
of the use of a limb ? Yes.
" Can he give him blows at very great distances p?Yes.
" Can he bewilder him on his way, make him leap ditches (as you
have assured me), place stumbling-blocks before him on the level road,
cause robbers or ferocious beasts to appear to him ??Yes.
" Can man cast stones into distant localities without beino- seen
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 305
bewitch the soil, gardens, animals, and men, as is stated in all works
on sorcery F?Yes.
" Can he act upon masses of men at the same time, causing them
to see, touch, and eat things, real apparently, but in fact imaginary
only p?Yes.
" Can man have disembodied spirits subject to him, and be served
by them ??Yes.
" Can he at his pleasure excite, or cause to cease rain, winds, hail ?
?Yes."
The supposed questioner (for the book is in form of a dialogue)
candidly remarks that assertion is not proof; whereupon the author
declares that although he cannot show the means by which all these
marvels have been effected, he will prove that they have been done,
and that it is possible to effect them " by magnetism as the principal
agent, aided by the infinite combinations of the human mind." The
proofs consist in a number of stories drawn from every branch of the
literature which treats of the wonderful and mysterious, and details of
experimental researches; they consist principally of three kinds?
firstly, absolute inventions; secondly, tricks of conjuring and swind-
ling ; thirdly, phenomena analogous to those of mesmerism and electro-
biology.
We shall defer for the present a more detailed account of the con-
tents of this curious pathological work, reserving to a later period
special instances of monomaniacal delusion which it contains. In the
meanwhile we will -adduce illustrations of this kind from other and
very different sources, analysing in particular some of the monomanias
with which the English public is perfectly familiar. The trivial and
absurd are just as important by way of illustration as the more pre-
tentious ; we shall, therefore, select instances of both kinds. The
better to display their source and progress, which are closely connected
with the association of ideas, we shall commence with those in which a
given idea is predominant, and the idea we choose is the religious.
The religious element of man's nature has (we need hardly remark)
a close connexion with the occult and the wonderful. " Faith is the
evidence of things unseen," of things beyond reason and observation.
M. Cahagnet shows that unhesitating faith is the basis of all his
occult knowledge. The whole power of "magnetic magic" depends
on the will; but, he adds, the human will has never been defined.
" Faith alone," he remarks, " is the soul of the will; it is its principal
agent, its lever, its power, its life." In the condition of absolute un-
hesitating faith "there are no longer impossibilities; the ordinary
laws of nature are abrogated, and the inexplicable is revealed by the
incomprehensible." It is a natural consequence of this state of mind
806 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
that they who have faith in the occult in philosophy are not slow to
add to it the mystical in religion. Whether there be a phrenological
reason for the connexion between religious delusions and more material
follies in the contiguity of organs, we do not pretend to say; certain
it is that they are often intimately allied in all these various forms
of monomania. As illustrations we subjoin the following. Morison,
the pill-merchant, like many other fanatics, believed in his own
absurdities. He maintained that the cause of disease in man which
purging cleanses away, first entered into the blood of Adam and Eve
at the fall, and is the infection, par excellence, of man's nature. He
certainly, if the history of his own case be credible, was a confirmed
hypochondriac. He says:?
" Reader, this was the cause from the beginning of my disease?
want of all rest and comfort, and loss of fortune. Ifrequently thought
that I should go mad, and that I ivas possessed of a devil within me.
In the first periods of it, and when my other feelings were still acute,
I would have taken up my abode in the sandy deserts of Africa to
obtain a few nights' sound sleep, the common solace of mankind.
You cannot imagine to yourself the anguish and pain of it; yet no
one knew how to give me relief. At its commencement, thirty-eight
years ago, it was only a simple humour that settled there
Header, all your diseases and pains arise from a like cause ; they must
proceed from a humour. I defy all ingenuity to establish any other
cause."
Now, a monomaniacal idea of this kind is not of itself incom-
patible with shrewdness and cunning. Numerous instances of suc-
cessful religious fanatics, the founders and leaders of sects, might be
adduced in proof. Even where the ideas themselves are incoherent
and the practical results ridiculous, the monomaniac exercises, in
virtue of his singleness of idea, a power over weak and ignorant minds.
There is a certain empiric wanderer about town, who is perhaps better
known from his propensity to disturb public meetings by his wild
crotchets than by his " Asthmatic Lamp, or Air Flame Magnet to
Breath.?(xii. 5 ; Job. xxvii. 3)." The reader who is familiar with
the literature of the insane cannot fail to recognise a well-known style
in the following literal extract from this monomaniac's description
of his lamp :?
"The inventor's reasons for a dry air fumigation?night and morn-
ing?in scrofula, in cancer, and in all cutaneous eruptions, is based on
the deliverance from ' king's evil,' by its drying up after eighteen day's
'use, in the child ' Owen,' of No. 7, Derby-court, Jermyn-street, which
event to one ' that is ready to slip with his feet,' is in perfect keeping
with the Almighty's laws, viz. that as the flow of tide twice in twenty-
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 307
four hours purifies the waters of the globe, and in its undulatoiy
movement, acts on the local temperature by atmospheric pressure, so
in like manner under analogy with, and in, the use of ' sulphate of zinc'
in drinks, as giving a vitriolic cause for morbid action, or sudden
clotting of the blood in persons."
The author of this insane rigmarole is only not a dangerous fanatic
because he has not even an elementaiy knowledge of any science, and
cannot write two ideas in normal association; yet even he has his
followers and votaries. It is not long since, when an explosion of a
coal mine in Scotland took place, that this monomaniac hastened to
the locality, persuaded the friends of some miners that were hurt to
submit them to his treatment; and when?as a necessary result of his
foolish interference?he was put upon his trial for manslaughter, and
a verdict of not guilty was announced, an enthusiastic audience of his
admirers could not repress their delight at the result!
The heterogeneous sect which Hahnemann founded presents an in-
teresting illustration of the working out of monomaniacal ideas from
a common root. It has been long known that active medicinal agents
produce morbid conditions not unlike those which they cure or relieve.
Thus, a purgative (an irritant to the mucous surface of the intes-
tinal canal) will relieve a disease (diarrhoea) caused by an irritant.
An inflammation artificially excited on the skin checks inflammatory
action elsewhere. The entire group of remedies termed counter-
irritants may be mentioned as belonging to this class. Now, a Ger-
man physician, following out this idea, found it applicable under
circumstances not generally recognised or known; and passing to
that hasty generalization from a few instances, which is the leading
fault of all investigation of the occult, he promulgated the funda-
mental doctrine expressed briefly in the phrase, similia similibus curan-
tur. This doctrine would soon have passed into the limbo of those
hasty generalizations which specially abound in the history of medicine,
leaving behind it a useful residuum of facts, had not Hahnemann been
infected with that monomaniacal temper which exercises so potent a
control over weak and ignorant people. Under another form, namely,
the doctrine of signatures, the primary idea had already had its day,
but Hahnemann claimed a special revelation to himself of the heal-
ing power of nature. In the doctrine of signatures it was main-
tained that the Divine mind revealed them to all alike who could
read the signs or signatures in the external appearance of plants.
" Eyebright," to the sagacious observer, revealed its valuable pro-
perties in the cure of dimness of vision by the form of its flower, and
"liver-wort" its valuable properties in hepatic diseases by its liver-like
appearance. Hahnemann, cunningly wise (as monomaniacs can be)
308 THE TSYCHOLOGY OF
pretended to found his views both upon experience and revelation.
He remarks, as to his Divine mission:?
" It was high time for the wise and benevolent Creator and Pre-
server of mankind to put a stop to this abomination (the ordinary
method of treating the sick), to command a cessation of those tortures,
and to reveal a healing art the very opposite of this, which should not
waste the vital juices and powers by emetics, perennial scouring out of
the bowels, diaphoretics, salivation, &c nor, in short, instead
of lending the patient aid, to guide him in the way to death, as is done
by the merciless routine practitioner it was high time that He
should permit this discovery of Homoeopathy. By observation and
reflection I discovered that, in opposition to the old allopathic method,
the true, the proper, the best mode of treatment is contained in the
maxim," &c.
Amongst the delusions of the insane hypochondriac none is more
usual (as is well-known to practical men) than that the health is
suffering from some constitutional taint or disease. We have seen
that Morison entertained this delusion. In this country the syphi-
litic poison is most usually fixed upon by the insane as the imaginary
fons et oricjo mali. Now, in Germany there is a very generally pre-
valent theory that scabies is a constitutional disorder, leaving behind
it important changes analogous to those caused by the syphilitic virus.
Hahnemann's monomaniacal mind naturally seized upon this idea, and
incorporated it with his other doctrines, thus giving rise to his psora
doctrine. Psora (or itch) is, according to his views, " the origin of at
least seven-eighths of all chronic diseases," the other eighth resulting
from "syphilis," or " sycosis," or a union of either or both with psora.
It is, he says, a sin against humanity to consider the itch eruption as
a local disease, and treat it by ointments or washes to drive it off the
skin.*
Hahnemann invoked experience by experimental researches into the
action of remedies, or " provings," in the jargon of the sect. The
basis of the method is, that a person who " proves" must take fasting
about the same dose as is usually given in diseases, he must remain
some hours longer fasting, and he must carefully observe himself, f
A very slight knowledge of the physiology of the nervous system is
only needed to convince the reader that no better method could be
devised for exciting those sensorial changes which unquestioning faith
and morbidly excited acts of attention are well known to produce. Hahne-
mann very quickly, therefore, came to the conclusion that very small,
indeed immeasurably small doses of remedies produced powerful effects.
* The British Journal of Homoeopathy, July, 1849, p. 349.
+ Ibid. p. 341.
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 309
From this to the doctrine that mystic forces developed by trituration
and succussion rendered them more powerful, or "potentized" them,
was only a step, and so the infinitesimal theory was founded. We
have, then, in Hahnemann's writings these notions developed :?1. That
he was specially inspired by the Divine mind, and that therefore the
system he proposes to overthrow is utterly wrong. 2. That Divine
Providence has provided special medicinal agents antagonistic to every
ill. 3. That there is an occult source of bodily disorder from which
every special disease arises?psora. 4. That there are occult powers
in the means provided by Divine Providence, which may be developed
by certain manipulations, namely, trituration and succussion.
These insane propositions (for no one of which there exists the
slightest foundation in fact) were not so insane as those to which they
have given rise in minds less disciplined and cultured. We have
already remarked how inevitable is the tendency in persons of this
monomaniacal mental character to develop their notions, and draw
within their circle any morbid analogous absurdities. The published
discourse of the Reverend Thomas Everest, Rector of Wickwar, preached
in London, in aid of the Hahnemannic Hospital, presents us with an
instance in point. This divine, who boasts of " some years of intimacy"
with Hahnemann, conceives that he has discovered the doctrines of his
friend in the Holy Scriptures. Here we can trace the operation of the
associating faculty:?
" At the fall of man, sin entered into the soul, and disorder into the
physical frame (with which that soul is connected) ; at the same
moment, God sent his Son to repair the mischief, and He bade his
ministers preach the Grospel and heal the sick; that is, cure the moral
disorder and the physical disorder together; and for nineteen hundred
years that precious wisdom has cried in the streets unheard."
There is therefore, according to both Morison and Everest, an ori-
ginal physical taint as well as a moral taint derived from the fall. In
the command of our Saviour to his disciples?"Cleanse the leper"?
Mr. Everest finds grounds for believing the leprosy of the New Testa-
ment and the psora of Hahnemann to be identical. He conceives, also,
that this corporeal taint is also the source of sin; or, in his own words,
" irreligion is the daughter of internal disorder." Now, as all internal
disorders depend on psora, it follows that an anti-psoric homceopathic
treatment is an excellent adjuvant to spiritual purgation. Mr. Everest
therefore very logically (your monomaniacs are unflinching logicians)
recommends that a continuous medicinal treatment, founded on these
principles, be begun in childhood, with the hope thereby " to antici-
pate disorders, to restore harmony, to combat the internal. josorio
310 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
tendencies, and to procure a patient hearing and kindly reception of
spiritual ministrations." Here is the fundamental idea of Morison,
but developed in a more theological manner, by an association with
ideas already grafted in the mind of the reverend divine.
This religious element of homoeopathy has assumed a more eccentric
development than even this of Mr. Everest's. A French writer speaks
of Hahnemann as " the new Evangelist," and " the most inspired of
revealers." The " school" of Rio Janeiro, from whence this notion has
arisen, is an excellent instance of the more developed forms of the
Hahnemannie monomania. The founder of it adopted the idea of potent-
ization, and invented machines for succussing or shaking remedies, and
thereby increasing then- medicinal virtues. It would be wearisome to
the reader to specify the follies of this sect in this respect. This school
also extended the religious branch of the delusion, and drew a parallel
between Hahnemannism and Christianity. Prince Alplionso, heir ap-
parent to the throne of Brazil, died in a few days after his birth, for
want of homoeopathic treatment. A European promulgator of the
views of this school (author of " Doctrine de l'Ecole de Rio," &c.)
maintained that for medicine to become, like other sciences, properly
Christian, it was necessary that a victim should be offered up as an
expiatory sacrifice, "to conquer the indifference of the vulgar." This
expiatory victim " for the physical redemption of humanity" was this
infant prince. " It seems," he concludes, " that it is only by an excess
of evil that man can return good. In order that humanity should
renounce the worship of false gods, nothing less than a Deicide (sic
in orig.) was requisite. It is by a Regicide (sic) that allopathy be-
hoved to mark its last hour."
We will follow this monomaniacal association of ideas a little further.
Out of the homoeopathic hallucinations the isopathic arose. Accord-
ing to isopathy, all contagious diseases contain in their contagious
matter the instrument of their cure. This was the notion of a German
veterinary surgeon, named Lux,?arising, manifestly, from the Hahne-
mannie dogma. All contagious diseases were therefore recommended
to be " potentized" into remedial agents?variolitic matter for variola,
the itch-virus, or " psorine," for the itch, &c. This latter became a
great remedy for all the so-called psoric diseases (nine-tenths of all
diseases whatever). Things horribly filthy or ludicrously nasty, were,
on the isopathic principle, gravely recommended to be "potentized"
and administered. A bug in the thirtieth dilution (the decillionth),
cured the inflammation arising from a bug-bite. But we will not record
the filtliinesses of these monomaniacs; suffice it to say, that no animal
product whatever is too abominable to be " potentized" and adminis-
tered as an infallible remedy !
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 311
Amongst the more curious divergencies of the homoeopathic ideas is
that towards mesmerism, the point of junction of the two being in the
monomaniacal idea of the " Od force." We have already seen that,
according to Hahnemann, certain occult forces can be developed in
matter by trituration and succussion; well, a Mr. Rutter invented a
" magnetoscope," whereby magnetic currents could be detected passing
through the human body. The instrument was analogous to the
" odometer" of the late Mr. Mayo,?the same in principle, a little more
complex and scientific-looking in construction. Great was the asto-
nishment and delight of Dr. Quin and other leading homoeopaths to
find that when their globular nonentities were tried by it, by being
placed in the hand of the experimenter, they proved to have a most
powerful magnetic influence?not less powerful, indeed, than Eeichen-
bach's favourite "rock-crystal"! Mr. Butter was almost worshipped,
as may be gathered from the following extract from a lecture on these
experiments by Dr. Quin :?
" I feel confident that you will agree with me, that science has made
a gigantic stride by the philosophical instrument and important dis-
covery of that gentleman, and that homoeopathic practitioners espe-
cially are greatly indebted to him for having proved the physical action
of our remedies, in infinitesimal quantities upon the human body
The only reason for sorrow is, that our revered master, Hahnemann,
is not alive to witness this triumphant proof of his own great dis-
coveries," &c.
Dr. Madden soon showed the true nature of this delusion. He found
that any anticipated motion of the magnetoscope took place invariably;
in short, that the movements depended upon the unconscious but sug-
gested muscular movements of the operator; and so the bubble burst.
The study of the occult in modern times is no more profound than
in the more ancient. The potentization of medicinal agents is little
different from the alchemical notions of an elixir vitae; delusions as to
the divining rod, and the various modifications of the " Od force," may
be compared with the mineralogical researches of the alchemical philo-
sophers. Even the metallic rings and other electro-biologic and mes-
meric agents have their parallels in ancient times. .The iEs Cypria-
neum of Alexander Trallianus is the exact analogue of nickel in the
hands of a too-celebrated English mesmerist. The subjoined remedy
for the colic is as likely to be beneficial as a magnetic ring, or a " po-
tentized" particle of matter:?
" Annulum ferreum accipito, ac in circulum ipsius oetangulum efficito,
atque ita in oetangulum inscribito fevye, (jjevys iov xoXrj {] tcopocaXoQ
?%r)rki; hoc est, Euge, fuge, lieu! bilis alauda quserebat subjectam autem
312 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
figuratam in annuli caput scribito ^. Hujus, magnam habui expe-
rientiam."
An iron ring (made, we ought to add, on the 21st day of the moon)
is the "base" in the above prescription. "Take an iron ring, make
in its circle an octangle, and thus write within that octangle: ' Fly,
fly, alas! bile the lark excites.' But inscribe the subjoined figure on
the head of the ring: . I have had great experience of this."
Shade of Hahnemann! thy predecessor, Alexander, was thy equal
not only in " proving," for he also rivalled the filthiest of thy isopathic
followers in the nastiness of his remedies.
In the preceding illustrations we have confined our attention to
occult force, used for good ends, or, at least, for things that may be
honestly desired?as health, riches, and the like. Man has, however,
been involved, from time to time, in delusions as to occult evil powers.
These are, indeed, much more frequently the subject of monomaniacal
delusions in the insane than of popular aberrations. The terrible times
of witch-finding and witch-killing are full of horrifying proofs to what
an extent delusions like these may prevail. The ideas as to the nature
of these evil forces differ according to the associated ideas?i. e., the
educational prejudices and pre-conceived ideas of their victims. Amongst
the Slavonic peoples, the horrible superstition termed vampirism
seems to have been current, like witchcraft amongst the Celtic and
Teutonic. So late as the beginning of the last century, it was epidemic
in Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Poland, Hungary, and Wallachia: there
was hardly a village that was not said to be haunted by one of those
blood-sucking demons termed vampires. Our Gothic and Teutonic
ancestors believed in some similar delusive appearance, and evil agents,
termed Stryga, or Stryx. We shall see shortly that a being, with bat-
like wings, haunted M. Cahagnet's midnight hours; vampyrism, never-
theless, is not (strange to say) amongst his marvels, although we have
a conviction it has not escaped his bibliomaniacal researches into " the
black art." It is not uncommon, since magnetism and electricity have
been made popular sciences, to meet with monomaniacs who have a
fixed idea that they are secretly galvanized or electrified by a distant
and inveterate foe. Even yet the monomaniacal notion of active
sorcery and witchcraft may be met with in practice, and a poverty-
stricken decrepit woman becomes an object for the hate and dread of
the miserable hypochondriac. The author of " Magie Magnetique"
expresses his entire belief in the various tales of sorcery with which
mediasval literature abounds?e.g., he quotes, approvingly, the stor}7-
from Boethius' "Annals of Scotland" as to a certain King Duffus (?)
of that country, who was bewitched by certain sorcerers by means of a
waxen image of him, which they roasted (sic) before a little fire; and
MONOMANTACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 313
who was only restored to health by the discovery and combustion of
the malefactors. He quotes, also, a story of seventy sorcerers who
were put to death, in 1670, in Sweden, who (amongst other crimes)
destroyed those that displeased them by striking the air with a wooden
knife. Some hundreds, indeed, of such sorcerers were burnt in that
country, without any apparent diminution of their numbers. But M.
Cahagnet only mentions these facts historically; he relies upon very
recent instances for his proofs, of which the following is an example.
It is taken from an author* whom he describes as one who appears to
him to be a very learned man, full of good faith, and above all sus-
picion of interested motives or of weakness of mind:?
" It was in the month of March that three itinerant magnetiques,
paid by I know not whom, began in the darkness, and at a distance, to
magnetize me, and to develop phenomena which I could not explain,
and which occupied much my attention. I heard persons abusing me,
but I could not distinguish them; I had headaches, was restless, the
nervous system began to be in an abnormally irritable state, &c. Sub-
sequently, tormented by the voices which menaced and insulted me,
especially during the night, and believing that the family Lavaud be-
trayed me, for their voices were imitated for the purpose of deceiving
me, I left the residence where I had been loaded with kindness
Some time after this change of abode, the three wretches who had ren-
dered me so unhappy, and who had calculated beforehand the advantage
of isolating me, took all possible means for bringing me wholly under
their influence, and succeeded towards the end of May. At that time,
one evening, at the moment between waking and sleeping, when my
will and powers of resistance had left me for a moment, I was magne-
tized in floods, if I may so express myself; and in the morning I was
wholly at the mercy of my persecutors,?or, in other words, three
strangers, whom I had never seen, did, unknown to me, and in spite
of me, so take possession of both my moral and corporeal freedom, that
they saw by my eyes, heard by my ears, touched by my hands, ....
&c. I pass over in silence" (continues M. Cahagnet) " the thousand,
and one miseries this gentleman suffered; he laid an information before
the tribunals, and caused a petition to be presented to the chamber of
deputies, through M. Croissant, with the view of directing the atten-
tion of the o-overnment to the occult machinations of magnetism. That
petition was not taken into consideration. To support the statement
as to his being bewitched, he quoted the case observed by Dr. Reca-
mier, member^ of the Royal Academy of Medicine of Paris. This
recent fact I subjoin."
The case there subjoined by M. Cahagnet is that of a peasant who
at the same hour every night, heard a deafening noise, as of a caldron
* Observations de Magndtisme Occulte, par Emile Roy, docteur-mddecin, ancien
chirurgien-major, p. 1840.
314 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
or iron pot struck very powerfully; it prevented him sleeping, and he
thought that he had either an affection of the brain, or some disease of
the organ of hearing. He therefore consulted Recamier, who, after
making the necessary inquiries, ascertained that a blacksmith, who
lived in a village at some distance from the patient, had a spite against
him for some trifling offence or other, and with a view to annoy him,
struck an iron pot every night at the same hour; and although no one
else, not under the influence of the smith, could hear the noise, the
unhappy peasant heard it as clearly as if it were in his room. Keca-
mier took the necessary steps to put a stop to the smith's spiteful
hammering, by frightening him with consequences, and the magnetized
was from that time let alone.
Amongst other similar stories related by M. Cahagnet, is one he
quotes from the Presse, from which we learn that Pascal had a con-
firmed belief in the power of good and bad spirits, for the following
written amulet was found in a fold of his doublet, wrapped up in
parchment:?
" L'an de grace 1655.
? " Lundi, 29 Novembre, jour de Saint Clement,: pape et martyr, et
aUtres du martyrologe.
" Yeille de Saint Chrisogone, martyr, et autres. Depuis environ deux
heures et demie du soir, jusqu'a environ minuit et demi.
" Feu.
" Dieu d'Abraham, Dieu d'Isaac, Dieu de Jacob.
" Non des philosophes et des savants.
" Certitude, certitude, sentiment, joie, paix.
" Oubli du monde, et de tout, hormis Dieu.
" Joie, joie, joie, pleurs de joie."
This amulet of Pascal is described by M. Lelut, member of the In-
stitute, and principal physician to the Asylum Salpetriere. Pascal (we
are told) was bewitched before he was a year old, by an old sorcerer
who received alms at his father's gate, and who confessed to having
cast a spell over the child. The old fellow sacrificed a cat to the devil
to break the spell, but 'without success; he then made a poultice of
various herbs, which he had got a little girl, aged seven years, to
gather, and applied it to the abdomen; the child fell into a lethargy,
but returned to life at midnight, as the sorcerer had predicted.
The true character of M. Cahagnet's mind ? namely, reasoning
mania?may be gathered easily from the details of a successful experi-
ment in incantation made by him. As it is calculated to throw light,
not only upon the state of mind of this mystical lunatic, but also upon
these maniacal delusions generally, we subjoin it. M. Cahagnet intro-
duces his story by an explanation of the way he was led to make his
experiments. He says?
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 315
" M. Eenard, of whom I have spoken to thee, is my master in all
these studies. He is possessor of an excellent library, as I have
frequently observed, in which he often left me to rummage out and
read at my leisure all the conjuring books therein. When I had got
thoroughly crammed with then- gibberish, I remarked to M. Eenard
that it was of little use to read only these old volumes, and stop
there. I wanted specially to know whether these magicians, sorcerers,
cabalists, astrologers, &c., had said anything true, or were only pur-
blind. Would you, on some fine midnight, make a regular conjury
with me in the midst of the forest of Eambouillet, in the most detes-
table and diabolical locality possible ? I should like to see the devil
face to face, and have a pull at his beard, &c. My friend frowned,
compressed his lips, and assumed the most picturesque figure of a
sorcerer I had ever seen. I thought for a moment that he was the
devil himself. He gave me no answer. 1 Oh ! indeed!' I said, ' are
you afraid?you the terror of the country, before whom the children
cross themselves, and the women tremble ?' ' Yes,' my friend replied,
in a tone which made me burst out laughing. ' Do not laugh,
Alphonso,' M. Eenard replied, ' and never you do that which you have
proposed that we two do. I have made the trial once, and I never
will repeat it.' ' What have you seen, then ?' I replied. ' That which
I not wish to see,' my friend answered. ' Let us cease this conversa-
tion, or change the subject. Only you remember my advice, and
profit by it,' were the last words of M. Eenard."
Now, M. Alphonso Cahagnet's curiosity was only whetted by this
mysterious counsel. He " had never known what fear was, and he had
so often escaped certain death that he had come to consider himself
invincible." He considered the matter well, and asked himself what
need was there to go into the depth of a forest and make a diabolical
incantation when according to the Christians (sic) we had always near
to us a good angel and a devil, and, according to the clairvoyants, a
good and bad director ? Why not call these directors up p This
conclusion appeared sound; so deciding that night was the best time,
he Avrote on a piece of paper, and signed the following exorcism:?
? Au nom de Dieu tout-puissant, ton createur et le mien, je te prie,
ange commis a ma garde, de m'apparaitre cette nuit, afin de me
prouver la realite de ton existence.
Or in other words he summoned his good angel in the name of God,
their common Creator, to appear to him, and prove thereby his exis-
tence. With this paper under his ear, and nothing doubting as to
the result, M. Cahagnet retired to repose. The result we will give in
his own words :?
" It was in February 1841 that I tried this kind of communication.
The first night I neither saw nor felt anything extraordinary; the
second offered to me a phenomenon which astonished me enough not
316 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
to desire to experience it again. I had only been in bed a few minutes.
I was not asleep; at least I was certain I was not, when I felt my left
arm gently drawn out of bed; then a stronger force drew upon my
leg, so that my body followed my two limbs, and I fell upon the floor.
I immediately exclaimed, ? Oh, my God! what is it that this means ?'
I had scarcely uttered than I replaced myself in bed, with the com-
plete consciousness that all that had passed was only the effect of the
imagination. I began to reflect upon what I had done, and upon the
consequences which might follow upon my exorcism. I did not like
to withdraw from the attempt, so 1 continued to place my little bit of
paper under my ear every night. I was quiet for some days, and I
already doubted the result of my experiment, when I one night begged
a good aunt of mine, who had been dead some years, to appear to me
instead of my guide. This aunt loved me much when on earth ; she
had tried by every possible means to induce me to observe what she
termed my religious duties without success. If I had thought I
should meet in the churches no souls but those as pure and angelic as
her own I would have gone every day to solace my wounded spirit
within their kindly sphere, but the intolerance of the priests had made
me an atheist. I conjured, then, this noble creature to appear to me,
if she were able to do so. I was astonished to be awoke on the same
night by the sound of a very powerful bell, the clapper of which
struck three times, and three strokes each time. Hardly fully awake,
I saw before me the son of my aunt, my cousin-german, who had died
after her. I entered into conversation with him, and was really quite
astonished to hear him speak to me of the spiritual world, of the good-
ness of God, and of the need of pure religion. When this cousin was
on earth he thought as I did; indeed, I think I owed a little of my
scepticism to him. I replied that I was better disposed towards these
matters than when he was on earth, seeing that I read books which
had enlightened me, and that at that moment I was endeavouring to
enter into communication with spirits so as to assure myself of their
existence and of a future life. I added that I had called my aunt for
this identical purpose. I had not finished the last sentence when I
saw that good aunt standing at the foot of my bed, in an attitude the
most majestic possible, stretching one arm toward heaven, pointing me
to it with her finger, and saying to me in a voice inexpressibly tender
and touching:?
" ' Alas ! Alphonso, do you still doubt the power of God ?'
" Overwhelmed by these words, I endeavoured to revive my scep-
ticism by a few unconnected expressions. All disappeared. I lighted
a candle to see what o'clock it was. It had just struck four. Some
days now elapsed without anything happening. Another night I
heard the sound of that same bell striking the same number of times.
I opened my eyes, and I saw a human head hover over my bed, the
most hideous imaginable; it was supported by two large bat wings;
its eyes were of fire, and seemed to pierce me to the heart. I was so
enraged to see such a monstrous creature that I repelled it with voice
and gesture, sitting up in bed the better to defend myself from contact
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 317
with it. iSTot being able to succeed, I invoked my good angel and my
aunt. Hardly bad I expressed the wish than all disappeared. On the
night following the same noise again awoke me, and I saw kneeling
before my bed a woman whose long black hair concealed her face, but
whose wicked intentions I knew, and which she avowed to me without
my knowing the motive. I was obliged to have recourse to the same
invocation to rid myself of this infernal woman. I began to write of
these visions, and noted the hour at which each occurred. Similar
noises and visions, more or less fantastic, continued for some months.
One night I had hardly laid my head on my pillow when I felt it to
move so as to raise me up at least six inches. I thought this was in
consequence of the breathing of a strange head beneath mine. I
asked (I know not why), ' Is it thee, my good director, who art here ?'
' Yes, tes, yes,' a voice answered at three distinct intervals, speaking
from just below my pillow. I was terrified by the answer, and asked
no more that night.
" The next day the noise changed; it was not the sound of a bell
which awoke me, but the same blows struck in the same manner with
rods, which I thought of iron from the clear sound they made; the
same movement was felt under my head; I again asked if it was my
director, and it made me the same answer in the same way. Less
afraid than the night before, I said to him, ' If thou be my good
angel, thou hast a name; if thou comest to me with a good intent, it is
right that I know how to address thee when I have need of thee?tell
me then thy name. The word Agooii was pronounced thrice with
such a prolonged detonation of sulphur that I beseeched Grod never to
let me hear that name again."
In this way M. Cahagnet goes on describing his nocturnal spectral
illusions. For three years, indeed, he tells us he heard voices of every
kind; saw all sorts of visions; felt various sensations; and especially
had numerous previsions. He could not get rid of them, and obtained
only a temporary relief by calling upon God for help. He applied to
his master, M. llenard ; he read medical works on various diseases, but
in vain. The first clairvoyante, however, whom he consulted told him
that he was under a spell. This self-inflicted suffering, so madly mis-
understood, had an evil effect on others as well as on himself. With
great naivete he further relates how an inhabitant of Troyes, a reader
of his Arcana of the Future Life, came express to Paris to state his
position. He and two others having read the " Occult Philosophy"
of Agrippa, determined to adopt the methods of incantation detailed
in that work. They made the requisite arrangements, reached the
place appointed, traced the circle, and commenced the ceremony, and
were forthwith assailed by a shower of stones, groans, and by hisses,
doubtless by hidden spectators. Nor was this all. One of the three
had lost 60,000 francs by his foolishness, and was reduced to poverty;
another lost an office under government which he held; and a third
so. XXVII. z
318 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
so mismanaged his affairs that he was sent to prison. These suffer-
ings were all, however, simply proofs of their truth and sincerity!
Compacts with spirits are as fully established (M. Cahagnet remarks)
as anything in the world.
Those who have read that sad chapter in European history which
unfolds the treatment of witches and warlocks, cannot fail to re-
cognise in this M. Cahagnet one of those men who would have
victimized hundreds by his follies, and would himself have finally been
the victim of the superstition, ignorance, and credulity of society.
Reading these details, so deliberately and calmly given, one can hardly
believe that it is now the middle of the nineteenth century. And
as formerly the deluded creatures named their familiar spirits Pye-
wacket, Vinegar Tom, Grizell Greedygut, Swein, &c., so do these vision-
aries name theirs. One Colonel Roger is quoted, who formed a
cabalistic club of nine members, whose object was the practice of the
black art, and who had a certain spirit, termed Mikenas, at their call.
Mikenas would fetch and carry like an errand-boy.
"Prospero. What, Ariel; my industrious servant Ariel?
Ariel. What would my potent master ? Here I am."
Mercurial water is wanted, Mikenas is invoked, and the flask is seen
to place itself of its own accord on the window-sill. The greater
number of the members took snuff, and complaining of the bad
quality of what they had, desired " narquitoche," a recherche American
snuff not sold in France. A certain lucide, already known in London,
we believe, to be an impostor, advised that money should be put
down for Mikenas to get the much desired snuff. No sooner said
than done. Mikenas was invoked?away went the money. Hey,
presto! in a minute came the snuff! The following story of the
colonel's of their cabalistic doings is too curious to be omitted:?
" Know that the members of this club have, in their cabalistic
articles of faitb, come to the conclusion that it is possible for elemen-.
tary [spiritual] beings to be transformed into material beings, as thou
may read in a book entitled, ' Le Comte de Cabalis,' &c. I have
already referred to this subject in our conversation on cabalistic
mirrors, when explaining that the cabalists admit that the elements
are only composed of such beings as ourselves, but without our im-
mortality, which they do not possess and cannot, except by being
united to the sons of heaven, who are our seigneuries. The chief of
the colonel's club (following the advice of the clairvoyante who en-
lightened them) had concluded a spiritual marriage with a sylph, a
spirit of the air; but to the end that this spirit should be visible
and palpable to his material senses it was necessary, naturally, that it
should be materialized, and this could only be effected by the spirit
absorbing those of our material substances the most adapted to its
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 319
nature. This is what happened for six months. Every day this in-
visible spirit placed itself at table before M. Pie , and devoured all
the food which it had demanded from their elairvoyante, and which
were expressly prepared for it. There only wanted a few months'
more of preparation for this spirit to be rendered visible to the eyes
of her fiance. .... But the revolution of July came to dash this
sweet hope by carrying off M. Pic , who died some time after, and
himself joined his fiancee in the spiritual world. What is certain in
this account is this, that the material food placed every day at each
meal on the plate of this spirit disappeared every time in the presence
of those whom monsieur invited to dine with him, and this continued
for six months. I have this statement from two eye-witnesses, Colonel
Roger and M. Bodes, an octogenarian now residing in a maison de
vieillards, rue des Recollets, in Paris."
The imaginary " Gr." of the dialogue exclaims, on hearing this re-
cital, " Oh, my good friend, where are you leading me ?"?and the
answer boldly is, " To the search after truth" !
"0, Setebos, these be brave spirits, indeed!"
We cannot omit stating that M. Cahagnet claims the power of
charming away the clouds,?relating numerous examples of his success,
indeed, and giving names of witnesses and dates. We will quote an
instance or two, for the delusion is novel, and is a useful illustration of
pathological psychology. We subjoin the history of his first expe-
riment :?
" I had just completed the perusal of M. Ricard's 1 Cours de Mag-
netisme,' in which that author appears much disposed to admit the
magnetic influence of man on the atmosphere. I was interested by
this idea, and on several occasions I made experiments, which appeared
to me to be tolerably successful. I communicated these attempts to
M. Renard, who lives in the woods six hours out of twelve every day.
This studious magnetist also made the same experiments, with the
same success. He believed it was not possible to doubt this magnetic
power of man over the atmosphere ; but the question is apparently so
ridiculous and nonsensical, as thou hast remarked, that we aban-
doned this sort of experiments. They were of this kind: when I felt
a VERT ARDENT desire to experiment, I went into a little garden that
I have; I there collected myself for a moment, looking at the sky and
at the' clouds with which it was more or less covered. My ima-
gination (or my will, if you like) was then excited, and I stretched
forth my hands towards some cloud which I wished to stop in its
course. After some minutes of this action and of this conviction, it
seemed to me that the cloud took the direction which I had imposed
upon it. I say, it seemed, because I dare not sat more. It was not
once only, but mant times. I had not the feeling that the cloud was
so distant as it really was. I likewise thought it to be of a compact
nature, capable of resisting any pressure, and I then used a certain
amount of force to push it, just as I would with a heavy weight."
z 2
320 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
M. Cahagnet also made the rain to cease, and the sky to clear up.
The liypersesthetic sensation described in the following (marked by us
in italics) is very significant and characteristic, pathologically. Some-
thing almost identical with it has been described by M. Cahagnet
before:?
" One day, when the sky was overcast, and a very small but heavy
rain was falling, I went into my garden, animated with the conviction
that I was about to disperse the clouds and procure fine weather. I
commenced proceedings, and passed into such a state that it appeared
to me as if the bone of my head teas raised some inches. I was not
long in perceiving that a beautiful blue crown formed above me, which
went on gently enlarging until, in about an hour, the rain ceased and
the sky was magnificent. Was it an hallucination ? It might be; but
on entering the house I got strangers to touch my clothes," &c. &c.
The clotbes were dry, and therefore, &c. Subsequently, M. Cahagnet
made some experiments equally brilliant and more satisfactory, under
various circumstances, and in the presence of different witnesses?
namely, M. Lecocq, of Argenteuil, watchmaker; M. Chevillard Medar,
farmer; M. Gerard, cooper; MM. Lejeune, Ravet, Emmanuel, &c.
Medar and Gerard call upon him to witness his exploits :??
" I said to Medar, I don't feel exactly in a condition for trying an
experiment of the kind just now, especially on such large clouds; how-
ever, if you will both help me, we will try. Oh, said they, we will
willingly. Then, said I, I attack the head of that one which is upon
the other and dissolve it away;?and I stave in its belly, said Medar,
with that sort of faith in magnetic facts which is daily exhibited.
M. Gerard added, ' and I will take the tail.' We all three set to work.
Seeing us thus engaged, we might have been compared with the three
Horatii, setting aside the object in view. In ten minutes our cloud
had gone to rejoin its companions in that vast ethereal laboratory wrhich
contains us, and was no longer visible to our eyes. M. Gerard said,
It is true the cloud is gone, but has not the cloud below it absorbed
it ? Possibly, I answered; let us therefore set to work to open the
belly of that one, and recover our cloud?what say you ? We will do
it if it be possible, they answered, but it is sharp work. Let us try,
then, said I; and at the same moment we went at the giant with such
force and energy, that it disappeared, like its companions, in about ten
minutes. Imagine the enthusiasm and astonishment of my visitors,
who from that day have continued to make experiments more and more
demonstrative and conclusive."
Here end our illustrations. Well may it be said, by the men and
women who pass their lives in the pursuit of delusive objects like those
we have discussed?
"we are such 3tuff
As dreams are made of."
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 321
We now propose to draw the moral deducible from these follies and
crimes. The whole history of these varied delusions is a most pregnant
chapter in the history of human nature. It unfolds to the thoughtful
psychologist wonderful and important glimpses into the more hidden
workings of the mind. What strange ground for belief!?what irre-
pressible convictions !?what trusting faith !?what horrible martyr-
doms !?what cowardly fears!?what constant fortitude! And all
based upon nothing more substantial than the fantasies of the imagina-
tion, or the knaveries of rogues! It is now well known that if the
attention be strongly directed to any object by individuals predisposed
to cerebral disorder, a condition of the cerebrum is excited closely allied
to notional insanity, or at least to that state which gives rise to various
disorders of the nervous system. If the directing cause be something
external to the mind, the phenomena induced come under the cate-
gories of the mesmeric, biological, &c., and frequently give rise to the
erroneous deduction that occult material forces present in the external
directing agent are the cause of the phenomena themselves. The atten-
tion may, however, be excited to special action by the internal opera-
tions of the mind itself. When this happens, the representative faculty
acts directly upon the cerebrum, induces corresponding change therein
and these return, as it were,* to the mind, in the form of spectral sensa-
tions, perceptions, imaginations, and associations of ideas,?not, how-
ever, easily recognised as morbid, when the mind is enfeebled, or the
reasoning powers imperfectly developed. It is this morbid mental and
cerebral condition which is most usually present in enthusiasts and
visionaries, in whom the attention has been strongly fixed on a special
object of thought or perception, in consequence of a predisposing love
of the marvellous, or from the compelling force of the circumstances in
which the individuals are placed.
In considering these forms of cerebral disorder, we have to examine
carefully the order of the phenomena, with a view to a correct idea of
their origin, nature, and development. In the first place, it is a notice-
able general fact that the subjects of all these varied changes in the
nervous system are persons already predisposed to the influence of
nervine agents. There is either great natural sensibility of that sys-
tem, or a hereditary tendency to morbid action, or an enfeebled condi-
tion of the blood, or (as has not unfrequently happened) medicinal
agents have been administered, either by inhalation or potion, with the
express intention of inducing this susceptibility; or extreme mental
labour has been endured, or a special emotional excitement has been
caused.
When the attention of a person thus predisposed is specially roused
and directed, the mind receives at the same time a suggestion as to the
822 ? THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
event likely to result; or, in other words, an anticipation is excited.
The strenuous act of attention is of itself a powerful modifying agent,
and largely exalts the predisposition to irregular nervous action which
may already exist, or develops it where it does not. It is therefore a
fundamental part of the morbid process that these two acts, attention
and anticipation, be excited. The phenomena will vary almost infi-
nitely, according as they are special or general in their character; that
is to say, according as some suggestion is made or particular idea is
excited ah externo, or according as the direction which the morbid process
will take is left to the individual's own mental workings. They are as
varied in the former case as the external circumstances from which
they originate ; in the latter, as the mental constitution, habits of
thought, and preconceived ideas upon which they are based.
Amongst the natural examples of these monomanias (for they exist
as such, and are to be found in all large asylums), the hypochondriacal
takes a prominent position. In these, the morbid influence of the
attention on the bodily organs has been fully recognised since Sir
Henry Holland called special attention to the subject, in the first
edition of his " Medical Notes and Reflections." It is generally agreed
now by the leading neurologists, that the anticipatory acts of atten-
tion which the hypochondriacal patient is'constantly directing towards
some viscus, is a cause of disease in the viscus involved?not func-
tional only, but structural disease?altering the sensations usually ex-
perienced, modifying the mode of action, and finally inducing change
in the tissues themselves.
Now, in h}rpochondriasis, the anticipation is of evil; the morbid
mental state is the predisposing source of the suggestion, and the
perusal of medical books, or other similar application of the mind, is
the exciting cause of the special ideas upon or from which the mind
acts. But there may be anticipation of corporeal good, as well as of
evil. In this case, the order of the phenomena is still the same?i. e.,
there is an alteration in the ordinary sensations, a change in the mode
of action, and an alteration of structure. To this class of anticipations
belong those developed by homoeopathy, mesmerism, confidence in
treatment, or faith in spiritual influences. These, it is true, result
from other sources than those seen in hypochondriasis, but very often
indeed the subjects of them are either hypochondriacal or hysterical,
or have a predisposition to insanity, or other sensorial disease of the
nervous system. To this large group of induced corporeal changes
belong also the evil results consequent upon delusive apprehensions as
to the influence of witchcraft, the "evil eye," diabolical agencies, and
the like. All morbid acts of attention from these sources, and the
morbid anticipations which accompany those acts, may?like those of
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. -323
the hypochondriacal?he followed by both structural and functional
changes in the viscera and in the sensations ordinarily connected with
them. It is doubtless these results which have so firmly fixed the
popular belief in the capabilities for evil of the performers in the black
art, and in the power of miraculous gifts of healing professed by
members of almost every religious sect in every age, and in every clime.
It cannot be denied that persons who profess the power of inflicting
injury may become proper objects of punishment if they maliciously
and deliberately make the subjects of their malice believe that they
are putting those powers into practice, and thereby induce bodily
and mental disorder. Indeed, it appears to us that thus to cheat a
simple-minded man out of his health and happiness is more criminal
than to swindle him out of his property. There are other instances
of analogous criminality that might be adduced?e.g., the nefarious
methods by which certain advertising quacks act on the mind of their
victims, and induce morbid acts of attention and anticipations as to
corporeal evil, of the most fearful character.
Perhaps convulsive movements of every kind might be properly
placed under the last head, when induced by morbidly excited atten-
tion. They differ in having a purely cerebral seat, although the.
phenomena be manifested outwardly. Every form of catalepsy, chorea^
and epilepsy are within this group. The monomaniacal societies to
which the dancing mania of the fourteenth century gave origin may
be classed with those of cerebral and intellectual origin, and the
disease itself was very similar to some modern affectations not con-
nected (as that was) with religious ideas. Of what we can have no
doubt we will, however, more especially speak?namely, those morbid
conditions of the sensorial and hemispherical ganglion which a strongly
directed attention induces. There are two principal divisions?namely,
those in which the mind originates spontaneously the strained atten-
tion and the suggestions arise in the ordinary way; and those in which
the attention is excited artificially, and the suggestions are derived
immediately from without. To the former belong all visionaries,*?
to the latter, the mesmerized clairvoyantes, the electro-biologized or
hypnotized, &c. A third division arises out of a combination of these
two sources of morbid action, as in the " evil eye," witchcraft, table-
moving, and spirit-rapping. The spectral phenomena which constitute
the bases of these forms of mental aberration are by far the most
commonly visual, then (in the order of frequency) auditory, muscular,
* Gibbon in his History describes in a. few pithy words the process as it was
manifested in Peter the Hermit. "Whatever he wished, says Gibbon, "that he
believed; whatever he believed, that he saw in dreams and revelations."?Decline
ind Fall, lviii.
324 . THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
tactile, and olfactory. The points of interest they present are too
numerous for consideration here; they also demand, on account of
their vast importance, a closer and more critical analysis than is
possible at present. It is hardly conceivable to what an extent they
have influenced man's conduct through the religious dogmas and
.political changes that have been based upon them. History is rife
with illustrations of their wide-spread influence. In the middle ages,
and even later, it was not possible for the wisest men to escape from
their influence. The epidemical power of witchcraft may be mentioned
as an instance. In numerous instances the accused confessed to
circumstances which could only have arisen (if any faith can be placed
in common sense) in a morbidly excited state of the system, the notions
being precisely those with which the popular mind was imbued from the
cradle. We find the following,in Sir W. Scott's "Letters on Demon-
ology and Witchcraft," as to the confessions of a reputed Scotch witch,
named Isabel Gouldie:?
" She had been, she said, in the Pounie Hills, and got meal there
from the Queen of Fairies, more than she could eat. She added that
the queen is bravely clothed in white linen, and in white and brown
cloth ; that the King of Fairy is a brave man ; and there were elf-bulls
roaring and skoiling at the entrance of their palace, which frightened
her much."
And a great deal more of the same kind.
The auditory illusions in these cases have had less attention bestowed
upon them than the visual; they are less common, because the sense
of hearing has not so extensive relations as the sense of vision, and
because the attention is less frequently directed to auditory percep-
tions, and the suggestions which develop them in morbid association
are not so numerous. It is in " spirit-rapping" that we have the best
?modern illustration, although all enthusiasts and visionaries who have
received spiritual messages, or held a supposed conversational inter-
course with spirits, the Deity, &c., belong to the group. It would, we
believe, be altogether contrary to the fact to say that those who profess
to hear the " spirit-raps" are deceived by others, or state what they know
to be false. They have the strongest possible conviction that the
sounds which they hear are genuine, just as in the analogous instance
of the insane, and they cannot comprehend by what machinery such
distinctly audible sounds can be produced except by agents external to
themselves. This conviction is more deeply rooted, when, as it often
happens, several persons, being subjected at the same moment to the
influence of a common suggestion, and of a morbidly excited attention,
hear the same illusory sounds. The following instance shows, how-
ever, how these illusions may be induced and removed. A lady being
MONOMANIACAL SOCIETIES AND LITERATURE. 325
on a visit to a family in which experiments at spirit-rapping were
made, became herself a " medium"?that is to say, whenever she
touched a door, a table, or a chair, she heard the raps. This was
amusing enough for a short time, but on her return home the same
circumstance occurred to such an extent that she could touch no
article of furniture without hearing these sounds. She wrote to her
friends to explain the awkward position she was in, and to beg of them
to "exorcise" the spirit?a duty they found to be rather puzzling.
However, they wrote back to say that they had taken the necessary
steps, and that from the time she received their letter she might confi-
dently rely upon not hearing the spirit any more; and actually from
that moment the raps were not heard. We had this history from one
of the persons engaged in the transaction, and who has taken great
interest in all these phenomena. Of course the reader acquainted with
hypnotic or "electro-biological" phenomena will readily recognise the
true nature of the " possession" and exorcism. Table-moving is one
of the same class, but the suggestions direct the muscular system in-
stead of the representative faculty.
Now, amongst the very important moral questions which arise out
of the consideration of these phenomena, there is one of transcendent
importance?that is, the bearing they have upon the nature and value
of evidence or testimony. There is hardly any more certain conclusion
to be drawn from the vast variety of experiments which the psycholo-
gist has made to his hands by the numerous classes of persons whose
vagaries we have glanced over than this?that sensorial perceptions,
ideas, associations of ideas, and general propositions utterly false and
erroneous, may be induced by suitable arrangements and manipula-
tions, not only in individuals, but in targe numbers of persons at the
same time, and yet appear to them as being indubitably real and in-
controvertibly true. Even when the phenomena are palpably impos-
sible as realities, and the propositions are evidently absurd (as we see
in homoeopathy, mesmerism, &c.), it is difficult to rebut the evidence
thus adduced; but in those cases in which they are probable, although
the alleged circumstances did not occur, how can it be proved that
they are illusions if in themselves not susceptible of re-examination?
such as simple spectral illusions and the like? The importance of
this question is not diminished when we remember that a designing
knave might, by an artful combination of influences, so hypnotize, or
otherwise influence the minds of a given number of persons as to make
them powerful witnesses in support of a delusion. That such practices
constituted part^of the system of the sorcerers in the middle and dark
ages is, we think, certain; nor are we without well-grounded suspicions
that even now, in this the nineteenth century, the nervous system is
326 ON PARALYSIS AND DISEASES OF THE BRAIN.
thus acted upon for the purpose of perpetuating1 deliberate well-planned
frauds. In the " Magie Magnetique" of M. Cahagnet there are several
examples of this kind.
What is the remedy for these serious evils ? Mr. Faraday has at-
tributed them to defective education in the people, and would improve
it in the direction of the Baconian philosophy ; but the cultivators of
science are themselves the victims of these delusions. As examples, we
need go no further than Yon Reichenbach and his English translator,
the Professor of Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh. The
remedy is not easy. The practical psychologist will not, however, lose
so favourable an opportunity for the study of the human mind in its
aberrations ; and the psychiatrician may gather something useful from
a careful inquiry into these monomaniacal societies and their literature.
The phenomena of which they treat are so closely allied to the
hallucinations and notions of the insane, whether we consider their
essential nature, their origin, their progressive development, and their
results, that for practical purposes they may be considered to be iden-
tical. The main difference is in the etiology; in the insane, in the
majority of cases, the cause is material rather than mental; in the
popular manias, it is rather mental than material.
