On Medico-Legal Evidence In Cases of Insanity
==============================================

Delivered before the Medical Society of London.
By FORBES WINSLOW, M.D., D.C.L.
I HA YE selected for my third and concluding Lecture a subject
of great, vast, and of daily increasing magnitude and importance,
not only if viewed in relation to our position as citizens of the
state, privileged to live under the protection of a monarchical
government and a constitutional sovereign, but as members of
an honourable and learned profession, exercising?rightly, justly,
and advantageously exercising?an incalculable degree of moral
influence through all sections of society, and all departments of
art, science, and philosophy. Is it possible to over-estimate or
to exaggerate the interest of the subject now under consideration?
I propose to submit to your critical judgment a sketch of our
high and responsible vocation as medico-legal witnesses?to sug-
gest for adoption certain general principles of evidence, which
may serve as our guide when called upon to give testimony in
difficult, doubtful, and disputed cases of insanity. The position
of the medical witness, even under the most favourable circum-
stances, is perplexing, anxious, and embarrassing. The character
of his education, the peculiarity of his habits of thought, the
philosophic cast of his mind, his constant and earnest search
after truth, the nature of his daily professional occupation, ill
adapt him for contending in the forensic arena with the know-
ledge, ability, and subtle acumen which are so often brought to
bear (in courts of justice) against those little skilled in the art of
legal fence. Occasionally we have to give testimony in relation,
to matters of fact; to describe physical states?phenomena cog-
nizant to sense. For example: in cases of sudden death from
supposed poisoning, the toxicologist has certain well-defined
scientific data to guide him to a right conclusion; he is in pos-
session of well-recognised tests, which bring him almost uner-
S96 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
ringly to a sound and safe deduction; his evidence has reference
more to an exact, than to a speculative?to a certain, than an
uncertain science; his province (when in court) is simply to record
the results at which, after careful investigation, he has arrived.
The questions involved in the inquiry, whether death, under
suspicious circumstances, was natural, self-inflicted, or the effect
of extraneous violence, are not necessarily intricate, obscure, or
difficult of satisfactory solution. How different, however, is the
position of the witness, when his mind is brought to the con-
sideration of questions connected with morbid mental phenomena?
In these exalted inquiries he has no fixed or certain test?no in-
fallible standard?no well-defined rules?no principles of exact
science, to aid him; no beacon to protect him from the rocks
and quicksands which beset his course?no chart to refer to in
times of difficulty?no compass to guide him in the hour of
danger?no harbour of refuge into which he can run his fragile
vessel when the tempest is howling and destruction impending.
As medico-legal witnesses, the obstacles with which we have to
contend are often of a grave and serious character. We have
to deal with phenomena, of the essence or intimate nature of
which we know absolutely?positively, nothing. It is our duty
to elucidate principles of belief?to unravel motives of action?
to explain erratic conduct the most anomalous and extraordinary;
we have to trace the line which separates passion?the subtle
and shifting transformations of wild, ungovernable, and impetuous
passion?from the excitement of mania, and the morbid emotions
incident to the minor forms of diseased mind; to sketch the
varying frontier, the nice and shadowy distinctions, which sepa-
rate lunacy from malignity?madness from brutality; to point
out where folly merges into mental derangement?where respon-
sibility terminates, and irresiDonsibility commences; to distin-
guish between eccentricity and insanity?crime and alienation
of mind?vice and mental derangement?between the delusions
of the lunatic and the false conclusions?the illogical deductions
?the unphilosophical reasoning of men of sound intellect and of
rational understanding,?to separate the normal rhapsodies of the
healthy imagination, and the Arcadian illusions of the poet, from
those morbid conceptions of the fancy?those
??????se Daggers of the mind false creations
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain ?
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 397
those " thick-coming fancies," the products?the well-recognised,
indisputable symptoms of a mind thrown off its healthy balance
by actual cerebral disease.
There is no possibility of our placing the diseased mental ele-
ments submitted to our critical examination in a psychological
crucible or test-tube ; we cannot avail ourselves, in these delicate
investigations, of the aid of the microscope ; there is no mode by
which we can penetrate behind the curtain, or tear aside the veil
that divides the material from the immaterial?mind from
matter; there is no possibility of our obtaining access to that
mysterious chamber where the spiritual portion of our nature is
elaborated ; Ave have no gauge, no square rule, by which we can
ascertain in all cases, with any approach to chemical or mathe-
matical accuracy, an accurate idea of the actual condition of the
mind, when apparently under a cloud. In the elucidation of
these points, we are in a great measure left to our unaided
mental sense?to the uncertain guidance of our own deceptive
experience, and alas ! often, fallible judgment.
We enter the witness-box, charged, under the solemn sanction
of an oath, to decide the important questions as to the legal and
moral responsibility of our fellow-men. In capital cases, we are
called upon to declare whether the criminal was or was not
insane when he committed the act; whether, by disordered mind,
he was reduced to a state of legal irresponsibility. In other
cases, equally important matters are submitted to our adjudi-
cation, involving points relative to the competency of persons to
make testamentary dispositions of their property, or manage,
during life, themselves and their affairs. In the former case, the
life of a fellow-creature is made contingent upon the evidence of
those deputed to examine him, and delegated with the respon-
sibility of recording their medico-legal opinion as to his state of
mind; in the latter instance, we are expected to depose to the
competency of certain persons to exercise the otherwise inalien-
able privilege of disposing of property agreeably to their own
notions of the law of inheritance and conceptions of what is just;
and, in the third case, it is our province to decide, not upon the
solemn question of life or death, but whether a fellow-citizen is
in a condition of mind to justify the law in alienating from him
his civil rights, depriving him of the control of his person and
affairs, and destroying, by a legal declaration of lunacy, his free
no. XXVII. e E
S98 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
and independent agency. In the first case, it is our imperative
duty to avert, if possible, actual death?a death of moral igno-
miny and of physical suffering; in the latter instance, it is left
for us to pronounce whether legal dissolution is to be recorded
against the party whose mind is the subject of medico-judicial
inquiry. In the former case, it may, happily, be in our power to
rescue a fellow-creature from the scaffold; and, in the latter instance,
we may, by our evidence, have the not less pleasing gratification
of shielding him from the expensive, but nevertheless, under pro-
per circumstances, humane guardianship of the Court of Chancery.
Under circumstances like those I have now cursorily sketched,
we have, as may readily be conceived, to contend with serious
impediments. The witness has to encounter the prejudices and
ignorance of those by whom he is surrounded?of those who, if
otherwise enlightened, are too disposed to forget that the mental
conditions relative to which he has to speak are the exceptions
to the general laws by which human nature is guided, and that
they can only be elucidated by facts of an extraordinary cha-
racter, which rarely present themselves in the state of society in
which an individual exists. In attempting to give the court
before which he is subpoenaed a lucid statement of his opinion,
based upon actual experience, long-continued observation, reflec-
tion, and patient study, the views thus expounded are too often
considered either as the offspring of a false philosophy?a mawk-
ish sensibility?a distorted science?the affectation of a learned
and metaphysical subtlety?or, alas ! as the sordid result of the
paltry honorarium awarded to him for the expression of his
professional opinion ! The medical witness has to encounter the
sarcastic doubts, the special pleading, the suspicious inuendoes,
the legal finesse, of the acute and accomplished advocate, always
on the alert to perplex and confound him ; he has also arrayed
against him the unbending dicta of the judge, and inexperience
of the jury, easily misled by the plausible appeals, the persuasive
eloquence, and ad captandum arguments of the counsel, who,
occasionally, in the discharge of his duty as an advocate,* considers
* Lord Brougham, in his celebrated speech on Queen Caroline's trial,
thus describes the duty of an advocate:?" An Advocate, by the sacred
duty of his connexion with his client, knows, in the discharge of that office,
but one person in the world?that client, and none other. To save that
client by all expedient means?to protect that client at all hazards and
coats to all others, and among others, to himself, is the highest and most
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 399
himself justified, whilst defending the interests of his client, to
combat truth by sophistry?to dumb-found, confuse, and entrap
the witness?dazzle and bewilder the judge?hoodwink the jury,
and, by a combination of qualities which the accomplished nisi
prius advocate and practised disputant is so competent to call
into successful operation, make the "worse appear the better
reason," pervert the ends of truth, and thus make what ought to
be revered as the Temple of Justice, and held sacred as the
Majesty of the Law, a mockery and a jest.*
Having referred to the peculiar position of the medico-legal
witness, I would direct attention briefly to the value?special and
peculiar value?of the testimony of those who have directed their
attention almost exclusively to the study of medical psychology,
and who, by patient investigation and long experience, have
obtained a practical insight into the characteristics of the varied
phenomena of mental alienation, the habits and peculiarities of
the insane, and who are therefore peculiarly fitted to give
evidence in these cases.
Questions of great difficulty and complexity often arise in the
course of important judicial investigations, involving matters of
science, upon which the judge, jury, and counsel are incompetent,
from actual want of knowledge, to form a sound and accurate
?unquestioned of liis duties ; and he must not regard the alarm, the suffer-
ing, the torment, the destruction, which he may bring upon others. Tv ay,
separating even the duties of a patriot from those of an advocate, he must
go on reckless of consequences, if his fate should unhappily be to involve
his country in confusion !"?(Oct. 3, 1820.)
* " Addresses to a court of justice or a judicial body by a paid advocate,
although they tend to a practical conclusion, do not fall under the head of
deliberative oratory. The advice is not given upon the personal security,
credit, and authority of the speaker, nor is he understood to speak his own
convictions, but merely to follow his instructions, and to present the facts
of the case and the application of the law to it, in the light most favourable
to his client. Hence a paid advocate speaks without moral weight, and his
arguments merely pass at their intrinsic value, without deriving any addi-
tional force from the source from which they proceed."?An Essay on the
Influence of Authority in Matters of Opinion, by George Cornewall Lewis,
Esq., p. 132.
Sir James Johnston happened to say that he had no regard for the argu-
ments of counsel at the bar of the House of Commons, because they were
paid for speaking. Johnson. " Nay, sir, argument is argument; you can-
not help paying regard to their arguments, if they be good. If it were
testimony, you might disregard it, if you knew it were purchased." There
is a beautiful image in Bacon upon the subject: " '1 estimony is like an
arrow f-hot from a long-bow?the force of it depends on the strength of the
hand that draws it; argument is like an arrow from a cross-bow, which
has great force though shot by a child."
E E 2
400 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
judgment. With a view to their elucidation, men of repute,
termed in France experts, and in Italy periti, who have made
the matter at issue a special object of study, are called upon for
their testimony, and their evidence is generally considered as
final and conclusive. In a case in which it is necessary, in
order to satisfy the ends of justice, to submit certain portions
of food, or the contents of the stomach, to careful chemical
analysis, in order to ascertain, by the aid of delicate tests,
whether a person had come to his death by fair means, pro-
fessional gentlemen who have a reputation for having paid par-
ticular attention to such investigations, and who are practical
and experienced chemists and toxicologists, are called upon for
their opinion, and upon the result of their investigations the life
or death of a fellow-creature often depends. No reasonable man
disputes the value of such testimony.* A similar course is pur-
sued when any difficult and complicated question arises con-
nected with navigation, mechanics, or civil engineering. The
most able men of the day are summoned to solve knotty points,
and to settle questions of disputed science, which sagacious and
experienced minds are only able satisfactorily to determine. For
what object are matters of great difficulty and doubt submitted
to the adjudication of the judges assembled in the highest courts
in the kingdom, if it were not to obtain from men, presumed by
their elevated station to possess the maximum amount of legal
lore, a safe and satisfactory opinion ?-f- If we were not daily
in the habit of deferring to the knowledge and judgment of expe-
* " For all purposes of philosophical observation, a knowledge of the
proper science and a peculiar training of the senses are requisite, and,
therefore, a witness who possesses these qualifications is far more credible
than one who is destitute of them. For example, a scientific naturalist,
who reports that he lias seen an undescribed animal or vegetable in a
remote country, is far less likely to be mistaken than a common traveller,
ignorant of natural history. A skilled witness of this sort may be con-
sidered in a certain sense, as a witness of authority, inasmuch as his pre-
vious study and habits of observation give a peculiar weight to his report
of the phenomenon."?JEssay on Authority in Matters of Opinion, by
G. Cornewall Lewis, Esq.
t Cicero, in enumerating the circumstances^which give authority to testi-
mony, places first, virtus, and afterwards, ingenium, opes, at as, for tuna,
ars, usus, necessitas, and sometimes concursio rerum fortuitarum. With
regard to the latter, he says, " Sed reliquis quoque rebus, quanquam in iis
nulla species virtutis est, tamen interdum confirmatur fides, si aut ars
quBedam adhibetur (magna enim est vis ad persuadendum scientise) aut
usu3; plerumque enim creditur iis qui experti sunt."?Topica, c. 19.
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 401
rienced and intelligent minds, why should there exist any neces-
sity for the establishment, in connexion with the judicature of
this country, of courts of appeal ? Does not the eminent common
law barrister bow with great submission to the distinguished
equity counsel, and willingly and implicitly refer to his decision
matters of great complexity connected with his own department
of the profession ? Is not the learned body of British jurists
divided and subdivided into sections, each having its distinct and
separate court? An analogous practice is adopted in our own
science, and we are repeatedly availing ourselves of the superior
attainments and practical knowledge of those whom we know
have acquired a large amount of experience in special depart-
ments of our profession. I cannot conceive why medical men,
who have devoted themselves to the study of the diseases of the
mind, should not be equally competent with the experienced
mechanist, the practical engineer, the learned jurist, the scientific
chemist, and the toxicologist, to pronounce ex cathedra on points
coming strictly within their own peculiar province.*
Whilst upholding the testimony of able, scientific, and expe-
rienced men, I would protect myself from the imputation of
urging a slavish or blind submission to men even of admitted
acute and vigorous intellects. "Although," says Lord Bacon,
" the position be good, oportet discentem credere, yet it must be
coupled with this, oportet edoctum judicare; for disciples do
owe unto masters only a temporary belief, and a suspension of
* "In order that a person should be eminent in a learned profession, ifc
is necessary that he should combine a knowledge of its principles with that
judgment, tact, dexterity, and promptitude of applying them to actual
cases, which are derived from habits of practice. The like may be said of
persons conversant in the constructive arts, as architects and engineers, of
the military and naval services, of agriculturists, gardeners, manufacturers
of different kinds, &c. In order that they may give sound advice with
respect to any practical question belonging to their own department, it is
necessary that they should combine actual experience with abstract know-
ledge. In some cases, that experience implies even manual skill, which can
only be acquired by practice. For example, a surgeon would not be a com-
petent judge on a question of practical surgery, unless his judgment were
assisted and corrected by actual manipulation of his instruments. In like
manner a person cannot be a competent judge of works of art, such as
statues, pictures, coins, engravings; or of articles of trade, as horses, wines,
plate, <fcc., without practical observation and experience. In these cases a
certain training of the sight is necessary, analogous to the training of the
hands and limbs in a mechanical employment or trade requiring bodily
dexterity."?G-. Cornewall Lewis, On the Marks of Trustworthy Authority,
in an Essay on the Influence of Authority in Matters of Opinion.
402 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
their own judgment until tliey be fully instructed, and not an
absolute resignation or perpetual captivity."*
When a medical man is summoned to record his testimony in a
court of law, upon a case in which it is important to ascertain the
degree of sanity that existed at any stated period, he gives his
opinion to the best of his knowledge and ability, upon an abstract
point, without any reference to ulterior results. He has not to
regard the legal consequences of his evidence; it is not for the
witness to consider whether life is to be prolonged to an indefi-
nite period, or whether a fellow-being shall be immediately
launched into eternity. To the questions?" Do you consider
the party insane??was he so, according to the best of your judg-
ment, at such a period ?" the medical gentleman experienced in
the characteristics of insanity answers, negatively or affirmatively.
If the accused party escape punishment, as the result of his
opinion?if, in consequence of the medical evidence, his life be
saved?I do not see by what right he can be held up to public
odium and censure. The witness is not to be considered respon-
sible for the operation of the laws (be they good or bad), neither is
he accountable for the escape of the prisoner, if acquitted on the
plea of insanity, and thereby exempted from the extreme penalty
awarded for his crime. The witness is sworn to state the truth
according to his honest convictions, regardless of the legal results
of his evidence.
There is, alas! a disposition in cases of alleged insanity to
repudiate in courts of law all evidence of this specific and scien-
tific character. I am bound, in justice to the legal profession, to
confess, that, occasionally the evidence of medical men adduced
at inquiries of this nature is extremely unsatisfactory. It is too
often the practice to place in the witness-box professional men
wholly incompetent to give testimony in cases of disputed
insanity;?incompetent, from ignorance of the meaning of
the ordinary medical terms used to designate the recog-
nised forms of diseased mind, as well as from inexperience
in the precise bearing of medico-legal evidence. I have, in
my time, seen men manifesting great self-assurance and
unbounded confidence in their own knowledge and saga-
city, step flippantly and eagerly into the witness-box, only
* Adv. of Learning, b. I. vol. i. p. 45.
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 403
to retire sadly mortified. It has been my duty to see some
melancholy exhibitions of painful professional humiliation, and I
must admit, that in most cases they have arisen from an actual
want of information on the subjects upon which the witnesses
have been examined! If I were not indisposed to descend to
particulars, I could refer to several recent trials for illustrations
of what I have said. It is too commonly imagined that a know-
ledge of insanity comes by intuition, and that, without special
and particular investigations of this class of affections, any well-
informed and regularly-educated medical man is qualified to give
evidence in courts of justice upon these matters. This is a sad
mistake; but, unfortunately, the discovery is rarely made until
the medical man has recorded his testimony.
The illiberal feeling to which I have adverted, as exhibited
towards those who, in the discharge of an anxious and solemn
duty, are occasionally called upon to give evidence in relation to
insanity, has, on more than one occasion, manifested itself in our
courts of judicature. x
A few illustrations will suffice. The Lord Chief Justice of
England, when playfully (I presume) alluding, in the celebrated
Bainbrigge case, tried at the Stafford Assizes, to the evidence of
the three physicians who had recorded their opinion in favour of
the insanity of the testator, observed after they had retired from
the witness-box, " The medical men who have just been examined
need not be detained any longer ?" Mr. Keeting?Certainly
not, my lord;" and upon Sir A. Coclcburn assenting, Lord
Campbell remarked, " Let it be fully understood, on both sides,
that the medical men may take their departureand, addressing
the three physicians, his lordship continued, " You may go
home, to your patients, and I wish you may be more usefully
employed there than you have been here!" Again, in his
charge to the jury, fearful that his graceful compliment might
be obliterated from the recollection of the court, Lord Campbell
added (when analyzing the medical testimony), " We have hady
during this trial, the evidence of three medical witnesses, and
I think they might as well have stayed at home, and have
attended to tlteir 'patients.' *
In connexion with these discursive sallies?these extra-judicial
* Taken from a report of the trial, printed for private circulation, from
tlie skort-liand writer's notes.
404 ON MEDICC-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
pleasantries (for such I presume they must be considered)?it
is necessary to associate the subjoined facts :?This remarkable
and celebrated trial was one of the most important disputed will
cases which has been made the subject of litigation, in this
country, for a considerable period; upon its issue depended
property to a vast amount; the investigation of the facts of the
case occupied more than a week ; and some of the most illustrious
advocates and distinguished common and equity lawyers were
retained as counsel. The question at issue rested entirely upon
the sanity or insanity of the testator. Evidence of a very con-
flicting character was adduced; the facts in relation to the
alleged insanity were strangely contradictory ; and it was there-
fore deemed necessary to bring specially from London, three
physicians, who were, I presume, considered to be men of
experience, sagacity, and science, to hear the sworn testimony;
and, as experts, to state, to the best of their judgment, basing
their conclusions upon the evidence adduced in court relating to
the testator's condition of mind, whether he, when the will was
executed, was of a healthy, sound, and disposing intellect. Can
we conceive a more important and relevant question for the
medical witnesses to decide, and one coming more legitimately
and strictly within their jurisdiction ?*
In March, 1.848, the following case occurred :?A woman was
delivered of a child. On the 10th of December, at the expiration
of a week, she was seized with a violent attack of puerperal
mania. Mr. Bell, of Tilstead, her medical attendant, gave
instructions that she should be carefully watched, and on no
account to have access to her child. On the 23rd of December,
in the absence of her attendant, she persuaded her daughter to
bring the infant to her, and obtaining possession of a razor, she
almost immediately cut the child's throat! The prisoner appeared
quite calm and collected after the occurrence ; she admitted that
she had destroyed the child, and that the crime was premeditated.
The medical witness, in answer to a question from Lord Denman,
before whom the case was tried, very properly declared, that the
prisoner might have known that she was going to kill the child;
* In this ease the jury returned an unanimous verdict against the will,
on the ground of insanity. Owing to some informality, the case was to be
tried a second time at Stafford, and two of the former medical witnesses
were subpoenaed to give evidence; but, by mutual consent, the will was
declared invalid, and consequently the question did not go to trial.
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 405
and he was of opinion that she acted under a sudden and
uncontrollable impulse. The judge took objection to the term
" sudden/' because the prisoner had deliberately asked for her
child, and had permitted a quarter of an hour to elapse before
the razor was solicited. Mr. Bell then, with great propriety,
observed, that the act was committed under an uncontrollable
impulse, acting upon a mind previously diseased. In his charge
to the jury, Lord Denham is reported to have said, that he was
of opinion, " That the judgment of the medical gentleman had
been very rashly formed." " How," exclaimed his lordship,
with marvellous simplicity, " How coulcl one person dive into
the mind of another, and express an opinion with regard to
its being in an unsound state, when there was no evidence
of any alteration of conduct, or any circumstances in the
case to shoiv alienation of mind ?"
If the act itself was insufficient to establish the insanity of
the unhappy woman, her prior morbid condition?viz., that of
puerperal insanity, (a form of mental derangement so generally
associated with an intense and uncontrollable desire to destroy
the offspring)?ought to have satisfied a judge fitted to adjudicate
in these important cases, that the evidence adduced was amply
sufficient to justify the acquittal of the prisoner. Lord Den-
man, however, thought otherwise.*
Leaving this section of the subject, I now proceed to the con-
* In a case of " wilful fire-raising," tried in Edinburgh some years back,
the plea of insanity was raised in behalf of the prisoner. The presiding
judge was the Lord Justice Clerk. Medical men of great eminence gave evi-
dence in favour of the culprit; but in consequence of the prisoner " showing
a certain degree of cunning and address" during the trial, the judge held
that his mind was not in a state to exempt him from legal responsibility;
and he laid it down that " this was just one of those cases in which the
jury was a better judge of the real state of a man's mind, from hearing all
the facts connected with the crime charged against him, than medical men
who only saw the prisoner once or twice, when he might be cunning
enough to perceive the object of their visit, and carry through a deception
upon\hem for the express purpose of finding what the medical man would
be led to think of him." In consequence of his lordship thus throwing
aside the medical testimony, a verdict of guilty was recorded against the
prisoner, and he was sent to Millbank prison preparatory to transportation.
Whilst in prison his insanity immediately manifested itself; and it was
deemed advisable to send him as a lunatic to Bethlehem hospital. This is
but one illustration out of many I could cite, showing the folly of repu-
diating medical evidence in cases of insanity, and the absurdity of sup-
posing that a jury, however intelligent, and a judge, however conscientious
and sagacious, are competent, in questions of this kind, without the aid of
scientific medical testimony, to arrive at a right conclusion.
406 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
sideration of the principal points involved in this inquiry, pre-
mising that I have, in unison with gentlemen of great eminence,
of high standing at the bar, as well as with distinguished men
connected with our own department of science, had to deplore?
to deeply lament?the absence of any approximation to unifor-
mity of opinion ; to regret the want of well-defined and settled^rsi
'principles to regulate our judgment, and serve as beacons, when
summoned into courts of justice to record our opinion upon
questions of such scientific, social, and national importance.
Upon these occasions, how often medical witnesses are conscious
of the want of some specific rules to which they could appeal
in cases of complexity, of doubt, difficulty, and obscurity! It
is with the object of illustrating some of these points, and of
suggesting a few principles in regard to medico-legal evidence,
that I bring this matter before the profession.
The occasions upon which medical evidence is required in
courts of law in reference to questions of insanity, and compe-
tency to manage the person and property, are as follows:?
1.
Cases in which the plea of insanity is urged in exte-
nuation OF CRIME.
2.
Cases where attempts are made to invalidate the
LEGAL OPERATION OF TESTAMENTARY DISPOSITIONS OF PRO-
PERTY, ON THE GROUND OF MENTAL INCOMPETENCY.
O
o.
When legal proceedings are instituted to invalidate
a marriage contract on the plea of insanity and imbe-
cility.
4..
In commissions " DE lunatico inquirendo," issued by the
Lord Chancellor, with the view of ascertaining the ex-
istence OF UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND, AND COMPETENCY OF THE
PARTY (THE SUBJECT OF INVESTIGATION) TO MANAGE HIS PERSON
AND PROPERTY.
5.
Cases in which medical men are called upon to certify
to TIIE EXISTENCE OF INSANITY, JUSTIFYING AN INTERFERENCE
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 407
WITH THE PERSON OF THE LUNATIC, AND DEPRIVING HIM OF HIS
FREE AGENCY, EITHER FOR THE PURPOSE OF PLACING HIM UNDER
TREATMENT, OR PROTECTING HIM FROM THE COMMISSION OF ACTS
OF VIOLENCE TO HIMSELF OR OTHERS.
If we refer to the acknowledged legal text-books upon the
" Law of Lunacy " if we examine the recorded opinions of all
the distinguished jurists who have adorned the bench ; if we
wade through the published decisions of eminent criminal and
ecclesiastical judges ; if we (as a last resource) appeal to the
combined wisdom and elaborate judgment of the learned con-
clave delegated by the British Parliament in 1843, to give an
exposition of the law of lunacy, before the highest court of judi-
cature in the country, we are obliged to confess that there exist
no settled, uniform, fixed, or unerring principles of jurispru-
dence, or legal tests, in regard to questions of criminal or civil
insanity.
Analyzing with great care the legal dicta of the judges, it
would appear that the courts of law have, upon different occa-
sions, admitted the following conditions of mind as evidence of
insane and legal irresponsibility:?
1.
An ABSOLUTE DISPOSSESSION, BY DISEASE, OF THE FREE AND
NATURAL AGENCY OF THE MIND ; PARTIAL INSANITY BEING NO
EXCUSE FOR CRIME.
2.
The EXISTENCE OF A DELUSION, THE CRIMINAL ACT BEING
THE IMMEDIATE AND DIRECT RESULT OF THE MORBID IDEA; THE
PROOF OF THE PRESENCE OF A DELUSION HAVING NO POSITIVE
AND CLEAR CONNEXION WITH THE ALLEGED CRIME, NOT BEING
LEGAL INSANITY, AND NO EVIDENCE OF THE EXISTENCE OF
IRRESPONSIBILITY.
3.
A CONSCIOUSNESS OF OFFENDING AGAINST THE LAWS OF GOD
AND MAN?IN OTHER WORDS, A KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND
EVIL.
4.
A KNOWLEDGE OF RIGHT AND WRONG?LAWFUL OR UNLAWFUL
??THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF MOTIVE.*
* The judges will not permit the medical witness to infer tlie existence
of insanity from tlie character of the act itself, apart from all other
408 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
I cite these four points as fairly embodying and truthfully
representing the leading and fundamental principles of our
criminal jurisprudence. It is unnecessary for me to remind you
that occasions have occurred in which the courts have departed?
plainly, palpably, and indisputably deviated?from these dicta,
some of the judges having directed the acquittal of persons
arraigned for the commission of capital crimes, in the teeth of
the tests laid down in the House of Lords for their guidance.
Cases are upon record in which parties have been absolved from
legal responsibility who have had no appreciable delusion, much
less one directly associated with and leading to the commission
of the criminal act. Again, 11 partial insanity" has been held
as a valid plea. Instances of what are termed "moral" and
" impulsive insanity/' " transient" and " homicidal monomania/'
have escaped the web of the law, and have eluded the judicial
test. Nevertheless, I have placed before you the recognised
and admitted legal criteria of insanity in cases of crime, and it
is therefore imperative upon us, from our position, knowledge,
and experience, to carefully ascertain whether they are safe
principles upon which to act in the present advanced state of
our knowledge of morbid mental phenomena, and in accordance
with the existing enlightened state of the sciences of psychology
and jurisprudence.
In considering the first legal test, viz. " an absolute dispos-
session, by disease, of the free and natural agency of the
mind"?very little need be said. This condition of mental
prostration?of intellectual obscurity?obviously can give rise to
no doubt, legal difficulty, or disputation. All must acknowledge
evidence of derangement of mind. In tlie case of Greensmitli, tried for
murder on the Midland Circuit in 1837, Mr. Justice Parke observed, in
liis charge:?"Nothing could be more contrary to the law than to infer
insanity from the very malignity and atrocity of the crime. It was true,
that such crimes could never be committed by men who were in the pos-
session and control of a right reason, and a proper mind; but it was his
duty to inform the jury that the complete possession of reason was not
essential to constitute the legal, any more than the moral responsibility of
man, it being necessary that the party should have sufficient knowledge
and reason to discriminate between right and wrong." This may be sound
lute, but it is not sound psychology. In many cases the "atrocity and
malignity of the crime" afford to the practical physician invaluable
evidence of the existence of insanity, the derangement manifesting itself in
the character of the act itself. I willingly admit that we should cautiously
act upon such evidence; but should we not be culpable if we were to set
it altogether aside ?
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 409
the wisdom of exempting this class from responsibility and
punishment. In regard to the second point?that of "partial
insanity"?the law is thus expounded by the judges. In answer
to the question, " If a person under an insane delusion as to
existing facts commits an offence in consequence thereof, is
he thereby excused ?" the reply was as follows: " If the de-
lusion were only "partial, the party accused was equally liable
with a person of sane mind. If the accused killed another
in self-defence, he would be entitled to an acquittal; but if
the crime was committed for any supposed injury, he would
then be liable to the punishment awarded by the law to
his crime." It will thus be perceived that the law re-
pudiates "partial insanity" as a plea in extenuation of crime,
or as an exemption from punishment. In the strictly legal
signification of the term, what is " partial insanity ?" Lord
Lyndhurst clearly defines the condition to be, " a mind in an
unsound state?not unsound upon one point only, and sound
in all other respects, but that this unsoundness manifests itself
principally with reference to some particular object or person."
According to this definition, it is evident that " partial insanity "
and "monomania" are not, as some have supposed, exactly
equivalent terms: they have, however, been so considered by
many medical and legal authorities. According to the 64 th
article of the French penal code, no person, whilst insane, is
considered responsible for a criminal act, " II n'y a ni crime ni
delit lorsque le prevenu dtait en etat de demence au temps de
Taction." In opposition, however, to this article, M. de Pey-
ronnet, the Advocate-General of France, in the cases of Leger,
Feldtmann, and other insane homicides, adopted the view of
Lord Hale on this subject, as to the existence of a partial and a
total insanity, laying down the principle, that the latter " can
alone .extricate the criminal from the penalties of the laws."
"The distinction between partial and total insanity," he ob-
serves "throws great light on the questions of insanity." In
confirmation of this view of the case, he referred at some length
to the opinions of Lord Hale, and quoted a passage from his
celebrated " Pleas of the Crown." The line of argument, how-
ever, adopted by the Advocate-General on these occasions dis-
pleased highly the medical jurists of France. M. Georget, who
has expressed his astonishment at the dicta of Lord Hale, says,
410 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
" This writer (Lord Hale) appears professedly to consider pro-
perty of higher value than human life! There is, then, no
excuse for the unfortunate lunatic, who in a paroxysm commits
a reprehensible action, even although it should appear to be the
result of his particular illusion I and yet the civil acts of this
same individual are to be annulled, although they have no rela-
tion to the insane impressions which might have influenced his
conduct! And even M. de Peyronnet cited such maxims as
these with approbation?at least we do not find that he has
objected to any of them; all monomaniacs, according to their
statements, are liable to become criminals, in spite of the 64th
article of our penal code, and may undergo the penalties recorded
for atrocious offences/'*
I will not, in this stage of the inquiry, consider whether,
metaphysically examined, the admission of a " partial" as well as
a " general" insanity does not vitiate the psychological theory of
the individuality of the mind, or the unity of the conscious-
ness; but viewing the phrase to import an unsoundness of mind
manifesting itself in the form of " monomania," or delusion upon
one prominent point, the mind being apparently sane and
rational upon all others, I would ask men of observation and
experience, if, in such cases (the most pure and uncomplicated
instances that the mind can conceive), the party so clearly and
manifestly insane should be held responsible to the criminal law
for his conduct, and be treated as if he were of perfectly rational
and sane understanding?
Partial insanity no valid excuse?no extenuation for crime!
Partial insanity no plea?no j ustification in criminal cases! How
monstrously unphilosophical, how wildly fallacious, how opposed
to positive facts, how absurdly illogical, how grossly unjust, how
* " A man may be deranged in liis mind, liis intellect may be insufficient
for enabling him to conduct the common affairs of life, such as disposing
of his property, or judging of the claims which his respective relations have
upon him; and if he be so, the administration of the country will take his
affairs into their management, and appoint to him trustees; but, at the
same time, such a man is not discharged from his responsibility for criminal
acts. I say this upon the authority of the first sages in this country, and
upon the authority of the established law in all times, which law has never
been questioned, that although a man be incapable of conducting his own
affairs, he may still be answerable for his criminal acts, if he possess a mind
capable of distinguishing right from wrong. Speech of Attorney-General
Sir Vicary Gibbs, on the Trial of Hellingham for the murder of the Right
Son. Spencer Perceval.
(
J
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 411
repulsive, how abhorrent to every right-thinking, to every
humane mind, and to every christian and philanthropic heart!
Apply this judicial, antiquated, and absurd dogma to the
great mass of miserable and irresponsible lunatics at this
moment legally in confinement, and two-thirds of them
would be immediately made amenable to the law for their
conduct ! If partial insanity can be clearly established, who
would be bold enough to declare or define the precise limits
of the disease, or to sketch the boundary-line separating a
responsible from an irresponsible state of mind? " Where is/'
we might exclaim, in the language of a distinguished modern
historian, when discussing the legality of the resistance made to
the tyranny of James II., "where is the frontier where virtue
and vice fade into each other? Who has ever been able to
define the exact boundary between courage and rashness,
between prudence and cowardice, between frugality and avarice,
liberality and prodigality? A good action is not distinguished
from a bad action by marks so plain as those which distinguish
a hexagon from a square."* Who can safely draw the line of
demarcation between night and morning, between light and
darkness? or say at what precise moment health fades into
disease? "Who can mark precisely the frontiers, the almost
imperceptible limits, which separate insanity from sanity ? Who
can number the degrees by which reason declines and falls into
annihilation? This would be to prescribe limits to that which
is illimitable, to give rules to folly, to be bewildered with order,
to be lost with wisdom/'f
The existence of delusion is the next judicial test and legal
plea referred to. " The true criterion" (says Sir John jNTicholl),
" the true test of insanity, I take to be absence or presence of
what, used in a certain sense, is comprehended in a single term?
viz., delusion. In the absence of anything in the nature of
delusion, the supposed lunatic is, in my judgment, not pro-
perly insane."% Lord Denmanthus gives exposition to the law:
" To say a man was irresponsible, without 'positive proof of any
act to shoiv that he was labouring under some delusion, seemed
to him to be a presumption of knowledge, which none but the
* History of England, by tlie Right Hon. 13. Macaulay, M.P., &c.
t M. d'Aguesseau, before the Parliament of Paris.
+ Dew v. Clarke.
412 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
great Creator could himself possess !"* Such being the law, what,
I ask, is the legal definition of this valuable, this fixed, and infal-
lible test? Lord Brougham defines a delusion to be, " a belief
of things as realities which exist only in the imagination of
the patient." Sir John Nicholl says, "A delusion is a belief of
facts which no rational reason would have believed" When
speaking of the latter definition, Lord Brougham observes that
it is liable to one exception?viz., that it gives a consequence for
a definition. His lordship then refers to his own definition,
which he declares not to be open to the same objection.
Belief depends upon testimony; and the degree of credence
attached to such testimony must necessarily be materially influ-
enced by the nature of the evidence adduced, as well as by
the character of the party giving it, and the knowledge, intel-
ligence, and health of the mind, the recipient of it. May
not a person believe in the existence of " something extrava-
gant," which exists " only in his imagination," and yet be
free from delusion, and of sound and rational mind? A dis-
tinguished philosophical writer says, "We obtain experience
either by the evidence of our own senses, or by the testi-
mony of others. The testimony of our senses, though generally
considered as one of the highest degrees of evidence, is often
fallacious and often deceptive. Although the impression is pro-
perly made on organs that are in their sound state, yet the ideas
conveyed thence to the mind may be so varied and modified by
the imagination as entirely to mislead the judgment. Thus
every part of natural history, and medicine above all others, is
crowded with facts, attested by eye-witnesses of supposed veracity,
which facts, notwithstanding, never had any existence but in
their own imagination."t A person of sound mind may, upon
false, shallow, and inconclusive evidence, believe in the wildest
improbabilities, and firmly maintain their truth; nevertheless, who
would have the boldness to affirm, that he was under a delu-
sion?! Lord Brougham's definition appears to involve exclusively
* Regina v. Smith. + Campbell's Philosophy of Rhetoric.
J " False and unfounded opinions have been entertained by entire com-
munities without question, for ages. Not merely lias this been the case
with respect to false religions, and legendary accounts of early history,
interwoven with the religious and patriotic feelings of the people, but even
I
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 413
the action of the healthy imagination. If I were bold enough to
commit myself to a definition of the term delusion, I would
venture, with submission, to give the following:?A delusion is
a belief in the existence of a something extravagant, which has,
in reality, no existence except in the diseased imagination of
the party, and the absurdity of which he cannot perceive, and
out of which he cannot be reasoned. In this definition I think
a scientific distinction is drawn between the eccentric conceptions
of a healthy, and the morbid creations of a diseased imagination
and judgment; a principle which we should never lose sight of
in our medico-judicial inquiries, definitions, and evidence. By
legal authorities, delusion and insanity appear to have been
viewed as convertible terms. Considering, however, delusion to
be a test of insanity, have the judges uniformly regarded it as
the standard of responsibility in criminal proceedings? In the
case of Overston, Mr. Justice Maule altogether repudiated the
test; and in the celebrated Bainbrigge case, Lord Campbell
admitted, that "mania may exist ivithout delusion." Need I
advance an argument in corroboration of Lord Campbell's dictum,
or in opposition to the dogmatic and bold assertion of Lord
Denman? It is allowed as the result of the collective experience
of those competent to give an opinion upon the matter?that
positive, dangerous, and irresponsible insanity, is often seen un-
associated with any manifested delusive impression, or appre-
ciable hallucination.
The legal test that next presents itself for consideration is, the
presence or absence of a motive for the commission of the crime.*
Dr Prichard observes, " The act of homicidal insanity is different
in its nature and moral causes from that of murder. Men never
commit crimes without some motive; the inducement which leads
them to an atrocious act is of a kind which other men can appre-
ciate and understand, though they do not sympathize with them.
?with respect to facts in the natural sciences, which admitted of being
verified by easy and simple observation and experiment."?G. C. Lewis's
JEssay.
* " It must for ever be remembered that with motives merely the legis-
lator and the magistrate have nothing to do; and that actions and external
facts, as the ends or objects of motives, are the only legitimately cogni-
sable subjects of human tribunals. Actus nonfacit veutn ?usi mens sit Yea,
is a rule of reason and justice not less than of positive law. On the JPi'in-
ciplcs of Circumstantial Evidence. By "W illiain Wills. 1850.
NO. XXVII. F F
414 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
Jealousy, hatred, revenge, excite some; others are moved by the
desire of plunder?of getting possession of money or property.
The act of a madman is for the most part without motive." I
have thus stated Dr Pricliard's view rather in detail, because I
shall feel it my duty to express an opinion adverse to that which
this physician entertained. As a test of criminality, I consider
the one just propounded not only as unsafe, but as unphiloso-
phical. On the trial of Francis for shooting the Queen, this plea
was urged in favour of the prisoner; but what did the then
Solicitor-General urge respecting its inapplicability? " This
doctrine about motive is of a most dangerous character, and
must be very guardedly received. It is very difficult for you
(the jury), very difficult for any well-regulated mind not accus-
tomed to contemplate the workings of iniquity?to discover the
motives for crime. What motive instigated the execrable
assassin in Paris, who shot at his king, and deluged the streets
with blood by means of his infernal machine? Did any one ever
hear propounded, in a court of justice, a doctrine that would
lead to so much dangerous consequences to society, as that you
must ascertain the motive before you convict of the crime ?" Is
this a test, I ask, that can safely be relied upon in all cases of
criminal insanity? Are not the insane often impelled to the
commission of acts of violence and murder by the same motives,
feelings, and passions, that influence and, regulate the conduct
of sound, healthy, and rationed minds 1 There cannot be any
difference of opinion upon this point among those practically
acquainted with criminal lunatics, and with the characteristics of
mental derangement. It would be monstrously cruel and unjust
to apply such a test in criminal cases. Were such to be our
standard of appeal, great crimes would escape unpunished, and
persons indisputably insane and irresponsible would often (to our
great reproach) suffer the extreme penalty of the law!
A patient who was confined in the Manchester Lunatic Asylum
liad been subjected to very cruel treatment by the person who
had the care of him. He consequently attacked the attendant,
and killed him. He related, with great calmness and self-pos-
session, the particulars of the transaction to the physician of the
asylum. He said, " The man whom I stabbed richly deserved it.
He behaved to me with great violence and cruelty ; he degraded
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 415
?my nature as a human being ; he tied me down, handcuffed me,
and confined my hands much higher than my head with a
leathern thong; he stretched me on the bed of torture; after
some days he released me. I gave him warning, for I told his
wife I would have justice of him. On her communicating this
?to him, he came to me in a furious passion, threw me down,
dragged me through the court-yard, thumped me 011 the breast,
and confined me in a dark and damp cell. Not liking this
situation, I was induced to play the hypocrite. I pretended
extreme sorrow for having threatened him, and by an affectation
of repentance, prevailed on him to release me. For several days
-I paid him great attention, and lent him every assistance. He
seemed much pleased with the flattery, and became very friendly
in his behaviour towards me. Going one day into the kitchen,
where his wife was busied, I saw a knife ; this was too great a
temptation to be resisted ; I concealed it about my person, and
carried it with me. For some time afterwards the same friendly
intercourse was maintained between us; but as he was one day
unlocking his garden-door, I seized the opportunity, and plunged
the knife up to the hilt in his back." He always mentioned this
circumstance with peculiar triumph, and his countenance, a most
cunning and malignant one, became highly animated at the
conclusion of the story.*
The following case in point excited much interest some years
back, in Philadelphia. Eighteen years previously to the com-
mission of the crime, a confectioner of the name of Wood had
come from England; had carried on his trade first in New York,
and then in Philadelphia; had realized money, and acquired a
respectable character. He had an only daughter, whom he was
desirous of advancing into a higher station by marriage. But
he himself was not in genteel society; yet he restrained her from
associating with persons of her own condition ; and she therefore
had no freedom in any circle. She assisted him in keeping his
shop, one of the first of its kind in Philadelphia. A young man
of inferior habits and station made love to her, and persuaded
her to leave her father's roof and marry him. She was absent
only one night, when she returned home, and confessed she was
a married woman. Her father became violently and passionately
* Dr Haslam.
F F 2
416 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
excited; lie drank a large quantity of rum ; and, under the com-
bined influence of disappointed ambition, rage, and intoxication,
he shot his daughter with a pistol. He did not attempt to escape.
When he became sober and free from excitement, he had no
knowledge of his crime. He was tried for the murder. His
counsel pleaded insanity, and proved previous mental aberration;
but, in his defence, he mainly relied on the shock given to his
feelings by his daughter's conduct having produced a real insanity
preceding the homicide. A verdict of lunacy was recorded. If
this case had occurred in England, it is questionable whether he
would have been acquitted.
It has been proposed, that the question of legal responsibility
should be determined by the fact, whether the party, when he
committed the offence, knew that he was acting in opposition to
those generally-received and recognised moral obligations which
are supposed to govern and influence sane, rational, and christian
minds. The question which the jury has to consider, to use the
language of one of the most distinguished and enlightened
British judges that ever adorned the bench, is, " Was the prisoner
conscious that he was committing a crime against the laws of
God and nature ?"*
In considering the value of this test, we are bound to remember
that there is a class, happily for themselves and for society insigni-
ficant in a numerical point of view, who repudiate the idea of a
Divine law regulating their actions and as binding upon their con-
sciences, and who deny the existence of a Supreme Being. I readily
admit that in all important matters of legislation we are not jus-
tified in considering the anti-christian or heterodox opinions of
small sections of the community. All our legislative enactments
are rightly based upon the assumption that the great mass
of mankind worship a Supreme Being, and implicitly recognise
the doctrine of a Divine revelation ; nevertheless, if we have a
legal test or standard to which we can refer, it should be catholic
in its character, and be susceptible of universal application.
Imagine a person arraigned for the commission of a capital
crime. The plea of insanity is urged in his defence. In ex-
pounding the law, the judge informs the jury, that the question
of responsibility in connexion with insanity rests upon the fact
* Lord Lyndhurst.
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 417
whether the prisoner had at the time a consciousness of his
having deviated from the law of God. Was he sensible of
this ? If so, he is to be considered amenable to justice, and
must expiate his crime upon the gallows. I can conceive,
after such a legal exposition, the prisoner making a declaration
of his being by virtue of his principles 'placed beyond the
jurisdiction of such a test, and maintaining that he could not
morally, legally, or logically be considered to be conscious of vio-
lating laws that in reality he never believed to exist. I will admit
that this may be considered to be an extreme case. I merely
cite it with the view of establishing my position, that there is
no legal test yet propounded applicable, or which could be indis-
criminately applied, to all criminal cases of insanity.
Among the other judicial standards or criteria of insanity, is
that recommended by the late Lord Chief Justice Tindal. I
refer to his suggestion to apply the test of the knowledge of
" right and wrong" to every case of crime alleged to be associated
with and the result of insanity, and upon its existence or non-
existence to determine the presence of legal responsibility. Lord
Chief Justice Mansfield says, in reference to this test,* " The law
is extremely clear. If a man was deprived of all power of
reasoning, so as not to be able to distinguish whether it was right
or wrong to commit the most wicked or the most innocent
transaction, he could not certainly commit an act against the
law. Such a man, so destitute of all power of judgment, could
have no intention at all. In order to support this defence, how-
ever, it ought to be proved by the most distinct and unquestion-
able evidence that the criminal was incapable of judging between
right or wrong. It must in fact be proved, beyond all doubt,
that at the time he committed the atrocious act with which he
stood charged, he did not consider murder was a crime against
the laws of God and nature. There was no other proof of
insanity which could excuse murder or any other crime. There
were various species of insanity. Some human creatures were
void of all power of reasoning from their birth ; such could not
be guilty of any crime. There was another species of madness,
in which persons were subject to temporary paroxysms, in which
they were guilty of acts of extravagance ; this was called lunacy
* Trial of Bellingliam.
418 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
If these persons committed a crime when they were not affected
with the malady, they were, to all intents and purposes, amenable
to justice. So long as they could distinguish good from evil, so
long would they be answerable for their conduct. There was a
third species of insanity, in which the patient fancied the exist-
ence of injury, and sought an opportunity of gratifying revenge
by some hostile act. If such a person was capable, in other
respects, of distinguishing right from wrong, there was no excuse
for any act of atrocity which he might commit under this,
description of derangement. The witnesses who had been called
to support this extraordinary defence had given a very singular
account, in order to show that at the time of the commission of
the crime the prisoner was insane. What might have been the
state of his mind some time ago, was perfectly immaterial. The
single question was, whether at the time this act was committed,
he possessed a sufficient degree of understanding to distinguish
good from evil, right from wrong, and whether murder was a
crime not only against the laws of God, but the law of his
country.'"*
It has been a question with metaphysicians, whether, abstract-
edly considered, there are conditions or states to which the terms
"right and wrong" can, with strict philosophical precision, be
applied. Are not these general terms, it is urged, merely
significant of the resemblance of various particular actions which
agree in exciting in the mind certain feelings that are analogous ?
In different phraseology, are not the terms " right and wrong"
general expressions indicative only of analogous relations which
certain actions bear to certain emotions ? Dr Hutchinson (who
has, perhaps, taken a more ultra view of this question than any
other metaphysician) says, " There is no right or wrong, virtue or
vice ; but there are agents whose actions cannot be contemplated
by us without an emotion of approbation or disapprobation; and
all actions, that is to say, all agents that agree in exciting moral
feelings, which are thus analogous, we class together as virtuous,
or vicious from this circumstance of felt agreement alone.
* " Tliey could only know one kind of right and wrong; the right is,
"when you act according to law; and the wrong is, when you break it.
Distinguishing right from "wrong, meant a knowledge that the act the per-
son was about to commit was punishable by the law."?Lord Brougham :
Speech in the House of Lords.
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 419
The similarity of the emotions which we feel in these particular
cases, is thus all to which we owe the notions or ideas of right
or wrong, virtue and vice." Dr Brown, in commenting upon this
passage, observes, " that right and wrong signify nothing in the
objects themselves. They are words expressive only of relation,
and relations are not existing parts of objects, or things to be
added to objects, or taken from them. There is no right or wrong,
merit or demerit, existing independently of the agents who are
virtuous or vicious."*
I allude to these generally received metaphysical dicta, not
because I would be guilty of so gross an absurdity as to deny the
existence of such principles of action, but because I infer from
the particular and special reference made to this legal test, that
it is supposed these conditions are easily appreciable and almost
tangible states, to which in complex and obscure cases the jurist
and psychologist might at once appeal for an immediate and
certain solution of their difficulty.
Before this test can be admitted as a safe standard in questions
of moral and legal responsibility, it will be necessary to establish
an infallible rule, by which we may be able to trace accurately
the distinction between right and wrong. Moral philosophers,
men of science, theologians, political and social economists, phi-
losophers and statesmen, are unfortunately very much at variance
upon many apparently self-evident, and first principles, relating
to their respective departments of inquiry. Need I refer to the
great discrepancy of opinion existing among different religious
denominations, each sect maintaining its own dicta to be " right,"
and theviews of other sections of the religious world to be " wrong."
The Roman Catholics consider themselves to be right, and the Pro-
testants to be wrong, and vice versa. A few of the Quakers, object-
ing upon principle to all war, on the ground of its not being sanc-
tioned by scripture, and from a conviction of its being morally
wrong, resolutely refuse to pay a war-tax. We differ from the
Quaker, and entertain the opinion, that,under certain circumstances,
war is right and justifiable. A large section of the religious com-
munity denounce infant baptism as " wrong ;" a still more import-
ant body think it " right." There are many who repudiate the
hierarchy and priesthood, from a conviction of their anti-scrip.-
* On tlie Philosophy of the Human Mind. By Dr T. Brown.
420 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
tural origin, character, and tendency. If we turn to the political
and scientific world, we find large bodies of intelligent and reflect-
ing men holding opinions diametrically at variance with each
other, and advocating the most opposite and irreconcilable views of
the same question, and contending most heroically for the truth
of their own individual and sectional opinions, from a persuasion
?an unalterable conviction?of their being "right," and the senti-
ments of their adversaries, "wrong." The right of to-day, in
matters of theology, philosophy, and science, may be the wrong
of to-morrow ; and what is now " lawful," may, in the course of
a short parliamentary session, be made illegal by the introduction
of new statutes! Analyzing this much-eulogized legal test as
metaphysicians, as medical philosophers, and as men of the
world, are we not compelled to pronounce it to be worthless,
and practically inapplicable ? Our views of " good and evil,"
"right and wrong," "lawful and unlawful," must necessarily
be dependent upon, and fluctuate in obedience to, temperament*
caste, climate, progress of civilization, education, knowledge,
early training, and example. If there be within us an innate
principle termed " conscience," acting independently of the judg-
ment?and existing as a separate agent or faculty of the mind
(which many metaphysicians and theologians deny), unerringly
suggestive to us of a knowledge of "right and wrong," is not this
moral sense or instinct often destroyed by adventitious circum-
stances, its perceptions deadened, paralyzed, or perverted ?
Considering this legal test of criminality apart altogether from
the metaphysical objections to which it is amenable, I maintain,
that it never can be safely depended upon, in all cases of insanity.
It is a notorious fact?a matter of every-day occurrence, and in
accordance with the experience of those conversant with the
phenomena of lunacy,?that the insane?the positively and un-
deniably insane?like many rational persons, often
" Know the ' eight,' and yet the ' wbong' pursue,"
and frequently act in direct opposition to their own clear and
unmistakable convictions of what is " right and wrong," " good
and evil," "lawful and unlawful." Many a maniac has com-
mitted a crime of great atrocity, with a full, unfettered, and un-
clouded consciousness and knowledge of its unlawfulness, its sin-
fulness, its criminality, and of the legal penalties to which he is,
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 421
by liis actions, exposing himself. A lunatic has manifested an
intense and morbid desire for death ; not being suicidally dis-
posed, he endeavours to effect his purpose by sacrificing the life
of another : he designedly brings himself within the pale of the
law, that he may compel others to do what he has not the courage
of accomplishing himself. How absurd, cruel, and unjust it
would be to apply the test of a knowledge of what is lawful or
unlawful to such a case ?
An intriguing, unruly, vicious lunatic was detected with a
piece of iron which he had contrived to shape like a dagger, with
a handle fixed firmly in it. Upon being interfered with, he
became excited, abusive, and violent. He was placed under
restraint; after uttering the most awful imprecations, he ex-
claimed to his attendant, " 111 murder you yet; I am a mad-
man, and they cannot liang me for it !"
When Martin set York Minster on fire, a conversation took
place among the inmates of a neighbouring lunatic asylum,
having reference to this general topic of remark and discussion.
The question argued was whether Martin would suffer the
extreme penalty of the law for his crime. Various were the
opinions expressed. In the midst of the conversation, one
patient, apparently as mad as the rest, exclaimed, " He (Martin)
will not be hanged." " For what reason V' interrupted several
voices. " They cannot hang him," replied the lunatic, " he is
one of ourselves." Of what value is this legal test, if applied to
such cases ? Before this can be recognised as a safe standard, it
will be necessary for British jurists to lay down for their own
guidance certain fixed and unalterable principles of jurispru-
dence. Is it not a notorious fact, that on apparently clear and
well recognised points, lawyers of eminence have arrived at the
most opposite conclusions ? One court reverses the judgment of
an inferior tribunal, and one distinguished jurist overrules the
decision of his predecessor. As long as able judges differ among
themselves upon what may be termed first principles of law, it
will be unreasonable to expect that we should prostrate ourselves
before the legal test which I have been analyzing.
Dr Mittermaier, a German jurist, maintains that two condi-
tions are required to constitute that freedom of will which is
essential to responsibility?viz., a knowledge of good and evil,
and the facility of choosing between them. The knowledge of
422 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
good and evil will require, first, that knowledge of one's self by
which we recognise our personal identity, and refer our acts to
ourselves ; secondly, acknowledgment of the act itself?i. e., of its
nature and consequences; thirdly, a knowledge of the relations
of the act both in regard to men and measures; fourthly, a know-
ledge that the act in question is prohibited either by the moral
or the statute law. He rebukes the English jurists for their rigid
adherence to the antiquated doctrine, that whoever can distin-
guish good from evil, enjoys freedom of will, and retains the
faculty, if he chooses to use it, of framing his actions to the
requirements of the law. The true principle, according to this
authority, is to look at the personal character of the individual
whose responsibility is in question; to his grade of mental
powers ; to the notions by which he is governed; to his views of
things; and finally to the whole course of his life, and the nature
of the act with which he is charged. A person who commits a
criminal act, being fully cognisant of the nature of the laws, and
of the punishment to which he is exposing himself, may yet be
of insane mind. The true test of irresponsibility should be, not
whether the party accused was aware of the criminality of his
actions, but whether he has lost all power of control over his
actions.
As the plea of insanity is one of the most important that can
be urged in a court of justice in extenuation of crime, it should
never be had recourse to except in clear and obvious cases, in
which little or no doubt can be entertained, not only of the
existence of mental derangement, but of derangement of such a
hind, and to such a degree, as to justify the immediate admis-
sion of the fact, and the necessary and consequent acquittal of
the prisoner. The utmost vigilance and jealous caution should
be exercised in all inquiries of this nature; and medical men,
considered specially competent to the elucidation of such intri-
cate psychological phenomena, should be particularly guarded in'
sanctioning, by their authority, the plea of insanity, exhibiting,
upon all occasions, a fear lest their opinions should be made
available for the purposes of shielding great criminals from the
just and legal penalties awarded for the commission of crime.
The reflecting portion of the public and profession naturally
place a high value upon the experience, testimony, and judg-
ment of men whose peculiar studies and opportunities enable
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 423
them to obtain a practical insight into morbid aberrations of
mind. If it be found that men of position and ability are dis->
posed to be lax in the use of this important plea, a reaction will
inevitably ensue, and cases of this character will be left exclu-
sively to the adjudication of the judicial tribunals, medical evi-
dence being entirely ignored in our courts of law.
In forming an opinion of the criminal as well as the civil respon-
sibility of any case of alleged insanity, it is very essential, with the
view of our arriving at right results, that we should make a just
and scientific distinction between the actions of a naturally
eccentric, ill-regulated, perverse, and wicked mind, and the
mental disturbance, perverseness, caprice, vice, extravagance of
conduct, ungovernable passion, sullenness of disposition, and
melancholia, consequent upon physical disease of the sensorium,
or organs in close pathological relationship with it, implicating
the healthy action of thought. There is a normal and natural
eccentricity, a healthy mental idiosyncrasy, caprice, and feeling, dis-
torted and perverted affection, disposition to acts of cruelty, vice,
brutality, existing independently of that irregularity and dis-
turbance in the operations of the intellect?those perversions
of the affections and madness of conduct, the clear, unmis-
takable, and undoubted consequence of a diseased mind. As
a man may have natural physical, so may he exhibit a connate
mental defect, apart altogether from actual cerebral, and conse-
quent mental disease. It should never be forgotten that there
is always floating upon the surface of society a large body of
strange, wayward, intemperate, eccentric persons, criminally and
viciously disposed, subject to every bad passion, impulsive in all
their movements, addicted to habits of debauchery, who lead a
kind of animal life; whose mode of existence appears fully to
realize Lady Morgan's somewhat illiberal conception of the
character of the modern Italians?
" Who eat, drink, and sleep. "What then?
Who sleep, drink, and eat again."
There is a healthy and natural melancholy, and a diseased,
depression of spirits. There is a species of drunkenness which is
not insanity, and there is a form of mental derangement solely
indicated by inveterate and uncontrollable habits of intemperance.
There is a brutality existing irrespectively of lunacy, and
424 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
violence of conduct, and cruelty of disposition, clearly the effects
of a morbid mental condition. There is a natural, and, speaking
medico-psychologically, a healthy improvidence, impetuosity
of temper, and vice, which should not be confounded with
abnormal and diseased states of the affections, passions, appetites,
and propensities. The melancholia?the sullen gloom?the
moroseness of real life (which is not "alienation of mind"), is
well described by an able metaphysician :*?" It disposes the
person to acts of unkindness, and makes him the slave of every
bad passion; it produces a fretfulness in all the daily and hourly
intercourse of life; it produces a domestic tyranny which brings,
alas ! with it a train of heartburnings and bitterness. This
melancholy temper is poisonous to the happiness, not only of the
individual, but of all that are brought within the circle of its
baneful influence."
Beattie's " Minstrel" is described as one of those half-cracked,
half-witted, sombre, clever, sullen, eccentric, melancholy youths;
the type of thousands who are daily mixing in society, and whose
condition might easily, upon a superficial examination, be con-
founded with insanity, and whose state of mind would certainly,
by some, be considered "unsound/' were they guilty of any
overt act of sufficient importance to call public and professional
attention to their moral and legal responsibility.
" Silent ?when glacl; affectionate, though shy;
And now his look was most demurely sad,
And now he laughed aloud, yet none knew why,
The neighbours stared and sighed, yet bless'd the lad;
Some deemed him -wondrous wise, and some believed him mad."
I cannot conceive a position of graver responsibility than that ^
assumed by the medical witness when called upon in a court of
justice to give evidence in criminal cases. Let me earnestly
entreat him, before discharging these solemn duties, to make
himself master of all the facts of the case. He should not assume
for granted the representations of those anxious to establish the
insanity of the criminal; were he to do so, he would occasionally
be sadly deceived. He should never forget that he has a 'public
as well as a professional duty to discharge; and he is bound, as
a citizen of the state, as well as a member of an' important and
' * Philosophy of the Human ilfind, chap, on "Immediate Emotions."
Dr T. Browne.
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 425
learned section of society, to protect himself from the possibility
of being deceived as to the facts of any given case presented to
him for his opinion. He must not permit his feelings to over-
power and interfere with the free and unclouded operations of
his judgment.
Under these circumstances, every possible influence will occa-
sionally be exercised to induce the witness to adopt an opinion
favourable to the prisoner. He will perceive the necessity of
patiently investigating the case itself, and will not be satisfied
with one or two interviews with the alleged lunatic. He must
obtain from the criminal an account of the act with which he may
be charged, and his reasons for committing it; he will also acquire
from his relatives, friends, and companions, an insight into his
former mode of life?his habits of thought?his prior state?the
peculiarities of his disposition?whether there exists in the case
an hereditary predisposition to insanity; and other circumstances
likely to elucidate the actual state of the mind at the time when
the alleged offence was perpetrated. Great perseverance and
ingenuity are often required before the truth can be elicited.
In these cases, the crime is occasionally committed during a
paroxysm of transient insanity; the mind manifesting no symp-
tom of derangement after the perpetration of the offence. Again,
a lunatic has been known to commit murder in a fit of frenzy,
his sudden arrest and committal to prison temporarily restoring
the mind to its healthy balance. A man has been guilty of a
capital crime; has been seized and sent to prison, and has, from
remorse, or a sense of horror at his position, suddenly become
insane; his derangement only exhibiting itself after his arrest.
Persons have been known to commit the crime of murder whilst
in a state of somnambulism, and also during that half-uncon-
scious condition between sleeping and waking. Cases of this
description are extremely perplexing to medical jurists. If it
can be satisfactorily proved that the person perpetrated the
murder whilst in this state?if the fact be unequivocally esta-
blished?then, I conceive, it ought to be considered as a good
exculpating plea. It should never, however, be forgotten, that
these cases are easily simulated. Examples of this character are
recorded by medical writers. A person has been suddenly roused
by a frightful dream, and, whilst under its influence, lias been
known to take away human life. Suicide has been committed
426 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
"under analogous circumstances. A person, apparently well, has
gone to bed without manifesting the slightest tendency to self-
destruction ; he has awoke suddenly and destroyed himself. A
case, illustrative of this fact, is on record. It is as follows : " An
old lady residing in London awoke in the middle, of the night,
went down stairs, and threw herself into a cistern of water,
where she was found drowned." It was maintained that the
suicide was the result of certain mental impressions conjured up
in the mind during a dream. Dr Pagan refers to the following
interesting case, to prove that murder may be committed by a
person when under the effects of a frightful vision.
Bernard Schedmaizig suddenly woke at midnight; at the
?moment he saw a frightful phantom, or what his imagination
represented as such?a fearful spectre! He twice called out,
" Who is that ?" He received no answer. Imagining that the
phantom was advancing upon him, and having altogether lost
his self-possession, he raised a hatchet which was beside him, and
attacked the spectre: it was found that he had murdered his
wife !
A pedler, who was in the habit of walking about the country
armed with a sword-stick was awakened one evening, while
lying asleep on the high road, by a man suddenly seizing him,
and shaking him by the shoulders. The man, who was walking
by with some companions, had done this out of a joke. The
pedler suddenly woke, drew his sword, and stabbed the man, who
soon afterwards died. He was tried for manslaughter. His
irresponsibility was strongly urged by his counsel, on the ground
?that he could not have been conscious of his act in the half-
waking state. This was strengthened by the opinions of medical
witnesses. He was, however, found guilty.* The murder, in
this instance, may have been the result of passion. We have no
evidence to the contrary.
In criminal cases, should the witness be interrogated as to the
alleged lunatic's consciousness of right and wrong, or as to his
knowledge that he was violating the law of God and man at the
moment when the crime was committed, I would strongly
suggest that he should, unless the case be one of obvious lunacy,
* British and Foreign Medical Eeview.
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 427
decline answering the question. The witness may have a clear
and positive opinion as to the existence of insanity; but how can
he, in every case, solve the question as to the lunatic's ability to
distinguish accurately between good and evil, right and wrong,
lawful and unlawful ? Dr Haslam says, when alluding to this
point, that " It is not the province of the medical witness to pro-
nounce an opinion as to the prisoner's capability of distinguishing
right from wrong. It is the duty of the medical man, when
called upon to give evidence in a court of law, to state whether
he considers insanity to be present in any given case, not to
ascertain the quantity of reason which the person imputed to be
insane, may or may not possess. If it should be presumed that
any medical practitioner is able to penetrate into the recesses of
a lunatic's mind at the moment he committed the outrage; to
view the internal play of obtruding thoughts and contending
motives; and to depose that he knew the good and evil, right and
wrong, he was about to commit,?it must be confessed, that such
knowledge is beyond the circuit of our attainment. It is suffi-
cient for the medical practitioner to know that the person's mind
is deranged, and that such a state of insanity will be sufficient to
account for the irregularity of his actions; and that in a sound
mind the same conduct would be deemed criminal. If violence
be inflicted by such a person during a paroxysm of rage, there is
no acuteness of metaphysical investigation which can trace the
succession of thoughts, and the impulses by which he is goaded
for the accomplishment of his purpose."
In many cases the plea of insanity is entirely based upon the
assumption that the prisoner is " morally insane." It is much
to be lamented that the term " moral insanity" was ever intro-
duced by Dr Prichard into our psychological nomenclature. The
phrase is generally repudiated in our courts of law; it has given
rise to much cavilling and disputation, and its adoption has un-
fortunately exposed the profession to great odium and obloquy ?
?and has, I think, very materially damaged the moral weight of
medico-legal testimony. It has been asserted, that the term is
used with the view of protecting the criminal from just punish-
ment, and of shielding vice, extravagance, malignity, debauchery,
cruelty, crime, and brutality, from the natural emotions of horror
and disgust with which such actions should be contemplated
428 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
by every right-thinking and well-constituted mind. "Moral
insanity I" I might conceive the judge to exclaim; " I will not
listen to such an excuse?to such a plea?to such evidence! I
will not sit here, and, whilst administering justice, permit the
great truths of science to be thus perverted and abused, with the
view of destroying the practical application, and beneficial and
conservative operation, of the criminal law of the land I"
Let us consider the subject of "moral insanity," or, as Pinel
terms it, " emportement maniaque sans delire," not only
pathologically, but metaphysically. All authorities agree in
opinion, that the specific characteristics of this form of derange-
ment are dependent upon a lesion of the affective or motive
powers of the mind, apart altogether from disorder of the
intellectual faculties, or powers of ratiocination. In the first
place, I would ask, whether the disease so designated is purely
an affection of the moral faculties; and whether, as meta-
physicians, we are justified in drawing so palpable a line of
demarcation between those faculties of the understanding that
reason, judge, compare, reflect, and those that supply motives
to the reason, and are termed, by metaphysicians, the active
principles of the mind ?
Viewing the question under review pathologically, I ask
whether, in cases of insanity which are represented to consist
in lesions of the will?in ungovernable impetuosity of temper
-?loss of self-control?perversion of the affections and propen-
sities?cases in which the mental alienation is manifested more
in conduct than in ideas?where the delirium is apparently
confined to the actions and moral sentiments;?whether in
this form of mental derangement, the intellectual, the reasoning,
and reflective powers are not more generally disordered than we
have hitherto admitted ? In many instances of mental disease,
considered as uncomplicated illustrations of moral insanity, the
malady is not confined to the affective or motive faculties. I
do not maintain that such is apparent in every case of impair-
ment of the moral sense or motive power; but I have detected
the intellectual aberration in many cases brought under my
observation as instances of pure derangement of the conduct,
propensities, passions, appetites, and moral affections. In nearly
all of them we may, upon a close logical analysis, perceive
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 429
co-existing with the moral disorder, a derangement of those
powers of the mind by which we compare facts with each other,
and mental impressions with external things; to speak with
metaphysical exactness, and philosophical as well as philological
precision?by which we appreciate the perception of relation.
If we carefully investigate the cases quoted by Pinel, Esquirol,
and Prichard, and referred to as types of moral insanity, we
are irresistibly led to the conclusion, that the malady, as de-
scribed by these authorities, was not in any one case restricted
to the affective or motive powers of the understanding.
The faculties of judgment, reason, and comparison, are repre-
sented in this form of insanity to be healthy and intact.
Apparently, upon a superficial examination, they may be so ;
but do not the "tyrant passion"?predominant vice?over-
powering emotion?loss of self-respect?brutality of conduct?
prostration of all the more refined sensibilities of the mind?
uncontrollable impulse?impetuous will?and the suicidal or
homicidal idea, during the crisis of the paroxysm, and con-
temporaneously with the commission of the act, dethrone
reason, and paralyze the operations of the judgment? Do
not violent and ungovernable temper, impulsive emotion, and
unreasonable conduct, leading to overt acts of what are termed
moral insanity, suspend the exercise of the will, and inter-
fere with the healthy balance or equilibrium of the intellec-
tual faculties ? In cases where the faculty of volition appears
to be suspended, and the patient is unhappily the willing and
facile slave of every wicked, sensual appetite and vicious pro-
pensity, and is guilty of most extravagant conduct?are, I repeat,,
the powers of judgment, reason, and comparison, the more-
exalted and intellectual functions of the mind, entirely free, un-
clouded, unfettered, and in a healthy state of activity ? Is the
"moral maniac" capable of pursuing an ordinary and healthy
process of induction, and competent to exercise the powers of
reason, comparison, and reflection, quoad the specific features of
his so-termed " moral" disease ? He may be apparently of sound
understanding, able to solve with great rapidity a difficult mathe-
matical problem; have great capacity for the ordinary business
of life ; may converse with ease upon points of science, art, and
philosophy; and astonish the world by the tenacity of his
NO. XXVII. G G
430 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
memory, the vividness of his fancy, the playfulness of his satire,
the brilliancy of his wit, and the majesty and sublimity of his
eloquence?all these elevated states of mind are compatible
with latent delusive ideas and intellectual disorder * Lord
Brougham makes some pertinent remarks on this subject.
When applying his able powers of philosophical analysis to this
question, his lordship observes: "We cannot with any correct-
ness of language speak of general or ' partial' insanity; but we
may most accurately speak of the mind exerting itself in con-
sciousness without cloud or imperfection, but being morbid when
it fancies; and so its owner may have a diseased imagination, or
the imagination may be diseased, and yet the memory may be
impaired, and the owner be said to have lost his memory. In
these cases we do not mean that the mind has one faculty, as
consciousness, sound, whilst another, as memory or imagination,
is diseased; but that the mind is sound when reflecting upon its
own operations, and diseased when exercising the combination
termed imagination, or casting the retrospect called reflection."
Then again, as to what is termed impulsive insanity, a form of
disease generally considered to be unassociated with derangement
of the ideas, I would ask, is it a fact that these cases are invari-
ably unaccompanied by delusive impressions, or by a disturbance
of the reasoning faculties ? Admitting the existence of a morbid
impulsive propensity, does it become absolutely irresistible and
uncontrollable except during a crisis of delirium ? It has been
maintained, that at the moment of the impulsion an intellectual
perturbation and positive derangement of ideas occurs. "We
believe," says a French writer, " that the doctrine of a tempo-
rary insanity, of a sudden eclipse of the reason at the time of the
act, is a safer and more philosophical doctrine than the hypothesis
of modern medical jurists, who assert that no monomania, whether
homicidal, suicidal, or incendiary, can compel to the consumma-
tion of the act, without insanity in the ordinary acceptation of
* In many eases, designated as illustrations of moral insanity, I feel
assured that undetected and unrecognised delusions often actually exist,
influencing the conduct of the patient. I could narrate several instances
of the kind. M. Marc mentions the case of a man, who for many years
had been in the habit of licking the walls of the apartment with his tongue,
until he had actually worn away the plaster. _ Jso one could imagine what
was the cause of this perseverance in so painful and disgusting a habit,
until one day in the author's presence he confessed that he tasted and
smelt the most delicious fruit on the walls.?(p. 119.)
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 431
the term, or intellectual disturbance. We repeat, that we cannot
admit this theory or principle of monomania with irresistible
desire, and without delirium during the act, because it appears
to us to be dangerous, inasmuch as it suspends the course of free-
will, is destructive of the morality of human actions, and tends
to favour impunity for crimes. For if the impulse be irresistible,
and is unaccompanied by delirium during the act, what becomes
then of free-will ? In our minds, the disturbance of the reason
will always be more comprehensible and conformable to the
common-sense of mankind than a perversion of the will without
delirium/'
Having considered this subject pathologically, I would briefly
analyze it metaphysically. In using the words "mind/' "in-
tellect," "understanding," we employ abstract terms to denote
an aggregate condition of all the phenomena of intelligence,
to describe the manifestations of one and an indivisible essence.
In classifying, for the convenience of philosophical investiga-
tion, the mind into separate and distinct powers or faculties,
emotions or passions, are we not oblivious of the fact, that
this arrangement, classification, order, division, and subdivision,
are essentially arbitrary, and that the principle, essence, and
substratum of mind, is in itself a unit, and incapable of being
subjected to such divisions and classifications? Many of the so-
termed faculties of the mind, the emotions and passions, which are
spoken of as independent and distinct powers, are obviously only
modifications of, or different modes of being or manifestations of,
ONE particular mental condition or state of intellectual relation.
" We cannot map out the mind as we can a country or a county,
assigning to each town, province, or state, its separate controlling
and free sovereignty. We are not justified in converting each
faculty into a little ' independent mind/ as if the original mind
were like that of the polypus, which, according to naturalists,
?may be cut into an almost infinite number of parts, each of
which becomes a polypus, as perfect as that from which it was
separated."* " I suspect/' says Locke, " that this way of speak-
ing of the faculties has misled many into a confused notion of so
many distinct agents in us, which had their several provinces, and
did command, obey, and perform several actions as so many
* Browne.
G G 2
432 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
distinct beings; which has been no small occasion of wrangling,
obscurity, and uncertainty, in questions relating to them/' " The
mind," says another eminent authority, " is formed susceptible
of certain affections; these states or affections we may generalize
more or less, and, according to our generalization, may give them
more or fewer names/' " But," he continues, " whatever may be
the extent of our vocabulary, the mind itself is as independent of
these transient designations as He who fixed its constitution??
still continues to exhibit the same unaltered susceptibilities which
it originally received; as the flowers which the same Divine
Author formed, spring up in the same manner, observing the
same seasons, and spreading to the sun the same foliage and
blossoms, whatever be the systems and the corresponding nomen-
clature, according to which the botanists may have agreed to
record and name their tribes. The great Preserver of Nature
has not trusted us with the dangerous power of altering a single
physical law which He has established, though he has given us
unlimited power over the language which is of our own creation."
May we not apply the same argument to the phenomena of life?
We observe the principle of vitality manifested through different
physical media; but whatever may be the character of the
material tissue, or the special function of the organic structure
through which life reflects its powers, we, as spiritual physio-
logists, maintain that these manifestations are only different
modes or states of development of one and the same principle;
that the life that manifests itself through the brain, lungs,
stomach, and the heart, is identical and homogeneous in its
nature and essence; the peculiarity of the physical organization
affecting, as it undoubtedly does, its mode of being or action.
Applying this metaphysical doctrine to the subject now under
consideration, it must be evident, that in all the varied phe-
nomena of insanity the same identical essence or principle is
affected; that, without any exceptions, the mind?using this
term in its liberal and philosophical acceptation?is in a state
of disorder. I would, however, protect myself from the impu-
tation of repudiating the great discovery of Gall, or of holding,
with the spiritualists, that the principle of thought is susceptible
of actual disease, apart from any abnormal stat6 of the cerebral
tissue. In all cases of mental derangement, the manifestations
of the mind, and not the mind itself, are implicated; or, to speak
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 433
with a strict regard to the principles of cerebral pathology, the
physical media, or different portions of nervous matter through
which the intellect is developed, are diseased, and, as a necessary
consequence, the principle of thought is disordered or deranged in
its operations. As there appears a determination to discounte-
nance the use of the term " moral insanity," I would advise the
witness to avoid, upon all occasions, an ostentatious and unne-
cessary application of the phrase. If called upon to give evidence
in cases of insanity, involving apparently the healthy action of
the motive and affective powers, I would recommend the witness,
when asked to state his opinion of the condition of the mind
and the degree of responsibility in cases of this nature, to speak
of the disorder as one implicating the normal state of the mental
principle. In reply to the interrogatory?" Do you consider the
prisoner at the bar of sound mind, and a responsible agent V'?
I would suggest to the witness the safety of answering, to the
best of his judgment, either affirmatively or negatively; bearing
always in recollection, that in all phases and degrees of insanity,
whatever form it may assume, one and the same essence is
involved in the disturbance?that all are, strictly speaking,
Affections of the Mind.
{To be concluded in our next Number.)
