Dr Charlesworth and Mr. Gardiner Hill Or the Non-Restraint System of Treatment in Lunacy
============================================================================================

151

It is of vital importance to the best interests of society tliat questions
of priority in the discovery of great truths should be decided with
impartiality and justice. A question of priority has been lately con-
tested with a warmth not very unusual in matters of this kind. Mr.
G-ardiner Hill (formerly house surgeon to the Lincoln Asylum, under
the late Dr Charlesworth, the visiting physician to that institution)
industriously advertises himself as the "originator of the non-restraint
system" in the treatment of insanity. Mr. Hill, as we understand his
position, prefers this claim to the extent of virtually excluding all share
in this " discovery" to Dr Charlesworth. How does the matter stand?
In the first place, can we call the " Non-Restraint" system, as ex-
pounded by Mr. Hill, a " discovery" ? It may fairly be questioned
how far a system of treatment which consists to some extent in the
substitution of manual force for instrumental coercion, is entitled
to this high-sounding appellation. In the second place, is it enough
to have enunciated, in an anticipative sense, the proposition, " that
it may be possible to conduct an institution for the insane with-
out having recourse to any instruments of restraint whatever,"?
is it enough, we say, to hazard this conjecture, in order to establish a
claim to a " discovery" of a principle hitherto unknown ? In the third
place, did Mr. Hill stamp this presumed discovery with the character
of a lasting truth, by carrying his anticipative speculation into successful
practice ? We are compelled to answer that he failed to accomplish
this upon his own showing?and we cannot admit that any explana-.
tion of necessity, however plausible, can in any way destroy the fact, or
weaken the inference from it.
That Mr. Hill generally evinced, throughout his official career, an
earnest endeavour to extend the application of the humane principle
of treatment for which the Lincoln Asylum had for many years previously
to his time been renowned, we willingly admit. That the authorities,
and no one more heartily and unreservedly than Dr Charlesworth
himself, repeatedly recorded their approbation of his zeal, is also true.
It would be unjust to deny to Mr. Hill this merit. But that he made
any " discovery" in the matter is most absurd. That he initiated, either
in theory or in practice, the system of non-restraint, is also opposed to
historic evidence. To assert that Dr Charlesworth ever transferred
from himself to Mr. Hill the honour of this said " discovery," is also
untrue. None of the expressions of Dr Charlesworth, so much relied
upon by Mr. Hill, will bear this forced construction. It is, on the
contrary, within our own knowledge, that Dr Charlesworth, who was
ever ready, in the most generous manner, to extol Mr. Hill's merits,
expressly and emphatically denied that he was entitled to the particular
honour which he now claims. We also know that those physicians
whose labours in this department of science entitle their opinions to
respect, entertain the same view upon the subject. In justice to the
152 THE NON-RESTRAINT SYSTEM.
honoured name of Dr Charlesworth, we cannot lielp expressing our
conviction that these gentlemen are hound to speak out before the
public that which they have not hesitated to say in private.*
But apart entirely from these considerations we ask, in sober serious-
ness, whether on other grounds Mr. Hill has any right to put himself for-
ward as the " discoverer," or " originator" of the " non-restraint system
of treating the insane" ? The great "discoverer," the illustrious "origina-
tor," was unquestionably the immortal Pinel ; but this tact appears to
be entirely ignored and lost sight of by those who have busied them-
selves in this noisy controversy. Mr. Gardiner Hill may have adopted and
carried out in this country a principle of treatment developed by this
celebrated physician ;t but he has no more claim to the designation of
"originator" or " discoverer," quoad the abolition of restraint, than a
man has to call himself the "originator" of vaccination, simply because
he enforces the importance of .Tenner's discovery, as a protection against
small-pox! Does not Mr. Hill expose himself to the charge of arro-
gance and presumption by designating himself, as he ostentatiously and
absurdly does in all his advertisements, as the author (?) and originator of
the non-restraint system of treatment in lunacy. "J We never read his
often-repeated advertisements without a feeling of pain and humiliation.
Let the honoured mantle fall upon the right shoulders ; let the revered
name of Pinel have all the credit of the " discovery" or " authorship," as
Mr. Hill ridiculously terms it; but, for God's sake, let it not be said
that any Englishman endeavoured by stealth to filch from the immortal
Frenchman the honour to which he is so justly entitled, and which the
whole civilized world awards to him, for first recognising the important
principle that it is possible in the treatment of the insane to dispense
(in a great measure) with the use of mechanical restraint! If Mr. Hill
asserts that Pinel only took the initiative?the first step in the matter,
and that it remained for him (Mr. Hill) to mature the discovery, and
to establish that it is possible to treat all cases of insanity without
mechanical restraint, then we understand his position and can appre-
ciate the validity of his claim to the title of "originator," "author,"
and " discoverer." If we are right in our estimate of Mr. Hill's much-
* The question lias further been put in the clearest light in an able and faithful
summary of the history of the Lincoln asylum in " The Lancet." The conclusion
from that summary is irresistible.
+ It is a curious fact, and one not generally known, that the idea of carrying
out a more humane system of treating the insane originated with two men whose
names are seldom mentioned in connexion with this subject. We refer to Tenon
and Rouchefoucald. But this fact does not detract from the gref t credit due to
Pinel for his heroic exertions at the Bicetre, where the experiment svas first tried.
The subjoined passage refers to the fact:?" Enfui, en 1708. . . . Tenon publia
un mdmoire rdmarquable, dans lequel se trouvent indiqudes les premierees notions d'un
regime doux et liumain pour les aliends. Un citoyen, La Rouchefoucald, en
comprit toute la port?e, et joignit plus tard ses efforts aux siens, en faisant en
1791, a l'assemblde constituante, pliisieurs rapports, qui devoilaient l'etat miserabl
dans'lequel languissaient les alienfe. C'dtait la sans doute la douleur d'une belle am e
et de nobles efforts auxquels il est juste de renvoyer la cause premiere des amdlio ra
tions que Pinel put 1'executes l'annee suivante h, Bicetre."?Scipion-Pinel, " Trait
Coniplet du Regime Sanitaire des Alienes. 1836. Pp. 55, 56.
1 Vide the Medical Directories.
THE NON-RESTRAINT SYSTEM. 153
vaunted " discovery," then we will only now say, that if it be his deli-
berately formed opinion that no case of acute insanity can possibly occur
in which the application of restraint would be justifiable?if such be his
dictum, he will find himself opposed to the united experience of all the
practical physicians of England, France, Germany, and America.
We have ourselves heard Dr Conolly (who has always been deemed
in this country the leading advocate of the " non-restraint" system of
treating the insane) declare, in a court of law, that "mechanical re-
straint" could not invariably be dispensed with ; that cases will present
themselves in which it may be necessary to have recourse to it.*
We may, in a few words, take our leave of this disagreeable subject.
We have stated that all the honour of this " discovery" is, beyond all
question, due to Pinel. Nor can any one of reflection and experience
admit the possibility of one man having conceived the splendid project
of working such a mighty revolution against the tyranny of opinion
and the inertia of custom, and of carrying out this work to practical
perfection in the course of a few years. More than half a century has
expired since the first step was taken by Pinel: and the gigantic
labour has not yet reached its consummation. Many minds have been
earnestly striving to forward the good work. Foremost amongst these,
in this country, must ever stand the name of Charlesworth. For
thirty-five years he never wearied in the task. If to the Lincoln
system is due the high honour of having shown a bright example of
what may be done in the abolition of barbarous instruments, that
honour it owes to Dr Charlesworth. To render this abolition feasible,
how many reforms were necessary! The whole physical and moral
aspect of the scene had to be changed. This was a work of time?of
devoted patience?of never-failing courage and perseverance. This
was the work of Dr Charlesworth. Let the applause of his fellow-
men?the only reward he can now have?be accorded to him.
If ever the motto of Lord Somers, " Prodesse quam conspici," could
be justly assumed by any other man, that man was the late Dr.
Charlesworth. We hope it may not be interpreted as evidence of an
unkind feeling towards Mr. Hill?a feeling we altogether disclaim?if
we invite his attention to this admirable maxim. It is doubtful whether
any man ever made good a claim to priority by blazoning his preten-
sions before the world in the shape of advertisements. Such a course
of proceeding will hardly promote his cause amongst men of science
and reflection, and is not altogether free from injurious imputations.
If Mr. Hill be the "author and originator of the non-restraint
system of treatment in lunacy"?if he really did make this great dis-
covery?then we ask, is it professional or even decent for him to parade
this fact in the advertisements that announce his being the proprietor
of a private asylum ? If he be the " coming man, the psycholo-
gical star "looming in the future," the world will not be long in reco-
gnising his merits, and thus release this gentleman from the fatigue
and inconvenience necessarily consequent upon his being always obliged
to blow his own trumpet!
* The trial of " Hill v. Pliilp," Court of Queen's "Bench.
NO. XXV. M
