General Paralysis of the Insane
===============================

55
Aet. IV.-

It is a singular fact that, notwithstanding the deeply interesting nature
of the subject, only one monograph on the General Paralysis of the
Insane (the treatise by Dr Winn) has appeared in this country; whilst
on the continent, not less than five monographs have been published
during the last thirty years. Dr Winn's treatise, published in 1848,
and previously printed as an original article in the "Psychological
Journal," contained a full account of all that was known respecting
the causes, symptoms, progress, and pathology of this peculiar disease.
Since then (1848), three fresh works on general paralysis have
issued from the French press. The most recent of these, from the
pen of M. Jules Falret* (son of the well-known physician to the Sal-
petriere), contains a good digest of all that has been written of late on
the subject, and as a methodical and comprehensive treatise it will be
found of service ; the practical physician will, however, regret to notice
that the author's speculative remarks are more numerous than his
clinical observations.
Much confusion and a variety of conflicting opinions prevail on the
continent respecting the nature of general paralysis, and it is not easy
to determine, from the statements of foreign writers, what they pre-
cisely mean by their various descriptions of the disease. M. Falret
attempts to clear up the difficulty. He says:
" Relative to general paralysis, there are four leading opinions: one,
the most ancient, advocated by Delaye, Calmeil, Georget, and also by
Esquirol and the greater number of his eleves, implies that the disease
is a simple complication or termination of any kind of insanity; another
opinion, supported by Bayle, Parchappe, and Ducheck, of Prague, re-
presents the affection as a distinct special form of mental disease, cha-
racterized at the same time by physical as well as mental symptoms,
and by anatomical lesions; a third notion, conceived by Requien, Bail-
larger, Lunier, and Rodrigues, confounds, by means of one symptom,
that of paralysis, those cases which are, and those which are not, at-
tended with delusion, under the name of progressive^ general paralysis;
lastly, the fourth view, supported by Sandras, Brierre de Boismont,
and JDuchenne du Boulogne, recognises two principal kinds of general
paralysis; one, in which the paralysis is associated with insanity; the
other, in which the paralytic symptoms are unconnected with any signs
of mental aberration."
M. Falret follows up these statements by a query?
" Are there two kinds of general paralysis, the one with, the other
without, insanity, or is there only one form of the disease ?"
* Recherches sur la Folie Paralytique et les Diverses Paralysies Generale. Par
Jules Falret, Docteur en Medecine, ancien Interne des Hopitaux et Hospices Civils
de Paris. 1853.
50 GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE.
This point, he thinks, might be determined by a comparison of the
cases in asylums for the insane with those in ordinary hospitals. It
would however appear, from the cases which he has appended to his
treatise, and to which we shall have occasion to allude, that the expe-
rience to be gained from general hospitals, with respect to general
paralysis, is of the scantiest and most inconclusive kind. M. Falret is
forced to admit that, in our present state of knowledge, it is impossible
to decide whether there is a form of general paralysis which may
exist independent of insanity, and he contents himself with an inquiry
into the nature of the general paralysis of the insane, and to which he
gives the name of paralytic insanity, but which we think less definite
than the term in common use. We shall, however, in this review,
adopt the author's designation, as it may help to define his particular
notion of the disease.
M. Falret divides his treatise into two parts. In the first, he en-
deavours to show that paralytic insanity is a special form of disease,
characterized not only by anatomical lesion and by the special phe-
nomenon of the paralysis, but also by its psychical symptoms and by its
peculiar mode of progression. In the second part he takes a rapid
review of the various maladies which might be confounded with para-
lytic insanity, in order to discriminate between them and the particular
malady more especially under consideration.
M. Falret, en passant, moots the following question :?" Is there,"
he says, " another and totally distinct form of paralysis, which would
merit the term of progressive?'''' This point, he thinks, cannot be
determined in the present state of our knowledge.
The following remarks by the author are extremely judicious :?
"It is not necessary to establish the fact that paralysis precedes,in nearly
every instance, the accession of mental derangement, in order to prove
that paralytic madness is a special affection and not a termination of
every kind of insanity. In fact, the proposition advanced by MM.
Baillarger and Lunier does not appear to be generally true. They
have advocated the anteriority of the symptoms of paralysis ; our
observations, on the other hand, would lead us to suppose, as a general
rule, that the mental derangement and the paralysis have a simul-
taneous origin, although in many instances the affection of the mind
precedes, for a longer or shorter period, the manifestation of the para-
lysis."
M. Falret concludes this part of the subject with the following pro-
positions, which he considers incontestable ;
" 1st. That this specific form of paralysis is never known to attack
insane patients who have been confined for many years in an asylum.
If paralysis occasionally attacks patients belonging to this class, it is
a totally different malady, and depends upon softening of the brain,
GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE. 57
apoplexy, tumours of the brain, or upon affections perfectly distinct
from paralytic insanity.
" 2ndly. That the insane who die paralytic in asylums, invariably
exhibit traces of paralysis on their admission, or very soon afterwards,
and that none of these patients survive a period of more than three
or four years."
We can vouch for this high rate of mortality, which is rather below
than under the truth. Out of 90 cases that were alive twelve months
since in one of our large asylums, scarcely a ninth part are now alive.
M. Falret does not profess, in his treatise, to give a detailed descrip-
tion of the course of paralytic insanity ; his object is to prove, that in
spite of individual differences, the disease presents a generic character.
He justly observes that a great obstacle attends an investigation into
the nature of the disease at its outset, owing to the difficulty of ob-
taining satisfactory information in the early periods of its manifestation.
The approach of the disease is so insidious that it often makes con-
siderable progress without the relatives of the patients having been in
the slightest degree aware of its existence. It is, generally speaking,
only at a late period, when the symptoms are sufficiently evident, that
the medical attendant has an opportunity of witnessing the progress of
the complaint.
M. Falret recognises four varieties of paralytic insanity:?the con-
gestive, the more especiallyparalytic, the melancholic, and the expansive
variety. As the author's views respecting these forms of the disease
are full of interest, we shall give them at length :?
" 1. Congestive variety.?Congestion has often been noticed as a
precursory symptom of general paralysis, but its importance has been
exaggerated. M. Bayle, for instance, asserts that the disease is always
marked by giddiness and d'afflux de sang a la tete, in addition to more
or less impairment of the reasoning faculties. It must be understood
that this congestive state has no reference to those sudden attacks of
congestion of the brain and of epilepsy which occasionally occur during
the progress of the disease. It generally happens that some of the
physical or psychical symptoms which characterise the affection, have
existed for some time before the explosion of the congestive attack.
The embarrassment of speech often becomes more intense after one of
these seizures, and the mind becomes disturbed. The accompanying
insanity may be marked by excitement or depression.
" 2. Paralytic variety.?So little is known respecting this form of
the disease, that its demonstration is by no means an easy task. It is
this very paucity of facts which has given rise of late to so much con-
troversy with regard to the nature of the malady. Occasionally, in
ordinary practice, we meet with patients who, without any known
cause, exhibit an almost imperceptible tremor of the upper extremities,
a difficulty in performing delicate manipulations with the fingers, such
as writing, for instance, an irregularity of gait, a difficulty of supporting
58 GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE.
themselves on their legs, and a trifling amount of hesitation in speaking.
They seem conscious of these defects, and attribute them to some acci-
dental or permanent cause, such as fatigue, cold, or the loss of a tooth.
Tremor of the tongue and upper hp are also frequently observable.
Vertigo is also a common symptom. Sometimes, as M. Baillarger
observes, there is irregular dilatation of the pupils, and impairment of
the sexual functions. In general, these paralytic patients appear to be
in full possession of their intellectual faculties ; but, if they are closely
examined, and above all, if the persons who live with them are questioned
minutely, Ave discover signs of impaired reason, even in the first stages
of the disease. Very soon, however, the mental disorder becomes fully
developed. The habits of the patients are completely changed, and
they perform a variety of singular acts, quite inexplicable to those who
are acquainted with their previous mode of hfe.
" The duration of this etat prodromique is necessarily variable, and
may be prolonged for a considerable period. The paralytic phenomena
increase progressively. The intelligence becomes weakened, and at
length decided symptoms of insanity are manifested. The patient may
be either in a state of excitement or depression, but in nearly every
instance the mental disorder is marked by ideas of grandeur or by self-
satisfaction.
" 3. Melancholic variety.?It is generally supposed, when paralytic
insanity commences with mental disorder, that it invariably gives rise
to a change of habits and character, and is accompanied by great mental
and physical excitement; yet if we inquire minutely into the history
of the case, we shall occasionally learn that the patient, before the
accession of maniacal excitement, had been in a state of moral depression,
and to which some authors, and especially Dr Ducheclc, have given the
name of le stade melancolique. MM. Bayle and Calmeil frequently
allude to the state of melancholy which precedes the appearance of the
phenomena of excitation. It is frequently marked by a short inter-
mittence, during which the patient resumes his ordinary occupation.
This interval is, however, very brief, and is quickly followed by an ex-
plosion, as it were, of agitation and incoherence.
" 4. Expansive variety.?This form, which is the most common, has
been frequently described. It may precede or follow any of the other
varieties. Its commencement is marked by an excessive activity, which
betrays itself in actions and in language. The patient's character is modi-
fied or exaggerated; he becomes more active in his profession,and occupies
himself at the same time with new pursuits. He sleeps little, and con-
ceives projects which are not altogether absurd, but which can only be
realised up to a certain point, He gives himself up to intoxication, to
venereal excesses, or to singular actions, which are often dangerous, and
sometimes criminal. It is in this variety that the patient commits
thefts and other felonious acts, which lead to his arrest. When the
patient arrives at this stage of extreme excitement, we often see them
a prey to excessive activity, which may terminate in one night, or in a
few hours, in maniacal agitation, or in those delusions of grandeur that
are so characteristic of the malady."
GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE. 59
The temporary benefit obtained by medicine in this disease is often
so striking as to lead medical men to suppose that they have cured
cases, when speedy relapses too often show how fallacious have been
their conclusions. M. Falret does not deny the possibility of a perfect
cure, and he instances a case of M. Fevrier's which had not relapsed
during a period of twenty-five years. He, however, believes that in
many instances the supposed recoveries were merely examples of inter-
mission. In one case of his own, the intermission lasted a year and a
half. In the practice of his father, at Salpetriere, he has frequently seen
the most marked remissions follow the application of the actual cautery
to the nape of the neck. M. Baillarger, in his clinical lectures, has
pointed out the frequent disappearance of the delusions in the course of
the disease; he, however, considers that the paralytic symptoms, and
especially the embarrassment of speech, never wholly disappear, and that
they evince, by their presence, the persistence of the disease. M. Falret
relates, on the authority of Dr Coindet, of Geneva, an interesting case
of paralytic insanity, in which the disease, after having been remarkably
intense and characteristic, was so completely suspended for a period of
five months, that the medical attendant was only once able to detect a
very slight embarrassment of speech, and this did not occur until the
close of the intermission. The recurrence of the disease was marked
by epileptiform attacks, which terminated the patient's existence at the
end of a month.
It is generally admitted that the mental disorder associated with
paralytic insanity, may appear under three principal forms?viz.,
monomania, mania, and dementia. M. Falret, however, asks this
question: "Is it not possible, by penetrating beyond the external
manifestations of this disease, to discover a special character in the
form of insanity which accompanies general paralysis, and which
distinguishes it from that of any other species of mental affection ?"
M. Baillarger inclines to this opinion : " The ordinary monomaniacs,"
he says, " differ from the paralytic monomaniacs by the obstinacy with
which they retain their ideas; the paralytic, on the contrary, on account
of the feebleness of their memory, have no coherence in their ideas, and
they constantly contradict themselves."
M. Falret's views respecting the character of the insanity which is
associated with general paralysis, is extremely faulty as regards arrange-
ment. He has fallen into an error so common to a youthful, ardent,
and imaginative Frenchman?that of unnecessarily subdividing and
complicating his subject, until all idea of unity is lost. He has, for
instance, divided the evolution of the insanity into three distinct phases,
which he terms the period " d'incubation ou de production des idees
delirantes" the "jjeriode de systematisation," and the "periode es-
CO GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE.
sentiellement chronique de Valienation." All this may appear very
scientific, but it is decidedly unphilosophical.
We have no doubt that ambitious or exalted monomania is the form
of insanity more commonly associated with paralytic insanity. Grene-
rally speaking, it is some mental eccentricity which has first attracted
the attention of the patient's friends, his bodily infirmity having been
quite overlooked. The patients speak of their fortune and grandeur,
that they are able to make considerable purchases, and build palaces.
Everything is transformed into gold or silver; and the very pebbles
are precious stones, which they hoard with care. Some consider the
asylum as a magnificent palace, the persons around them as only there
to wait on them ; and the strangers who come to visit the institution
are regarded as petitioners for their powerful influence. Others con-
sider their detention as a shameful injustice, opposed to all laws, both
human and divine. They promise thousands to the physician for their
release, and they seek to corrupt the keepers by signing bills for
enormous sums of money. One fancies he is a king or an emperor, and
exacts homage ; another imagines himself to be a deity, requiring adora-
tion. In an asylum containing patients suffering from general paralysis,
we find in imagination barons, peers, generals, physicians, astronomers,
poets, men who know everything, even to the secrets of Providence,
and whose power is such as to give motion to the universe. In the
second period of general paralysis the patients have the same ideas of
grandeur, but the insanity is more general. Ambitious monomania,
however, does not invariably accompany paralytic insanity. The insane
aspect varies very much in different individuals, and in the same
person at different times. The disease generally begins with mania
or monomania, and ends in dementia.
M. Falret, in the second portion of his work, deprecates the ten-
dency evinced by recent authors to unite under the head of general
paralysis or progressive paralysis, facts which differ strikingly from
each other, whether we regard the general symptoms, the progress of
the malady, or the peculiar paralytic features of each individual disease.
He then proceeds to notice the various diseases liable to be confounded
with paralytic insanity. He begins with affections of the brain.
" Cerebral licemorrhage.?When the invasion of this disease is
sudden and accompanied by hemiplegia, there is little probability of
its being confounded with paralytic insanity. Very often the intellect
is unaffected, and the embarrassment of speech is persistent. The only
cases of cerebral haemorrhage which are likely to lead to an error of
diagnosis, are those in which a less intense paralysis of one half of the
body supervenes upon an old hemiplegic attack of the opposite side.
This generalisation of the paralysis is generally attributed, by authors,
to an effusion of serum upon the brain or into the ventricles, and which
is consecutive to the primitive lesion."
GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE. 61
" Softening of the brain.?The diagnosis, in some instances, between
this affection and general paralysis, is much more difficult than between
the latter disease and cerebral haemorrhage. * * * The signs which
especially distinguish softening of the brain from paralytic insanity,
are as follows?intense and continued headache, frequent vomiting,
violent pains in limbs, cramps, and occasional numbness of one side of
the body. Embarrassment of speech rarely occurs, but when present
it is more marked than hi paralytic insanity. The intellect is
generally unaffected, but the memory is frequently impaired. Anaes-
thesia and hyperaesthesia more commonly occur in this affection than
in paralytic insanity. Moreover, the indications to be derived from the
course of the disease must not be overlooked. The progress of softening
of the brain is often rapid, and the invasion of the disease is frequently
sudden. The paralysis and impairment of consciousness does not
generally supervene until after one or more attacks. The course of
the disease is much more rapid than that of general paralysis, and the
patients seldom survive more than a few months."
" Tumours of the brain.?The principal characteristics which distin-
guish cerebral haemorrhage and softening, apply with equal force to
tumours of various kinds, tubercle, cancer, cysts, exostoses, syphilitic
nodes, &c. * * * Tumours of the brain have ordinarily a long dura-
tion and a slower development than paralytic insanity, although the
evolution of the latter disease is remarkably slow."
" Meningitis.?The progress of acute meningitis is generally so
extremely rapid, that the possibility of confounding it with general
paralysis is extremely slight, unless, as some authors assert, there be
a form of acute paralytic insanity; this, however, is extremely pro-
blematical. * * * The assimilation of these two affections appears to
have been owing to a mistaken identity or to anatomical lesion. It is
possible that during the progress of general paralysis meningitis may
ensue; should this, however, be the case, the occurrence must be
merely considered in the light of an accidental complication."
" Affections of the spinal cord.?Very little reflection will suffice
to show that this disease bears only a partial resemblance to paralytic
insanity. Medullary paralysis is almost invariably paraplegic, and if
general paralysis ensues it supervenes solely as a secondary affection.
There is, moreover, neither disorder of the intellect nor embarrassment
of speech."
" Nervous paralysis.?Since modern anatomical researches have dis-
covered in the nervous centres the origin of the greater number of
paralytic diseases, we are little disposed to acknowledge the existence
of any affection of the nervous system which is unassociated with
lesion of some part of the brain or spinal cord; nevertheless, a certain
number of these maladies have been classified by the best authorities,
as a distinct and peculiar species of functional disease. ^ They may be
divided into two classes?those paralytic cases which depend on
epilepsy, hysteria, chorea, &c., and those which are the result of
poisoning from alcohol, lead, mercury, &c."
" Paralysis from the effects of lead.?It is possible that persons who
have been long exposed to the influence of lead, may be attacked with
62 GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE.
symptoms closely resembling paralytic insanity, but this must not be
confounded with the true general lead-paralysis, which constitutes a
special disease. We have met with two cases of general paralysis
which appeared to have been occasioned by lead. In one, there was a
complete paralysis of all the members of the body, but the case differed
in several respects from one of paralytic insanity. The affection
occurred in a young man who was at first attacked with paralysis of
the extensor muscles of the forearms. For these symptoms, electri-
city and transcurrent cauterisation were employed in vain, under the
direction of M. Bricheteau. A year afterwards the paralysis had
extended to the thighs and the trunk of the body. He died suddenly,
and a post-mortem examination revealed softening of the superior part
of the brain."
" Mercurial trembling.?The action of mercury has been supposed to
be a cause of the paralysis of the insane, but the arguments which have
been brought forward in proof of this opinion are extremely question-
able. Mercurial paralysis has un cachet tout special, and notwith-
standing the analogy of some symptoms, the diseases cannot be
considered as identical."
" Paralysis from the effects of alcohol.?This affection bears a closer
resemblance to paralytic insanity than any of the preceding diseases.
"We do not allude to acute delirium tremens, but to the affection
which Dr Huss has termed alcoholismus chronicus. * * # The first
phenomenon which commonly exhibits itself in those who indulged to
excess in alcoholic drinks, is trembling of the hands, which is more
manifest in the morning than in the evening. It is also most conspi-
cuous after numerous excesses, or after the sudden deprivation of the
stimulus to which the system has become accustomed. For a long
period this trembling is, in many drunkards, the only symptom pro-
duced by the abuse of alcoholic liquors. Not unfrequently, however,
they are attacked with headache, vertigo, and dazzling of the sight,
which obliges the patient to lean for support on any object near at
hand. The digestive organs are frequently deranged at the very outset
of the affection, and a vomiting of mucus often occurs in the morning.
After a while, if the abuse of alcohol be continued, we notice the first
symptoms of alcoholic paralysis, and which have been so well described
by I)r. Huss. Formications in the upper and lower extremities, numb-
ness in the fingers and toes, and cramps and pains of the limbs, are
amongst some of the commonest signs of the disease. All these pheno-
mena of muscular and nervous weakness are generally confined to the
extremities, and seldom extend above the neck. At the same time the
brain becomes the seat of abnormal symptoms, indicated by giddiness,
indistinct vision, and muscse volitantes. * * * Many symptoms of
chronic alcoholism resemble general paralysis at their outset. The former
disease, however, differs from the latter by the fact of the paralysis
generally commencing with a numbness of the toes and fingers before
these organs become decidedly weakened. In general paralysis, on
the contrary, the lesions of motion generally affect the whole length
of the members, and, moreover, they do not always commence in the
GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE. 63
extremities. * * * The impairment of the mental faculties in alcoholic
paralysis is marked by a state of hebetude, especially after the full
development of the paralytic symptoms. The memory is also greatly
weakened, and the patient forgets the most important incidents in his
life. He is often, however, quite conscious of his mental and physical
defects. He is generally low-spirited, and often hypochondriacal. The
illusions of sight are also extremely characteristic, but the patient is
often aware of the unreality of these phantasms. In addition to these
false perceptions of sight, which may be extremely various, the invalid
is troubled with the same spectra in his sleep, and it is a peculiar fea-
ture of alcoholic intoxication, that the patient is unable to distinguish
the illusions which occur during sleep from those which happen when
he is awake. * * * Decided intermissions or remissions moreover occur
much more frequently in alcoholic paralysis than in the general
paralysis of the insane."
"Progressive Muscular Atrophy.?The diagnosis between muscular
atrophy and paralytic insanity, when it has been ushered in without
incoherence, is not an easy task. The absence of insanity at the out-
set of the disease, the more or less rapid development of maniacal ex-
citement, the absence of embarrassment of speech, except perhaps
towards the close of disease in one instance or at the commencement
of the affection in another, are the points to which attention must be
directed in our endeavour to arrive at a correct diagnosis."
Dr Winn has, in the treatise to which we have previously referred,
drawn attention to the remarkable resemblance which paralysis agi-
tans bears to paralytic insanity. Shaking palsy often commences im-
perceptibly, and progresses slowly; it may commence in the head or in
the arms, which may remain affected for years; after a while the
paralysis extends to the legs, which become weak and tremulous, and
unable to obey the will; at a more advanced period the power of
speaking and eating is lost; the urine and fseces are passed involun-
tarily; coma at length ensues, and terminates in death. Although
the two diseases are distinct, there is nevertheless a remarkable coinci-
dence in many of the symptoms. It is also a remarkable fact, that
induration of some parts of the nervous system has been discovered
occasionally in both diseases.
M. Falret concludes his observations with the following inferences:
" 1st. If, by the words General Paralysis, it is intended to designate
a disease characterised by other phenomena than that of paralysis,
then there is only one species of this affection which has, as yet, been
scientifically demonstrated. 2ndly. If, on the contrary, we merely
understand by this title a symptom which can supervene on various
diseases, it must be admitted that there are not only two, but many
kinds of General Paralysis; that there exists, for instance, the apo-
plectic, the epileptic, the saturnine, the alcoholic, and the atrophic
forms of General Paralysis."
64 LOGIC AND PSYCHOLOGY.
Nowithstanding all that has been advanced on the continent to the
contrary, we are inclined to consider that the disease commonly
termed in this country "the General Paralysis of the insane," is a
distinct and specific form of paralysis, having a peculiar origin, pro-
gress, and termination. The question, after all, can only be deter-
mined by experience and an appeal to facts, and much more research
is required before a positive opinion can be formed on the subject.
The cases which M. Falret has appended to his treatise are ex-
tremely few. They are only ten in number. Four of these were cases
of General Paralysis accompanied with ideas of grandeur. Three
were instances of alcoholic paralysis; one was a case of muscular
atrophy; and one afforded a good example of saturnine paralysis.
Perfect recovery only occurred in one instance, and that was a case of
alcoholic paralysis associated with delusions and hypochondriasis. He
only gives the results of three post mortem examinations, and these
present nothing noticeable.
M. Falret is evidently a shrewd and clever man, and has certainly
done good service to psychological science, by the industrious and
methodical manner in which he has given us an exposition of the
various opinions which have agitated our continental friends of late,
with regard to the various and complicated phenomena of an obscure
and singular malady. We could have wished that M. Falret's treatise
had exhibited marks of a more extended experience ; this is, however,
a fault which we hope to see corrected when he next appears in
print, and we trust, from some words which have fallen from him in
the commencement of his thesis, that it will not be long before we
have the pleasure of renewing our acquaintance with an author who,
from position and capacity, is admirably qualified to investigate the
nature of one of the most interesting subjects that can possibly
engage the attention of the physician or the psychologist.
