Recent Trends in the Control of Mental Deficiency in the United States
=======================================================================

By Stanley P. Da vies, Ph.D.
(Executive Secretary, Committee on Mental Hygiene, State Charities Aid
Association, New York.)
To the average American citizen, mental deficiency was a problem that seemed
remote enough before the war. To the man on the street it had to do with a com-
paratively small number of persons, considerably less than one per cent, ot the
Population, who were safely and comfortably isolated in some more or less dis-
tant institution. Small wonder then that this same citizen was startled into an
^pleasant consciousness of the mental deficiency problem when, following the
war, the official report of the intelligence tests given the troops recruited into the
United States Army during the war revealed that 47.3% or practically half of all
the white drafted troops had mental ages of less than thirteen years. The many
articles published apropos of these results are an indication of the sober though
which the problem of mental deficiency began at once to create m the public
^md- One needs to read only the captions of some of these articles to discove
the trend of these thoughts: "American Misgivings ; Is America Feeble-
minded?"; "University Head Derides Delusion of Democracy.
50
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
Although psychologists have since pointed out that many of the alarmin#
inferences drawn from these findings were wholly unwarranted and due to mis-
interpretation, and although to the writer, the tests when carefully analysed
merely prove that average people have average intelligence, nevertheless, the very
suggestion that half of us might be feebleminded, ridiculous as it is, brought
mental deficiency close home to Mr. Average Citizen and made him aware of the
fact, as never before, that the problem is all about us and not merely within the
four walls of a few public and private institutions. It made him realize that
there was not lacking an element of truth in that whimsical remark of the late
Joseph H. Choate, former Ambassador of this country to the Court of St. James:
"The great difficulty which this problem of mental deficiency presents is that
there are so many of us.''
Along with this recent popular appreciation of the extent of mental defici-
ency, there has been developing a change in public attitude toward the
mentally defective person. He was wont to be regarded not so long ago as be-
longing to an almost distinct species, something less than human. He now
appears as a human being not so very different from the rest of us. This growing
sense of a common human bond with the mental defective is making possible a
sympathy for him and an understanding of his needs and potentialities that was
not possible before. It is a matter of general knowledge now that there are many
more mental defectives in our midst than are in our institutions and that not a
few are working about us, if not with us, doing much of the steady toil of the
world and looked upon as plain, hard-working, decent citizens.
True, this latter type is not the one we ordinarily have in mind when we
speak of the problem of the mentally defective. None the less the recognition
of this type has led to important changes in the public and official attitude toward
those who are ' 'problems.'' The alarmist period of some ten years ago, when the
relationship of mental deficiency to crime, delinquency, vice, pauperism and
vagrancy was shown to be so close that the mentally defective appeared at last
to stand revealed as the root of all social evil, is recent enough to be well recalled.
It only awaited the gathering of more complete information about the mentally
defective, particularly those in the community, as distinguished from the selected
groups of cases in jails, reformatories, houses of prostitution, institutions for
the feeble-minded, etc., from which previous conclusions were drawn, to make it
plain that these latter were only a small and by no means representative propor-
tion of all the feebleminded. Whether the picture of the mentally defective is
seen only in that small part of which we first had a glimpse, or whether it is seen
in the large, makes a decided difference in public policy.
In the United States, as in England, the picture is coming to be seen in the
large. For every figure in the picture who appears to be steeped in all the evils
of our modern society, there now stand out several others with the sweat of honest
toil on their brow. If the picture, as formerly, is viewed in its worst part only
and every feeble-minded person is depicted as an actual or probable social offender
one finds logically resulting the program which formerly prevailed of the endeav-
our toward complete segregation with perhaps sterilization as an additional safe-
guard. If, on the other hand, the picture is seen as a whole, and the industrial
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
51
and social possibilities of the mentally defective are observed to outweigh their
potentialities for evil, then one finds reflected in public programs, as of late, the
plan of training the feebleminded, in so far as they are capable of it, for the lead-
ing of useful lives in the community.
It is on this constructive aspect of the problem that emphasis is now being
placed in this country. This program of socializing the feebleminded, so to
speak, is being carried out primarily through the institutions, the public schools,
and community clinics and field agents.
Without doubt the work of Dr. Walter E. Fernald, Superintendent of the
Massachusetts School for the Feebleminded at Waverley, and of Dr. Charles
Bernstein, Superintendent of the Rome State School for Mental Defectives at
Rome, New York, has led the way in America to a new conception of the place
of the institution in the treatment of mental deficiency. The conception of the
institution which formerly prevailed has been characterized by comparing the
institution to a still lake which receives a slow influx of new waters and loses its
contents only by gradual evaporation. Thus the institution of the accepted type
in the past received patients slowly as its capacity permitted and kept them until
death took them away. This was the familiar custodial care which the complete
segregation program urged. In its favor, be it said, that it did securely restrain
from further social damage those whom it kept within its walls. It overlooked or
neglected, however, the much larger proportion of the feebleminded not in insti-
tutions who remained without proper care or oversight. It was a case of giving
undivided attention to one irresponsible, while nine or more others were left to
drift to disaster and to add to a fast accumulating pile of social wreckage.
The newer conception of the function of the institution, which has been
developing of late, would compare it, to go back to the figure, to a lake fed and
drained by a running stream with ample inflow and outflow. In other words the
institution is now coming to be regarded as not for custodial care primarily but
rather for training purposes and for the final restoration to society o a t ose
capable of social rehabilitation. Under this latter plan, an institution of given
capacity can be of helpful service to a far larger number of the mentally deficient
than under the old plan. _ ,..
At Waverley since 1918 there has been under Dr. Fernald s direction, an
extensive, though careful, development of the parole system. Under this sys-
tem, institutional cases, who, after a period of training, are deemed suitable for
life outside are permitted to return to the community on trial, remaining,
however, under the supervision of the institution as exercised by its social worker
until such time as they give evidence of having sufficently stabilized themselves
in their new life to warrant discharge. The report of the institution at Waverley
for 1920 shows how this work had developed up to that time. ie ac a prac
tically all of the male morons who have no innate propensities for evil, who have
finished our course of training in the schools, the workshops, and on the farm, are
returning to their homes at the age of 18 or thereabouts, if they have good homes,
and are nearly all doing well in every way, gives the impression that the training
at the school is practical and useful. Each year we feel more strongly that with a
male moron, the crucial period is from 14 to 17 or 18 years, when he eithei forms
52
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
habits of obedience and self-control, or gives himself up to self-indulgence and
anti-social conduct. If he can be safely led through this critical period and made
to feel that he has a place in the world, he is likely to become a useful and law-
abiding citizen."
The boys who go out on parole arc charged for the most part with finding
their own jobs. Running down an alphabetical list of former male patients now
at work in the community one finds such occupations as errand boy, locomotive
fireman, machinist's helper, helper on express truck, stock boy, farm helper,
mill hand, roofer, labourer, teamster, packer, porter, etc. Weekly wages range
from $10 to as high as $50. At last report 220 former male patients of the
Waverley institution were working steadily for wages and had earned during the
year a combined total of $198,800.
The parole work for girls at Waverley has developed more slowly than that
for boys for obvious reasons. In the 1920 report of the institution Dr. Fcrnald
states: "Hitherto we have allowed the female patients to go out only in excep-
tional cases where home conditions are very favourable. The fact that nearly all
of these cases so released have done well has encouraged us to believe that it is
only fair that a large number of well-behaved girls who have been here for a long
time should be given a trial. If the legislature had enacted the long-asked-for
law providing for extra-institutional supervision of the feebleminded ... at least
100 female patients now present could be returned to their homes." In other
words the matter of restoring many of the institutionally trained girls to outside
life is not so much a question of the ability of these girls to do well under super-
vision as it is a question of providing adequate supervision.
The ability of many of the boys and girls who have completed a period of
institutional training to adjust themselves satisfactorily to life in the community
is shown in the fact that at Waverley not more than three or four per cent, of
those permitted to go out on trial in any given year have to be returned to the
institution or are received in other institutions because of social failure.
At the Rome State School for Mental Defectives in New York State, there
has been developed under the leadership of Dr. Bernstein an additional method
of social rehabilitation which serves as a preliminary to parole. This is the colony
system. Colony care has, of course, been employed elsewhere, but nowhere on
such an extensive scale as at Rome. The Rome colonies have been particularly
noteworthy because of the application here of several new principles: (1) colon-
izing of women as well as men; (2) establishment of industrial colonies in towns
for both men and women, in addition to farm colonies for men and domestic
colonies for women; (3) using the colony as a definite training centre for community
life and as a midway station between the institution and parole. In other words
the Rome colonies have not been merely a modified form of institutional care
but they have been made a definite part of the institution's system of training,
looking toward social rehabilitation. The colony is one stage in the moving-up
process from the institution to community life.
The first Rome colony, a farm colony for boys, was established in 1900. At
last report there were in active operation 18 colonies for boys with a total popula-
tion of 376. Sixteen of these were of the farm type, that is, located for the most
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
53
part on rented farms within a few miles of the institution, with the boys, twenty
or more to the group, living in the renovated farm-house and working the land.
The other two of the boys' colonies were of the industrial type. Here the boys
lived in rented dwellings in the city ol Rome, two miles from the institution, and
worked about town in industrial establishments, stores, and at various odd jobs.
In immediate charge of each of the boys' colonies are a responsible man and wife.
All of the colonies are under the frequent observation of the Superintendent of
the institution.
The first Rome colony for girls was begun in 1914. At last repoit there were
fourteen girls' colonies. Eleven of these were of the domestic service type, where
the girls worked out by the day at house-work. The other three were of the indus-
trial type, the girls being employed in cotton mills which in all three cases are ut
a stone's throw from the colony house. The girls' colonies are located m di er-
ent cities and towns in central and western New York State, the t iree neares
being in the city of Rome, the furthest in East Aurora 150 miles from
the institution. . ? , .
The economic advantages of the colony plan from the standpom o le a e
and the taxpayer are obvious. The earnings of the colony members are in prac-
tically all cases more than sufficient to cover the rent of the colony house Hous-
ing some 700 inmates in colonies, as the institution now does, releases that many
beds in the institution and thus provides the institution with increased facilities
for the reception of new cases as truly as if the additional beds ia eeno
by means of expensive new construction. And yet by the colony plan these addi-
tional accommodations are provided without one cent of cost to t e a e. ore
over the colonies represent a further large economy in the fact that the majority
of the colony members are contributing in large measure to their own mainten-
ance (food and clothing). . , , ? llf
The primary purpose of the colonies is not fmancia economy, ow ,
the social reconstruction of their members. In the case of the feebleminded bo>
whose institutional training has been completed, but who canno \e e rus
make his way in the outside world, the colony is a real salvation. It gets
away from the institution and the institutional atmosphere. It makes-him teel
like a new person. He no longer has a sense of being locked up. He takes a
proprietary interest in his place of work and a real pride in everything he Pi?d?es.
He can at last hold up his head in the knowledge that he is at least he p p^ y
way in the world. With all this freedom and sense of freedom, this outlet lor
oppressed energies, the boys are still, without being over-conscious; of it, uirider
eareful supervision. From the standpoint of segregation they are as safe in t
eolony as in the institution. From the disciplinary standpoint they give; les
trouble in the colony than in the institution. There are fewer boys who run away
from colonies than from the institution proper.
, The colony gives the boy training in those very qualities wMch arc necessary
for his success in the community and it affords an excellent opportunity ^ the
observation of the boy to determine whether he is yet ready forthenextstepof
Parole. The colony assures a greater likelihood of success, on the part ol^ those
who are later paroled and discharged, both in the direction of industrial useful
ness ai*d social fitness,
54
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
The colony has proved to be an equally useful and desirable method in the
training of girls for life in the community. The colony girls are under the direct
supervision of a competent matron and assistant. The girls are made to realise
that they are placed in the colony on probation and know that an error in conduct
means being returned to the institution. In observing the colonies at first hand
one is strongly impressed by the fact that many of the girls who have formerly
been delinquent have become considerably sobered by their past experiences, and
are now extremely anxious to go right and prove themselves worthy of a trial in
the community. If the higher-grade feebleminded girls who are received in the
institution are ever to be given a chance to prove their ability to get along
satisfactorily outside, the colony plan, in the writer's opinion, minimizes the
chances of failure. The colony helps to fill the rather large gap between the
institution and parole. It is, so to speak, the sheltering arm of the institution
extended into the community. It is much easier for a girl to "make good" as
a member of a group than to "go it" entirely alone. The girls serve as an
incentive one to the other. There is competition among them in the making of
the best record. There is a strong motive to do well in one's job and go right in
order to win the admiration and respect of the other girls. Furthermore, super-
vision in the colony is closer and more effective than it can be when the girl is on
parole.
In the industrial colonies, for example, the girls not only live in a group but
work in a group. Under supervision they can go to work in a group and return in
a group. Their amusements can be planned in the same way. The girls, who
need it, can in this way have very strict supervision. ' 'What is the use,'' it may
be asked, "of colonising girls who are bound to fall into difficulties as soon as
supervision is relaxed ?'' To that question the answer lies in the still virgin field
?f personality adjustment. Empirically, however, it has been demonstrated in
the colony work, that once a girl successfully falls into the colony regime, she is
likely to become stabilized by it. Give a troublesome girl of this type good
home training such as the colony offers, kindly oversight, companionship with her
peers, wholesome recreation, and a chance to be herself; put her at a job that
demands her steady attention seven or eight hours a day; let her begin to feel
her productive potentialities by a record of steady weekly earnings; have her open
a personal savings account and buy some nice clothes with her own earned money;
see that she stays faithfully at it for six months, a year, or two years; and an
entirely changed girl is likely to result. From such a regime, self-esteem and the
desire for the esteem of others are apt to replace former motives. Such results
have not been infrequent occurrences in the colony work.
The records of many individuals who have gone out from the colonies into
the community show very plainly the extent to which the colony training has been
helpful in the making of occupational and social adjustments.
The parole plan as carried out at Waverley is now being quite generally
adopted at all the forward-looking institutions for the feebleminded in this
country. The colony plan as developed at Rome has been observed with great
interest but has as yet not been widely followed. There are some indications,
however, that it will be taken up elsewhere. The State of New York has officially
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
55
endorsed the colony plan by incorporating in the State Mental Deficiency Act
sections outlining procedures to be observed in instituting the colony system. Two
of the other State Schools for Mental Defectives in New York have begun or are
planning to begin colony operations.
Space will not permit mention in detail of two other extremely important
agencies in the extra-institutional program: (1) the public school; (2) community
clinics and field agents. The public school is now recognized as the largest single
agency capable of coping with the problem of mental deficiency. By reason of
the compulsory education laws it should be able to identify all the mentally
defective individuals of the coming generation and provide specialized training
for the majority of them, so that only the more extreme cases would need to be
cared for in institutions. It is far better that the backward child be not separated
from the normal life of the home and the community in order to receive the train-
ing necessary for self-support and self-guidance. Studies of the after-school
careers of backward children who had profited by special class training in the
schools, studies such as those made in New York City and more recently in Cin-
cinnati, show how well the public school can meet this problem when properly
equipped both from the standpoint of intra-school provision, and extra-school
and post-school supervision.
The importance of the community supervision of the large number of mental
defectives who do not come under the control of institutions has been recognized
in New York State by the organization, under the direction of the State Com-
mission for Mental Defectives, of a corps of field agents and a number of community
clinics. The work of the field agents is to keep in touch with all mental defectives
in the community who need guidance and assistance in reaching a desirable level
of economic efficiency and social behaviour. While the field agents supervise
mental defectives of all types and ages, their largest and most important single
function has come to be in practice the supervision of defective children during and
especially after the school period. For the most part, even the school systems
which are progressive enough to have special classes and visiting teachers, do not
make provision for following up such cases after they leave school. Othei states,
among them Pennsylvania, have organized similar corps of field agents in con-
nection with a series of state-wide clinics for mental defect.
The process of socializing the feebleminded resolves itself, as does any process
of assimilation or socialization, into a matter of rappvochement between diverse
social elements, in this case the better elements of the citizenship on the one hand
and the feebleminded in question on the other. It is a process in which all the
approach is not on the side of the feebleminded. It is continually emphasized
how the feebleminded must be taught to adapt themselves to the community.
There is the further fact that the community must adapt itself to the feebleminded.
The community must adapt itself to the feebleminded to the extent of giving
them helpful and practical training and supervision, and by making the commun-
ity far as possible safe for those who are permitted to remain in its midst.
Society owes it to the feebleminded to give them the opportunity to come under
good influences. For the more difficult cases it should provide institutional care
and training and the means whereby the more favourable institutional cases may
56
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
be gradually restored to community life after their training is completed. For the
remainder it should provide special classes in the public schools where they can
receive the kind of instruction which'they can best absorb and which will be
useful to them in later life. This social program should also include visiting
teachers and social workers who can inquire into the home conditions of sub-
normal children and make necessary adjustments, and who will also stand ready to
lend a helping hand when the sub-normal boy or girl leaves special class or insti-
tution to make his way in the world. Finally, society's duty toward the feeble-
minded is not complete unless it makes available for such as need it, kindly and
understanding guidance throughout life.
Those of an intelligence level which is below the standard that we now regard
as normal represent no insignificant proportion of the population. Of these
there are many who, by reason of favourable environment or personality or both,
will get along satisfactorily without special help. Others, because of unfavorable
environmental conditions and lack of adaptive powers, will not be able to make
their way independently in the world. The well-organized community as a
matter of social expediency will put itself in a position to know about its weaker
members at as early a period in their lives as possible. It will determine what
measures of social control may be instrumental in enabling these individuals
sooner or later to become satisfactorily functioning units in the community life,
as a preferable alternative to having them cause a serious amount of social damage
or become dependents upon the group for the rest of their lives. In other words
the far-seeing community will recognize the vast social and economic advantage
of making such expenditures for the special education and supervision of the
feebleminded as may be necessary to make social efficients of the largest possible
number. It will make every endeavour to reclaim these border-line individuals
for social life, and, if we may judge by the indications of the work already done
in the United States, it will have a profitable measure of success.
