Reviews and Abstracts
======================

:Author: R. Ruggles Gates

Heredity and Eugenics. , Ph.D., F L.S. Pp. '273 xx. Constable & Co. London. 21s.

The purpose of this book is to give an account
of the chief phenomena regarding hereditary
transmission and of their bearing upon the
theory and practice of Eugenics. As the
author states in his preface: ' 'The germ plasm
of the race is a uniquely precious material, and
its conservation and improvement in each
generation should be the first aim of the State.
The first essential for such a conservation is
the recognition of the inherent (inherited)
differences in the capacities of individuals."
After defining heredity in chapter 1, the author
proceeds to discuss its general aspects. Since
he is a botanist, it is natural that he should
regard this mainly from the Mendelian point
of view, but he is careful to recognize, and to
point out, that while Mendelian heredity is
very common in mankind, it is yet by no
means universal. ' 'Many quantitative characters, and perhaps racial characters, will
probably be found not to follow simple laws
of inheritance involving fixed germinal units.''
This broad-minded attitude is characteristic
of the book as a whole, and it is distinctly
refreshing to meet it after the dogmatic statements of some ardent Mendelians. In Chapter 3 an account is given of the chief inherited
physical characteristics of man, including
stature, colour, skin, left-handedness, anomalies of the hands, eyes, teeth, and hair, and
some diseases. There is much here that will
repay reading. Chapter 4 deals with the
inheritance of mental characteristics. While
his treatment of this question in so far as it
concerns mental inheritance in general is
accurate and judicial, the subject of mental
deficiency calls for some criticism. He quotes
largely from Goddard (whose name, by the
way, is almost invariably spelled Goddart)
and Davenport, and he mentions the opposing
view of Holmes who ' 'very much doubts if the
facts concerning the inheritance of mental
defect are as yet known with sufficient precision to warrant our trying to force them into
simple Mendelian formulae," yet he seems to
us to incline moi'e to the Mendelian hyp0"
thesis in this connexion than the actual facts
warrant. In our opinion not only has it by
no means been proved that the inheritance of
mental defect follows Mendel's laws, but we
consider that the evidence on the whole lS
much more in favour of a blending of inheritance as the explanation. However, Dr Gates
clearly recognizes, whatever the form of m*
heritance may be, that a large number
' 'carriers'' exist who do not themselves show
the actual defect, and that as a consequence
"even if all feebleminded individuals were
prevented by segregation (we may also add by
sterilization) from multiplying, the most
difficult part of the process of eliminating
feeblemindedness would scarcely have begun,
As Punnett, an ardent Mendelian showed, with
only three feebleminded persons in a popula*
tion of a thousand, it would require 250 generations, or about 8,000 years, to reduce the pr?"
portion to one per thousand, by merely segregating or sterilizing those who show the
defect. We cannot but feel that the author s
want of first hand knowledge of defectives has
led him into the pitfall of giving too much
credence to some matters of no little doubt
and in some instances to making distinctly
inaccurate statements. For example, to say
that "in hereditary feeblemindedness the
children tend to have about the same grade ol
mentality as the parents" is apt to convey a
decidedly misleading impression. Nor is the
mentality of a Mongolian ament "nearly
always that of a four year old child." Sim1*
larly it is not correct that Mongolism is a form
of hypothyroidism, or that these persons
"usually appear in good class families.
With regard to the prime causation we entirely agree with Dr Gates that "on the
whole it appears most likely that feeblemindedness has arisen many times, and may
still arise, as a defect mutation." But he
gives us no inkling as to the cause of such
mutation and he appears to be unaware of the
concept that it may be due to pathological
change in the germ plasm brought about by
deleterious external conditions. The final
chapters deal with the subjects of winn >
the effects of crossing, the problem o pop
tion, the parts played by the duct ess g an ?
^c., and the author here gives much uset
information in a very interesting w^y*.
While we have felt compelled to crlt*
certain matters, which after all are y
allowable in one who is not an exper on
object of mental defect, we wish to recora
?nr decided appreciation of the boo a
^hole. It contains an array of facts regar 1 g
the phenomena of heredity which should p
great value to all those desiung o s
this subject. These are well arranged a
clearly presented. It shows evidence o
broadminded point of view in dealing wit
VerY difficult subject. We can recommen
as a distinctly valuable addition o
library of heredity and eugenics.

A. F. Tredgold.
Introduction to the Theory ^
tional Measurements. By Walter .
Monroe, Professor of Education an
Director of the Bureau of Educational
Research, University of Illinois. P361. xxii. G. Harrap & Co., 7,6.
Anyone who is seriously contemplating the
of constructing a test or scale or
Measurement of ability, or who desires,
^ect such a scale for use will find in th
Introduction to the Theory of Education
Measurements a fund of valuable informa ion.
Monroe is very decided as to the nee or,
and the value of educational measuremen s,
^th of those designed to give informa io
^lth regard to general ability and o o
^hieh measure the pupil's achievement in tne
Cerent departments of school work.
8reater number of illustrative tests given
indeed?and they are many?are tes s o
achievement; and to many English readers
,e insistence on the need for and use of these
Wlll be little short of a revelation, lna
standardised objective tests are "a pre-requisite for the most effective kind of superVlsi?n of instruction" is a doctrine not yet
accepted in most English schools.

The many pitfalls which lie in the path oi
the maker of tests and the best ways of avoiding these are clearly indicated. The problems
of derived scores, of norms, of marking, and of
weighting answers are critically considered:
while the suggestions offered for the improvement of examinations of the more ordinary
type are worthy of close consideration.

Mr. Monroe fails, however, even to touch on
the most serious practical difficulty in the way
of the effective carrying out of the educational
implications of tests?viz., the difficulty of
organisation, due largely to the size of schools
which hinders adequate classification and
specialised educational treatment. In this
country at least, the problem is a most serious
one.

The book ends with two chapters dealing
with simple, yet essential, statistical methods.
L.G.F.
The Psychology of Education. By David
Kennedy-Fraser, M.A., B.Sc., Lecturer
at Edinburgh University and Training
Centre. Pp. 198. viii. Methuen &
Co., 6s. 6d. net.

Psychologies of Education abound, but
readable yet sound psychologies of education
are few. Mr. Kennedy-Fraser has undoubtedly added to those few, and in so doing has
rendered valuable service to the cause of education. It is perhaps to be regretted that he
has said so little, especially in making clear
his own psychological position: though that
may be too much to expect in a book written
confessedly for those without technical knowledge of psychology.

The main intention of the book is clear
from the first. It is written to show how the
individual, starting life with fixed capacities
and instructive tendencies, can be made the
most of by a suitable environment and by a
fitting education. Effective education, it is
definitely shown, depends on a knowledge of
the individual's inherited capacities?both of
his instructive tendencies and of his intelligence.

The main primary instincts affecting education are brief!}'' but comprehensively considered. Fear, curiosity, imitation, play are
all revealed as common motives for action, to
be used or avoided as occasion dictates.
Especially interesting here is the true position
given to play as a motive. It is an incentive
to effort, differing widely from games and
mere amusements as such.

The main part of the book, however, deals
more with the development of intelligence and
the growth of knowledge than with instinct
and motive. Many valuable education inferences from psychological experiment are
clearly put forward?inferences which should
be of great value to the intending teacher.
Typical are the suggestions for the developing
of memory, for training habits, for formnig
right ways of learning, and for the need of
using imagination and thought. Undoubtedly these are for the most part true, though
with some we must quarrel. Can we for
instance accept the statement that it is ' 'worse
than useless to know a word without having
first a clear conception of the objective realities for which it stands.'' Language does not
develop along such lines.

The chapter on discipline is perhaps
specially useful in these days, when our ideas
of discipline are so very much in the melting
pot. It has the great merits of a sane outlook
and a psychological foundation.

A useful bibliography is given?one not too
long to be of service to the general reader.

L.G.F.
The New Examiner. By Philip Boswood
Ballard. Pp. 285. Hodder & Stoughton
6s. net.

Never have examinations been so much used
as they are to-day and never have they been
found more wanting. So much the more,
therefore, will the reader of ' ''The New Examiner" find himself unable to resist Dr.
Ballard's plea that for the essay some more
reliable test shall be substituted. As a form
of examination, Dr Ballard shows definitely,
the essay is a failure?it fails on the side of
the examinee. Many of the best candidates
cannot do themselves justice on it. It fails
lamentably on the side of the examiner?consistent marking of essays is impossible. The
marking is subjective, unscientific, unfair
and yet almost all examinations to-day are
examinations in essay writing, and that in spfte
of the fact that the increasing emphasis on education demands above all things an adequate
means of testing the results of the different
school systems.

For this reason alone no one engaged *n
teaching or in testing children can afford to
neglect the information which Dr Ballard s?
convincingly gives in this book.

The new examination has become a realityWe must study its claims. Above all we must
use it to find out how far those claims are true.
What to do and how to do it are both told us
in the pages of ' lThe New Examiner.'' Typ*'
cal tests are given for many subjects. The
change in emphasis from the marking to the
making of a satisfactory test is clearly brought
home. Difficulties are fairly discussed and
shortcomings as well as advantages are
brought forward. But there seems no doubt
the advantages are many and the shortcoming8
comparatively few.

L.G.F.
Social Control of the Feeble-minded. ^
Study of Social Programs and AttI'
tudes in Relation to the Problems of
Mental Deficiency. By Stanley
Davies, Ph.D., Executive Secretary?
Committee on Mental Hygiene,
State Charities Aid Association. Puk*
lished by National Committee for Menta
Hygiene, 370, Seventh Avenue, Ne^v
York City.

This little book is an exceedingly welcome
addition to the literature on Mental Deficiency*
for it fills a gap that up to the present has been
left unfilled.

Dr Davies tells us that his aim has been
' 'to present as fair a picture as possible of the
concepts which have been held from time to
time regarding mental deficiency, and to outline the various stages of the development o
social control of this problem" and within the
modest span of 207 pages he achieves this
object with commendable vividness and
clarity.

The story begins with Itard and Seguin an
their experiments in the physiologica e uca
tion of defectives, giving rise (in the United
States) to widespread hopes as to the possi 1 1
^es of curative treatment?hopes leading o
the establishment of institutions whose aim
Was ' 'cure'' rather than ' 'care.

This phase lasted for many years. Then
came, at the end of the Nineteenth en ury,
the birth of the Eugenics movement with its
study of family histories and its emphasis on
heredity, followed by the appointment ot the
British Royal Commission on the Care anc
Control of the Feeble-minded, and there was
revealed for the first time, as in a glare o
iight, the ' 'menace'' of the defective, raismg
an alarm which the introduction of the Bine
Tests in 1910 involving the detection ot men a
deficiency in quarters where it was u iei
unsuspected, did nothing to allay. A he
defective was found to be at the bottom oi al
fanner of social offences; no longer was he^
Ui popular imagination, a subject foi tiainm^
and education, but a danger from
society must be protected. The era o
social indictment of the feeble-mnic c
had set in. ,

The nature of this social indictment, and
the statistical information that was co ec e
support of it, Dr Davies describes with
?reat vigour. It resulted inevitably in a
insistent demand for a large increase in e
number of institutions as well as for dras ic
Measures of sterilisation?demands whicli, m
the nature of things, could not be satishe .
The end of the phase was heralded by t ic
emergence of three new factors. Ur-pfi
researches into heredity resulted in a moc 1
cation of the earlier teachings as to its connec
lion with mental defect; certain experiments,
notably those at Rome State School, New
York State, demonstrated the possibi 1 y o
extra-institutional care as an alternative o
Permanent detention; and the publication by
J?r. Pernald, of Waverly, of an "After-Care
study of the Patients discharged for a 1 erioci
25 Years," brought into prominence the
fact-?upon which it is likely that all oui
uture policies will be based that t etc
are bad defectives and good defectives.'' The
era of the undiscriminating social indictment
of the feeble-minded was over. The era of the
socialising of the feeble-minded had begun.
In the last two chapters?"The Socialising
Process" and "The Feeble-minded in the
Social Order," Dr Davies discusses the problem from this new standpoint, and in these
chapters a whole world of progress stands
revealed. No longer are we solely preoccupied with the sins of the defective against
the community. Rather do we seek to detect
the sins of the community against the defective, for:?

"The feeble-minded quite truly reflect in
their behaviour the kind of environment in
which they find themselves. In that way
they are an index of social conditions.
The feeble-minded may be perpetrators but
rarely instigators. . . . The result of
this tendency on the part of society to cast
off the feeble-minded was simply to foster
in them those anti-social proclivities with
which they have been charged. To know
the feeble-minded and their impressionistic
nature is to realise what the effect upon
them of such a social attitude is. This
policy of ostracism, far from solving the
problem of mental deficiency only tended to
aggravate it."

This is the indictment the feeble-minded
might make against us.
What is the solution of the difficulty ? To
quote Dr Davies again:?

"The indications of the foregoing pages
are that the majority of the feeble-minded
may be safely and profitably retained as
functioning members of society, both from
an economic and a social standpoint, provided the group exercises over them a
sufficient degree of social self-control to
give them, until they approach adult life,
the training suited to their capacities, and
continues to furnish throughout their lives
the sort of leadership which will foster in
them the highest social ideals."

The book would be provocative of thought
for these two chapters alone. To all Mental
22 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
Welfare workers such a treatment of the
problem must bring new incentive and new
hope. It does not bring the goal nearer. If
Dr Davies' deductions and theories are correct
it is made far more difficult of attainment.
But as it recedes in distance it will gather
to itself added significance, and it is that
sense of significance which will bring us the
courage to carry on.

Mental Hygiene and the Public Health
Nurse. Practical Suggestions for the
Nurse of To-Day. By V. May Macdonald, R.N., Formerly Assistant Superintendent of Nurses, Johns Hopkins Hospital, U.S.A., with a Foreword by
Thomas W. Salmon, M.D., Prof, of
Psychiatry, Columbia University. J. B.
Lippincott Company. $1.50.

This little book is written for Nurses in the
Public Health Service by a Nurse, to awaken
them to a sense of the importance of Mental
Hygiene, to urge them to feel that they should
be as responsible for the mental health as for
the physical health of the community, and
that they should not consider themselves
fully trained until they are equipped to undertake that responsibility.

The writer's zeal seems to us to be sometimes
in danger of running away with her discretion,
particularly when?in advocating a scheme
for the vigorous ascertainment of conditions
of mental ill-health, she declares that " the
nurse should go into the factories and tell the
overseers and foreman why she should like to
be told of the men or women who cannot work
harmoniously with their fellows.'' The book
contains, however, much sound teaching and
might usefully be put into the hands not only
of nurses but of other workers to whom the
whole subject of Mental Hygiene is quite new.
In the October number of "T/ie Journal of
Mental Science"* there is published a paper
on '' The Early Treatment of Mental Disorder,
A Critical Survey of Out-Patient Clinicst
read by Dr J. G. Porter-Phillips, Physici*111
Superintendent of Betlilem Royal Hospital
at the Annual Meeting of the Medico-Psychol0"
gical Society in July 1923. It includes a
very interesting account of the Bethlem ClinlC
and particularly of the experiment made there
in the appointment of a specially trained
social worker as Lady Almoner. Several other
medical officers in charge of Clinics contri*
buted to the subsequent discussion on 111
? ? fli6

paper and some useful information on 111
subject was brought to light.

At the last Annual Meeting of the Dorse
Voluntary Association, an interesting address
was given by Dr Mackintosh, Assistant Scho?
Medical Officer for the County, on liThe
Psychology of Moral Defect and the Treatrn^1
of Criminal DefectivesHis paper has no>v
been printed for circulation and copies can be
obtained on application to the C.A.M.W.,
Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.
