A Critical Examination of Psycho-Analvsis
===========================================

:Type: Reviews and Abstracts.
:Author: A. Wohlgemuth, D.Sc. u
G. Allen and Unwin, Ltd., Lon on.
Pp. 250. Price 10s. 6d.

Although in this country the theories and
practice of Freud have made appeal to ve y
few leading psychiatrists, and even to ewe
scientific psychologists, yet they have undoubtedly been seized upon with av id it} > <
considerable number of the more ju^or an
inexperienced practitioners, by still
educationalists, and by a large section ?
general public and certain sections o
public press. This being the case, it 1S 0 *
desirable and right that Freudism should oe
object to a critical examination by someone
competent to perform the task, and since t eie
^ no doubt that Dr. Wohlgemuth is so qualified we welcomed his book and read it "wi 1
^uch interest.

T-i
*1 after & diS"
it consists of ten chapters, ai ^ aUthor
cussion of some preliminary p?m s' nawtic
deals with the basis of the psycho-ana
eult, namely, the '?.US^? derstood
arrives at the conclusion that, *=> . ,_?is for
by Freud, this is a gratuitous ^T'tificawhich there is no scientific proo aresimpty
tion whatever. "Unconscious idea
nonsense." "Although Freu docfollowers repeatedly protest tha Gf
trine does not violate any concep en_
modern psychology, yet their w o ^ ^
clature and speech do so. H deals
to the subject of Dreams, with w ic ^
at considerable length. He comes ?whatever
elusion that there is no evidence ,
that the dream is a ' 'wish fulfi mei:' and
that Freud's doctrine regarding ' on a
many other matters, is merely base p ^
confident assertion devoid of all proo ?
criticises Freud's method of reasoning as s
quite illogical and merely consisting o
argument in a circle. With regard to or
interpretation as practised by the p Y
analysts he very pertinently points ou
a result of arbitrary selection of the events of a
dream, aided by "symbolism," it can be
manipulated so as to allow of almost any
interpretation according to the taste, ingenuity, and, dare we say it, mental complex, of
the interpreter. Of this he gives a very
amusing example. Other chapters deal with
symbolism, the Oedipus complex, Homosexuality, and Methods and Suggestion. In
this last chapter is given an account of the
Psycho-analysis of a five year old child, performed under the guidance and supervision of
Freud, which shows what an appalling and
disgusting effect such a process must produce,
and how the mind of a young child cannot fail
to be polluted by this means.

We might say much more, but it is not easy
to review a book of this kind at length, unless
one is prepared to deal with the whole subject
of Freudism, and space forbids this. It is
evident, however, that the author has come to
the conclusion that Freudism is not based upon
any new scientific facts, it is not scientific at
all, but merely a mystical cult, a religion, an
article of faith. This being so, its professors
will doubtless treat his work with silent and
complacent contempt, pretty much as a
religious fanatic regards one who is outside the
true fold. But there are many who will not
be thus satisfied and who will want to form
their own opinions on the matter, and to these
we strongly recommend its perusal. It is
written by a man of standingwho has himself
contributed to our knowledge of psychology,
who originally approached the subject in no
unsympathetic spirit, and who tells us that it
was only when, owing to the propaganda of
psycho-analysts in the press, the general
public began to take an interest in the subject,
but especially when he saw that some medical
men, and worse still, educationalists appeared
to be taken in by "the psycho-analytic confidence trick," that he decided to warn the
unwary. Personally, we have never read a
more convincing and damaging criticism, and
we do not think the warning has come any too
A, F. Tredgold, soon.

Psychology of Early Childhood up to the
Sixth Year of Age. By William Stern,
supplemented by Extracts from the unpublished Diaries of Clara Stern. 3rd
edition, revised and enlarged. Trans.
Anna Barwell. Geo. Allen and Unwin.
Pp. 557. 17s. net.

This book, first published in 1014, will in
its present form take rank as the most comprehensive contribution to child-psychology
that has appeared since the works of Wilhelm
Preyer and Millicent Shinn. An idea of its
scope can best be given by a brief statement of
the contents of the several parts.
Part I. A survey of the development of
child-psychology with a general consideration
of the methods.
Part II. The Period before Speech. The
first signs of intelligence and the beginnings
of sense perception and memory are discussed;
a critical attitude is assumed towards the
theory of 'infantile sexuality.'

Part III. Development of Speech, including
a suggestive though too brief chapter on tests
and measurement of power of speech.
Part IV. Looking at Pictures gives an
extremely interesting and valuable account of
the developments of the child's poAver of
interpreting pictures along with a description
of certain standardised tests bearing on the
recognition of pictures.

Part V. Memory. This part includes a
short criticism of the Montessori Method,
some remarkable examples of little children's
verbal memory, discussion of the early forms
of remembrance, and an account of memory
tests by means of observation and description
of pictures.

Part VI. Fantasy and Play, including
Dream Fantasy.
Part VII. Enjoyment and Creative Activity.
This treats the introductory stages and initial
forms of aesthetic feeling. It deals with the
child and the fairy-tale, the child and music,
with creative and imitative drawing.
Part VIII. Thought and Intelligence treats
of judgment and reasoning in childhood and
devotes a chapter to experimental tests of
mental power.

Part IX. Effort,?Emotion?Will?the
Various Forms and Directions of Endeavour.
This part, which includes such topics as
wilfulness in childhood, nervous fears, hate,
envy, cruelty, necessity of punishment and
appropriate forms of punishment, will certainly
prove of great value to those who seek help in
the difficult task of training the little child.

The criticism of the Montessori method
found in Part V. contains nothing new and
would probably be better omitted. It is
purely theoretical and there is no evidence
that the writer has any experience of a Montessori school or any realisation of the character
training which results from an intelligent
application of Dr. Montessori's principlesThe enormous part that pictures may pla}'' in
the education of very young children is, however, rightly stressed by Stern, and it is true
that Dr. Montessori does not appear to have
realised this.

Stern's criticism of the psycho-analytlC
doctrines of child development is directed
mainly against the sexual interpretation which
is put upon the activities of the child. The
Freudian account of infantile activities and
interests is in a general way accepted, but
"if two people do the same thing it is not the
same thing," and Stern claims that the representation of the childish mental condition is
distorted by the application to it of terrns
appropriate to mature human beings. His
arguments will leave the psycho-analysts cold,
but no doubt will prove a support to those who
have already adopted his conclusion.
There is an extensive bibliography chiefty
of German contributions to the subject. Its
usefulness would have been much increased
had the names of publishers been added to the
titled listed.

Margaret Drummond.
-----------------Mental Tests and the C"s?E?OM^ctor of
By Virgil E. Dickson, Ph.D., un
Bureaus of Research and Guidan ,
Oakland and Berkeley, California, ?
6s.

Improving Schools by Standardised ests.
By Samuel S. Brooks, District Supeiin
tendent of Schools, Winchester, U.b.A.
6s.

Measuring Devices in Composition, Spell
ing and Arithmetic. ByWm. y ?
M A B Sc. D.Phil. Lecturer in belt
cation in the University of Glasgow.
4s. 6d.

Measuring Intelligence. By Har a
Cameron Hines, Associate Prof, ot
cation, University of Washington,
3s. 6d.

We have received from Messrs. Harrap ^
Co., these four of their latest publica ion.
objects connected with Mental Tes in0The first three?as their titles indicate
are intended primarily for teachers.

"Mental Tests and the Class-room eac
deals generally with the use of tes s in
school-their value for purposes of classifica
and school organisation, their applica
the kindergarten, the elementary sc 100
the high school?their help in s0^n^tt._
edueational problems presented by ie
ferior" and the "superior" child.

The author of "Improving Schools y
Standardised Tests" gives an enthusia
ai*d spirited account of the results o
experiment, which, with the co-opera 10*\
the teachers concerned, he was able to ms 1
ln his district consisting of 26 ' 'rural ungra
?ne-roomed schools," in all of which a pr gramme of standardised tests was intro uc
ai*d systematically followed. After two Ye^
he claims its success to be established and i
Popularity testified to by teachers and pup1
, ke. Not only has the outcome been better
Ossification, the adoption of a more uniform
and a less subjective standard of estima mg
ability and progress, and greater general educational efficiency, but the results revealed bv
the tests have led to practical reforms in
methods of teaching, especially in teaching
reading to which subject several chapters of
the book are devoted.

The author?as is pointed out in an editorial
preface?accepts that tests themselves uncritically, but the vigour with which the experiment is recorded as well as the experiment
itself should make the book of considerable
interest.

The title of the third book?"Measuring
Devices in Composition, Spelling and Arithmetic"?is in itself an explanation of its content. It was written?the author explains in
his preface?primarily to help Scottish
teachers of "Qualifying Classes" to arrive at
a correct non-subjective standard for determining which of their pupils should be recommended for enrolment in the Secondary School,
as well as to supply them with some means of
estimating the efficiency of their educational
methods. The measuring devices offered are
limited for use with children at this particular
period of their school career, viz., those from
10 to 14.

Measuring Intelligence'' is a small volume
giving a resume of the general aims and present
position of Mental Tests, and written to tell
parents, teachers and citizens "what ought to
be known about the most important single
movement in our current educational life.''

On the Symptoms and Home Treatment of
Mentally Defective Infants and
Young Children. By John Thomson,
M.D., LL.D., F.R.C.P.Ed., Consulting
Physician to the Royal Edinburgh Hospital for Sick Children and to the Royal
Scottish National Institution, Larbert.
Obtainable from the Offices of the
C.A.M.W. Price Is., post free.

Our readers may remember that some
months ago we reviewed a valuable little
pamphlet by Dr. John Thomson intended
70 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
especially for the guidance of mothers in
training and managing young defective children.

We now have the pleasure of announcing a
further pamphlet by the same author, who
this time treats the subject from the point of
view of the medical man in general practice,?
the person "to whom the mentally defective
baby in a special sense belongs'' to whom he is
taken when his condition is first suspected, to
whom his mother looks throughout his life for
advice and help. But though written
specially for doctors, and though forming part
of the Morison Lectures delivered to an
audience of doctors, the pamphlet is couched
in terms well within the understanding of
the lay reader, and Secretaries and Visitors of
Mental Welfare Associations should find it of
no less value that its predecessor.

The symptoms of Mental Deficiency in
infancy and early childhood are dealt with
very clearly and comprehensively whilst the
pages devoted to the treatment and training
which should follow diagnosis contain information which should form part of the equipment
of every Mental Welfare worker. The information is conveyed moreover in a way that
lends the subject a charm not found in ordinary
text-book treatment, and to which even those
who are completely uninitiated must be
susceptible.

"When we examine mentally defective
children after the first year or two of life,'' Dr.
Thomson writes, "we very often find that
many of their unpleasant ways are only partly
due to the morbid state of their brains, and
are to be regarded much more as the result of
lack of discipline and the prolonged spoiling
which has characterised their mother's treatment of them.''

This faith that the M.D. child has potentialities which can be released through training, reveals itself on every page of the pamphlet and gives to its teaching that touch of
hope and idealism which alone can provide
the inspiration so indispensable if they arc
to be successfully applied.

For this and for his Opening Doors the
C.A.M.W. feels that all Mental Welfare
workers owe to Dr. Thomson a debt of gratitude?a debt which can only be discharged by
securing for both pamphlets all the publicity
that is possible.

The Diagnostic Findings from Seven Years
of Examining in the Same School
Clinic. By J. E. W. Wallin, Ph.D.,
Director Bureau of Special Education and
Psycho-Educational Clinic and Professor
of Clinical Psychology, Miami University.

This pamphlet contains the results of Dr.
Wallin's seven years' experience as Director of
the St. Louis Psycho-Educational Clinic, and
is presented as being the only summary of the
kind for an equal number of years that has so
far been published.

His data is derived from the examination
of 2,774 cases, which he classifies as follows:
Per cent.
Normal..
Retarded
Backward
Borderline
Diagnosis Deferred
Undetermined
Morons
Imbeciles
Idiots
Special types subjected to a Supplementary
Diagnosis are further class
portant divisions being:
3-2
3-8
25-2
28-1
33
?2
23-2
12-3
?2
35-7
fied, the most lffi"
Speech Defectives (545)
Delinquents (444)
Epileptics(47)..
Psychopathies (33)
Unstable and Neurotic (194)
Mongolians (23)
Cretins (8) ., ,,
Per cent.
19-64
1600
1-69
1-18
6-99
8-6
?28

The statistical findings in each o
groups are analysed and discussed, and u
subdivided on a basis of Intelligence.
The Mongol group is subjected to par
larly detailed analysis, tables being comp
as to position in family, average ageo Pare '
size of familes, etc., which though q
tentative on account of the small num ers c
cerned, Dr. Wallin hopes will lead to ur
experimental investigations on a larger sca
Meanwhile it is of interest to note is c?
elusions that neither advanced age m
parents nor the size of the families m w 1C
Mongols appear, are in themselves impor an
causative factors. All he can affirm is
Mongolism is due to a perversion 01 arres
foetal development, the exact agencies c0.1
eerned in its production being as yet qul
^perfectly understood."

With regard to the general group oi
minded" (994 cases) Dr. Wallin emphasise^
t^o important conclusions he has reached:
(1) That there is a larger amount of
pedagogical retardation than men a
intellectual retardation among sc o
children, obviously because pe ago&
cal proficiency depends on many ac o
other than intelligence.

(2) That the percentage of feeble-minded
ness amongst school children is co
siderably less than has been assume^
on the basis of arbitrary standards ana
brief intelligence surveys in
schools. According to his '
only about one-half of 1% can
classified as such.

this connection Dr. Wallin takes the
?Pportunity of protesting anew against t ie
year old standard of feeble-mindedness upon
^hich the U.S.A. Army Tests were worked,
an<* re-affirms his contentions that if an
111 ividual possesses an intelligent e^e
?Ven no higher than 10 years, it ' 'consti u es
mcontrovertible evidence that he is no
feeble-minded, whatever else he may be,"
and that feeble-mindedness is fundamentally a "socio-legal" concept and cannot
be diagnosed merely by intelligence tests.
These contentions, he says, have been everywhere assailed and repudiated, but he claims
that "time has brought swift vindication" of
their truth.

This pamphlet has been added to the Mental
Welfare Library and anyone who is anxious to
study the statistics it presents in detail is
invited to apply to the Librarian.

Mothercraft. A Selection from Courses of
Lectures on Infant Care, delivered under
the auspices of the National Association
for the Prevention of Infant Mortality.
4th edition, revised and enlarged. Published by the National League of Health,
Maternity and Child Welfare, 117, Piccadilly, London, W. 1. 4s. 6d. post free.
Although it is to Infant Welfare Workers
and Health Visitors that this little volume
will make its primary appeal, it well repays
study by all those whose work takes them in
and out of the homes of the people and not
least by Mental Welfare workers; for the
physical care of a mentally defective child
varies in essentials no whit from that necessary for the normal child and "the more
knowledge that is possessed by the visitor to
the home of a young defective as to the principles of modern child hygiene the more helpful
will her visits be. Moreover amongst the
lectures incorporated in this book are two
directly bearing on the special problems, viz.,
"The Backward Child," by Dr. Tredgold,
and the "Nervous Child" by Sir Maurice
Craig. For these two chapters alone the
book could fittingly be placed by the Secretary
of a Voluntary Association in the hands of new
voluntary helpers to whom it should serve as a
useful introduction to further study.

The Howard Journal. A Review of Modern
Methods for the Prevention and Treatment of Crime and Juvenile Delinquency.
Vol. 1. No. 3. Published by the
Howard League for Penal Reform, 18,
Savoy Street, W.C.2. Price 2s. 6d. (by
post, 2s. 10d).)

The third number of this journal has
recently been published and contains much
that is of special interest to the Mental
Welfare Worker.

We would instance particularly Miss Margery Fry's paper, A Belgian Psychological
Laboratory, describing her visit to an
"Observation School" for the treatment of
juvenile delinquents at Moll, Dr. Hamblin
Smith's paper on the Medical Examination
of Delinquents, and a critical note on the
Report of the Committee on Insanity and
Crime. Amongst the reviews, that of ?
publication on Juvenile Delinquency in
France,* gives much useful information as to
methods of procedure in that country.
No one who is interested in the general
question of Penal Reform can afford to be
without this journal which constitutes a fund
of up-to-date information presented in a form
at once concise and eminently readable.

*"Le Tribunal pour Enfants. Etude sur Ie
Traitement de l'Enfance d^liquante en France."
Chloe Owings, Docteur de l'Universite Paris (Letters).
With a preface by M. Henri Rollet, Judge of th?
Children's Court, Paris.
