Psychology. A Study of Mental Life
===================================


:Type: Book Reviews
:Auyhor: By R. S. Woodworth
 Ph.D. Pp. 580.
Methuen & Co., Ltd., London. 8s. 6d.

In this comparatively short volume Dr.
Woodworth, who is the Professor of Psycho-
logy in Columbia University, has collected
his experience of the teaching of his subject
in a convenient form for presentation to both
the student and the general reader, the key-
note throughout being the treatment of men-
tal life by the methods of scientific investi-
gation, which is to say that the author gives
the facts regarding the mind so far as they
are known and established, while with
theories he is relatvely little concerned.

His method of delimiting his subject is
characteristic of the practical aspect of the
book as a whole, and is as follows :?
"Psychology is a part of the scientific
study of life, being the study of mental
life. Life consisting in process or action,
psychology is the scientific study of mental
processes or activities. A mental activity
is typically, though not universally, con-
scious ; and we can roughly designate as
mental those activities of a living creature
that are either conscious themselves or
closely related to those that are conscious.
Further, any mental activity can also be
regarded as a physiological activity in
which case it is analysed into the action of
bodily organs, whereas as "mental" it
siimply comes from the organism or indi-
vidual as a whole. Psychology, in a word,
is the science of the conscious and near-
conscious activities of living individuals.
Psychology is not interested either in
dead bodies or in disembodied spirits, but
in living and acting individuals."

From the foregoing it will be seen that
technicalities, though necessary in a text-
book such as this is, can be made as easy to
read and as intelligible when they have to do
with Psychology as with any department of
knowledge, and there is no more fascinating
subject than the study of mind. Life becomes
much more interesting the more we know of
the world around us, and in no instance is
this more true than in regard to that part of
our life which has to do with our social con-
tacts. To be sure, the scientific interest in
the mental activities of ourselves and our
fellows involves an attitude which demands
the sinking of our personal feelings, for to
science there is no question of right or
wrong, of praise or blame, but in Dr. Wood-
worth's words : " . . some experience with
the psychological attitude is of practical
value to anyone, in giving clearer insight,
more toleration, better control, and even
saner standards of living."

The physiological basis of the mind, as
revealed in the functioning of the Nervous
System, always a difficult matter for the
general reader to grasp, is dealt with simply
but adequately, and by various considera-
tions the reader is led gently from the con-
ception of activity as a pure reflex reaction
to a stimulus, to that of a complicated series
of responses dominated by a purpose as a
foreshadowing of an end or aim. These
earlier chapters emphasise the fact that the
mind is a part of life's activity, that it itself
is a form of activity and that all the com-
ponents which go to make up the total mind
are so too. By arranging his material in this
way the author avoids the building up of the
mind as a compound structure from elemen-
tal conceptions which have no life in them,
and as he develops his subject through the
succeeding chapters on Instinct, Emotions,
Feeling, Sensation, Attention, Intelligence,
etc., the reader can never lose sight of the
fact that the matters treated upon are living
reactions which, in themselves, are different
aspects of that grand total which we call
mental life, and which, by their fine elabora-
tion in the highest creation of the process
of evolution, the human being, render pos-
sible and effective that complicated life we
lead at the present day. Memory, for in-
* All the books reviewed in these pages arc now in
tli 3 Mental Welfare Library.

stance, is not a thing but a function w lose
purpose is to introduce useful experiences o
the past into the present reaction so that we
may re-act the more effectively to the situa
tion we are now facing. .

In the emphasis on the factual basis o
knowledge, in the constant ^correlation be-
tween the two aspects of mental life the in
ternal or subjective, and the external or o
jective?and in the clear exposition of a
mental processes as subservient to the con-
scious purpose of the organism an e
necessity for making that purpose effective,
this book is a welcome corrective to the pre-
valence of a certain type of psychological
Writing which would lead the unsuspecting
and therefore easily led initiate into a be ie
that disorder and disruption were the dom-
inating forces operating in the darkness o
the unconsciousness among a mob o con
flicting mental entities which would obey no
higher law than that of their own being.
Following each chapter the author sets a
series of questions which, by making tie
reader think over the subject matter and re-
arrange it in his own mind, ensures that the
knowledge contained shall be stored ProP^* ^
and usefully in relation to real practica 1 e,
and the book can be confidently recommen e
to all workers in the many provinces o
Psychology, as a lucid, interesting and a e
quate survey of the subject which gives a
sane and acceptable account of the modern
knowledge of the ' Mind.'
Thomas Beaton.

liHUMAO?

The Kingdom of Evils. Psychiatric
Work presented in One Hun re ^
Histories together with a classi ca ^
Social Divisions of Evil. J '
Southard, M.D., late Bullard
of Neuropathology, Harvar :a+e
School, and Mary C. Jarrett, s
Director, Smith College 1 raining
for Social Work. Allen & Unwin. - ^
This is, especially from the Social ^tu^el!v
Point of view, one of the best if no
best?text-book I have come across.
ease material is clear, ample, and adequa
illustrates the special sections under which it
is grouped. The book itself covers a wide
field of necessary social and medical work
with a breadth of outlook and an absence of
dogmatism that is very unusual, stimulating
to thought and making for progressive work.

The cases described and discussed range
from those of simple family nuisances to
those of incipient or Borderland mental dis-
ease. Emphasis is laid on the need of the
"individualisation of diagnosis and treat-
ment of Psychiatric cases." In other words
each case must be treated by the methods
best suited to itself?there is no one treat-
ment applicable to all cases, a fact that op-
ponents of particular psychological systems
would do well to remember. Another point
which this work clearly establishes?a point
which I have appreciated for some time, as a
personal difficulty, in out-patient psycho-
logical work?is the need for, value and
scope of, a Social Service in Psychopathic
work. We in Britain have a slight attempt
at such a service in our greatly overworked
Probationary Officers at Juvenile Courts and
in a very few other directions, but the im-
mense therapeutic value of a Social Service
on the lines indicated in this book has not
yet had even the glimmerings of recognition,
although it clearly must be an essential fac-
tor in the success of any form of Psycho-
therapeutic Clinic Work.

Those engaged in Mental Welfare work will
find this book of great practical value, for it
can contribute to the solution of many
problems. Those interested in the national
problem of Mental Hygiene, in its broadest
sense, will find many new avenues of thought
opened up, and many new lines of approach
indicated. The book deserves the widest
publicity.

E. A. Hamilton-Pearson.

Addresses to Mental Nurses. A series of
fifteen lectures delivered to the Nursing
Staff of the Retreat, York, by various
Authorities. Edited by Bedford Pierce,
M.D., F.R.C.P. Bailliere, Tyndall &
Cox., 1924. Pp. 288. 7/6.

The appearance of this book is specially
welcome at a time when there is a particular
need for public enlightenment on the prob-
lems which are the daily task of the Medical
and Nursing Staff of mental hospitals.

These lectures, delivered at the Retreat
during a period of years by many distin-
guished Psychiatrists, deal with mental
nursing from divers points of view. They
throw a broad light upon the advance made
in this branch of nursing and render justice
to the spirit of devotion with which this work
is being undertaken. The editor himself
contributes two of the lectures, the first of
which is an admirable historical summary
dealing with the lives and work of William
Tuke and Philippe Pinel, those great re-
formers to whose enlightened initiative and
courage the world owes so large a debt of
gratitude, and to the former of whom the
Retreat owes its origin.

Among the lecturers will be found such
names as Bevan-Lewis, Clouston, Mereier
and Savage. The philosophical as well as the
ethical and scientific aspect of nursing is
dealt with, and an excellent description of
what a modern mental hospital is, and aims
at, is given by Dr. C. Hubert Bond.

Every training school for nurses should
possess this volume. The addresses which
contain much general information are excel-
lent reading and several of them are written
with a charming humour and are punctuated
with anecdotes. On many subjects, as for
example, occupation therapy, treated by Dr.
Henry Devine, there is matter for much re-
flection, as well as instruction which will be
found but scantily dealt with in text books,
and the whole series provides a stimulating
lesson which others besides nurses may profit
by, and thereby rise to higher things.
A short biography of the contributor pre-
cedes each address.

Dr. Bedford Pierce, who has recently
vacated the directorship of the Retreat, is to
be congratulated upon the publication of this
volume, and it is not too much to say that it
cannot fail materially to disseminate the
highest ideals of mental nursing and attract
to it educated men and women who are actu-
ated by some of that love and charity which
distinguished Florence Nightingale.
G.F.B.

The Physical Education of Dull and
Backward Children. By Miss M. I*
Fernyhough and Mr. E. Major, Organi-
sing Inspectors of Physical Training,
Nottingham Education Committee.
This little pamphlet describes the scheme of
Physical Training in force in the Special
Schools and Classes of Nottingham, and
should be of great value to Special School
teachers and teachers of Dull and Backward
children throughout the country.

The pamphlet sets out the principles upon
which successful physical training of sub-
normal children must be based and gives out-
lines of "typical lessons" and lists of classi-
fied exercises specially suited for the purpose.
It also contains twenty illustrations.
Copies of the pamphlet can be obtained
from Mr. Ernest Major, Inspector of Physical
Education, South Parade, Nottingham. Price
1 /- post free.
