The Training of Attendants in Certified Institutions
=====================================================

Correspondence.

Apropos of Br. Turner's article on this subject in our last issue, we have
received the following communication from Miss Price, formerly Superintendent of
the London County Council's Certified Institution South Side Home, Streatham
Common, and now one of the C. A. M. W.'s Occupational Organisers:?
"The syllabus set forth by the General Nursing Council for the training of
nurses for the mentally defective certainly shows some lack of realisation of the
needs of the patients and the lines upon which up-to-date treatment of such cases
proceeds.

General sick nursing knowledge, while a useful adjunct, is of 110 more value
in the work of the average attendant on the mentally defective than it is in that of
anyone else responsible for the general welfare of a number of people, and if too
much time is spent in an endeavour to acquire hospital nursing technique, it must
hinder what is the essential part of the treatment, viz., the development of whatever potentialities for mental and physical growth which the patient possesses.
But the loss of time involved is not by any means the only serious objection to
such a course. As Dr. Turner so clearly states, one of the chiel aims in the educational treatment of these patients is the creation of an atmosphere which will tend
to develop self-respect in persons who are suffering from a marked sense of
inferiority and is it reasonable to expect that this atmosphere will be successfully
created by workers who are themselves suffering from a like feeling? For the
technique of nursing cannot be successfully learnt in any institution foi defectives
and the ' 'nurses'' trained there cannot hope to attain the status of the fully
qualified hospital nurse.

Since this work is neither that of a professional nurse nor on the other hand,
that of a professional teacher, but a combination of some of the duties of each with
a considerable share of a parent's duty added, would it not be possible to devise a
course of training more definitely on these lines ? A satisfactory foim of tiaining
does, undoubtedly, do more than anything else to attract the right type of candidate, but here we are confronted by a difficulty which, under present conditions,
is very great. Hospital training, and training for the teaching profession, both
lead to an assured career, but the training of the mixed type needed for the attendant in an Institution for defectives has 110 such definite and concise goal, and this
consideration may have figured in the minds of those who drew up a syllabus
which does not take into account the true needs and nature of the work.
It seems as though this difficulty might be overcome by devising, as Dr.
Turner suggests, a syllabus which demands, in those subjects a knowledge of
which is really essential for the work, a more scientific training up to the standard
required, and which shall then be supplemented by special subjects selected by the
candidate. In the compulsory part of the syllabus the necessary knowledge as to
^e physical care of the patients should be adequately conveyed in a course of
lectures on anatomy, First Aid, Home Nursing, Hygiene, Inlant Care, etc., taken
UP to the British Red Cross or St. John's Ambulance standard. This is a standard
reached by many lay people who are responsible, in various ways, or t e p ysica
welfare of others, and it need not be confused with hospital nursing proper. For
the few candidates who decide to take nursing as the special subject for the
42 studies in Mental inefficiency.

Certificate in order to qualify for responsible work in sick wards, facilities for a
period of hospital training, in addition, should be forthcoming.
Subjects which might usefully have a larger place in the compulsory part of
the syllabus in addition to the more technical ones are, domestic training, nursery
training, kindergarten and other methods of education for young children,
elementary handicrafts, physical drill, dancing, games and singing, storytelling, nature study, gardening, principles of scout and girl guide work and of
club-work for boys and girls. Lastly some knowledge of speech training and of
the correction of speech defccts should be regarded as of first class importance.
It may be contended that candidates should possess a knowledge of many of
the subjects indicated in the above list before presenting themselves for specialised
training in an Institution, but be that as it may, the fact has to be faced that the
majority of such candidates do not possess it, and that consequently facilities must
be given them for acquiring it after their training has begun.

To provide competent teachers for a syllabus so varied would of course be a
matter of some considerable administrative difficulty, but it is now the custom
in most hospital training schools to appoint one specially qualified person whose
sole duty it is to teach the probationer staff and doubtless some such plan will
ultimately be adopted in the larger Institutions. In smaller institutions near
large towns it might be possible to arrange with the Local Education Authority
for the attendance of trainees at certain Evening Classes. Even in the larger
institutions the co-operation of that authority in organising classes in nonmedical subjects held in the Institution itself, might, where the numbers merit it,
meet a real educational need by providing for outside people whose work prevents
them from attending classes held at other times and places.

Another plan which would be of great value, if the many formidable objections
in the way could be overcome, would be to place probationers in the institution
school for a few weeks before introducing them to the wards, for they would then
start from the beginning with the idea that their charges were to be pupils to be
trained rather than patients needing bodily nursing. One of the drawbacks of the
recent method of training is that it tends to begin with instruction in physical
care, leaving till later the educational aspect of the work, whereas it is important
that the latter should be emphasised from the first.

It will no doubt be urged that to devote so much time to training probationers
would be to impose too great an additional burden on an institution where the
training of patients makes such all-absorbing demands, but in actual practice it
will, I think, be found that this extra work is more than compensated for by the
educational atmosphere in which it results. Moreover it has its indirect effect
upon the patients, many of whom, especially amongst the restless high-grades
anxious for liberty, will only really benefit from detention when they realise that
they have a chance ' 'to make good'' and this realisation can best be conveyed to
them by nurses who are themselves aiming high, conscious of their profession as a
respected and recognised branch of social work.

Dear Editor,

I have read with much interest and warm gratitude Dr. Turner's article in the
January number of Studies in Mental Inefficiency. I feel he has voiced with
authoritative knowledge what many of us who have not had his experience want to
say. The need for an examination on the lines he describes is very pressing.
I have long been trying to find a way for people working in small homes like
mine to have some recognition, which would induce them to go on with the work,
but so far have failed.

During a period of more than twenty years I have had many hospital trained
nurses on my staff. In sickness of the body they are all that can be desired, but
in the general training of healthy though undeveloped minds and bodies they are
not as a rule successful. I think the reason is that cure is the main idea in the
nursing of sickness, whereas in the nursing of the undeveloped what the world
calls 'cure' is rarely if ever attained, and people who aim for this get dissatisfied by
their inability to achieve a definite end. With all due respect to brilliant exceptions, members of the medical profession find it difficult to make efforts to understand the needs of cases who from their point of view cannot be cured; but is it not
well to stabilize our ideas, and realise that to bring a human being who is incapable of independent self-development to a plane where he is able not only to care for
himself but, as Dr. Turner says, "do his job in life," is as great, if not a greater
work than restoring to health the body of a normal self-active person ?
Dr. Turner says we want to keep the name 'nurse.' I heartily agree, as our
schools must always be nurseries to some extent: it seems that our scholars arc
never too old to have some undiscovered part that can be nursed into fresh life.
Longfellow knew the kind of thing we need when he wrote:

And Nature, the old nurse, took
The child upon her knee,
Saying: 'Here is a story book
Thy Father has written for thee.
Come! Wander with me,' she said,
Into regions yet untrod.' "
I believe our nurses and their nurslings do wander into regions tiod by no
other portion of the community.
Yours truly,
Margaret imacdowall.
Avonhurst, Burgess Ilill, Sussex.
G, March, 1924-.
