News and Notes
===============

The G.A.M.W. at Wembley.
----------------------The C. A.M. W. scheme for the provision of an exhibit at the British Empire
Exhibition during the month September 22nd and October 18th has met with
cordial support from those Institutions that have been approached on the matter.
The exhibit will be shewn in the pavilion belonging to the International Council
of Women, which will be found in Quality Street, just behind the Government
Pavilion.

Literature dealing with the subject of mental deficiency will be on view and
on sale, and it is hoped to arrange an interesting exhibit of (a) Educational
apparatus, for both low-grade and high-grade defectives, graded schemes of work,
etc., and (b) Handicrafts, including Woodwork and Metalwork, Needlework,
Weaving (of all kinds), Toymaking, Brush and mat making, Lace-making,
Tailoring, Printing, and other handicrafts which have actually been adapted for
defectives. An experienced worker will be in charge of the exhibit, to answer
enquiries and give information to visitors.

The Annual Meeting of the C. A. M. W. will be held in Hal 13 at the Exhibition,
on Monday afternoon, October 6th. Special speakers are being arranged for and it
is hoped that as many members as possible will attend, and bring others who may
be interested. Invitations and particulars as to special tickets of admission to the
Exhibition and the Conference Hall will be sent to anyone who will communicate
with the Honorary Secretary at the C.A.M.W. Offices, 24, Buckingham Palace
Road, S.W.I.

C.A.M.W. Courses.
--------------(a) Course in Mental Deficiency for Medical Practitioners'
The Fifth Course for Medical Practitioners was held by the University of
London Extension Board in co-operation with the C.A.M.W. from May 19th o
May 24th, with 57 students?39 men and 18 women in attendance.
(^) Short Course for Teachers of Mentally Defective Children.
The second Short Course to be organised this year by the C.A.M.W. on
behalf of the Board of Education is being held in London, at King s College
Hostel, Vincent Square, Westminster, as we go to press. 47 teachers are m
attendance, of whom 6 are from Scotland and one from New South Wales.
(c) Course for Secretaries of Voluntary Associations and other Mental Welfare
Workers.

Preliminary arrangements are now being made for a Course in Mental Diseases
which it is hoped to hold in October for Secretaries of Mental Welfare Aso? ?n
fnd other experienced Social Workers. The proposed Course wall consist of
lectures on Mental Diseases and Mental Deficiency,
at various Hospitals for the treatment of Mental Disorders, and Certlfiedn
tions for Defectives. Only persons of training and experience will be admitted to
'he Course which will last for six davs. A fee of One Guinea will be charged.

Further particulars will be available in the middle of July,* and those interested
are invited to write to the Hon. Secretary.
C.A.M.W. Conference. May 28th and 29th, 1924.

In point of numbers, the Conference held by the C.A.M.W. at the Central
Hall, Westminster, on Wednesday and Thursday, May 28th and 29th last was
even more successful than the one held two years ago. The following analysis
of delegates may be of interest:

Local Authorities under the M.D. Act .. .. .. 95
Local Education Authorities .. .. .. .. 102
Boards of Guardians .. .. .. .. .. 168
Local Associations for Mental Welfare .. .. .. 48
Certified Institutions, Homes, etc. .. .. .. 31
Special School Teachers .. .. .. .. .. 28
Social Organisations .. .. .. .. .. 30
Government Departments .. .. .. .. .. 36
Prisons .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
Individuals .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
545

This illustrates the representative nature of the gathering. The Association
was fortunate in securing the presence of the Rt. Hon. J. Wheatley, M.P,,
Minister of Health, at the opening session, and his assurance to Local Authorities of
his sympathy with their work for the mentally defective, and his willingness to
consider favourably any well-considered schemes for the welfare of the feebleminded was received with loud applause.

The subject of discussion throughout the first day was "The best methods of
dealing, administratively and educationally, with the mentally defective (feebleminded) child." Dr. Brackenbury, who presided at the first session, in the
unavoidable absence of Sir Leslie Scott, opened the discussion in an address setting
forth the present position, and indicating possible lines of future development.
Mr. Salter Davies, Director of Education for Kent, spoke in elaboration of his
paper The Education of Mentally Defective Children in rural areas followed by
Mrs. Fern, a member of the Renfrewshire Education Authority, who spoke of
experiments carried out in that area. Discussion followed, and the subject was
continued at the afternoon session under the Chairmanship of Lt. Col. F. E.
Fremantle, M.P. Dr. Herd, Assistant School Medical Officer, Manchester, spoke
on his paper which dealt with The Borderland Cases, and Mr. A. H. Hill,
Inspector of Special Schools under the London County Council, opened the discussion.

On Thursday morning the Conference re-assembled with Dr. W. A. Potts in
the Chair to hear papers on The Influence of Heredity and Environment in
Causing Mental Deficiency by Dr. A. F. Tredgold, and Professor E. W. Mac*As we go to press, further information about the Course is availableand will befound
at the end of this issue.

Bride. Major Leonard Darwin, President of the Eugenics Education Society,
opened the discussion. Many delegates considered this the most interesting
session of the Conference; but some, on the other hand, found the papers too
scientific and suggested that a subject of more practical import might have been
better for discussion at a meeting composed largely of laymen.

The last session was occupied with the consideration of Mental Tests their
value to the Medical Officer, the Educationalist and the Social Worker. Interesting papers were given by Dr. Cyril Burt, Psychologist to the L.C.C., and Di.
Robert Hughes, School Medical Officer, Stoke-on-Trent. The discussion was
opened by Mrs. Patrick Green, J. P., speaking from the point of view of the Social
Worker, and Mr. D. Kennedy Fraser, Psychologist to the Glasgow Education
Authority, and an interesting debate followed. The Rev. Principal Thomas,
J.P., President of the Association of Education Committees took the Chair at
this last session.

A full report of the proceedings of the Conference is now being printed, and
will be issued within the next week or so. Copies may be obtained, at a cost of
3s. each, post free, from the C.A.M.W. offices. An order form is enclosed with
this number of the magazine.

Legal Responsibility and Mental Deficiency.
-----------------------------------------Sir Leslie Scott's address on "Legal Responsibility and Mental Deficiency,"
delivered to the Magistrates who attended the Short Course last March, has been
reprinted in pamphlet form and may be obtained, price 6d. pei eopy, ro[n. ?
C.A.M.W. offices. Sir Leslie, it will be remembered, was one of the original
members of Lord Justice Atkin's Committee on "Crime and Insanity, and can
therefore speak with authority on this question. The speech is full of mos
valuable information that has not hitherto been available in a concise form, and
^ is hoped that the pamphlet will have a large circulation among magistrates and
others concerned with the administration of the law.

The Board of Control. A Recent Circular.
--------------------------------------A Circular was issued by the Board of Control on March 19th last to .^"tory
Committees for the Care of the Mentally Defective, dealing wi wo i p ^
subjects, (1) < 'The Use of Poor Law Institutions approved under Section 37,
(2) "The Granting of Licence." , eknuM
It is pointed out, in connection with the first subjec , a ca^ ^
taken by Local Authorities to see that no defective capable of benefiting by
training and occupation should be detained in such ins i u ions P
* made for these things, and that defective children should be removed without
delay to institutions where they are separated from adult inmates and given
'^'SHoronhfcircular which deals with the subject of' Signed
one and the same time to promote a wider use of th.s procedure and to urge^the
importance of systematic preliminary enquiries as to the suitabi y
conditions, to which the defective is to be returned.

The granting of licence is commended to Local Authorities m cases who m
the course of several years' training have established good habits and some
measure of self-control; who do not display erotic, unstable or violent tendencies
and who have been trained to do simple work." It is pointed out that complete
discharge in such cases is too experimental to be advisable, but prolonged licence
so that recall to the institution may be easily effected in case of necessity can often
safely be given. A preliminary period of licence, too, for patients who have
sufficiently improved to justify consideration of their discharge is of great advantage. In all these eases, however, the utmost care must be taken to ensure that
the home is suitable and will afford the defective adequate protection.

The advantage of dealing with some patients by transferring them from
Institutions to Guardianship rather than by granting licence is referred to as a
matter to be considered "if and when the Act is amended so as to permit of this
procedure without the necessity which exists at present of obtaining a new Order.'?
The Board of Control. Appointment of new Lay Inspector.

It is very gratifying for the C. A.M.W. to be able to record that the new Lay
Inspector recently appointed by the Board is Miss Landon, Organising Secretary
of the Devon Voluntary Association for Mental Welfare, and one of the first workers to be trained at the Central Office.

We feel sure that Miss Landon's experience of Voluntary Association work
will be of great value to her in her new post, and we gladly take this opportunity
of expressing to her our congratulations, in which we are confident our readers
will join.

A Whole-Time Occupation Centre at Croydon.
----------------------------------------We are glad to be able to bring before our readers the following account from
Miss E. A. McDougall, Visitor for the Croydon Mental Deficiency Committee, of
the first whole-time Occupation Centre to be started in this country. For the number of children at present in attendance the cost per head is of course high, but the
same staff and accommodation could be used for a larger number so that every additional child will bring down this cost very considerably. The precedent the opening of this centre creates is a valuable one, and the experiment will be carefully
watched by other authorities with the result, we hope, that some at least will be tempted
to follow it.

On the first Monday in May, Croydon Occupation Centre opened as a full
time Centre, in its new premises in the Mansion House, Grangewood Park,
South Norwood.

The Centre is conducted by a Supervisor with two assistants, and twentyfour low grade children, of ages varying from six to eighteen, are on its register.
In the afternoons, special classes are held, attended by sixteen high grade girls
and boys over school age.

Grangewood Mansion and its surrounding park were bought by the Corporation of Croydon many years ago, and for the last twelve years the Special School
has been carried on in the large airy rooms on the first floor. Ninety-six children
attend the Special School, and by the goodwill of the Local Education Authority
it has been possible for the children of the Centre to share in the existing arrangements with regard to the midday meal, and in their conveyance to and from
Grangewood by tram car, in conducted parties.

An excellent two course dinner is provided at a daily cost of 4d. per child,
or Is. 6d. for the five days, if paid on Monday morning. The Occupation Centre
pays for one guide, and for an assistant to the School Cook, and also provides its
own cleaner.

Both the past and the present Medical Officers Dr. Veitch Claik and Di.
Newsholme?have given much time and thought, in the effort to plan a satisfactory full time centre within the Board of Control s limit of ?10 per head pei
annum. This was finally given up as an impossible task and the present scheme
?which works out at about ?18 per head*, with an initial expenditure of about
?350 for structural alterations, furnishing and equipment was approved by the
Mental Deficiency Committee, and sent on to the Council. It was passed by
them as a workable scheme, three rooms on the ground floor of the Mansion were
granted, rent free, for the use of the Centre, and alterations were at once put in
hand to provide the necessary cloak room and lavatory accommodation.

The routine of the day is as follows:?
-------------------------------------Work begins at 9.30 a.m. and the usual occupations for low grade children
are taught. There are various breaks during the morning?for a slight lunch,
and, when fine, for excursions outside, to look at the flowers, oi visit e pon .
At midday, work stops, the rooms are tidied and hands washe , w n e a pai^ y o
children, with a teacher, go upstairs to prepare the tables foi inner. .
dinner is served, and when it is over, the tables are cleared an e oor swep
UP by the children. Then comes a Rest Time, when all lie down quietly tor
about half an hour, and many sleep soundiy. 

At two o'clock the senior girls or boys arrive, and all is l e '
when toys and work are put away, and the children get ready for the journey
homewards.

Girl Guide Companies in Certified Institutions.
Those of our readers who were interested in the articlc on1The ^
tion which appeared in our last number will be glad to know a
(Price 6d. a copy, post free) a detailed account of the History and Consttitution, of the
Institution's Girl Guides Companies, mitten by Dr. H. F. Stephens,
Assistant Medical Officer ? ??

This paperlouk. be invaluable to those who arc thinking of inaugu,.ting a
similar experiment in connection with a Home or Institution, and we hope that
ryo^:f;?id^n:;:tto the C.A.M.W. Offices, ? Buckingham Pa.acc
ttoad, S.W.I.
?wT^deretand that this figure is likely to be reduced shortly owing to an expected
1 ase ln the numbers attending.
