Report of the Committee on Insanity and Crime
==============================================

STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
The report of the Committee on Insanity and Crime was published in Nov-
ember 1923. This Committee was constituted by the Lord Chancellor in July,
1922 ' 'to consider and report upon what changes, if any, are desirable in the exist-
ing law, practice and procedure relating to criminal trials in which the plea of
insanity as a defence is raised, and whether any and, if so, what changes should
be made in the existing law and practice in respect of cases falling within the pro-
visions of Section 2, subsection (4) of the Criminal Lunatics Act, 1884."
On learning of the appointment of this Committee representative committees
were established by the Council of the British Medical Association, with which
were associated representatives of the Central Association for Mental Welfare,
and by the Medico-Psychological Association. Both these sub-committees sub-
mitted reports (which are published in an appendix to this report) and appointed
members to give evidence before the Committee.
After considering this evidence and stating briefly the reasons for its conclu-
sions the Committee fm$s to the effect that the existing rule of the law is sound;
that a person may be of unsound mind and yet be criminally responsible, provided
that he knows the nature and quality of the act or knows that the act is wrong.
No alteration, therefore, is suggested in the present rules of law for determining
criminal responsibility as formulated in the rules in McNaughten's case laid down
in 1843, although a very important addition is recommended, which will help very
materially to remove the adverse criticism from the medical standpoint. It was
established to the satisfaction of the Committee that " there are cases of mental
disorder where the impulse to do a criminal act recurs with increasing force until
it is, in fact, uncontrollable, "and it is thought advisable that such cases should
be brought expressly within the law by decision or statute. It is recommended,
therefore, that:?"It should be recognised that a person charged criminally with
an offence is irresponsible for his act when the act is committed under an impulse
which the prisoner was by mental disease in substance deprived of any power to
resist.''
This recommendation gives effect to a view of the law which has been accepted
by some authorities as being the existing law, and in fact in the opinion of the
Committee such cases would now fall within the existing law; but as there seem to
be definite decisions of the Court of Criminal Appeal against such a ruling and
directions by some judges to the opposite effect, in order to remove all legal doubt
it is considered advisable to make the law clear by an express statutory provision.
This extension is in accordance with the Criminal Code of Queensland, with
the law of South Africa, and with the laws of other countries; and as long ago as
1874 the principle was recognised in this country, when provision was made for it
in the Homicide Law Amendment Bill, which failed to pass into law. The
opinion then expressed by the Lord Chief Justice Cockburn to the Select Committee
appointed to consider that Bill is still of sufficient interest to quote at some length:
"As the law, as expounded by the Judges in the House of Lords now stands, it is
only when mental disease produces incapacity to distinguish between right and
wrong that immunity from the penal consequences of crime is admitted. The
present Bill introduces a new element, the absence of the power of self-control,''
then he adds " I concur most cordially in the proposed alteration of the law,
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
having been always strongly of opinion that, as the pathology of insanity abun-
dantly establishes, there are forms of mental disease in which though the person
is quite aware he is about to do wrong, the will becomes overpowered by the
force of irresistible impulse; the power of self-control when destroyed or suspended
by mental disease becomes, I think, an essential element of responsibility.
The remainder of the first part of the Committee's report deals with observa-
tions on the existing practice and procedure in criminal trials in which the defence
of insanity is raised. It is advised that the illogical verdict of Guilty of the act
but insane at the time" or "Guilty but insane," provision for which was made
under Section 2 of the Trial of Lunatics Act 1883 in deference to the wishes of Her
Majesty Queen Victoria, should be altered so as to restore the logical principle
that where insanity is such as to produce irresponsibility, the accused is entitled
to a verdict of acquiital of crime. A recommendation therefore is made that the
existing statutory provision in this respect should be amended and that the ver-
dict should be ' 'that the accused did the act (or made the omission) charged, but
is not guilty on the ground that he is insane so as not to be responsible according
to law at the time."
Two further recommendations are made by the Committee: (a) that pro-
vision should be made under departmental regulations for the examination of an
accused person by an expert medical adviser at the request of the prosecution, the
defence or the committing magistrate, and (b) that accused persons should not be
found on arraignment unfit to plead except on the evidence of at least two doctors,
save in very clear cases.
The second part of the report details the history and development of the statu
tory powers conferred upon the executive for dealing with prisoners certified during
imprisonment to be insane, and examines the procedure under Section 2 (4) of
the Criminal Lunatics Act 1884 for inquiring into the sanity of persons under
sentence of death.
Quotations from eminent authorities from the time of Henry VIII are given
to show that apart from statutory provisions it was contrary to common law to
execute an insane criminal, and we are told that "since the Act of 184? we ave
indisputable authority for saying that no prisoner under sentence of death has
ever been executed as to whom a certificate of insanity has been given un er t e
statute for the time being in force." }}
The report concludes that ' 'to the insane person justice is done and recom-
mends that no alteration is called for in the Criminal Lunatics Act 1884.
E. Prideaux.
*
.
? .
??d. post fG ?k*a'ned froro H.M. Stationery Office, Imperial House, Kingsway,
W.C.2. Price
