Crime and Insanity
===================

:Type: Book Reviews.
:Author: W. C. Sullivan
M.D. E. Arnold & Co. Pp. VI.-(-239.
Price 12s. 6d.

The opportune appearance of this work
should be welcomed by those interested
generally in criminal problems, as well as by
psychiatrists and others professionally engaged in the criminal courts, for the author,
Dr. Sullivan, Medical Superintendent of
Broadmoor Criminal Lunatic Asylum, has
borne in mind the difficulties of the nontechnical reader studying a work of this
character and his authoritative exposition of
the subject should be easily followed.
The books falls naturally into three parts.
The first two chapters deal with crime as a biosocial problem, and the psychological classification of crimes. Then follow chapters dealing with crime in connection with various
forms of mental disease and defect, and finally
the last two chapters treat of mental disease
and criminal responsibility, and morbid crime
and social security. In an appendix is set out
the legal procedure in criminal cases involving
the issue of insanity.

The various forms of insanity and amentia
dealt with are illustrated by 52 clinical histories. No less than 37 of these are cases of
murder and 6 of attempted murder, and
although the relation between insanity and
other offences is discussed, the reader, unacquainted with facts, may be led to consider
erroneously that the mental condition of
persons accused of other offences is neglected,
whereas in a series of 371 insane trial prisoners
only 10 were cases of murder and 21 of
attempted murder.

The student of mental deficiency should find
the Chapter on dementia praecox of special
interest. The author directs attention to, and
illustrates by cases, the speculative character
of the diagnosis of this condition when its
development may have become arrested in an
incipient stage, and no indications of mental
disorder have been observed before or after a
crime apparently, but not conclusively,
motiveless. And suggestions of partieulai
value in court work will be found in the chapter on transitory states of mental disorder.
We regret however the omission of a chaptci
on crime in relation to the exhaustion
psychoses, a not infrequent and important
association particularly in borderline cases.
Crime in relation to mental deficiency lS
dealt with in two Chapters. We were somewhat surprised to find the older estimates of
the percentage of defectives in prisons still
quoted, without reference to more recent
figures. And it should be remembered 111
considering the table taken from Dr. Goring s
work on "The English Convict," shewing the
percentage of mental defectives amongst
prisoners committing criminal offences, that
this publication appeared in 1913, and that
there is reason to believe these cases referred to
a very comprehensive group, in which were
included various other conditions of mental
enfecblement in addition to amentia.

Five cases of moral imbecility are described. In two, Binet-Simon tests shewed
intelligence defect. A third is said to have
possessed acute intelligence. The author
observes that in such cases intellectual
debility must be inferred from their conduct
and inability to profit by experience, and that
to constitute moral imbecility absence o1'
deficiency of moral feeling must be combined
with at least that amount of intellectual defect
shewn by lack of common sense. His views
appear on the whole to agree with those of such
authorities as Dr. Tredgold and the late Dr.
Mereier. The former it will be remembered
states that moral imbeciles shew no defect of
ordinary intelligence, but possess invariably
two distinguishing qualities?lack of moral
sense and lack of wisdom. And Dr. Mereier
wrote that the moral imbecile was often, perhaps usually, clever, but cleverness was not the
highest faculty, it occupied only the second
level, and was quite compatible with serious
defect on the higher level, which he entitled wisdom.]

The closing Chapters discuss the presen
methods of determining criminal responsibility and suggest amendments. Dr. Su lvai*
admits that "in practice the legal doctrine o
criminal responsibility has been innocuous,
it has not produced its logical consequences ,
because it has never been fully applie ?
Whilst agreeing with this it appears open o
doubt whether alterations in the law might no
result in its less elastic administration, wi
consequent hardship to the offender.

The author is to be congraulated upon is
l^cid, concise and interesting treatment o a
difficult subject, and we have no doubt that
reference will be frequently made to his important work.

W. Norwood East.
Three Problem Children. Publication o.
2, Joint Committee on Methods o re
venting Delinquency. 50, East n
St., New York, U.S.A.
Judge Baker Foundation. Case Studies.
W. Healy & A. Bronner. 40, Court bt.,
Boston, U.S.A.

The activities of children concern man)
individuals and organisations, all of whic are
somewhat disposed to regard events i no
exclusively from some one angle at any ra e
a strong bias in that direction,
educationist considers more especial y m e
gence as measured by school progress, oug
in some schools much will be forgiven e y
^"ho evinces prowess in games. Pla>
sations concentrate on games, those sue as ^
'Scouts' who pay attention to character ram
*ng are often forced to drop problem cases es
^hey damage many for the sake of ou
benefit to an individual. Special ProJlslf!
almost limited to residential schools or
?ut of control, while the only mental state
^ hich approximately reasonable pro"\ ]S1^n
ni&de is innate deficiency. Even psye ?
fiists have shown a tendency to divide in o
camps the 'mental testers' and the 'psychoanalysts', the former in most cases only
touching the fringe of the problem of the
abnormal and the latter somewhat underestimating the role of the intellect and also
from considerations of time and expense
obliged to abandon the study of the subject
who refuses his co-operation.

It is clear that all the available resources of
normal and abnormal psychology, of medicine
and of the field social worker are required if
the study of the problem of the individual child
is successfully to be undertaken. No one
branch can hope to succeed alone, unless perhaps the investigator has the time and knowledge to follow up all for himself. A useful
study therefore demands intensive team work
and the usefulness of the above mentioned
books in no inconsiderable measure depends on
the comprehensive manner in which they indicate how such can be applied to social problems.
Problem children may present any degree of
intelligence, any variety of emotionality, they
may be permanently handicapped by defects or
suffer from maladjustments from a too rigid
educational system, unsuitable home treatment, or unfortunate companionship. Behaviour is not a problem in itself but results
from complex and usually hidden causes.
The authors of these case studies have not
emphasised the possibility of classification but
point out that each child forms a distinct
personalty problem arising from a special
combination of physical, mental and
social assets and liabilities. It is important
to notice the study given to the assets, since
usually attention is concentrated solely on
the liabilities while in reality it is on the
assets that the solution of the problem depends.
Certain cities in America are fortunate in
having competent organisations to review the
whole field of the individual, though it would
be interesting to know how far and how often
their recommendations are carried out. Public
opinion in this country is awakening to the
need for something of the kind. The more
important points are well summed up by Dr.
Healy who stresses seven points.

1. The great breakdown of morale that may
follow initition at an early age into disturbing secret experiences.
2. The relation of recidivism to persisting
unrecognised factors even when external
conditions are altered.
3. The strength of habit formation.
4. The vastly greater chance of meeting such
fundamental issues successfully at the
earliest signs of breakdown.
5. The weakness of attempting to meet problems of delinquency without a knowledge
of the underlying factors.
6. The necessity lor the treatment of delinquents , if in institutions, by individualised
methods adapted to their needs.
7. The need for the study of conduct problems of children in centres which the
family, the school or the court can use.
These should be as readily available as the
clinics for physical ailments.
Xn all the case studies the facts are set out
and the summarised report which would be
available for the court or school is indicated. In the cases from the Judge Baker
Foundation the studies are published in such a
form as to be avilable for purposes of instruction, the details being on one sheet and the
comments on another.

These studies from child guidance clidics,
as they are termed should be read by all who
are interested in the mental welfare either of
children or adults.

F. C. Shrubs all.
Classroom Handwork. By R. N. Sharman.
Pitman's Handwork Series. Pp. 131.
4s.
Purposeful Handwork. By Jane W.
McKee. The Macmillan Co. Pp. 105.
5s.

These two books, the first English and the
second American, both disclaim any attempt
at being exhaustive treatises on their subjects ,
they offer the teacher suggestions only.
"Classroom Handwork," is the more ambitious in that it covers the whole ground-^
"for all grades of boys and girls"?but it
makes a beginning at the Junior Stage. It
touches on widely diverse topics, "some
hundreds of models are hinted at" and one
feels it would be of use more particularly to
those non-specialist teachers who have themselves attended brief courses of instruction, but
who require guidance in the interweaving of
practical activities with the various branches
of the curruiclum. Small but clear sketches
are given on models that can be attempted
under classroom conditions. It is rather to be
regretted that the author has seen fit to thrust
in scraps of educational theory where fuller
information regarding construction of the
models would be more welcome. The book,
or at least sections of it, would be useful in the
Special School to teachers requiring hints only
and chiefly in connection with the work of the
older and more intelligent pupils.

'' Purposeful Handwork '' concerns itself
with "kindergarten and first grade pupils"
only, presumably children of from 4 to 7 years.
In the short chapter dealing with the Psychology of Handwork one is glad to find emphasis
laid on the initial "manipulative" stage so
often neglected even in our Special Schools.
The main chapters are devoted to suggestions
for three types of handwork, viz., the making
of play-toys, the making of articles of utility,
and the decorating of articles of both these
types. The author recommends the suggesting
of "projects" to the pupils by means of wellworked-out models which they can examine
and imitate as they choose, all the necessary
materials being provided. The models desscribed here vary greatly in difficulty and a
few of the difficulties are passed over somewhat
lightly in the text. One wishes the diagrams
had in all cases been printed so as to face the
appropriate directions instead of sometime*
being over-leaf. Expensive specially prepared materials are rightly scorned and the
child does most of his work with waste material
obtained chiefly from the home. In Chapter
> lists are given of such useful o s
and ends" and of a minimum of equipment.

We already have better and more comprehensive books on this subject but Special Schoo
"Teachers will find much in this little volume
that is simple, new and effective.

F E.L.S.R.
----------
Report of the Consultative Committee of
the Board of Education on Psychological Tests of Educable Capacity.
H.M. Stationery Office. 2s. net.
Tests of educable capacity are necessarily of
Peculiar interest to those whose work lies with
^e mentally inefficient. This report, valuable to all concerned in education, must therefore make a very special claim on them, for it
summarises clearly and adequately the opinions of a large body of experts, both psychological and educational, with regard to the
nature of such tests and their possible uses in
0ur educational system.

The expression 'psychological tests of educable capacity' is in the report interpreted
^idely to include tests of 'intelligence,' both
^dividual and group tests, standardised
scholastic tests, some vocational tests, tests
special forms of mental activity such as
Memory and imagery, certain physical tests,
and tests of temperament and character. With
regard to all of these the opinions expressed
are worthy of the closest consideration. We
learn which type of tests can usefully be
employed at present and which need more
research before they can yield satisfactory
results. We see how far obtained results can
be relied on and how they can be used to pio*n?te the best interests of the children in our
schools. We are shown the different lines of
investigation that are likely to yield useful
information in the future.

Not the least interesting part of the report
is the historical sketch of the development of
psychological tests, contributed by Dr. Burt,
with which it opens. Only too often the subject of mental tests is thought to begin and
end with Binet's work; and it is refreshing to
find that work placed in its right perspective,
where alone it can be truly appreciated.
Dr. Burt shows how mental testing originated with the development of experimental
and individual psychology. He indicates how
necessary was the earlier experimental work
with the simpler mental processes. He emphasises the importance of the application of
the exact method of correlation to psychological data. Finally he surveys briefly new
fields of investigation.

In the report itself a suggestive discussion
on the nature of intelligence is incorporated
together with an account of the values of
mental tests as a method of examination.
They measure inborn capacity rather than
acquired knowledge: Their results are not
heavily handicapped by poor environment:
they are a means of educational prognosis:
they eliminate the personal equation of the
examiner: they are easy to mark. Yet they
are by no means infallible. Test results
should always be supplements to, and not substitutes for, other forms of examination, and
must be interpreted and acted on with caution. The main tests of different types are
here described and admirably criticized and a
definite leading is given with regard to the uses
to wnich they may be put in schools of different kinds.

Part 4 of the report deals with the question
of the training necessary for those who are to
administer the tests. Special emphasis is
well laid on the point that, whereas group
tests can safely be given after a short training
of only a few weeks in educational psychology,
individual 'intelligence' tests cannot be
successfully applied or their results interpreted except by those who have had an adequate training in 'experimental psycnology,
in the technique of applying the tests and in
the use of statistical methods.' This fact
holds good whatever other form of education
the examiner may have received. Mental testing, like some other branches of psychology,
has suffered only too greatly from the abuse of
the unqualified.

The Appendices include interesting accounts
of experimental work with tests, and excellent
bibliography, and illustrative te9ts.
Guide to Porteus Maze Test. S. D. Porteus. The Training School at Vineland,
U.S.A. Department of Research, 1924.
Two main claims are made for the Porteus
Maze test; first, that in addition to estimating
intelligence it measure social adaptability:
second, that it gives a performance age scale
which avoids the language bias of the Binet
scale. Hence it can be used as a supplement
to the Binet scale, especially in cases of mental defect, for failure in social adaptability
rather than mere failure in intelligence is the
true problem here.

Inh is introduction to the 'Guide to the Porteus Maze Test, 1924', Dr. Porteus defends
these claims on the evidence of many years of
research- Social adaptability, he argues, is
based at least in part on prudence and foresight. Success with the maze is impossible if
these qualities do not exist; and as a matter of
fact the correlation between failure with the
mazes and social failure is very high?much
higher than that between social failure and
failure with the Binet scale.

On such counts as these, the tests must stand
or fall with the results of future experiments,
which alone can provide material for adequate
criticism. But our urgent needs to-day include the need especially for reliable tests of
temperament and character and Dr. Porteus
has supplied us with most valuable suggestions and results.

The Guide includes exact instructions for
the administration and marking of the tests.
Temperament and Mentality in Maturity ,
Sex and Race. By S. D. Porteus.

Reprint from Journal of Applied Psychology. Vol. S. No. 1. March, 1924.
Some of the conclusions apparently justified
by the results of investigations with the Binet
Scale and its modifications are certainly difficult to accept. Dr. Porteus finds objection
here to three of them. The tests suggest:

(a) That "intelligence" attains maturity
at about sixteen years;
(b) That no appreciable differences exist
between the 'intelligence' of men and
of women; and
(c) That there is little measurable difference between the mentality of different races.

All these things, says Dr. Porteus, are contradictory to common sense and to other evidence. Some other evidence, mainly that
of head measurements and conclusions drawn
from his maze test, he brings forward in this
article.

There is, he declares, postpubescent brain
growth, greater on the average in men than in
women, greater in some races than in others.
This is in all probability accompanied by increase in intelligence and also by increase in
self-control since it may lead to greater power
of inhibition. An interesting suggestion, but
a suggestion only in our present absence of
exact knowledge

The maze test, as opposed to Binet results,
shows better results with boys than with girls
of the same race, while its findings differ
notably with different races. Therefore,
argues Dr. Porteus, the sexes and the races
must differ. But one cannot help feeling that
he is fighting a non-existent foe. The maze
test is claimed as a test of temperament as well
as a test of intelligence. The Binet findings
never suggest the absence of temperamental
differences between men and women or between d ifferent races. The existence of intelli*
gence merely is never claimed as a surety or
success either on the part of an individual or o
a race!
But the paper enphasises the existence o
problems too often ignored.

L. G. Fildes.
In the September number of " The Special
Schools Quarterly "* there is published a
Useful account of the " Results of a Two
Years' experiment to determine the Value of
*The Official Journal of the National Special Schools
Union. Published by Morris & Yeamen, 41, W?y?
tfeet, Manchester, price 4d.

Phonoscript as a means of teaching Reading
to Children," by Mr. G. B. Dodds, Head
Master of the Harraood Street Special School,
London, N.W. An article by Miss Ida C.
Ward, Senior Assistant in the Phonetics
Department, University College, London, on
" The Speech of Mentally Defective Children,"
which is based on her examination of 166
children attending the Harmood Street Special
School, gives a series of exercises recommended
for speech-training, which should be of considerable help to those who are struggling
with this problem in Special School or Occupation Centre.
