The Educational Significance of Certain Specific Mental Defects
================================================================

:Author: Lucy G. Fildes, B.A.

The use of the term specific as opposed to general when speaking of mental
defect is one which calls at once for definition. For the purposes of this article
it is proposed to use specific to indicate a disability which directly affects some
one particular mental process or some closely allied group of such processes with-
out at the same time influencing in any marked degree other mental powers.

The effect which such a disability will have on the behaviour and educability of
the individual suffering from it will depend very largely on its kind. To fail in
discrimination of pitch will not matter so much for living as will a serious failure
in rote memory, yet both result from specific defects.

From the point of view of the school those specific defects which most affect
educability are of the gravest importance. Often where they exist the con-
dition of general deficiency, even of inbecility, is simulated and the child be-
comes at once a candidate for the Special School. Indeed, even it the specialised
nature of his disability is recognised the ordinary school has no place for him.

Individual study and instruction only can aim at supplying his special needs.

Two specific defects will be considered here. Both are defects of language,
limited in extent when viewed from one aspect, yet far-reaching in their influence
on the power to live effectively, if they are not properly understood and dealt
with during school life. The first is concerned with the ability to understand and
to use spoken language normally. It is possible for a child, not deaf (if that woid
is used with its ordinary meaning as indicating failure to have auditory sensations
from an adequate external stimulus), nor mentally defective in the usual mean-
ing of that term, to be unable to learn to understand spoken language at all ade-
quately. The defect may be so great that it extends to sounds other than that of
the voice and produces behaviour of the type normally associated with complete
deafness. Neither words nor other sounds in the environment are responded to.
Gesture language only is used. For the failure to comprehend is accompanied by
the failure to employ spoken words. Some words, more commonly, however,
generally names learnt through constant repetition, are understood, especially if
spoken slowly and with care. Some words, too, are used : an attempt may be
made at voluntary speech in sentences. But always the speech is poor, usually
!t is almost impossible to understand.

Such signs as these may indicate a typical specific mental defect. ic
important question is what best to do for the children. Some of them, diagnoscc
as deaf, are drafted to schools for deaf or for partially deaf children. And prob-
ably that is their right place; especially if the fact that they can be taught to
understand language by hearing it is recognised. Others, because they can
obviously hear, are diagnosed as mentally defective and often through lack of
understanding are not helped to overcome their particular trouble ;
which is a failure, not in hearing, but in the discrimination of
spoken sounds. The voice is heard, but it is heard as a blur: words
sound alike; they are confused: they gain no meaning and cannot easily be
repeated. The child's intelligence is caged in and cannot without reasonable
help learn to express itself. But, if that help is given, the trouble
may be largely overcome and the child helped towards a useful life.

This defect, it is true, often accompanies slight general deficiency or slight
deafness. It is to be suspected whenever the failure in language, either in com-
prehension or in use, does not appear warranted by the degree of general
deficiency or by the amount of actual inability to hear.

The second disability to be considered is that which is involved in the failure
to learn to read. No teacher of mentally defective children can fail to appreciate
the problem which the mechanics of reading presents to them. But, although
mental deficiency is a common cause of difficulty in learning to read, it
is not the only cause. Some children, normal or even supernormal in other
powers, find in the mechanics of reading an almost insuperable obstacle to educa-
tional progress.

As in the disability affecting spoken language we find here too all degrees of
defect: from a mere slowness in learning to read it ranges to a complete failure to
learn to recognise even the written symbols of numbers or the letters of the alpha-
bet, apart from words, which may present an even greater problem. Always the
trouble is accompanied by the absence of power to spell: it may finally show itself
only in the absence of that power if once the mechanics of reading have been mas-
tered. The point is that inability to read is not necessarily a sign of general
defect.

With regard to its cause?two factors seem mostly operative. Sometimes
they act alone; sometimes together. One is an abnormal difficulty in discrimin-
ating between forms of the letter type, especially if these closely resemble each
other and have to be remembered. The common tendency of children to reverse
or invert forms without considering the change of position as a difference is
important in this connection. Letters and figures alike except for their direction
are the most difficult to learn. It would be interesting to know if the type of
imagery used has any bearing on this point. The second important cause
appears to lie in the failure to establish direct associations between a sound
and a form. "A" cannot be remembered by its name or sound unless it is
regarded as a (h)aystack. ' 'T'' is learnt as two tables placed for tea, and so on.

The cause of the trouble indicates the lines of treatment. Whole
words or sentences, as unlike each other as possible, should be taught first in
cases where discrimination is at fault. So the child will gain in confidence and
in power of attack. The use of a motor method of teaching the alphabet is a
help to visual discrimination. Phonics should be introduced gradually after
much preliminary work. Oral spelling is often a help, especially if the audi-
tory memory is good. In cases of serious memory failure, much varied repetition
of the words to be learnt, together with suggestions whichjwill give meaning to
the letter sound or form will be best at first. Here, when once the phonic values
of the letters are known the trouble is over?but too often that time is unduly
long.

The point mainly to bear in mind is that children with specific defects such as
those just considered are apt to be of more potential value as citizens than are the
more generally defective, and are especially responsive to'instructed help. The
use of Scales for Measuring Intelligence which emphasise flanguage in particular
is apt to penalise such children unfairly, and should not be too much relied on.
Cases in which special defect is suspected should be tested rather on graded per-
formance tests to get some estimate of their ability apart from language. Only
in that way can some idea be gained as to how far individual instruction is justi-
fied and what lines such instruction should follow.
