News and Notes
===============

C.A.M.W. Conference, May 28th and 29th, 1924.

The fourth C.A.M.W. Conference on Mental Deficiency will be held on Wed-
nesday and Thursday, May 28th and 29tli, 1924, in the Central Hall, Westminster.
The Rt. Hon. J. Wheatley, Minister of Health, will attend the opening session
and give an inaugural address.

On May 28th, papers will be read, followed by discussion, on "The Best
Methods of dealing, Administratively and Educationally, with the Mentally
Defective (feeble-minded) child.'' On May 29th, discussion will take placc in the
morning on "The influence of Heredity and Environment in causing Mental
Deficiency," and in the afternoon on "Mental Tests, their value to the
Medical Officer, the Educationalist and the Social Worker."

Tickets, price 3/6, including advance copies of the papers to be read, may
be obtained from the Hon. Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace
Road, S.W. 1.
A full report of the Conference will be obtainable at the price of 3/- per
copy.

The C.A.M.W. and the British Empire Exhibition.
------------------------------------------------

The British Empire Exhibition at Wembley this year will draw visitois from
all parts of the Empire; among those visitors will be many educationalists, psy-
chologists and others interested in mental welfare work in the Colonies. The
Council of the C.A.M.W. have therefore decided to provide, for four weeks during
the Exhibition, a special display of educational apparatus and handwoik suit-
able for the training and teaching of mental defectives. A room has been booked
in the pavilion belonging to the International Council of Women, for four weeks,
from September 22nd to October 18th, 1924, and during that time the C.A.M.W.,
with the co-operation of several of the most important Certified Institutions for
mental defectives throughout the country, will hold its special exhibition.
Mental Welfare workers will be on duty throughout the four weeks, to answer
enquiries, give advice, distribute and sell literature, and explain to visitois the
use of the various kinds of apparatus. One of the lecture halls at the Exhibition
has also been booked for one day a week during the time of the C. A. M. W. Exhibi-
tion, and meetings will be arranged, and the C.A.M.W. Film shewn.

The Annual Meeting of the Association will be held at Wembley on Monday,
October 6th, 1924.

Course for Magistrates, March 18th to 21st, 1924.
---------------------------------------------------

A Short Course for Magistrates in connection with their duties under the
Lunacy and Mental Deficiency Acts was held, under the auspices of the C. A. M. W.,
from March 18th to 21st, 1924. It was the first Course of the kind to be given in
this country and aroused much interest, and although the number of Justices
attending was relatively small, it is felt that a beginning has been made in what
may prove to be a work of very great importance. In all, twenty-eight Justices
entered for the Course?six men, and twenty-two women. The majonty came
from various parts of England, but one was from Nigeria and two from South
Australia.

The instruction given consisted of eight morning lectures, deliveied at the
K?yal Sanitary Institute, supplemented by afternoon visits to various Prisons,
Remand Homes, Mental Hospitals and Institutions. For the purpose of visiting,
the Justices were divided into small groups, so that the greatest possible benefit
could be gained.

Sir Leslie Scott, K.C., M.P., gave the inaugural lecture, on Legal Responsi-
bility and Mental Deficiency" ;* Dr. J. G. Porter Phillips, Physician
Superintendent, Bethlem Royal Hospital, gave three lectures on Mental Disorders,
dealing especially with their medico-legal relationships; Dr. A. F. Tredgold
dealt with the subject of Mental Deficiency in three lectures, paying special atten-
tion to the question of defective delinquents, and Dr. F. C. Shrubsall gave one
lecture on ' 'Legal Administration under the Mental Deficiency Act.''

Visits were paid to Brixton and Wandsworth Prisons (by courtesy of H.M.
Prison Commissioners): to Bexley and Claybury Mental Hospitals, The Manor,
Epsom, South Side Home, Streatham, and Ponton Road Place of Detention
(by permission of the London County Council) and to Pield Heath House Special
Industrial School, Hillingdon.

From the great appreciation expressed by those Justices who attended, there
can be no doubt that the Course proved a means of giving valuable information
on the subjects of Lunacy and Mental Deficiency, and that this new departure was
thoroughly justified. It is hoped to hold a further Course at a later date. In-
formation as to future Courses may be obtained from the Hon. Secretary,
C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.

Short Courses for Teachers of Mentally Defective Children.
----------------------------------------------------------

The Short Course announced in our last issue is being held in Liverpool as
we go to press, with 48 students in attendance.

The number of applications for the Course so greatly exceeded the accommo-
dation available that the Board of Education have authorised the holding of a
second Com""! this year to take place in London from July 5th to July 24th. This
Course will be primarily intended for teachers who already hold the Certificate
for Part II, or who have had considerable experience of Special School work.
Applications for further information should be addressed to Miss Evelyn Fox.
The Work of the C.A.M.W. Occupational Organisers.

In March 1923, the C.A.M.W. appointed its first Occupational Organiser,
Miss Wingate, and we feel that the following record of her work during the past
twelve months shows conclusively that the experiment has fully justified itself.

Miss Wingate's main work has been the starting of Occupation Centres for
low-grade defectives, and she has now opened or re-organised 15 Centres in the
following areas:?Barrow-in-Furness, Bury St. Edmund's, Liverpool (3),
London (2), Northampton, Stafford, Warwick, Wiltshire (2), Willesden, Worth-
ing and York. She has also carried out the preliminary visiting for the starting
of a Centre in Chester, and as soon as a suitable room can be secured, the Centre
will be opened. In addition to starting Centres, Miss Wingate has visited, for
periods of a month each, Prudhoe Colony and the Howbeck Schools, Hartlepool,
and Caterham Institution, where she has advised and assisted the staff in organ-
ising a scheme of training for the low-grade children. She has also paid visits to
Kettering and Peterborough Institutions (Section 37), and has advised the
Guardians on the training and occupation of the defectives under care
therein.

* Sir Leslie Scott's address is being printed and will shortly be obtainable, in pamphlet
form, from the C .A.M .W. office.

Miss Wingate visits the children's homes, when necessary, with the Super-
visors of the Centres, and advises parents on matters of training. At the Centres
she gives to the Supervisors what help and instruction may be needed in methods
of speech training, sense training, physical exercises, games and rhythmic work,
handwork, elementary reading, writing and number, etc. She helps with the
preparation of apparatus and equipment, making a considerable amount herself,
and showing how gifts of material may be utilised to this end, and puts the Super-
visors in touch with educational supply firms from which other apparatus can be
obtained. She also gives specimen lessons to the children, and helps in the draw-
ing up of suitable syllabuses of work and time-tables. A full report of her work
at each Centre is sent to the Central office at the end of her visit.

In October 1923, the Council felt that many Boards of Guardians who were
Managers of Institutions approved under Section 37 of the Mental Deficiency
Act would be glad to benefit by the services of a specially qualified worker to
visit their institutions and advise their staffs with regard to suitable occupations
and recreations for the defectives maintained therein, and a second Occupational
Organiser, Miss Price, was appointed for this purpose with the approval of the
Board of Control, starting work in November 1923. Since this date she has
visited Lincoln, Milnthorpe and Settle, and is booked to visit other institutions
in the spring. At each institution she stays one month and during that time
organises occupations, games and recreation for the older patients, and
special methods of training for low-grades, with most successful results.

Letters of appreciation of the work of the Organisers have been received
after each one of their visits, and their appointment seems to have met a real
need. The Council are most anxious that their services should be utilised to
the fullest extent, and applications for them addressed to the Hon. Secretary of
the Association, 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W. 1., will be welcomed. *
We should like to take the opportunity of recording here that this experi-
mental pioneer work has only been made possible by the generosity of two sym-
pathisers, each of whom gave ?50 to enable a start to be made.

Visiting in Mental Hospitals.
------------------------------

Miss Violet Dale, of the Society of the Crown of Our Lord, has sent us the follow-
ing account of the pioneer work now being done by the Society in connection with the
visiting of Mental Hospitals, and zve have great pleasure in bringing it to the notice
of our readers:?

' 'This work first started in America?where it is known as Psychiatric Social
Service"?in connection with the War.

In England also it had a connection with the War, for Horton Mental Hos-
pital, Epsom, where it started, was used as a Military Hospital. After it reverted
to its original status as one of the Mental Hospitals belonging to the London
County Council, the Medical Superintendent, Lieut. -Col. Lord, made an appeal
for a voluntary worker who would come and visit the patients from outside, not
as an L.C.C. Official but as an authorised Hospital Visitor. Thanks to the
C.A.M.W., we heard of this request, and fortunately there happened to be a
member of the Society of the Crown of Our Lord available to begin the work.

The Visiting Committee of the Hospital had to be satisfied of
the desirability of such an innovation, and this position was reached by May 1923,
* In most cases the following fee is charged: Salary for the time of the visit, lodging
allowance at ?l per week, and third class railway fare from the last place ot work.

when the scheme was approved for all London County Mental Hospitals. Since
then, "Visitors" have been found for three?Claybury, Long Grove and Hanwell
?of the remaining seven Hospitals, and all have begun by visiting for a time
at Horton to gain some preliminary insight into the work.

Although organised slightly differently in these other Hospitals the work in
all of them has a three-fold aspect:?

(1) Visiting the patients in the Hospital.
(2) Doing commissions for the patients.
(3) Visiting the patients' homes, or friends, on behalf of the doctors.
(1) Visiting the Patients.

As at Horton, there are about 1600 patients (nearly all female), it is of course
impossible to visit all, and I devote most of my time to the two Reception Wards
as it is often to the newly-admitted patients that one can be of most use. In
these ' 'acute wards'' most types of mental disease are represented and as they are
later passed on to the other wards, it is possible to follow up those who care to be
visited.

At first all patients spend a week in bed, and in one of the Reception Wards
(B. Hospital, which is quite separate from the Main building), the beds are wheeled
out every day when possible on to the verandah, or into the garden, so that all
the patients, except those who have to be in the side-rooms by themselves, can
benefit by the fresh air.

All the patients are not of course ' 'accessible'' to the visitor. I do not mean
physically accessible, for all are that, as the Visitor has the keys of all the Wards
and the side-rooms and padded rooms are at Horton open all day, with rare
exceptions. But they are not mentally accessible. Some cannot speak, some-
times for months, sometimes for years. Some do not want to speak, as in many
cases of Dementia Praecox. Some are quite incoherent and apparently unaware
of the visitor's presence, though subsequently she may find that the visit did
make a very definite impression and was by no means so fruitless as it seemed at
the time. But besides all these more or less inaccessible patients, there are many
more who are perfectly coherent and welcome a chat with someone from the out-
side world.

(2) Commissions for the Patients.
----------------------------------

It is for these last patients that one can often do small jobs, which may help
to relieve the diseased mind of some part of its worries and anxieties, even if
those worries are imaginary. The effort of writing a letter is sometimes too great
for these invalids, and as relations are discouraged from visiting for the first
month, the Visitor may be a useful link with the patient's home. It is, I think,
an interesting fact that I have never been given a wrong address by any of the
patients.

(8) Visiting for the Doctors.
-----------------------------=
When a newly-admitted insane patient pours out a long story to the doctor
it is not always possible to be sure how much of it is true and how much may be
delusion. Many quite strange things may be facts. Moreover the relatives
apparently often adopt a very unfriendly and suspicious attitude towards the
doctor, and are unduly reticent, when they are formally interviewed, and more
can sometimes be elicited by means of a friendly chat at the home. Personally
when paying these visits I have always found the relatives perfectly friendly.
It is to be hoped that more women of the right sort may come forward for this
work, so that all the L.C.C. Mental Hospitals may soon have "Visitors," though
the work, as far as the Council are concerned, must for the present be entirely
voluntary.''

Lectures on Mental Disorders for Social Workers.
-------------------------------------------------

The Course of Lectures advertised on page 48 marks a step forward in awaken-
ing the social worker to the importance of the factor of mental hygiene in her work,
and we draw the special attention of our readers to the experiment.
The lectures have been arranged under the auspices of the Central Association
for Mental Welfare and through the kindness of the Medical Superintendent of
Bethlem Royal Hospital, and the following extract from the circular which has
been issued about them clearly shows their nature and objects:?
"Dr. Thomas Beaton, who has kindly consented to give the lectures is
the Senior Assistant Physician and lecturer in Mental Disease at Bethlem Royal
Hospital.

A great advance in knowledge and methods of dealing with mental disorder
has taken place during the last few years, and an interest and desire for enlighten-
ment has been felt by all social workers. The problem of the unstable and un-
balanced individual confronts them again and again, and it is becoming increasingly
evident that some insight into the earliest stages of mental disorder is essential
so that the signs and symptoms may be recognised and the right steps taken to
secure expert advice and the early treatment so essential for a speedy return to
normality.

These lectures are especially designed for the lay worker: they will not be
highly technical, but eminently practical and should be exceedingly useful to
those engaged in the following branches of social work:

Out-Patient Mental Clinics in General Hospitals.
Visiting in Mental Hospitals or Mental After-Care work.
Mental Welfare Association.
Police Court work (especially in Juvenile Courts).
Settlements, Charity Organisations, Societies, etc.
Children's Care work.

No charge will be made for the course and it is hoped that all who are inter-
ested in the subject will make early application for tickets, which can be obtained
either from Miss Evelyn Fox, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.,
or from Miss Townsend, 52, Lambeth Road, S.E.

We hope that the lectures will prove that the need for them is appreciated
and will make it possible for more ambitious educational experiments of the kind
to be subsequently undertaken. The full syllabus will be found on page 48.
Mental Defectives and Venereal Disease.

There was set up in 1922 a Government Committee of Inquiry, under the
Chairmanship of the Right Hon. the Lord Trevethin, "to consider and report
uP?n the best medical measures for preventing venereal disease in the com-
munity having regard to administrative practicability, including cost.
The Report has recently been issuedf and in it occurs this pronouncement:?
' 'There are found to be a considerable number of persons suffering from
venereal disease among mental defectives, and the present arrangements for
their control and treatment are inadequate."

The statement will doubtless be taken by many readers of the Report as indis-
putable, and obvious, but the Mental Hospitals Committee of the London Count}''
Council do not concur in it. Whilst recognising that mentally defective girls, if
unprotected, are "prone to moral lapses," the Committee points out J that their
County Medical Officer of Health in giving evidence before the Government Com-
mittee in question, ' 'emphasised the fact that there is comparatively little evidence
as regards the incidence of primary venereal disease amongst the mentally defective
and that the number of defectives notified under the Mental Deficiency Act . . .
who have been found to have the disease is small and confined to cases notified from
refuges, hostels, hospitals, or prisons.'' ' (The italics are ours). Thus of 300
girls notified from such sources only 65 (between 21 and 22 per cent.) were known
to be infected. Amongst imbecile and idiot girls under the supervision of the
Council none are recorded to have contracted the disease.

The Mental Hospitals Committee further contend that the Mental Deficiency
Act should afford all the protection that is needed to ensure against the risk of
venereal infection in the cases of the defectives with whom it deals.
The Mentality of Sexual Offenders.

In a paper recently published in the ' 'Lancet,'' * Dr. Hamblin Smith, Medical
Officer of H.M. Prison, Birmingham, gives the results of his special examination
into the mental condition of a series of 1000 cases of indecent exposure and in-
decent assault. His findings are as follows:?

Indecent Indecent Total.
Exposure Assault.
Insane ........ 4 4 8
Mentally defective .... 11 15 26
Subnormal intelligence .... 2 2 4
Undeveloped physically & Men-
tall y.. ...... ? 1 1
Senile degeneration .... 4 7 11
Epileptic ........ 2 ? 2
Mental conflict .. .. .. 18 13 31
Negative results ...... 9 S 17
Total  50 50 100
The number of cases upon which these figures are based is of course not large,
but Dr. Hamblin Smith considers that from the fact that in only 17 cases were the
mental conditions apparently normal, at least one inference of great practical
importance may fairly be drawn, viz., the "pre-eminent necessity for the
fullest investigation" of these offenders before conviction. Such intensive
investigation is, he contends, the key-note to the whole position.
t Repoit of Committee of Inquiry on Venereal Disease. H.M. Stationery Office. Price 3d.
j L.C.C. Minutes, 4th March, 1924,p. 352. Obtainable from P. S. King & Sons, Great
Smith Street, Westminster, S.W.I. Price 6(1.
* 2!>,3.24.
