American Journal of Insanity, January 1880
===========================================

1G1
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
. Edited by John
P. Gray, M.D., Utica, N. Y. State Lunatic Asylum. John
Wiley & Son, Astor Place, New York.
This Journal continues to maintain its very high reputation.
The first article is an ? interesting one on the responsibility of
Asylum Superintendents in America, in which some knotty legal
points having reference to the laws of the United States are dis-
cussed. The second article relates to English laws on lunacy,
which more immediately concerns us. Upon review of the whole
evidence before the Dillwyn Committee, the writer concludes that
the only possibility of unfair dealing lies between the party
placing a person in confinement, and the medical superintendent
of the institution, and he thinks absolute impossibility of fraud
or collusion might be secured by the interposition of a magis-
trate's authority between the party sending the patient, and
the authority to whose custody he is committed. He, however,
candidly quotes the evidence of Mr. Percival before the Com-
mittee as follows. It is opposed to the American system and
appears to us conclusive :?
" My own idea is that if you substitute any magistrate or
official person as the party to sign the order, it will be most
mischievous to the liberty of the subject, and very prejudicial
to the alleged lunatic, for this reason; there is, I think, no
greater safeguard for the due performance of a duty than indi-
vidual, personal responsibility. Such responsibility, if it is not
duly exercised, a jury will visit with damages, and in cases of
false imprisonment juries give very heavy damages. At the
present time the responsibility is such that very many decline
to take it upon themselves for the benefit of the lunatic, even
when his benefit loudly demands it. I think that this safeguard
is very well supplemented by certificates and reports, and by visits
by the commissioners and others. If you allow a magistrate
either to sign the order or to countersign the order, you will at
once destroy all the responsibility of the relative or other person.
If a person is falsely imprisoned under a magistrate's order there
can be no remedy. If a magistrate has acted bona fide he will
be relieved from all responsibility; he cannot be visited with
a verdict for damages, and there will be no remedy for the
lunatic. Besides, the magistrate will become simply a minis-
PART I. VOL. VI. NEW SERIES M
162 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
terial officer in the matter, and will be guided, if not absolutely,
to a very great extent, by the certificate, so that really it will
come to this, that the only safeguard will be the certificates.
The great safeguard now is the responsibility of the individual
who signs the order."
The report of the case of sarcoma of the dura mater, by
Dr. Edward N. Brush, is interesting from the fact of the patient
retaining his intelligence until coma set in not long before
death, although, in addition to the tumour, which weighed Im-
pounds, there was an abscess the size of a pigeon's egg in the left
posterior central convolutions.
The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease.?Edited by
Drs. Jewell, Bannisteh, Hammond, Clymer, and Mitchell.
January 1880. Chicago.
This number opens with an able article by Dr. Jewell, on
Neurasthenia, under which term he includes all the various
forms of defective nervous power, whether inherited or acquired.
He premises his remarks by stating that the causes of disease
in general are not only complicated but often subtle and un-
known. With regard to cases of neurasthenia, he groups them
according to their apparent mode of production, as follows :?
" 1. Hereditary or diathetic neurasthenia. This is a class of
cases often met with, and to which reference will be made here-
after at greater length. 2. Dyspeptic neurasthenia. 3. .4m-
milative or trojphic neurasthenia. 4. Genito-urinary neuras-
thenia. 5. Neurasthenia from over-work and from over-
excitation. 6. Diseases in which neurasthenia forms a
prominent factor. Besides these clinical groups, others should
be made, such as partial and general neurasthenias, mental and
bodily neurasthenias, and various subordinate groups named
according to the parts of the body or groups of organs
affected."
With respect to the first class, he makes the following
practical remarks:?" Persons are daily coming into life, to
pass their days until death, from beginning to end, below the
plane of an average nerve-nutrition. They seldom present us
with localised, destructive disease, but from first to last lack an
average volume of nerve power and endurance, whether mental
or physical, and joined with this condition of things, there is
undue sensibility. In these cases the energy of nutrition is
low. Recuperative power is far below what is ordinarily met
with. Such persons are frail and puny from the cradle to the
grave. They ane at all times easily exhausted. They are with
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 163
difficulty rested. They are usually thin in flesh, but they are
not always so. They are often quite fleshy, and in a few cases
may have a ruddy exterior. But they are neurasthenic all the
same. If females, they are prone to hysteria, to headaches,
irregularities in the action of the circulatory organs, especially
to disordered cardiac action, to neuralgias, to be unduly
excitable, and to be easily exhausted, or they may be easily
kept awake, and thus lose sleep, from comparatively slight dis-
turbances."
With reference to the dyspeptic form of the disease (diges-
tive neurasthenia), he says there are two chief ways in which it
becomes of practical importance :?
" First, by diminishing the quantity and deteriorating the
quality of the supply of materials to the blood. In such cases
there may be, as already said, no over-action or over-excitation,
or lack of rest, or any hereditary tendency to neurasthenia, or
excessive or unnatural discharge to waste the materials of the
blood for the nutrition of the higher tissues, though any or even
all these conditions may be present with the dyspepsia in any
given case. Under such circumstances, the tissues become
worn and feeble in action, and once in this unhappy condition,
a repair of damage is almost impossible without a cure of the
dyspepsia Secondly, dyspeptic disorders of the stomach
may be related to neurasthenia, or certain of its phenomena, in
an indirect or reflex way. The stomach, small intestine, liver,
&c., have very important nervous relations, not only with the
ganglionic system, but also with the spinal cord and medulla."
The third form of neurasthenia, the assimilative, is one
which Dr. Jewell thinks has never been clearly recognised. He
considers it to be owing to " a defect of the process of assimila-
tion itself, a sort of paresis" of " the intimate process of
nutrition, as it is accomplished between the tissues and the
blood."
The fourth form is the genito-urinary neurasthenia, which
comprises those cases of exhaustion from sexual excesses, with
which every medical man is familiar.
Dr. Jewell reserves the forms spoken of under the fifth
head for discussion on a future occasion.
Lastly, he makes the following remarks with reference to
the forms of disease in which neurasthenia is a prominent
element:?
" There are many cases of neurasthenia presenting a com-
bination of all the forms already described. Such may be called
complex. But it is rather to forms of nervous disease more or
less distinct, in which neurasthenia is a factor, to which I would,
at present, call your attention. First among such nervous
164 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
affections is hysteria. A careful analysis of the multiform
phenomena of hysteria reveals consistently, two features?undue
excitability, or mobility, and loss of nerve power. No case of
typical hysteria can be found, in which these two elements are
not present. But to particularise: the morbid increase of the
sensibility of the nervous system is especially observable in
respect to simple reflex and emotional excitability. . . . Keflex
responses of the nervous system, whether from a peripheral or a
cerebral source, occur in hysteria more easily than in health.
As respects the emotions in hysteria, they are altogether more
easily excitable than in health, and the cerebral reflexes or
impulsive actions to which emotional excitations tend to give
rise, occur more easily than in the normal state. ... In the
next place I would direct your attention to melancholia, which,
so far as its symptoms go, embraces morbidly distressing and
at times exciting emotion, and side by side with this, loss of
will power and of thought power. Such cases may, of course,
include, as they often do, localised disease in the nervous system,
more especially the brain, but, in the majority of instances,
such is not the fact. There is brain exhaustion, and it may be
morbid excitation from some source. There may be hereditary
weakness of nervous organisation, deficient nutritive supply, in-
sufficient sleep, and too much work and worry. In all these
ways, singly or combined, that state of brain exhaustion may
occur, coupled with an unhealthy cerebral circulation, which
together are the essential conditions of most melancholias. In
such cases the cure is usually effected, sooner or later, by
much sleep, the best nourishment possible, and the removal
as far as possible of causes of nervous exhaustion."
The whole of Dr. Jewell's article will well repay attention.
Seventh Annual Report of the Northern Hospital for the
Insane of the State of Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin :
David Atwood, State Printer. 1879.
The psychological observations of Dr. Walter Kempster, the
Medical Superintendent, deserve especial attention, as they
form a striking contrast to the ordinary routine of asylum
reports. The following remarks on the return of persons to
asylums with second attacks of insanity are well worthy of con-
sideration : ?
" This disease does not differ from- others in liability to
recurrence?especially where predisposition or environment
foster the germs of disorder. For instance, certain people are
liable to repeated attacks of lung disorder, others to bowel or
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 165
kidney trouble, others to rheumatism and its allied complaints,
each attack recurring after some breach in hygienic conditions
by which the general tone is impaired and health interfered
with. This is a matter of common observation, and is recog-
nised by all; it simply indicates that lungs or stomach or kid-
neys, or the muscular or arterial system, are the weak points in
family or individual organisation, giving way when more than
ordinary strain is put upon them, and so the individual may
have one, two, three?a dozen attacks of either form of disease
and recover, providing no serious lesion results in the organ
specially affected. Brain disease follows precisely the same
general laws as do other forms, recurring when the conditions
reCur which gave origin to the first attack, and subsiding when
health is restored, providing, as before, that no serious organic
change has taken place within the brain which precludes it from
properly performing its functions. In the one instance a chronic
change in liver, heart, stomach, and so on, precludes the
affected organ from acting properly; so in the other a chronic
change in brain tissue prevents that organ from properly per-
forming its function?the ultimate condition in each case being
that in repeated attacks the affected organ succumbs. In the
one instance the nature of the complaint does not often prevent
the family or friends from properly caring for the sufferer; in
the other, the manifestation of disease is of such a character as
to preclude, in many instances, proper care at home, and society
is called upon to care for them ; it may be in one or a half-dozen
attacks.
" There is one important item, however, to be taken into
consideration. I believe that in many cases second attacks of
insanity occur because the individual is removed from treatment
and required to pick up the tangled ends dropped from the
mental grasp on the approach of disease and again attempt to
weave them into the daily fabric of his life, before the brain has
had time to recover from its first shock of disease, and is in a
proper state to perform labour. In this respect, it differs from
the other organs, which have a specific amount of work to do.
But the brain is often in the hands of a hard task-master, who
lashes it onward to its own overthrow, when it should be nursed
and protected from violence without or within. It is therefore
important that everyone should know that, in a great measure,
he carries in his own hands that which shall contribute to his
weal or woe according as he uses or abuses it."
He speaks encouragingly as to the cure of chronic cases of
insanity, and states that nineteen of the cases discharged as re-
covered from his hospital had been insane upwards of one year.
His remarks on the causes of insanity are those of a man
who has thought earnestly on the subject:?
166 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
" In attempting to arrive at a satisfactory conclusion as to
the causation of insanity, we are at the outset met by a com-
plex question not easily solved. To explain this, let each
endeavour for a time to resolve into component parts the ideas
which lead one presumably sane to do certain acts or perform
certain offices, or in other words, to analyse one's own mental
operations, giving the steps, one by one, by which conclusions
are reached, and the reasons for such conclusions. The task
will be no easy one, and there are but few who undertake the
experiment. Now if this matter of analysis is so difficult for an
individual to do for himself, how much more difficult is it for
one to analyse the conditions existing in the mind of another,
especially when the operation of that mind is affected by
disease. To resolve the tangled web of causation and determine
what item is harmful and what item harmless to mental health
is a task that only infinitude can comprehend. It is impossible
under the most favourable states to separate into elementary
parts all the minute circumstances leading up to a final change
from a sane to an insane state; it is, indeed, often difficult to
draw the line between these two conditions, and to say where
one ends and the other begins, so subtle are the beginnings. It
is not often that one grand catastrophe overtops mental health ;
it is the constant recurrence of unfavourable acts or thoughts,
the steady disregard of healthful conditions, the accumulation
of adverse surroundings which, from selection or misfortune, heap
themselves upon the individual; the oft-repeated disregard of
the common laws of hygiene, ignoring temperance in all things,
deviating from established principles either in thought or morals ;
in fact, any or all things which tend to lower vitality and produce
disease, operate as a cause. Now, it is impossible to separate
out from all the rest one factor which would be more likely to
produce disease than its congeners, and if we could do so it
would not affect the result. Each individual organism has its
own peculiarities, its own weaknesses, and what might seriously
retard healthy growth in the brain tissue of one person might
not so seriously affect the same tissue in another."
On the question of hereditary transmission, Dr. Kempster
refers to the interdependence of diseased states, and gives
instances of the mutual convertibility of different forms of
hereditary disease which substantiate Dr. Winn's theory of the
correlation of force in hereditary disease. Dr. Kempster was
apparently not aware that in 1869 Dr. Winn published a treatise
on the " Nature and Treatment of Hereditary Disease." * He
also wrote an article in the Journal of Psychological Medicine
for October 1875, vol. i. (new series), part II., in which he gave
additional arguments in support of his theory.
* Published by David Bogue, 3 St. Martin's Place, London.
