Dr Bucknill and Private Asylums
=================================

300
Aut. IX.?

Dr Bucknill's plentiful disquisitions on the subject of private
asylums for the insane have recently been supplemented by a
volume* containing the fulminations contributed by him on
the same subject to the pages of the British Medical Journal
in the form of a series of sensational articles. The style and
contents of these articles make it highly probable that they
will commend themselves to that mysterious being, " the
Englishman of average intelligence they are eminently
adapted to appeal to the mind that accepts obfuscation for
illumination; and especially do they deserve commendation
for the remarkable skill they display in presenting actual facts
in that imaginative manner that is so well calculated to
mislead the unreasoning and uninformed members of the
reading public. It is impossible, of course, to assume that
Dr Bucknill is ignorant of the arrangements common to private
lunatic asylums, but his remarks must cause some amusement to
those who are familiar with the subject on which he writes.
The average intellect is, unfortunately, little prone to examine
assertions laid before it with the air of authority, and cannot fail
to be impressed with the statements of a writer who ventures
to address a popular audience on a subject of vital importance,
of which, however, he only shows the side to which his own
sympathies are inclined. In the " Care of the Insane " this
is just the fault of which our author has been guilty; he has,
moreover, seen fit to pursue a method of demonstration
calculated to inflame the senses of his readers, without at the
same time affording any accounts on which a correct judgment
concerning the data to be considered is alone possible. He is
an excellent partisan, but with the zealous vehemence of every
defender of a crotchet, he resolves lustily to combat the evils
his own indefatigable fancy has enabled him to create. For
a long series of years, as Chancery Visitor in Lunacy, Dr.
Bucknill enjoyed the fullest opportunities of witnessing the
progress of improvement in the institutions into which, in his
official capacity, he always possessed a right of entry. It is,
therefore, a strange persistence in error that can admit of his
being still in a position of such absolute darkness, as his last
book proves he must be, regarding the merits of the institu-
tions on which he showers such wholesale condemnation.
The work itself, when submitted to careful examination, is at
once seen to be a reflex of long pent up desire to reconstitute

* On the Care of the Insane, and their Legal Control, by J. C. Bucknill, M.D.,
E.R.S. London, 1880. Macmillan & Co.

a system in which its author professes to feel no confidence,
and which desire he even admits to be the ruling motive of
his attack.

It is as well, therefore, to analyse in brief detail the
charges he brings against private asylums, in substantia-
tion of his demand for their universal suppression in their
present form, and the establishment of State institutions for
the treatment of insane persons. It should be carefully noted
that Dr Bucknill makes an accommodating reservation to
the effect that medical men may, even after the realisation of
his ideal arrangements, continue to have charge of one, two, or
at most three, private patients. This extraordinary suggestion
?extraordinary, when the prime cause of offence against
licensed proprietors is the unfounded supposition that they
may, under the influence of the auri sacra fames, be induced
to unduly detain their inmates?is the most illogical and
inconsiderate that could have been made, as it is open to the
same objection persistently urged against the present system.
A priori the inducement to keep one or two high-paying
patients is infinitely greater than the temptation to detain even
a larger number where the average profit derivable from each is
less. Dr Bucknill, in fact, in his devotion to a single idea has
unconsciously strayed into numberless bye-paths, not only of
error, but of inconsistency also. There is, however, no ground for
the language he employs in respect of the improper detention of
lunatics in private asylums. Dr Bucknill cannot be ignorant
that the owner of a licensed institution is as powerless as Dr.
Bucknill himself now is, to withhold a patient's liberty for one
single day. His concealment of facts that would influence the
judgment of the reader whose information is gathered from
his pages alone, cannot, we think, be justified on any grounds.
The Commissioners in Lunacy, the Visiting Justices of the
Peace, the Local Gruardians, are likely at any time to inspect
unannounced, and without intimation, every institution where
a lunatic is under confinement; what chance then is there
for a licensee to hoodwink all or any of those authorities in
respect of his charges, especially since the latter are all freely
in communication with the inspectors for the whole period of
their visit ? We do not care to deal with Dr Bucknill's insinua-
tions against the bona fides of proprietors ; but it may be said
of them that they are at best but an ungrateful reflection on
the discrimination of the authorities to whom the aspersed
class owe their appointment to the positions they hold.
The question of acts of violence inflicted on patients is dealt
with in a way that leaves it doubtful whether our author is
under the impression that bruised bodies and broken limbs
are the usual concomitants of treatment in private asylums, his
<?onfusion of the terms " private house " and asylum being well
calculated to leave an unfavourable impression in the mind of
the uninformed reader. Proceeding from this, he gives his
opinion, that the home treatment of lunatics is often likely to
he fraught with benefit to them, but with the strange tendency
to forgetfulness of his premisses we have before alluded to, he
insists on " medical treatment" as a distinctive feature in the
cure of every case.

The superior efficiency of public asylums on which Dr.
Bucknill has so long insisted with all the energetic utterance
of an enthusiast, is a figment of his excited imagination, rather
than a probable, or even possible, truth. The associations
of a Government institution are rarely, even under the most
prepossessing appearances of more than a prison cheerfulness ;
and how the benignant influences that largely enter into the
conception of Dr Bucknill's lunatics' paradise, are to be
resolved out of the concomitants of the routine existence of a
state prisoner controlled by uninterested, salaried officials, it is
not possible to understand. Officialism in any form is fatal to
mental quietude; the constant presence of the signs and
symbols indicative of incarceration, are the most to be regretted
of all the hindrances to recovery in the county asylums of
to-day; and every visitor to a private retreat at once appreciates
the kindly influence of the homely surroundings amid which
the patients pass a contented, and often even happy period of
their existence. By sweeping away the personal interest of a
superintendent in those under his care, and merging it in that
which is demanded simply as an official duty, we shall lose a
prominent, and, as the Commissioners readily admit, fruitful
means of ameliorating the painful state in which patients are
committed to seclusion. Dr Bucknill's estimate of the matter
he reviews, however, takes no cognisance of these important
details. Private asylums are to him private enterprises, and
nothing more ; and as such he seeks for their abolition : because
they, do not accord with his ideas, firstly and chiefly, and
secondly and lastly, because he charges them with being the
scenes of irregularities and improprieties, no single one of which,
that is important, does he succeed in exposing. Sensationally
headed leading articles will not lead the public astray; and
Dr Bucknill would have been wiser to base his statements on
something more stable than innuendo and imagination. We
object to his attempt, not on its own account simply; it has a
raison d'etre, appreciable to all acquainted with the history
and present aspect of lunacy in this country ; but we do empha-
tically complain that one who is recognised as some authority
in the matter, should thus unfoundedly asperse a beneficent
system to the English public.
