Lunacy in Scotland
===================

251
Art. VI.?LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
Tiie Twenty-second Annual Report of the Commissioners
in Lunacy for Scotland.

The Annual Reports of the Lunacy Commissioners are
among the most valuable contributions to the literature of
insanity; they, in effect, provide the material information by
which the working theorist is enabled to develope his views,
and on the basis of which the practical physician can determine
his treatment. They have, indeed, become an essential part of
the alienist's resources; without them he would be at a loss in
many hours of trying emergency; their cessation would be a
fatal bar to general progress in the therapeutics of insanity. It
is, therefore, a matter for much congratulation that these
reports are of the excellent nature they are, and of that one
now more particularly under notice, we can speak in terms of
unqualified praise. In every respect it is admirable; exhaus-
tive in detail, rich in experience, historically complete also, it
presents the reader with an invaluable resume of the actual
condition of the country of Scotland in regard to its lunatic
population, and the means available for their cure and improve-
ment.
The Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland entered on their
duties in 1858, at which time the insane registered population
amounted to 5,823 persons. There are now on the official
books 9,624 names, and an analysis of the numbers, their clas-
sification and distribution, reveals many facts of importance and
interest in connection with the growth and spread of madness
in its several forms. The two classes of patients, private and
pauper, have varied within two-and-twenty years since 1858,
only in the direction of a steady increase, numerically, except
that the paupers placed in private dwellings have decreased to
the amount of 369. The explanation of this considerable change
is afforded in the existence of a parliamentary grant towards
the cost of their maintenance, and the assistance thus afforded
towards their being placed under proper care in establishments.
There is traceable a connection between this and the increasing
readiness generally exhibited to submit to asylum treatment?a
very important influence in its bearing on the actual increase
in the number of insane persons under the official cognizance of
the Commissioners. This increase, after all deductions, is a net
s 2
252 LUNACY IN NEW SOUTII "WALES.
total of 3,801, or 65 per cent, for the period since 1858?a
startling fact in relation with the increase of population during
the same period, this being only in the ratio of 20 per cent.,
were it not for the assurances held out that it is a consequence
of the better appreciation of the benefits of asylum treatment.
The report considers, in great detail, all the facts bearing
on these changes, and then discusses the progress made during
the year in the various institutions for the insane throughout
the country. ^ We regret that the pressure on our space forbids
a lengthy notice of this most important volume in our present
number, but we shall return to it in our next issue. W^e will
only add that it reflects the highest credit on the Commissioners
to whose industry it is due.
