Psychological Aspect of the Laros Case, on the Trial Op Allen C
=================================================================

Laros, at Easton, Pennsylvania. U.S.A., For the Murder of His Father, 
Martin Laros, by Poison, the De- Fence Being Based Upon the Allegation Of Epileptic Insanity

222
Art. IV.?

:Author: Dr Edward C. Mann, Superintendent Sunnyside Medical Retreat for Mental and
Nervous Diseases, Fort Washington, New York City,
The history of this very interesting case is as follows, and was
obtained from my distinguished friend, Henry W. Scott, Esq.,
of the Pennsylvania Bar, to whom I am indebted for the material
for this paper:?

The Laros family lived at Mineral Spring, situated on the
Delaware River, in Northampton County, four miles above
Easton, Pa. The little hamlet consists of a tavern, and the homes
of seven or eight families, near together, along the river road.
Martin Laros, the father of the family, was fifty-seven years old,
and his wife was fifty-one. They had lived at Mineral Spring for
thirty years. He taught school during the winter months,
worked his farm in the summer, and at the same time was em-
ployed as undertaker and cabinet-maker. He was quiet, unob-
trusive, and respected in his neighbourhood. Mrs. Laros was a
woman of domestic habits and lively temperament. They have
had seventeen children, thirteen of whom are now living. Seve-
ral of them have been school teachers. Some are living in the
neighbourhood, and others have removed to a distance. At the
time of the poisoning, the family consisted of the father and
mother, Allen (the prisoner), Erwin, Alvin, Clara, Alice, and a
very young grandchild. Moses Schug, also a member of the
household, was a bachelor, sixty-two years of age. He assisted
Martin Laros on the farm and in the shop. One evening, while
the family were at the supper-table, they were one by one taken
violently ill. Neighbours came in to do what they could for
the sick, and physicians were summoned. Allen also assisted in
caring for the sick; he was taken ill later in the evening. Mrs.
Laros died at seven o'clock the next morning. Mr. Laros also
died on the same day about noon, and Moses Schug at three
o'clock on the following afternoon. The other members of the
family recovered in about a week. The fatal supper was par-
taken of on Wednesday. The coroner's inquest was begun on

Thursday afternoon, and on Saturday the following verdict was
rendered: " That tlie said Martin Laros, Mary Ann Laros, and
Moses Schug came to their deaths from the effects of arsenic
poison, administered in coffee on Wednesday evening, May 31,
1876, and that we believe the same was administered by Allen
C. Laros." A warrant was issued at once, young Laros was
arrested as he lay sick in his bed, and taken to the county
prison at Easton, Pennsylvania. The prisoner was about 26 years
of age, a little under the medium height, and slightly built.
He had received an ordinary common school education, and was
fairly intelligent. He was temperate, industrious, and moral, and
was a church member. He was always disposed to be somewhat
reticent, and spent much of his time alone. He was of respect-
able parentage, of healthful surroundings, of good moral and in-
tellectual training, a teacher of the young in one of the public
schools in his own township. He was, however, an epileptic,
the epilepsy having first manifested itself more than four years
before the poisoning took place, and had continued by succes-
sive steps of longer or shorter duration until the time of the
poisoning. For three weeks before this time almost daily he
was so afflicted with epileptic convulsions as?so counsel for de-
fence claimed?to dethrone his reason, and destroy the powers
of his mind. It was claimed and proved that on the Saturday
previous to the crime he was afflicted with convulsions ; that he
had them on Sunday, on Monday, Tuesday (the day the common-
wealth claimed he bought the poison), on Wednesday?the day
of the poisoning?and on Thursday and Friday, immediately
after it. After his confinement in prison he was similarly
affected by these convulsions, varying in duration from a few
minutes to several hours. During the continuance of the con-
vulsions he was totally unconscious. Before and since his con-
finement, for a period of several hours after these convulsions
had passed away, his mind was clouded and confused, and his
conversation and acts not responsible. My own opinion has
alwavs been, that in the event of a criminal act by an epileptic,
we should suspect' mental disorder, and, that in the absence of
any strong personal motive, there should be immunity of pun-
ishment to epileptics for acts committed within three days
before or after an attack, such insane acts being to me the evi-
dence of an insane mind. Such persons are, 1 think, able to
conduct their business and perform their duties and continue
their pursuits in all respects like other people, except at the
time of seizure.

In the case of young Laros there was an inherited tendency
to insanity and nervous diseases for several generations, and in
many branches of the family of the prisoner?grandfather,
grandmother, and maternal aunt?these circumstances all con-
tributed to lower the grade of his offence, even if it was not
the offspring of decided insanity. While young Laros was in
prison awaiting trial, every possible experiment was tried to
ascertain if he were conscious while in the convulsions, and
every conceivable test applied to see if the prisoner were feign-
ing. The prison physician, during the first paroxysm he wit-
nessed, suddenly thrust the blade of a sharp knife into the
prisoner's hand, and no sensation was manifested. A heated
key was next applied. Then the flame of a lighted lamp was
held to the sole of his bare foot, and still not a quiver of sensa-
tion followed. Melted sealing-wax was dropped upon the bare
skin, so that the sealing-wax burned into the skin, and no indi-
cation of pain was shown. Nothing that science could suggest
was left untried to detect imposture, if any existed, but all
these tests failed to detect any feigning on the part of the
prisoner.

At the trial, Dr John M. Junkin, of Easton, Pa., testified
that he was called upon to visit Martin Laros on the morning
of June 1. Reached there about three o'clock, and concluding
from the symptoms that they were all suffering from arsenical
poison, gave stimulants and hydrated peroxide of iron. He
found his patients vomiting and purging, and gave it as his
opinion that the death of Martin Laros was caused by arsenic. .
During the progress of the trial various persons testified to
having been aware of the prisoner's infirmity, and the deputy-
warden of the county prison testified as to the nature of the
attacks while Laros was in prison ; he described finding the
prisoner " struggling in his cell in a fit, with his face very white,
eyes partly closed, the hands clenched with the thumbs inside,"
and that he heard the prisoner's teeth gritting. He also described
incoherent and apparently insane conversation of the prisoner,
and hallucinations of sight. The prison physician also testified
that he found him with a weak and feeble pulse, and cool, pale
skin, acting in a wild incoherent manner, talking about fishing,
seeing water snakes, and other nonsensical insane conversation.
Any bright object he would endeavour to get hold of. His
pockets were stuffed with bits of paper and such things. He
tried to get the warden's shoe buckles, and the bright tips
of the Doctor's shoe strings. The Doctor also testified that
he?-the prisoner?did not appear to have good control over his
muscular movements. The Doctor also described various
epileptic convulsions which he witnessed, and testified as to the
total unconsciousness of the prisoner during the paroxysms. He
also testified to seeing the prisoner six to eight hours before an
attack, when he appeared dull and gave imperfect answers, and
complained of pain in the head. The prisoner's condition while
under observation, coupled with the testimony of his friends as
to his previous symptoms and condition, led all unprejudiced
observers to believe that he was mentally unsound. Dr John
Curwen, the Superintendent of the Pennsylvania State Lunatic
Asylum, testified that he considered frothing, swelled veins in
the neck, and lividity of face as essential symptoms, and with-
out these he would doubt the genuineness of the epilepsy;
although on re-examination by counsel for defence he admitted
that these signs might possibly be absent in cases even of pure
epilepsy. Dr Curwen was expert for the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.

The jury in this case rendered a verdict of murder in the
first degree, and the prisoner was duly sentenced to be hung.
The death warrant was signed, but a writ of error was sued out
in the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, which operated as a
supersedeas, and the Governor recalled the warrant.
The counsel for the defence then presented to the court a
petition, alleging mental unsoundness, and asked for a commis-
sion to inquire into the matter and ascertain whether the
prisoner was a proper subject for capital punishment. The
commission appointed by the court consisted of Dr William
Pepper, of Philadelphia, Dr T. Preston Jones, also of that city,
associated with Dr Kirkbride, at his asylum, and Hon. A.
Rose, a lawyer of Pennsylvania. The commission spent a month
or more in taking testimony and making personal examination
of the prisoner. They made a unanimous report to the court
that he was an epileptic, and mentally irresponsible; that he
should not be visited with capital punishment, and recommended
his removal to an asylum. Thereupon the court ordered
him to be removed to the State Lunatic Asylum at Harris-
burgh, Pennsylvania, of which Dr Curwen was, and is, super-
intendent. After confinement for a period of about two years
he escaped, and subsequently was captured in Arkansas, or
rather he surrendered himself to the authorities, and requested
them to send hir6 back to "this country to be hung." He
didn't want to be returned to the asylum. He was returned to
the asylum, and about six months ago he escaped from there
the second time, and nothing is now known of his whereabouts,
nor has any effort been made to find him. The able efforts in
his behalf, and in the cause of humanity, are owing to the
exertions of his counsel, Henry W. Scott, Esq., of Easton,
Pennsylvania, who is one of the most talented and brilliant
lawyers in the State of Pennsylvania. Upon his examination
the prisoner declared that his father and mother were both
living, and that his father was making a door when he left
home. One of the prisoner's brothers was up to the time of
his death a quiet, uncommunicative, and retiring man, and he
died by hanging himself, without apparent motive or cause.
Young Laros was a person of uniformly mild and tractable dis-
position, who was brought up amid the softening and restraining
influences of a pious and affectionate family, and away from
demoralising surroundings or vicious companions. This out-
rageous and enormous crime was very evidently the outcome of
mental disorder, which had depraved and eclipsed the moral
faculties. Yet the judge and jury deliberately arrived at a
verdict which doomed this unhappy creature to the scaffold,
and cast an indelible blot on justice by the readiness with which
the popular demand for conviction was complied with.

In reviewing this case psychologically we have, as I have
said, a mild-mannered boy of previous exemplary behaviour,
uniformly kind and affectionate, suddenly developed into an
inhuman monster of depravity. For four years he had been
afflicted with epilepsy, and we must bear in mind the tendency
of epilepsy to generate the insane impulse to crime. We must
also bear in mind that there are on record many homicides
committed by epileptically insane persons under every circum-
stance of apparent motive and design. There was a rapid
succession of the spasms shortly before and after the Wednesday
night on which the family were taken sick. These attacks had
been noticed, more particularly during the few months pre-
ceding the tragedy, and they had occurred with startling
distinctness and frequency ; and on the very evening of the
murder he was unquestionably under the influence which pre-
cedes and follows the epileptic paroxysm in epileptic insanity.
The experts for the commonwealth in this case adopted the
typical case of epilepsy as the unvarying standard by which the
disease is to be ascertained, and it was only under the most rigid
cross-examination that they would modify, in some degree, this
position.

The symptoms of epilepsy, however, I contend, are not in-
variable. There may be every variety, from the simply verti-
ginous to the most demonstrative muscular and nervous spasms.
The epileptic may be pallid or purple-hued; the pupils may
contract or dilate; the fingers may be clenched or extended;
there may be foaming at the mouth or it may be absent; that
some of the symptoms of the most decided and impressive type
are not present, is no proof that the disease is not epilepsy.
The disorder of the intellect which accompanies epilepsy is
similar to that we meet with in chronic insanity, and while, of
course, it is not the invariable rule, yet in my own practice, I
have, in the great majority of cases, observed enfeeblement of
the memory and intellectual powers amounting to insanity in
many instances. While an epileptic may be very intelligent,
I do not believe that either during the attack or for an in-
definite period subsequently, the mental faculties are under the
control of the patient. The patient, particularly as the effect
of the lighter seizures, becomes very irritable indeed, and there
are instinctive impulses, I think, to acts of violence. This state
often ceases upon the completion of the act of violence. The
confused recollection of what has happened and the unconscious-
ness of the gravity of their acts is, I think, diagnostic of the
mental state of the epileptic, and should be considered as the
essential characteristic of it. The epileptic, in the majority of
cases, seems to automatically obey the impulses generated by
his disease, and seems utterly powerless to resist them, even
though they are impelled to criminal deeds. This constant dis-
turbance of the affective and intellectual faculties which is
manifest after the paroxysm may last during the greater part of
the interval between the fits, and this is a medico-legal point of
great importance which should be perfectly understood by the
judiciary. There may be abortive epileptiform attacks where
there are no convulsions and where there is no complete loss of
consciousness, a sort of epileptic vertigo, and yet such persons
have committed sudden deeds of violence, and were utterly
unable to remember the circumstance afterwards.

Young Laros had an attack on the Saturday preceding the
tragedy and also on the following Monday night and Tuesday
night, and on Wednesday morning the family observed the same
staggering walk and the confused manner which he always exhi-
bited after the nocturnal attacks. On the Thursday morning
following and on Friday he had repeated attacks of renewed
power and frequency.
