The Physiology of Mind
=======================

being the first'part of a third edition,
revised, enlarged, and in great part rewritten, o/ the
" Physiology and Pathology of Mind.''''
The Pathology of Mind; being the third edition of the second
part of the " Physiology and Pathology of Mind," recast,
enlarged, and rewritten.
Dr Maudsley's work on the " Physiology and Pathology of
Mind" has now reached a third edition. The first volume
of this edition, which appeared in 1876, deals with the Physio-
logy of Mind; the second part, published last year, deals with
the Pathology of it.
The new edition in its entirety being now before us, it may
not be amiss to glance at the scope and purport of the work.
It is written with the intention of harmonising physiology
and psychology. An inauspicious divorce has, in Dr Maudsley's
opinion, hitherto existed between these two sciences. The con-
sequence has been sterility, or, worse than sterility, an unhal-
lowed and ill-begotten fruitfulness. Dr Maudsley, the herald
of a new era in mental science, appears, and forthwith the
barren shall be made to conceive.
Let us examine the charge against psychologists, and then
Dr Maudsley's claim to be the founder of a sacred union be-
tween the divorced sciences.
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 315
The charge against psychologists is that they have confined
themselves to their own consciousnesses for their observation of
mental phenomena, and that they have neglected to study the
insane and idiots, the lower races of man, and the lower animals,
as well as the experimental investigation of the nervous system.
In considering this accusation we will first consider what weight
is to be attached to it if true ; and secondly whether it really is
true.
That it is useless or misleading to examine our own
consciousness is upheld by an argument borrowed from
Comte. To observe we must pause; while if we do pause there
is nothing left to observe. This argument unluckily proves too
much. It proves that from self-examination we cannot draw
any trustworthy conclusions; while as a matter of fact Dr.
Maudsley wishes not to discard, but to dethrone, this method
of acquiring knowledge about mental states. But must we
pause to discover the co-existence and the succession of the
phenomena of consciousness ? Can we not remember them ?
Can we not even to some extent observe them in passing, with-
out disturbing the current of thought or of feeling ? How else
have been obtained any of the acute analyses of intellect and of
emotion that are to be found in all psychological writers, from
Aristotle's days to our own ?
The laws, too, that govern the relations of these mental
states to each other have been obtained by the same method.
In fact, the psychology of Dr Maudsley's book is a psycho-
logy borrowed from the men he charges with raw and
windy disquisitions. We do not wish in the smallest
degree to detract from the value of Dr Maudsley's work. On
the contrary, we consider it to be a valuable and praiseworthy
attempt to give a higher generality to the derivative laws of
mind, and to discover the hidden portions in the chain of events
of which thought, emotion, and volition are the last links. The
attempt is a valuable one, because of the abundant collection,
the lucid exposition, and the scientific groupingof facts, and the
ingenuity wherewith inferences are extracted from them. It is
a praiseworthy one because it presses towards the generalisation
whereby the facts of mind shall be connected with the facts of
body. But still it is only an attempt, inasmuch as, apart from
those generalisations that had been already made, there is little
that deserves a higher title than is conferred by the term hypo-
thesis. There is certainly no such material advance over philo-
sophers in the succession from Hartley to Bain and Spencer, as
to warrant such animadversion as is bestowed on all previous
writers. Bain and Spencer are, indeed, to some extent excluded
from the general condemnation, because they have viewed
316 EE VIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
mental phenomena by the light of physiology. But Mr. Bain
owes very little to physiology for any of his great work. The
essential parts of it might have been written almost as well if
physiology were no farther advanced than it was a thousand
years ago. And, Dr Maudsley's book notwithstanding, we have
no doubt that most competent persons consider that mental
science is even now more advanced on its psychological than it
is on its physiological side.
But is the charge against psychologists true? Have they
really neglected to study the insane, and the lower races of men
and animals ? On examining this question we must remember
one or two circumstances. The early psychologists, as a rule,
had no opportunity of investigation by means of the insane and
of the lower animals. In former days the country was not
studded with asylums, and vivisection was not freely practised.
Ethnological observations, in so far as they had been made,
were taken into consideration by all philosophers of the
a posteriori schools. Psychology had little, indeed, to
learn from the physiology of one or two hundred years ago;
and certainly cannot, with justice, be charged with neglecting
that little. In fact, we have only to recall the names of Hartley
and Priestley in England, and Condilliac and Cabinis on the
Continent, to show that any light from physiology would have
been seized with eagerness. It would be much juster to charge
physiologists with neglecting the paths of investigation pointed
out by speculative philosophers than to charge psychologists
with neglecting any department of knowledge that could eluci-
date their science. Not until Sir C. Bell's time was there any
but the most meagre acquaintance with the functions of the
nervous system ; and Sir C. Bell's time was at least a century
and a half after the publication of the Novum Organum.
Since the labours of this distinguished physiologist?as before
them?psychologists have always been found who assimilated
whatever truth physiology had to tell them, and thus have
always placed their science on a level with the most advanced
observations of the day.
According to Dr Maudsley, however, psychologists were by
their method precluded from studying psychology from a physio-
logical point of view. This, truly, is a strange statement, con-
sidering that from the time of Bacon there has always been a
school of philosophers who investigated mental phenomena or,
at least, some departments of mental phenomena, according to
inductive principles. From Hobbes and Locke to Bain and
Spencer, the method has been the same. Philosophers of the
school now known under the name of the Association Psychology
have never contented themselves with simply torturing their
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 317
own consciousnesses. But it would be interesting to know in
what way the physiology of two hundred years ago could have
profited psychology if the method of psychology did not debar
its use, as Dr Maudsley asserts. Dr Maudsley does not,
however, make an assertion; he gives a conspicuous example?
an example, moreover, not of two hundred years ago, but even
of our own day. The example is Mr. J. S. Mill I Mr. Mill
did, indeed, condemn M. Comte's attempt to discard psychology,
or to convert it into a branch of physiology ; justly believing
that, at least for a long time to come, the laws of psychology
cannot be deduced from physiology. But, in order to show
that Mr. Mill's method was in no wise adverse to regarding
psychology from a physiological standpoint let us quote his
words. " The relations, indeed, of that science (Science of
Mind) to the science of physiology must never be overlooked or
undervalued. It must by no means be forgotten that the laws
of mind may be derivative laws resulting from laws of animal
life, and that their truth, therefore, may ultimately depend on
physical conditions; and the influence of physiological states or
physiological changes in altering or counteracting the mental
successions is one of the most important departments of psycho-
logical study. But, on the other hand, to reject the resources
of psychological analysis, and construct the theory of the mind
solely on such data as physiology at present affords, seems to
me as great an error in principle, and an even more serious one
in practice. Imperfect as is the science of mind, I do not
scruple to affirm that it is in a considerably more advanced
state than the portion of physiology which corresponds to it;
and to discard the former for the latter appears to me an
infringement of the true canons of inductive philosophy, which
must produce, and which does produce, erroneous conclusions
in some very important departments of the science of human
nature." (Logic, vol. ii. p. 439.) It is thus seen that Mr.
Mill confined himself to protesting against the attempt to
discard psychology. So far was he from being debarred from
physiology by his method, that it was really part of his method
to have recourse to it, as could be shown by many passages
besides the one just quoted. It is true that Mr. Mill himself
did not investigate the physical relations of mind. His special
department of inquiry lay in the subjective aspects of thought.
He does not treat even of all the subjective aspects of mind ;
but, with one or two exceptions, of intellectual states only.
"With as much justice might it be said that his method forbids
him to investigate the emotions and the will, as that it debarred
him from investigating mental phenomena from a physiological
stand-point. He attended specially to the inquiries that he con-
318 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
sidered most important, and that he deemed himself most
fitted to examine. What more can be demanded of any man ?
Dr Maudsley, however, thinks that no man has any business
with metaphysics, that it is a barren study?in fact, he likens
it to an attack of measles ; the ambitious youth undergoes
it, and haply gets immunity from it for the rest of his
life. This can hardly be termed a modeat criticism on
by far the majority of the greatest intellects the world has
ever seen. But perhaps it is just; the greatest intellects
may go wrong. What has metaphysics done ? What is its
value ? Can it show reason why it should exist ? In answer
we may say that to those who value only the " bread and butter "
sciences, metaphysics can never seem to be of importance. But
to those that value truth for its own sake ; to those that wish
to know the nature, the extent, and the validity of human
knowledge, metaphysics will not merely never lose its charm,
but it will never cease to be the foundation of all other sciences.
Dr Maudsley does not, perhaps, always mean the same thing
when he uses the term metaphysics. If he does always ascribe
the same meaning to it, he certainly has not made that meaning
clear. He speaks of the " received system of psychology," the
" accepted system of psychology." At very few epochs in the
history of philosophy would such phrases have been correct,
and never would they have been more erroneous than now.
Dean Mansel protested against grouping all medijeval philo-
sophers under one name, and calling them " The Schoolmen."
But to speak of the " accepted system of psychology " is a still
more heedless attempt to characterise by a common term the
most heterogeneous opinions. The expression is, in fact,
about as significant as such a phrase as the " accepted view of
things in general." Touching the real meaning of the word,
what people generally mean when they use it, let us quote
Dugald Stewart:?" Metaphysics was a word formerly appro-
priated to the ontology and pneumatology of the schools, but now
understood as equally applicable to all those inquiries which have
for their object to trace the various branches of human knowledge
to their first principles in the constitution of the human mind."
(Dissert., part ii. p. 475.) Elsewhere he speaks of it as the
" inductive philosophy of the human mind." Mr. Bain is still
more explicit:?"By ' metaphysical study ' or ' metaphysics ' I
mean?what seems intended by the designation in its current
employment at present?the circle of the mental or subjective
sciences. The central department of the field is Psychology,
and the adjunct to psychology is Logic, which has its founda-
tions partly in psychology, but still more in the sciences
altogether, whose procedure it gathers up and formulates. The
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 319
outlying and dependent branches are?the narrow metaphysics
or ontology, ethics, sociology, together with art or aesthetics.
There are other applied sciences of the department, as education
and philology. The branches most usually looked upon as cognate
or allied studies of the subjective department of human know-
ledge are psychology, logic, ontology, ethics." ("Metaphysical
Study/' Contemporary Review, April, 1877.)
We suspect, however, that Dr Maudsley did not use the word
according to its current meaning; but applied it rather with
special reference to the narrow metaphysics or ontology; though
nowhere does he make this clear. But should even this narrow
metaphysics be banished from the sphere of human speculation ?
Those who wish to know for themselves how far, and with what
result, human reason can investigate some of the most recondite
problems that have ever engaged the mind of man, must
examine the subject for themselves. They will not be satisfied
to accept without question the dogmatic utterance of even the
greatest philosopher. It is not needful that everyone should be
a metaphysician any more than it is needful that everyone should
be an astronomer or an accomplished mathematician. But
surely it is desirable that intellects having an aptitude for
metaphysical inquiry should let the light of their genius illu-
minate the subject. Does the present age not owe any debt to
metaphysicians of former days, that we should forget them, or
be unmindful of their teaching? To enumerate the debts
would be to a large extent to trace the history of philosophy for
the last two hundred and fifty years. To name only one thing,
Descartes's rule that nothing should be accepted without proof,
has been one of the most fruitful principles of modern times,
and it is now one of the most striking characteristics of modern
thought. It is, moreover, especially from metaphysicians, from
those engaged in the subjective sciences, that such principles
come. The proof lies in the history of the sciences themselves.
In the chapter on Mind and the Nervous System the aoc-
trinevthat mind is an abstraction, that it is not merely an ab-
straction, but that it is nothing more than a function of matter,
is vigorously asserted. We freely grant that it is an abstraction.
But so also is matter in the sense in which it is ordinarily
understood as a noumenon. With matter as with mind we
know only the phenomenal. Possibly there may not be any
noumena or things-in-themselves underlying the phenomena or
things-as-they-appear-to-us; and some have gone so far as to
assert this universal negative, a negative which by the nature of
things can never be proved. Assuredly it is not easy to per-
ceive by what process of valid reasoning noumena can be dogma-
tically established for the one series of phenomena and dogmati-
320 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
cally rejected for the other. The question is one of probabilities;
and though personally concurring in Dr Maudsley's opinion, we
regard the question as an open one, and think it will so continue
till the end of time. That Dr Maudsley should have laid so
much stress on the doctrine that mind is a function and nothing
more than a function of matter, is the more to be regretted, in-
asmuch as it was wholly needless for his purpose. That every
mental change is accompanied, or perhaps preceded by a physi-
cal change, though not yet actually proved, is highly probable ;
and would most likely be granted by all. Such an hypothesis
(for how probable so ever it may be, it is still, according to strict
principles of induction, only an hypothesis,) would have served
the purposes of Dr Maudsley's exposition equally well; while it
would have this advantage, it would not carry dogmatic infer-
ence beyond the strict warranty of facts, an advantage of no
mean importance in a scientific treatise. We may add also
that it would not be so likely to bar the way to the reception
of the generally sound doctrines of these volumes by stirring up
the opposition of some of those who act according to Tennyson's
principle:?
Hold thou the good: define it well:
For fear divine Philosophy
Should push beyond her mark, and bo
Procuress to the Lords of Hell:?
instead of clinging to that purer faith and higher principle
that truth and truth only should be our guiding star in attempt-
ing to penetrate the mysteries of nature. We believe, however,
that Dr Maudsley would not value much the too delicate sen-
sibilities of these people. Nay, he oftentimes goes out of his
way to animadvert on religion.
Apart from the blemishes we have pointed out, the work is,
on its theoretical side, one of great and unquestionable merit.
Both volumes are replete with interest; and suggestive remarks
are to be found on almost every page. The style, too, is lucid,
in fact, classical.
