The Brain the Organ of the Mind
================================

307
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
:Author: H. Charlton Bastian,
M.A., M.D., F.E.S., &c. Vol. 29 of The International
Scientific Series. London: C. Kegan Paul & Co, 1 Pater-
noster Square. 1880.

In the absence of any prefatory remarks, we are at a loss to
understand the motives which could have induced Dr Bastian
to write, and Messrs. C. Kegan Paul & Co. to publish, a work so
full, not only of fanciful but mischievous hypotheses. If Dr.
Bastian had any new and positive facts to enumerate respecting
" the new phrenology," all well and good; but, as this is not
the case, why should he be so desirous to animalise and materialise
the human mind, and to spread, for the enlightenment of the laity,
doctrines about which the leading cerebral physiologists are not
agreed ?

Dr Ferrier anticipated Dr Bastian in an article in The
Princeton Review for July 1879, entitled The Organ of Mind.
Both title and arguments are substantially the same as Dr.
Bastian's; they both assert that the intellectual and moral
faculties can be located in the brain, whilst the facts which they
adduce are insufficient even to determine the seats of motion
and sensation. Is it, then, fair to the public that crude and
dangerous theories, calculated to destroy all social happiness,
should be blazed abroad as truth ?

In his first chapter, Dr Bastian attempts to explain the
origin of the nervous system. After divesting his language of
technicalities, his arguments make us acquainted with nothing
more than we knew before?that the nervous system had an
origin.^ As to its origin, we know no more than we do of any
other of the mysteries of creation. The non-recognition of
a First Cause inevitably leads to a hopeless entanglement
of ideas.

In his chapter on the scope of mind he gives utterance to
his materialistic proclivities as follows :?" It is customary to
speak of the mind as though it were a something having an
actual independent existence?an entity, that is, of a spiritual
or uncorporeal nature. Consequently we find spread abroad in
all directions definitions of mind, and descriptions of the powers
of mind, which, to say the least, carry with them implications
of a decidedly misleading character." What, then, are we to
say of those who hold the opposite opinion, and who would
reduce the human mind to a -mm-entity, and who would have
us believe that our thoughts are evolved by some inexplicable
cerebral mechanism? When Dr Bastian can show us, by means
of a microscopical cerebroscope, the ideas as they " burst into
birth " from the cells of the brain, we will believe him.
The author, in common with other physiological psycholo-
gists, believes in unconscious cerebration, that extraordinary
function of the brain, discovered by Dr Carpenter, by which
the higher faculties of the mind can be exercised independently
of the mind itself.

In his attempt to explain the nature of reason, imagination,
and volition, on physiological principles, Dr Bastian gets into a
complete fog. He says:?"We may, perhaps, safely conclude
that, while many instinctive actions are more or less immediate
products or resultants, consequent upon the undeviating regu-
larity in the recurrence of visceral states and impressions, and
of the sense-guided movements which they evoke; reason,
imagination, and volition, on the other hand, as mere higher
developments arising out of previous processes, have their seed
time in all that is unfamiliar among the chance sensorial
impressions which animals, whose experience is growing and
whose nervous systems are developing, are accustomed at inter-
vals to receive from the outer world."

Dr Bastian does not derive much support for his theory by
a comparison of the brains of different individuals. Whilst
men of great intellect have been found to have had large brains,
the heaviest on record was that of a native of Sussex, who had
been a poacher. He could read and write, and had a good
memory; but was not conspicuous for mental ability. We are,
however, told that the potentialities were there ; but this is
begging the question.

With regard to man's moral faculties, he makes no original
observations, but contents himself by quoting, as if it were
gospel truth, the following pedantic and obscure remarks of the
late Gr. H. Lewes, on whom he seems to have pinned his faith :
?" Man's individual functions arise in relation to the Cosmos :
his general functions arise in relation to the social medium;
thence moral life emerges. All the animal impulses become
blended with human emotions. In the process of evolution,
starting from the merely animal appetite of sexuality, we arrive
at the purest and most far-reaching tenderness; from the
merely animal property of sensibility, we arrive at the noblest
heights of speculation. The social instincts, which are the
analogies of the individual instincts, tend more and more to
make sociality dominate animality, and thus subordinate per-
sonality to humanity Thus, the human intellect
emerges from animal intelligence, and develops a vast indepen-
dent creation, having the whole Cosmos and humanity for its
material. Concurrently with this, the moral intelligence de-
velops its system. Both intellect and conscience are products of
the animal impulses and social impulses, acting and reacting.
While the intellect is mainly occupied with the relations of the
Cosmos and its history, having the ultimate aim of making
these subservient to practical needs, the conscience, or moral
intelligence, is mainly occupied with the relations of humanity
?human needs and human actions?having the ultimate aim
of conforming our conduct to those relations, harmonising our
impulses with the impulses of others, thus aiding others and
gratifying ourselves." This debasing view of human nature
needs no comment.

Dr Bastian suggests the question whether, in the event of
localisation being a reality, the several mental faculties " are
dependent upon separate areas of brain-substance, or whether
the localisation is one characterised by mere distinctness of cells
and fibres." This, by Dr Bastian's admission, settles the
fundamental question at issue. Phrenology, neither the old
nor the new, has yet discovered the seats of the intellectual
faculties.

In our critical remarks of Dr Bastian's psychological views,
we have no desire to detract from his reputation as a patholo-
gical anatomist. We cannot, however, refrain from expressing
our regret that his position as a professor of medicine gives weight
to materialistic and misleading notions relative to mental science,
a study which does not lie within the scope of his speciality.
J. M. Winn.
