The Collapse of Scientific Atheism
===================================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AXD
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Art. I.?
By J. M. WINN, M.D., M.Ti.C.P., &c.
It must be admitted by every candid and unbiassed observer
who has watched the controversy between the supporters and
opponents of the materialistic theories, that have so sorely per-
plexed the public mind during the last five years, that the
fabric on which they have been reared is baseless and tottering
to its fall?in other words that scientific atheism is " played
out." Nevertheless, although our opponents have been com-
pletely beaten in a regular stand-up fight, they still persist,
with a stubbornness worthy of a better cause, and with a strange
obliviousness of facts, to oppose their light but poisoned arrows
of fiction to our heavy artillery of facts; and if they will
persevere in airing their dangerous dogmas in print, we are
forced, at the risk of being tiresome, to bring forward again
our battery of inexorable scientific truths. This is no idle
boast, and we shall proceed to show, by the irresistible logic of
facts, the fallacies and inconsistencies of the theories which
have been arrogantly paraded by their authors, under the garb
of science. To prove this position it will be necessary to pass
in review many of the facts and arguments which I have from
time to time published in the Journal of Psychological
Medicine.
To the British Association for the Advancement of Science
is due the unenviable distinction of having inaugurated, through
their former President, Dr Tyndall, the infidel doctrines which
have of late poisoned the minds of thousands, through the
medium of the public press, which has conveyed his baneful
teaching even to our very thresholds, and, we fear, made ship-
PART I. VOL. VI. NEW SERIES. B
2 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
wreck of the faith and hopes of numbers of the rising gene-
ration.
We would be the last to check the spirit of scientific
inquiry, but there are scientific publications enough for the
discussion of any hypotheses, however extravagant. Surely,
then, the President of a public body might, for the sake of
humanity, pause before loudly proclaiming to the world un-
verified theories, which he must be aware would, if true, subvert
the fundamental principles on which all our morality and polity
are based.
As an antidote to the school of false philosophy, to which the
Professor belongs, I published in the Journal of Psychological
Medicine for April 1875, a paper* containing arguments
diametrically opposed to Lhose of Dr Tyndall and other
materialists; and as they have taken, and still take, every oppor-
tunity to bring forward any hypothesis, however extravagant, in
favour of materialistic infidelity, I shall have no hesitation in
taking up seriatim, as I have done before, the chief points of
scientific atheism, which have given rise to so much contro-
versy during the last few years, for reconsideration and
confutation.
Omnipotence of Atoms and Physical Forces.?Dr Tyndall,
who believes in the Almighty Atom, showed his atheistical
proclivities by quoting in his ever-to-be-deplored address the
following passage from Lucretius, for whom he evidently has
unbounded admiration :?" If you will appreciate and keep in
mind these things, Nature, free at once and rid of her haughty
lords, is seen to clo all things spontaneously of herself, without
the meddling of the gods." He also said that he saw in matter
" the promise and potency of all terrestrial life." The Pro-
fessor does not seem, however, to be quite satisfied of the truth
of this marvellous statement, for he subsequently confessed,
with an inconsistency so common with his school, that "it is not
in hours of clearness and vigour this doctrine commends itself
to my mind ; that in the presence of stronger and healthier
thought it ever dissolves and disappears, as offering no solution
of the mystery in which we dwell, and of which we form a
part." By this self-contradiction he left his molecular theory
unsupported; and yet from his subsequent writings there is
strong reason to fear that Dr Tyndall has not experienced
many of those lucid intervals, in which the doctrine of mate-
rialistic atheism ceases to commend itself to his mind, and
it must therefore be concluded that he is still wandering in
the dark and dreary region of atheism ; for, in his answer to
* Materialism. Subsequently published in a separate form, with Appendix,
by David Bogne, Xo. 3 St. Martin's Place, W.C., London.
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 6
his opponents in the Fortnightly Review* he dogmatically
asserts that "the conclusion of pure intellect points this way
[to scientific atheism] and no other! " We will proceed to
show that the reasoning on which he and others attempt to
establish their infidel doctrines, is, like that of the rest of the
school, not the expression of pure intellect, but rather the
visionary speculation of those who have allowed their judgment
to fall asleep, and given unbounded reins to their fancy. We
presume Dr Tyndall would call this " the scientific use of
the imagination but the question at issue is of such vital
importance, that the imagination, however useful in framing
scientific hypotheses, must be kept in abeyance, and in the present
inquiry we shall take nothing for granted at the hands of our
adversaries, but rely solely on the evidence of absolute facts.
We would premise the observations which we are about to
make, before entering upon details, with the fundamental
axioms, that admit of no reasonable doubt, that there can
be no laws without a lawgiver, and no effect without a
cause. Now, all scientific atheists admit that the universe
is regulated by laws, but by a strange perversion of reason-
ing they ignore a Lawgiver. They also deny a superin-
tending Providence. If a clock of human construction requires
careful supervision, is it incredible that the vast wheels of the
universe, which revolve with more than chronometer-like pre-
cision, should require to be guided by a Being of infinite intel-
ligence and power ? We would be the last to limit the power
of the Creator, and it is quite conceivable, as has been often
suggested, that the machinery of the universe was created in
such a manner that it could go on for ever without further
help. It is an authenticated factf that there is a constant
dissipation of energy from the sun; that its heat is
constantly passing away into space, and no compensation has
yet been discovered. Who can restore this lost energy save
He who first called it forth ? But the Positivists believe that
the so-called physical energies now in operation on the earth
are all-sufficient, and do not need constant renewal, and that
there is therefore no Almighty Force required above them all.
But surely faith in an eternal omnipotent power is more con-
sonant with the common sense of mankind than the atheistical
doctrine that the laws and physical forces of the universe are
eternal and unalterable.
* For November 1875.
f Mr. Justice Grove, the highest authority on the subject of Conservation of
Energy, in his Address before the meeting of the British Association in I860,
stated that the sun and the planets were incessantly ladiating heat into space,
and that science had not yet shown how the energy can be restored.
b 2
4 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
The belief in a superintending and sustaining Providence is
also more in harmony with man's moral nature, for it gives the
consoling conviction that the Power which can restore physical
energy can also give support and fresh mental vigour to fainting
humanity.*
If the materialist will not accept the theory of an eternal
Creator, he is inevitably driven to the monstrous conclusion
that atoms are all-sufficient in themselves?in fact, endowed
with higher faculties than human beings?and believe with
Griordano Bruno and Dr Tyndall that, " Matter is not the mere
naked capacity which philosophers have pictured her to be, but
the universal mother who brings forth all things as the fruit of
her own womb."f After this expression of opinion, it is unfair
for Darwin, Tyndall, and others, when they find that they have
shocked the public feeling, to say that they do believe in a
God (after their own fashion). It is by the help of such an
empty protest that many of their admirers, who have not time
or opportunity to examine their arguments closely, are led to
adopt and believe in doctrines which cannot be proved by the
inductive process of reasoning. One of the most extraordinary
attempts of the atomists, and one which has completely broken
down, is their strange endeavour to account for animal and
vegetable growth by molecular forces. The examples which were
chosen to support the hypothesis were singularly unfortunate;
for instance, in order to illustrate the sufficiency of matter to pro-
duce all the marvellous beauty of the vegetable world, Tyndall
draws a most illogical comparison between the growth of a tree
and the action of an ingenious acoustic instrument devised by
Sir C. Wheatstone, which Dr Tyndall describes in this manner :
" There is an experiment, first made by Wheatstone, where the
music of a piano is transferred from its sound-board, through a
thin wooden rod, across several silent rooms in succession, and
poured out at a distance from the instrument. The strings of
the piano vibrate, not singly, but ten at a time. Every string
subdivides, yielding not one note, but a dozen. All these vibra-
tions and subvibrations are crowded together into a bit of deal
not more than a quarter of a square inch in section. Yet no
note is lost. Each vibration asserts its individual rights ; and
all are at last shaken forth into the air by a second sound-
# Since ?writing the above, I have found in the first number of the Modem
Review, an article by Dr W. B. Carpenter, on The Force Behind Nature, in which
he gives in his adherence to the principle of a superintending Providence. As he
is ono of the leading physiologists of the day, his recognition of a sustaining Power
is a gratifying circumstance. He observes: "I deem it just as absurd and illogical
to affirm that there is no place for a God in nature, originating, directing, and
controlling its forces by His will, as it would be to assert that there is no place in
man's body for his conscious mind."
j- Vide Dr Tyndall's Address at Belfast.
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 5
board, against which the distant end of the rod presses
I turn to my tree and observe its roots, its trunk, its branches,
and its leaves. As the rod conveys the music, and yields it up
to the distant air, so does the trunk convey the matter and
the motion?the shocks and pulses, and other vital actions
which eventually emerge in the umbrageous foliage of the tree."
It requires only a small acquaintance with the first principles
of acoustics and vegetable physiology to see the fallacy of this
parallel. One part of it is merely an illustration of the mode in
which sounds may be conveyed rapidly to a great distance, by
a vibrating medium. Far different is it with the other part of
the parallel?with the gradual growth of a tree, which requires
for its accomplishment a variety of processes, under the control
of vital force. Dr Tyndall is himself driven to the necessity
of using the words vital actions, although he denies the exist-
ence of vitality.
Another assertion of the atomists is that vital actions are
almost as physical as those that lead to the coalescence of two
globules of oil suspended in a mixture of alcohol and water,
which do not unite until the pellicles that have formed around
them burst. From similar combinations, mounting up step by
step, from one to another, it was imagined that a living body
was constructed. Had the atomists recognised the wonderful
facts revealed by the microscope, which some physicists are apt
to despise, they would have perceived that the oil globules,
with, their pellicles, are totally different from the germinating
cells of which a living body is built up. The original and pro-
found observations with the microscope by Dr Lionel Beale
have shown beyond contradiction that these minute cells have
the powers of absorption, motion, and proliferation, and are, in
fact, true living germs, admitting of " no analogy to any non-
living matter whatever."*
An equally improbable hypothesis was brought forward by
Professor Huxley, who thought that a crystal and a living
structure were analogous, and that both were the result of
physical forces. A chemist can produce a crystal by various
combinations; he can dissolve it, and afterwards repioduce it
by evaporation, which cannot be done with any animal or
vegetable organism. There is not the slightest resemblance
between the minutest living being and a grain of salt, and a
crystal as much resembles a life-cell as an icicle does a waim,
living, palpitating animal.
W e must then come to the inevitable conclusion that the
molecular theory of life has completely broken down, and that
life, this birth, this growth, this mystery which we cannot com-
* Vide Dr Lionel Beale's Lumleian Lectures On Life and on Vital Action in
Health and Disease. J. and A. Churchill, London, 1875.
6 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
prebend must liave been superadded to matter after tbe creation
of tbe eartb.
Bathybius.?Little need be said respecting this young
pretender. He never bad tbe gbost of a fact to support bis
claims, and bas very properly been disowned by his own parent.
A year since, I made tbe following observation respecting this
lusus naturce*: "Of all tbe ephemeral pseudo-philosophic
discoveries, the one which a short time since most alarmed all
sober thinking people and delighted the scientific atheists was
Huxley's?that life sprang from deep sea mud. Huxley named
bis wonderful discovery, out of compliment to Hackel, Bathy-
bius Hackelii. The joy of Strauss was without bounds. Here
was tbe link that was needed to join the organic with the
inorganic world, and the superstitious belief in a Creator had
received its death-blow. This is what he says, in The Old Faith
and the New f : ' Huxley has discovered the bathybius, a shiny
heap of jelly on the sea bottom ; Hackel what he has called the
moneres, structureless clots of an albuminous carbon, which
although inorganic in their constitution, yet are capable of
nutrition and accretion. By these the chasm may be said to be
bridged, and the transition effected from the inorganic to the
organic.' Since this was written Huxley himself has abandoned
the muddy notion of bathybius."
Spontaneous Generation.?This extraordinary idea, opposed
to all experience, which had, strange to say, some enthusiastic
supporters, even among men of science, two years ago, has
vanished into thin air. It is singular that we should be
indebted to Dr Tyndall, tbe high priest of Materialism, for the
complete contradiction of this materialistic figment. Every
one must admit that the Professor is almost unequalled as an
experimenter; and we must not forget our obligations to him
for so candidly exposing the fallacies of a theory that would have
given so much support to the creed which he unfortunately
upholds. He published a full and faithful report of his experi-
ments in the Nineteenth Century for January 1877. He made
a thousand experiments on infusions of vegetable matter, heated
to a temperature sufficiently high to destroy all vital organisms,
and he found that no sign of life could be discovered in any of
them, unless by any chance external air, containing germinal
matter, had been admitted. Virchow, the eminent physio-
logist, confirms Dr Tyndall's observations. I quote bis remarks
as they appeared in the Times: " Moreover the generatio
equivoca which has been so often contested, and so often contra-
dicted, is nevertheless always meeting us afresh. To be sure, we
* Vide an article on Modern Psendo-Philosophy?Journal of Psychological
Medicine, vol. ivr., part I. New Series.
f The Old Faith and the New, p. 188. Asker & Co., London, 1873,
TIIE COLLArSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 7
know not a single positive fact to prove that a generatio equivoca
has ever been made?that there ever has been procreation in
this way; that inorganic masses such as Carbon and Co. have
ever spontaneously developed themselves into organic masses.
Nevertheless, I grant that if anyone is determined to form for
himself an idea of how the first organic being could come into
existence of itself, nothing further is left than to go back to
spontaneous generation. This much is evident. If I do not
choose to accept a theory of creation ; if I refuse to believe that
there was a special Creator who took the clod of earth and
breathed into it the breath of life; if I prefer to make tor
myself a verse after my own fashion (in the place of the verse
in Genesis), then I must make it in the sense of generatio
equivoca. Tertium non datur. No alternative remains when
once we say ' I do not accept the creation, but I will have an
explanation.' Whoever takes up that first position, must go
on to the second position and say ;?' Ergo, I assume the gene-
ratio equivocal But of this we do not possess any actual
proof. No one has ever seen a generatio equivoca really
effected, ard whoever supposes that it has occurred is contra-
dicted by the naturalist and not merely by the theologian."
In the face of these facts, who will be so bold as to believe
m spontaneous generation ?
Evolution.?It is a melancholy satire on the credulity of
mankind that this unverified theory of pseudo-philosophy
should have taken such a firm hold on the minds not only of
numerous laymen, but also of some weak-minded or faint-hearted
clergymen. With a timidity unworthy of their creed?which
has been glorified by the blood of the noble army of martyrs
and the heroic deeds of the Crusaders?men of high position in
the Church are endeavouring to reconcile it with the atheistical
doctrine of evolution, and making a miserable attempt to adapt
Christianity to Darwinism, instead of fighting manfully, not
only against the world and the flesh, but also against evolution.
They imagine that all may be made smooth by admitting that
the primordial germ was created?not produced?by spontaneous
generation or the potentiality of atoms. They do not seem to
be aware that if they admit that the first germ was created
millions of years ago, and was sufficient to develop all the
endless and complicated forms of life which are found at the
present day upon the earth, it must follow that the necessity
tor a watchful and superintending Providence is done away
with. This Theistic form of evolution removes the Creator so
far from us and our sympathies that He becomes a mere
vanishing point in the dim vista of infinity. They have
recently had recourse to another expedient. Ihey attempt to
draw a line between the evolution of animals and the origin of
8 THE COLLAPSE OP SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
man. The latter, they say, was produced by a special creation,
the former by development. This is virtually a surrender at
discretion, for if evolution could produce all the animals in the
world, why not man ?
It is a mistaken policy for the clergy to succumb to their
antagonists at the present time, when the discoveries of science
are more than ever opposed to the fatalistic doctrine of
Darwinism in every form. The advocates of evolution are con-
stantly driven to make concessions, and its most sanguine
supporters do not pretend to say that they can establish it by
the inductive process of reasoning. Nevertheless, a writer in
the Nineteenth Century, so recently as December 1879, has the
boldness to say, " The grand scientific hypothesis (evolution)
of the century is upon its trial, as the theories of Newton and
Galileo were before it!"
I will now proceed to array against the chimera of evolution
the phalanx of facts which strike at its very root. In 1875, in
the essay to which I previously referred, I adduced some of the
facts which show that evolution, which assumes to be a law, is
absolutely at variance with the recognised laivs of nature. I
there stated that no one has succeeded in producing a new
genus or a decidedly new species, though it is well known to
all breeders of animals?and to every common gardener?that
an enormous variety of animals and plants can be produced by
careful selection, crossing, &c. Long before Darwin's work on
The Descent of Alan appeared, naturalists had observed the
gradations of organisms, on which evolutionists lay so much
stress, as well as the similarity of the bodily functions and con-
formations of animals ; but this is nothing more than that
archetypal unity, which is found throughout all nature.
The barrenness of hybrids is universally acknowledged, and
is utterly irreconcilable with the theory of evolution. Can a
better reason be given than the one commonly received, that
the great Lawgiver has established a law to prevent the con-
fusion of species ?
In the same essay I stated the fact that the forms and
features of men and animals are the same now as they were
thousands of years ago, as depicted on the Egyptian monuments,
or as still traceable in the mummies of the pyramids, and that
the intellect of man has never been developed in a higher
degree than it was in the days of the Hebrew prophets and
Greek poets. The only answer offered is, that evolution
requires not only thousands, but billions upon billions of years
for the development of a new species. This is dreaming and
not sober reasoning. The palaeontologists can read the records of
the past, stamped on the crust of the earth, but who can read
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 9
the future of a million years to come ? The mind of man has
not only a limited field of observation, but has also limits to
its own power, and it is not a healthy exercise for the mind to
indulge overmuch in the pleasures of the imagination.
The periods required for the evolution of one species into
another are infinitely longer than the time, as calculated by the
physicists, which has elapsed since life first appeared on the face
of the earth. It has been estimated that a period not much
exceeding one hundred millions of years must have passed since
the earth was sufficiently cooled down to support life. An
approximate calculation will show that this is not nearly long
enough for the imaginary law of evolution to produce all the
species, living and extinct, that have been discovered; for the
Darwinites are obliged to admit that a time almost fabulous is
required for the development of even a single species by evolu-
tion.
Sir Charles Lyell estimated the now existing species of
vegetables and animals on the terraqueous globe at one and a
half millions : this is exclusive of microscopic beings, whose
number is incalculable. A single drop of stagnant water, accord-
ing to Leeuwenhoeck, contains about 500,000,000 of animalcules,
a large number of which probably consists of distinct species,
kir Charles Lyell says it is very difficult to form a calculation of
the number of extinct species. Each stratum which contains
fossils is marked by species which are peculiar to it and to the
epoch when they were deposited, and myriads have no doubt
been obliterated by the mechanical and chemical forces to which
they have been subjected.
It may be roughly calculated, from the observations of various
naturalists and geologists, that the number of extinct species,
including both animals and vegetables, amounts to not less than
3,000,000. The addition of 1,500,000 of still existing species
makes a total of 4,500,000. If we grant for the sake of argu-
ment, that one species could be evolved from another in so short
a space of time as 5,000 years, and multiply the 4,500,000
species, living and extinct, by 5,000, we shall find the time
required to produce all the number of species that have ever
appeared is 22,500,000,000.
Difficulties are constantly arising in the path of the evolu-
tionist. Can he inform us whence, or through what channel,
the nightingale derives her song? Are the wings of birds
derived from the quills of the porcupine ? Whence does the
beaver obtain his constructive power, the spider learn to spin her
geometric web, or the carrier pigeon acquire her wonderful
instinct ? Are the beauty and scent of flowers, which are the
grace and ornament of the earth, due to natural selection ?
10 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
The liabits of different kinds of bees have been quoted in
proof of this law of natural selection, showing that the skill of the
house-bee has been developed by evolution, step by step, through
inferior classes of bees. It is also believed regarding instinct,
that it is to be accounted for by hereditary transmission; that
each animal is " not individually taught, its personal experience
is nil, but has the benefit of ancestral experience. In that
inherited organisation are registered all the powers which it dis-
plays at birth." In this manner the chick learns " the very
complex co-ordination of eye, muscles, and beak " which enable
it, on "coming out of the egg, to balance itself correctly, run
about, pick up its food " &c. In all cases of this kind the evo-
lutionist holds that the instinctive powers displayed by animals
are nothing more than the results of organic memory. The
law of hereditary transmission cannot be disputed, but it is
carried to a fabulous length when it is asserted that the human
brain is a register of " infinitely numerous experiences received
during the evolution of that series of organisms through which
the human organism has been reached." But all this ingenious
specidation must not be mistaken for sober truth, and when we
show, as we hope to do, that the organic chain, which is supposed
to support this airy fabric, is destitute, not only of what should
have been its strongest link?the ape-man, but is also wanting
in many other links, it must be acknowledged that the dream of
evolution will pass away like the " baseless fabric of a vision."
Two years since, having seen no answer to the above
difficulties in the Avay of Darwinism, I repeated them in an
article which I published in the Journal of Psychological
Medicine* and gave the following additional evidence of its
fallacy, from two of the highest authorities in natural history
and paleontology. Mr. William Carruthers said, in his address
delivered at the opening of the Geologists' Association in
November 1875 f:?"The plants portrayed on the ancient
paintings and sculptures of Egypt; the fruits placed in coffins
with embalmed bodies, and the fruits and seeds found in ancient
lake dwellings, all belong to existing species, with which they
agree in the most minute and apparently accidental particulars.
The existing order of plants if it be due to genetic evolution
supplies no proof of it. . . . The cellular algas preceded the
vascular cryptogams, or the gymnosperms of the newer palaeozoic
rocks, and these were speedily followed by monoctyledons, and
at a much later period by dicotyledons. But the earliest repre-
sentatives of those various sections of the vegetable kingdom
* Modern Pseudo-Philosophy, vol. iv., part I. New Series.
f By William Carruthers, Esq., F.R.S., F.L.S., F.G.S., &c., Keeper of the
Botanical Department of the British Museum.
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 11
were not generalised forms, but as highly organised as recent
forms, and in many cases mere highly organised', and the
divisions were as clearly bounded in their essential characters,
and as decidedly separated from each other as they are at the
present day. ... Is it possible from the record of organic life
preserved in the sedimentary deposits, to discover the method
or agent through the action of which the new forms appeared
on the globe ? The rocks record the existence of the plants
and animal forms, but as yet they have disclosed nothing what-
ever as to hoiv these forms originated."
The testimony of Thomas Davidson, Esq., F.R.S., V.P.P.S.,
&c., derived from the animal kingdom, is equally strong. Mr.
Davidson is one of the most distinguished palaeontologists of the
age, few men having had more honours bestowed on them from
both British and foreign scientific bodies. He stands unrivalled
in his knowledge of the nature and history of those small sea-
shells called brachiopoda, of which there are three thousand
species. He is, moreover, the friend of Darwin, and it was at the
particular request of that great naturalist that he undertook the
task of minutely examining the characteristics of the brachio-
pods, with a view of proving whether or not they would support
the truth of the Darwinian theory. In the Geological Magazine
for 1877 Mr. Davidson says: "We have no positive evidence of
those modifications which the theory invokes, for types appear
on the whole to be permanent as long as they continue, and when
a genus disappears there is no modification that I can see of any
of the forms that continue beyond, as far as the brachiopoda
appear to be concerned ; and why should a number of genera,
such as lingula, discina, crania, and rhynclionella have continued
to be represented with the same characters, and often with but
small modification in shape during the entire sequence of
geological strata ? Why did they not offer modifications or
alter during those incalculable ages? Limiting myself to the
hrachiopoda, let us see what further they will tell us on this
question. Taking the present state of our knowledge as a
guide, but admitting at the same time that any day our conclu-
sions and inductions may require to be modified by fresh dis-
coveries, let us ascertain whether they reveal anything to sup-
port Darwinian ideas. We find that the larger number of genera
niade their first appearance during the palaeozoic periods, and
since they have been decreasing in number to the present period.
We will leave out of the question the species, for they vary so
little that it is often very difficult to trace really good distinc-
tive characters between them; it is different with the genera,
as they are, or should be, founded on much greater and more
permanent distinctions. Thus, for example, the family Spiriferidae
12 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
includes genera which are all characterised by a calcified spiral
lamina for the support of the drachial appendages; and, how-
ever varied these may be, they always retain the distinctive
characters of the group from their first appearance to their
extinction. . . . Now, although certain genera, such as tere-
bratala, rhynchonella, crania, and discina have enjoyed a very
considerable geological existence there are genera, such as
stringoceplialus, uncites, porambonites, koninckina, and several
others, which made their appearance very suddenly and without
any warning ; after a while they disappeared in a similar abrupt
manner, having enjoyed a comparatively short existence. They
are all possessed of such marked and distinctive internal
characters that we cannot trace between them and associated or
synchronous genera any evidence of their being the result of
descent with modification." It is thus evident that the eminent
brachiopodist, to whom Darwin himself had referred for the con-
firmation of his theory, has decided against him.
I also drew attention at the same time to the facts, that
the fossil trilobite crops up abruptly, at the close of the car-
boniferous epoch, with the eye 'perfectly developed?that no
breeding has yet been able to produce, by selection, two species
so distinct that they can generate hybrids?and that there is a
limit to the variability of species. The scientific objections to
the Darwinian hypothesis are innumerable, and its advocates
are constantly driven to fresh concessions. It would be well if
its supporters would be silent for a while. A fixed law or a
general principle gains by investigation, but this has not been
the case with Darwinism. Every year some fresh defect is
revealed, and it is wonderful that there should still remain any
who believe it to be standing on as firm a basis as the law of
gravitation. Hackel goes so far as to propose that it should
be accepted as the basis of education! and " the protoplastic
soul (die plastidul-sede) be assumed as the foundation of all
ideas concerning spiritual being! " Can this extravagance be
exceeded ?
We are indebted to Dr Bateman for a valuable work, Dar-
winism tested by Language * in which he proves scientifically,
that the faculty of language places an impassable gulf between
man and the brute creation. This work was very unpalatable
to evolutionists, and Dr Bucknill, in a review of it, in the first
number of Brain, not being able to refute this fact, had recourse
to the dangerous expedient of attempting to turn his opponent
into ridicule, by stating that he was unable to comprehend the
" amount of evidence " which " Darwin had collected " in favour
* Bivingtons, London.
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 13
of evolution. To us it appears, on tlie contrary, that Dr.
Bucknill himself does not appreciate, or is " not aware of the
amount of evidence " on the other side of the question. In my
review of Brain, in the Journal of Psychological Medicine * I
asked him to answer the objections which we have already ad-
vanced in the foregoing pages. I will now give a few extra?
additional facts, and if they all remain unanswered the inference
must be?that they are unanswerable.
It has been asserted that the distinguishing characteristics
observed in animals in various countries are due to their en-
vironments?to use a newly-coined word. How does it happen
then, that in parts of South Africa and Australia, alike in soil
and climate, the species are entirely different?
Evolutionists have never informed us which was developed
first, the male or the female of animals. A man and woman
are very different, and yet one mother produces both. How
can this be ? Again, how is the balance of the sexes preserved ?
These are mysteries which the materialist can no more explain
than he can the mystery of life.
It is impossible for the evolutionists to explain by insensible
gradations or fortuitous changes the orign of the electric battery
in the torpedo. Would they presume to say that if Galvani
was able to perfect his battery in a few years, the Great Me-
chanician required billions of years to complete the wonderful
weapon of defence with which the torpedo is endowed ?
Another point on which great stress has been laid, is the
resemblance in appearance between the human embryo, and
that of various animals, during its development in utero. But
a little consideration will show that the similarity is partial, and
is not carried so far as to lead to any doubt as to the existence
of that law which prevents the confusion of species ; and without
which the world would long ago have been filled with legions
of monstrosities.
It is affirmed that the human embryo, when in utero, passes
through successive forms of organisation analogous to those of a
fish, a reptile, a bird, and the inferior mammalia. But if it is
fish-like at one period of its growth, how does it not sometimes
come to pass that it is developed into a perfect fish. There
must be a fundamental difference between the germ of a man
and that of a fish from the very beginning, which no microscope
has yet been able to detect. Moreover, psychological observa-
tions have led to the probable inference that the brain of the
human fcetus, does not at any time exactly resemble that of
any inferior animal. Merely vague resemblances are very im-
perfect data on which to form a theory.
* Vide Journal of Psychological Medicine. New Series, vol. iv., part II.
14 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
With reference to the two principles?" the struggle for
existence " and "selection in relation to sex"?nothing more
need be said here, than that they would he of no avail with
regard to those animals that are destitute of the power of
locomotion.
We have mentioned facts enough, and more than enough,
to prove that the chain of evidence in favour of evolution, which
was supposed to be constructed of links of iron, is in truth no
better than a rope of sand. Much of its popularity was due to
its advocacy by Herbert Spencer, and other Positivists, who no
doubt were delighted to find a theory which gave support to their
atheistical opinions. It is extraordinary that the illogical lucu-
brations which Herbert Spencer disseminated under the garb of
philosophy should have been received with such admiration, not
only by a portion of the public, but also by scientific men, like
Dr Tyndall and Dr Allen Thomson. The former called him the
" Apostle of the Understanding." Does he think that what
Herbert Spencer says of life, which he defines as "a continuous
adjustment of internal relations to external relations," has won
that title for him ? Can anything be more indefinite than such
a definition ? I would ask, has he originated or established any
great scientific or moral truth ? * Again I repeat that as a writer
he is obscure and pedantic, and his style forms a striking con-
trast to the simplicity and perspicuity of our greatest writers.
This is what he says of evolution : " Evolution is a change from
indefinite incoherent homogeneity to a definite coherent hetero-
geneity, through continuous differentiations and integrations."
This is little short of nonsense. Can such expressions as these
be considered indications of a master mind, and is such a teacher
to be looked up to as a guiding star ?
One of the evil fruits of evolution is the objection it has
raised to the evidences of " design in nature "?a theme which
has given rise to the holiest thoughts and called forth the
noblest expressions of adoration and praise. We have now to
learn that the admirable Bridgwater Treatises, by Sir Charles
Bell and others, are mistakes, and that the prosaic process of
development effects all that is seen in animated nature, and that
we are to shut our eyes to the endless wonders of design, as
exhibited by the manner in which the requirements of the
species are suited to the circumstances in which they are
placed. Are not the wings of the eagle adapted for an elevated
* We must apologise. We had nearly forgotten the great discovery he has
recently announced?that it is the duty of mm to enjoy himself. This establishes
his fame, not only as the "Apostle of the Understanding," but as one of the
greatest moralists of the age. Some have illnaturedly remarked that it is to
Epicurus, and not to Herbert Spencer, Ave are indebted for this great moral truth.
THE COLLAPSE OP SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 15
flight, and the fins of the trout to darting through the
water ? *
Beauty can have no place in the scheme of the evolutionist,
for it is impossible to believe that the lowest grades of animals
acquired it by the assumed law of natural selection. One of the
greatest of living geniuses (Ruskin) says the Power which gave
to " the opal its fire," which " wreathed the swan with snow and
bathed the dove with iridescence," would not be subdued under
the slow influence of accident and time.f Genius spurns evolu-
tion?common sense ridicules it.$
* To Dr Andrew Wilson we are indebted for the following striking instance
of design: " Even more interesting than the case of-the primrose is that of the
myosotis versicolor, a species of forget-me-not, the arrangement for securing fer-
tilisation of the seed exhibiting a perfect adaptation to all possible exigencies
which may arise in the life history of the flower. If we examine the myosotis just
after the flower has opened, the pistil with its long style is seen to project above
the level of the flower itself. It thus presents a most likely object for contact
with the proboscis of an insect which has come from another myosotis laden with
pollen. But failing to obtain fertilisation of its seeds by insect-carried pollen
from a neighbour flower, the myosotis has yet another resource in the pollen of
iis own stamens. The stamens at the opening of the flower are placed far below
the style, and hence it is impossible, so long as the stamens remain below, for the
pollen to be placed on the pistil and thus to fertilise the seeds. But nature has
been equal to such an emergency. As time passes, we find the stamens to grow
upwards with the petals, and as in time they overtop the pistil, the flower is
enabled to fertilise its own seeds. Not less interesting or remarkable are the
phases observed in the action of pollen itself, in its work of fertilisation. Left to
themselves and unapplied to their special purpose, the little yellow grains of
pollen wither and die. But, placed in its appropriate and intended situation on
the pistil, each pollen grain, as if guided by some inherent instinct, projects from
its surface a tube-like structure, which passes through the style of the pistil, and
brings the essential matters of the pollen grain in contact with the seeds."
f From Euskin's Love's Meinie, in a lecture on Greek and English birds, (x.
Allen & Co., Keston, Kent, 1873.
J The following satire appeared originally in an American paper a few years
since. I never could learn the name of the paper, or of the writer. It is too good
to be lost sight of:?
" The New Scriptures, according to Tyndall and others.
" 1. Primarily the Unknowable
moved upon cosmos and evolved proto-
plasm.
" 2. And protoplasm was inorganic
and undifferentiated, containing all
things in potential energy; and a spirit
of evolution moved upon the fluid mass.
" 3. And the Unknowable said, Let
atoms attract; and their contact begat
light, heat, and electricity.
" 4. And the unconditioned differ-
entiated the atoms, each after its kind;
an1! their combinations begat rock, air,
and water.
" ft. And there went out a spirit of
evolution from the Unconditioned, and,
working in protoplasm by accretion and
absorption, produced the organic cell.
" 6. And cell, by nutrition, evolved
primordial germ, and germ developed
protogene, and protogene begat eozoon,
and eozoon begat monad, and monad
begat animalcule.
"7. And animalcule begat ephemera ;
then began creeping things to multiply
on the face of the earth.
" 8. And earthy atom in vegetable
protoplasm begat the molecule, and
thence came all grass and every herb
in the earth.
" 9. And animalcula in the water
evolved fins, tails, claws, and scales ;
and in the air, wings and beaks ; and
on the land they sprouted such organs
as were necessary as played upon by
the environment.
16 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
Anyone who visits the Zoological Gardens, in a healthy
frame of mind, cannot fail to be struck with the evidences of
design as exhibited in the conformation of the various animals,
so marvellously adapted to the spheres in which they were born,
each one having been so organised as to be fitted to get his own
" living, in that state of life in which it had pleased Grod "?not
evolution?to place him.*
Many of those who adopt evolution as a guiding principle
have been driven into a complete state of puzzledom. The
Rev. J. W. Fowle, in the Nineteenth Century for July 1878,
" 10. And by accretion and absorp-
tion came the radiata and mollusca,
and mollusca begat articulata, and ar-
ticulata begat vertebrata.
" 11. Now these are the generations
of the higher vertebrata, in the cosmic
period that the Unknowable evoluted
the bipedal mammalia.
" 12. And every man of the earth,
while he was yet a monkey, and the
horse, while he was a hipparion, and
the hipparion, before he was an oredon.
" 13. Out of the ascidian came the
amphibian, and begat the pentadactyle,
and the pentadactyle by inheritance and
selection produced the hylobate, from
which are the simiadse in all their tribes.
" 14. And out of the simiadse the
lemur prevailed above his fellows and
produced the platyrhine monkey.
" 15. And the platyrhine begat the
catarrhine, and the catarrhine monkey
begat the anthropoid ape, and the ape
begat the longimanous ourang, and the
ourang begat the chimpanzee, and the
chimpanzee evoluted the what-is-it.
" 16. And the what-is-it went into
the land of Nod and took him a wife of
the longimanous gibbons.
" 17. And in process of the cosmic
period were born unto them and their
children the anthropomorphic primor-
dial types.
" 18. The homunculus, the progna-
thus, the troglodyte, the autochthon, the
terragen?these are the generations of
primeval man.
" 19. And primeval man was naked
and not ashamed, but lived in quad-
rumanous innocence, and struggled
mightily to harmonise with the en-
vironment.
" 20. And by inheritance and natural
selection did he progress from the
stable and homogeneous to the complex
and heterogeneous; for the weakest
died, and the strongest grew and
multiplied.
"21. And man grew a thumb, for
that he had need of it, and developed
capacities for prey.
" 22. For, behold, the swiftest men
caught the most animals, and the
swii'test animals got away from the
most men ; wherefore the slow animals
were eaten, and the slow men starved
to death.
" 23. And as types were differen-
tiated, the weaker types continually
disappeared.
"24. And the earth was filled with
violence, for man strove with man, and
tribe with tribe, whereby they killed
off the weak and foolish, and secured
the survival of the fittest."
* It may be here incidentally noticed that some men of high culture hare been
saddened by the thought that the progress of modern science has reduced both the
earth and man to greater insignificance. Astronomy, by extending our view of
the universe, and navigation, by enabling us to steam round the globe in a holiday
tour, have, they say, given a familiarity and comparative contempt for the earth
and for ourselves. But if astronomy has added trillions of miles to our know-
ledge of the space between us and distant suns, our idea of infinite space is not
increased any more than -when -we thought they were only billions of miles from
us; and our more intimate acquaintance with the geography of the earth does not
lower our position, or make us less the lords of the brute creation. The multi-
plicity of stars need not discomfort us, if Coleridge's idea be true. When asked
what could be the use of so many worlds if they wore uninhabited, he replied,
" To make dirt cheap.'"
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 17
labours hard to find a place in it for conscience! Another poor
bewildered writer in the North American Review cries aloud for
a new religion.
Spiritualists, by a strange anomaly, talk of materialising
spirits ; and one of their body has lately said that the last step
of evolution is to develop the human spirit. The force of evolu-
tion can no further go?it is played out.
Antiquity of Man.?The subdued tone of the believers in
the fabulous antiquity of man, at the last meeting of the British
Association, at Sheffield, was a strong contrast to the boldness
?and confidence with which Mr. Pengelly, F.R.S., delivered a
sensational address on the previous occasion, at Glasgow, to a
crowded audience. Mr. Pengelly was one of those who were
selected by the Royal Society to examine the contents of the
Brixham Cavern. It is therefore to be regretted that, on in-
sufficient evidence, he should have availed himself of the influ-
ence of his position to imbue the public mind with the notion
that the facts revealed by the exploration of the Brixham Cavern
proved theexistence of man in Devon during the pre-glacial, or at
least inter-glacial period. The chief evidence is derived from the
discovery of what he terms flint implements and a stone hammer
in the cavern. It is fair that the public should know what has
been said on the other side of the question.
Mr. Whitley, Vice-President of the Royal Institution of
Cornwall, whose talent, enthusiasm, and geological attainments
are not inferior to those of Mr. Pengelly, has made most careful
examinations of the Brixham Cavern, and his deductions are
diametrically opposed to those of the former gentleman. In
several papers which he read before the " Victoria Institute, or
Philosophical Society of Great Britain," Mr. Whitley has proved
that the supposed flint implements are not of human manufac-
ture, and are nothing more than pieces of rubble flint and
fragmentary flakes that had drifted into the cavern, and he
adduced good evidence to prove that they had a geological and
not .an antiquarian origin. He stated that, if a nodule of flint
be crushed by a heavy blow, it will shiver into flakes precisely
similar to those found in the cavern, and, moreover, that change
of temperature will split silicious minerals into flake, resembling
the supposed knives and scrapers.
Mr. Whitley, in an exhaustive treatise, entitled, A Critical
Examination of the Flints from Brixham Cavern * gives the
following summary of his arguments :?
" I have now shown that the so-called ' thirty-six rude flint
implements, of indisputable human workmanship,' are, for the
* A Critical Examination of the Flints from Brixham Cavern. David Bogue,
'3 St. Martin's Place, London, W.C. 1877.
PART I. VOL. VI. NEW SERIES. C
18 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
greatest part, small undefinable pieces of rubble flint, mixed
with a few imperfect subsoil flakes.
" That the marks of use, or secondary chipping-, so strongly
asserted to be found on the edges of the flints, and so clearly
shown on the woodcut, fig. 410, in Ancient Stone Implements,
are not to be found on the flint itself.
"That the flint described in Ancient Stone Implements as
a remarkably symmetrical scraper, and said to be found in the
cavern, was not found there but in the soil without and above it.
" That the cast of a very perfect flint knife exhibited among
other relics in the cavern, and sold to visitors as a cast of a
cavern specimen, is a deception.
" That the portion of a cylindrical pin or rod of ivory, said
to be found in the cave, was not found by the committee of
exploration, is not now with the flints in the museum, and that
there is no evidence to show that it is a cavern specimen.
" That the ' charcoal bed ' contains no charcoal. That slate
has been mistaken for flint, and flint for bone; and that the
description given of the ' whole hind-leg of a cave bear,' the
most famous specimen of the cavern, has been found to be so
loaded with erroneous facts and false conclusions, that its
evidence has been withdrawn and abandoned."
With regard to the so-called stone hammer, Mr. Prest-
v/ich is of opinion that it is a Budleigh-Salterton pebble; and
Mr. Whitley observes that it was imbedded in drifted gravel
similar to that of the neighbouring raised beaches. He contends
that it was introduced into the cavern by natural causes, and
that the indentations on its surface, which have been regarded
as signs of its having been used as a hammer, are due to its
having been "battered by a thousand storms."
Southall, the eminent American geologist, in his work on
the Recent Origin of Man* gives it as his opinion that the
earliest inhabitants of western Europe were intelligent savages,
like the Esquimaux Indians, and that neither archaeology nor
geology have detected any earlier form of man. We may there-
fore hesitate to believe that the aborigines of Devon were no
better than beasts, who herded with wild animals in dens and
caves. He mentions a curious fact, which shows how cautious
observers who have pet theories should be not to jump to hasty
conclusions. A skull said to have been found in a cave was
pronounced by Huxley to be a most brutal human skull. It
was afterwards discovered, on careful examination, to be an
average skull. Moreover, it was not associated with extinct
animals, and was discovered under five feet of mud! In
* Bcccnt Origin of Man. Philadelphia, 187o. Triibner & Co., London.
THE COLLAPSE OP SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 19
the face of these facts, the Illustrated London News for
August 25 last, in the report of Mr. Pengelly's paper, con-
fidently assures us that the " discovery and systematic ex-
ploration of a comparatively small virgin cavern on Windmill
Hill, at Brixham (in 1858), led to a sudden and complete
revolution, for it was seen that, whatever were the facts
elsewhere, there had undoubtedly been found at Brixham flint
implements, commingled with remains of the mammoth and its
companions, and in such a way as to render it impossible to
doubt that man occupied Devonshire before the extinction of
the mammoth."
With all the evidence to the contrary, it seems certain, in
spite of all Mr. Pengelly says, that this Orson?this wild man
of the caves?this grovelling monster?never inhabited the
caverns of Devon; and we have yet to learn that any other part
of the world had the honour of being his birthplace.
Physiological Psychology.?This pseudo-science, which was
ushered in with such loud and triumphant acclamations, and
was supposed by its enthusiastic supporters to solve the mystery
of mind?this ignis fatuus which, if true, would destroy the
independence of the mind and the freedom of the human will?
has at length proved to be nothing more than a wild and
visionary speculation.
Physiological psychology is the most subtle and dangerous
form of scientific atheism, because the knowledge required to
confute it is confined to a limited number of inquirers. Its
doctrines are permeating all classes of society, and are most
conspicuous among the younger members of the medical pro-
fession ; which is to be expected when so many of the influential
teachers, holding high rank in our medical schools, have un-
hesitatingly and recklessly done their utmost to imbue the minds
of the rising generation of students with the notion that all
our time-honoured creeds are the assumptions of credulity and
folly. The students are taught to look down upon them with
contempt, and to substitute speculative opinions, which cannot
be of the slightest practical value, but must inevitably, sooner
or later, make shipwreck of the highest hopes and noblest
aspirations of our nature.
I stated five years ago in the Journal of Psychological
Medicine, and again in an address on the Materialistic Phy-
siology, which I delivered before the Victoria Institute, in 1877,
that the terms Mental Physiology and Physiological Psycho-
logy were illogical and anomalous, as they jumbled together
mind and matter, and I proposed to substitute the term
Materialistic Physiology* I also stated that the chief dogma
* Subsequently published in The Journal of Psychological Mcdicine. Vol. iii.j
part I. * c 2
20 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
of the new school is that mind and all its faculties?perception,
memory, will, reason, imagination, as well as all moral attri-
butes?are the result of bodily functions, as if they were secre-
tions from the brain, like those of the liver or kidneys. They
have various unintelligible modes of describing the phenomena
of the mind. Its operations are spoken of by some as the
product of the caudate cells of the brain?by others as a dis-
turbance of the equilibrium of the nervous power?as expres-
sions of material changes in the brain?as cerebral vibration?
an emanation from the body, &c.* It seems strange that any-
one can believe, or expect others to believe, that assertions like
these, unverified by careful scientific inductions, can be substituted
for what is commonly understood by the word " mind." Mind is
a fact; its existence is proved by our own consciousness,
and its operations are indelibly inscribed on the literature and
art of ages. It would be as absurd to doubt it as to doubt
that of a God, although we cannot explain the nature of either.
That it is connected in a mysterious manner with our organisa-
tion no one can disbelieve, but we defy the modern physiolo-
gists to explain the connection. They speak as confidently of
their speculative opinions as if they were acknowledged facts,
and as if recent researches had thrown a flood of light on the
functions of the brain and spinal cord. I again challenge
them, as I have done before, to show that any one really great
fact has been elicited since the discoveries of Sir Charles
Bell and Marshall Hall. The nerve-fibres of sensation and
motion have been traced a little further towards the circum-
ference of the brain, but we are as ignorant as ever of the pro-
perties of the caudate nerve-cells of the cerebral convolutions ;
we can only surmise that it is through them that sensations are
perceived and volition exercised.
The chief arguments which have been brought forward in
favour of materialistic physiology may be summed up as
follows:?
First. That the doctrine of a correlation of force proves
that vital, and even mental energy, are interchangeable with
physical force.
Secondly. That the phenomena of insanity give weight to
the theory of physiological psychology.
Thirdly. That memory is merely a register of impressions
on the brain cells.
* The English language itself is getting corrupted by the new philosophical
nomenclature that has been adopted in the endeavour to make the new theories
intelligible. They -will soon require to publish a glossary of the new terms which
are accumulating fast. For instance, they call poetic emotion the thrill of a
ganglion ; thought, cerebration; life, molecular force; creation, evolution; the
Peity, a primordial germ ; crime, cerebral disease ; &c.
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 21
Fourthly. That there is a function of the brain, termed
unconscious cerebration, by which it is understood that the
brain can think without individual consciousness.
Fifthly. That the experiments of Fritsch, Hitzig, Ferrier,
&c., have gone far to prove that mental faculties can be localised
in the brain.
Although the last of the points which we have enumerated,
we will take first into consideration the recent electrical ex-
periments on the brain, especially as they just now occupy so
much attention both at home and abroad, particularly among
the members of the medical profession.
One of the most prominent teachers of this mode of in-
vestigation, in this country, is Dr Ferrier; my observations
will therefore be chiefly directed to his experiments and de-
ductions.
With an incomprehensible alacrity, the medical journals in
England, with scarcely-an exception, vied with each other in
extolling Dr Ferrier to the skies ; they seemed to think that
he had discovered a royal road to a thorough knowledge of the
nature of the human mind?it was nothing more, after all, than
a mass of cerebral functions. They did not stop to consider that
the inevitable consequence of that belief must be, that mind
and brain would both perish together. A pleasant prospect, if true!
In my address before the Victoria Institute in 1877 I re-
marked that physiological psychology was the revival of the
exploded system of phrenology, under a new name. Its object
is to materialise mind, by giving a local habitation to each of
the moral and intellectual faculties in different parts of the
brain. The scheme is an old one, and has been defeated over
and over again ; nevertheless, as time goes on, it is revived in
some fresh shape, either by those who think, by the adaptation
of a new phraseology to an old idea, they can gain reputation
and fame, or by well-meaning but too enthusiastic men, whose
imaginations are unfortunately stronger than their reason; men
who, however distinguished in some special department of
natural science, are evidently incapacitated by their mental
constitution from clearly comprehending the fundamental truths
of psychology.
It is the confident boast of this psycho-physiological school
that the physiological method is the only means of arriving at
a right interpretation of mental phenomena; that it is by
experiments on the brain, combined with a careful study of
the functions of the nervous system, that it will be ultimately
proved that mind is only a function of the brain, and that all
the great metaphysical truths which have been believed and
taught for thousands of years are to be regarded as idle tales.
22 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
Dr Ferrier has published two works* in which he gave an
account of his observations and experiments. I reviewed them
both, one in October 1877 and the other in April 1879,f and
combated his deductions from them, especially with reference to
the localisation of mental faculties in the brain.
As the experiments which Dr Ferrier, Fritsch, Hitzig, and
others conducted were performed on the brains of monkeys, cats,
dogs, jackals, rabbits, pigeons, frogs, and fish, we would remark,
in the first place, that we cannot conceive, even if they had
been less conflicting, how they would throw any light on the
nature of the moral or intellectual faculties of man.
It so happens that Brown-Sequard and Eugene Dupuy
(of New York) cerebral physiologists holding the highest rank,
and most careful experimenters, have come to conclusions
diametrically opposed to the above authorities. Five years
since I remarked in the Journal of Psychological Medicine
that " many of the so-called discoveries of the most painstaking
cerebral physiologists are at variance with each other. It had
been for a long time believed that the optic thalami were closely
connected with the upper extremities as motor centres, but
experiments by Northangel had completely dislocated our
ideas on the point, for he found that, after destroying the
whole of the optic thalami, rabbits were able to leap about.
These facts show that physiologists should pause before asserting
that the highest mental manifestations are only emanations
from particular portions of the brain, when they have not yet
been able to satisfactorily determine the centres of motion and
sensation."
Dr Ferrier's experiments consisted, first in ploughing up
(as he expresses it) parts of the brain by a wire cautery ;
secondly, in wholesale slicing away large portions of the cere-
bral substance ; and thirdly, in electrifying particular spots of
the brain. It is more than probable that the two first of these
experiments must have caused so severe a shock to the nervous
system as to interfere materially with the results. It is not to
be wondered at that a monkey's appetite should have been im-
paired after the whole of the occipital lobes of his brain had
been removed. It is more reasonable to suppose that it was the
shock of the operation which caused the lessened appetite rather
than the injury to an imaginary seat of hunger, as Dr Ferrier
suggested. Neither can we place much reliance on the class of
experiments which have reference to electrifying particular spots
in the brain supposed to be the seats of sensation and motion.
* The first, The Functions of the Brain, was published in 1876. The second,
The Localisation of Cerebral Disease, in 1878.
f Vide The Journal of Psychological Medicine, vol. iii,. part II., and vol. v., part I.
THE COLLAPSE OP SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 23
Even granting that the electrical current had been directed
with extreme precision to the required spot, what is to prevent
the current from becoming diffused through the brain and the
blood in its capillaries, as water, a good conductor, enters so
largely into the composition of both ? If this should occur it
would be impossible to determine what set of muscles would or
would not be affected by the experiment. There is also another
influence which must be taken into consideration?reflex action
?which is likely to interfere with the accuracy of the electrical
experiments.
The fact must not be lost sight of that the convolutions of
the brain are a homogeneous sort of mass, and that one convolu-
tion resembles another, as to microscopical appearances and
chemical elements, as much as one portion of the liver does
another, and it would be as reasonable to map out the latter
into separate divisions, when there are no visible lines of demar-
cation, as the former. The brain must therefore be considered
to act as a whole.
As Dr Ferrier is evidently unable to determine precisely the
centres of the mere bodily functions of sensation and motion, all
that he has said in his chapter on The Hemispheres considered
Psychologically* is so much waste paper.
With the unphilosophic haste so conspicuous in the mate-
rialistic school, it was most confidently asserted that the faculty
of speech was located in the third frontal convolution of the left
hemisphere of the brain, but this opinion has been proved to be
incorrect by pathological facts. This localisation of the faculty
of speech (Broca's theory) was the only ground which appeared
to give any support to the materialists in their untiring efforts
to destroy the independence of the human mind. Although
this has been utterly swept away, as we shall presently show,
they still cling with desperate energy to their forlorn hope.
Many cases are on record in which Broca's convolution and
the island of Reil have been diseased or injured without loss of
the faculty of speech. Oh the other hand, aphasia has been
present when disease has been confined to the right side, lo
explain this contradictory evidence Broca suggests a most fanciful
theory?that the faculty of speech is in some way connected
with the use of the right side of the body and the left side of
the brain.
One of the most striking instances adverse to the theory of
a left-sided faculty of speech is the celebrated American crow-
bar case, in which a tamping iron an inch and quarter m
diameter was driven completely through the head of a workman
* In his work on The Functions of the Brain.
24 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
by a sudden explosion of gunpowder. It was proved by careful
measurement that it must have destroyed not only the left Sylvian
artery, which supplies Broca's convolution, but also nearly the
whole of the island of Reil. This extensive injury was not fol-
lowed by any impairment of the faculty of speech.
A somewhat analogous case occurred in the practice of the
late Mr. Lanyon, of Camborne, many years since. I had the
particulars from himself, and he was a man of remarkable intelli-
gence and undoubted veracity. A miner, whilst engaged in
blasting a rock, was, by a sudden explosion, struck by a tamping
iron, which entered at his forehead and came out at the back of
his head, completely transfixing the brain. Incredible as it may
appear, the man, immediately after the accident, walked to Mr.
Lanyon's house, and in his presence tried to pull out the iron
himself. This case was related to me long before the subject
of aphasia was broached, or I should have made particular
inquiries as to the man's mental condition, and as to which side
the iron entered. As it is probable that the man was able to give
an account of the accident, he could not have been aphasic ; it
is also more than likely that such an extensive lesion must have
injured Broca's convolution.
For the future there will be no necessity for the advocates of
Broca's theory to shift about from left to right, as the question
has been set to rest by a crucial test. M. Bouillaud offered a
prize of five hundred francs for any well-authenticated case in
which the two anterior lobes were destroyed without speech
being affected. This was claimed by M. Velpeau,* who had a
patient under his care in whom a prominent symptom was
intolerable loquacity. After death, it was found that a cancerous
tumour had taken the place of the two anterior lobes.
Another case is recorded by M. Peter, of a man, who, after
Tallying from the first effects of a fracture of the skull, became
extremely talkative. After death, it was discovered that the two
anterior lobes were reduced to a pulp.
In 1877 I publishedf a case which occurred at St. Mary's
Hospital, in which speech and memory continued after extensive
softening of both anterior lobes of the brain.
Maragliano, one of the most strenuous advocates for experi-
ments on the brain, only ventures to say modestly, that he
thinks they will have a tendency towards the discovery of some
general truth. Professor Pansch, of Keil, moreover, one of the
late writers on the subject, is entirely opposed to division of the
* Vide Gazette des Hopitaux from April 6 to JuneS, 1865, for the discussions
on this case. It is remarkable that Dr Ferrier never referred to this case in his
work on The Functions of the Brain.
f Vide Journal of Psychological Medicine, vol. iv., part I.
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 25
brain into lobes, and proposes that it should be divided into
principal convolutions, and these again into smaller sulci, and
gyri.
Notwithstanding all the irrepressible facts we have just
mentioned, Dr Ferrier lias published his materialistic and fact-
less fancies in an article in the Princeton Gazette* for July 1879,
entitled The Organ of Mind, and there he makes the astound-
ing and positive assertion, that it is " the brain that thinks . . .
in connection with the whole sensory and nervous apparatus ! "
This is a petitio principii fallacy?the bane of modern science.
One of the miserable consequences of physiological psycho-
logy is, that having no sound fundamental principles for its
basis, it involves its disciples in inextricable confusion of ideas,
and entanglement of words. This is still further illustrated
by the following remark of Dr Ferrier's in the same article :
" Mental phenomena are the subjective aspect of the functions
of sensory and motor substrata, and that, in the last analysis,
mental phenomena, however complex, should be reducible to
correlation with the activity of certain simple motor and sensory
elements, their accompaniments and combinations." In the
vain attempt to cross the chasm which separates mind from
matter, Dr Ferrier became giddy in his flight, and has fallen
down hopelessly crippled and confounded.
Unfortunately, the propagandism of physiological psycho-
logy does not end with Dr Ferrier. In the Nineteenth Centui*y
for December 1879 Dr Althaus, in speaking of the localisa-
tion of the faculty of intelligent language in the third left
frontal convolution of the brain and its immediate neighbour-
hood, says : " This discovery was foreshadowed by Gall but
actually made by Broca " ! One of the proofs of the truth of
this discovery is, that when "electricity is applied to this part in
the brain of the living monkey or rabbit the animal opens its
mouth, and alternately obtrudes and retracts its tongue," in
its efforts, we presume, to say, Don't.
Dr Andrew Wilson, in an article on The Old Phrenology
and the New, in the Gentleman's Magazine for January 1879,
says: " Our 'New Phenology '?for the word is perfectly explicit
as denoting a science of mind or brain?is gradually being
built up from sure data and accurate experimentation.
Another publication, Mind, established a few years since,
* AVe have no fear that the Americans, who are a clear-headed and practical
people, should take Dr Ferrier's assertions for facts. We are convinced of this by
an admirable jcu $ esprit ?which appeared not long since in an American paper. It
described with an ingenious air of truth and scientific minuteness a wonderful
instrument called a ccrebroscope, by which the learned in\entor could see the
thoughts and sentiments as they arose in the brain. The account of the invention
wag copied into The Journal of Psychological Medicine, vol. v., part II.
26 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
has been doing its utmost to propagate the baneful doctrines of
physiological psychology and positivism ; but fortunately, owing
to the dreary dulness of its articles, it is not likely to become
popular. In the number for April 187ii, there is a paper by
Mr. Stavely Hall on the oft-told but ever-interesting story of
Laura Bridgman, from which he flatters himself that he can
gather facts in support of the views of his school. He has been
unfortunate in his selection of this case. Blind, deaf, and
dumb as she was from infancy, she learnt to communicate with
the outer world by the means of the sense of touch alone, and
it was observed that when dreaming, or thinking earnestly, her
fingers moved like the lips of a person in deep thought. This
shows the independent working of the human mind.
In the course of his disquisition, Mr. Stavely Hall makes the
following incomprehensible remarks :?" Dreaming and waking
notions are related as species and genera"; and he says of the sleep-
ing state, " Inner work has brought cells [of the brain] into un-
stable equilibrium, and excitability very easily becomes excitation.
Where the work of repair is not done, the slight stimuli of the
sleeping state is not sufficient to rouse them ; where it is done,
the almost spontaneous activity of rested cells easily raises their
?processes above the threshold of consciousness." This is the
sort of nonsense that is talked nowaday in the name of science
and philosophy.
The Edinburgh Review for January 1879, in an article on
Mental Physiology, has endorsed some of the boldest and most
extravagant views of the materialistic physiologists. The writer,
in referring to the recent experiments of Hitzig, Fritsch,
Ferrier, and others, of trying to determine by electricity the
centres of motion in the brain, observes : " There can be no
doubt that in these experiments ideas were excited in the brains
of the insensible animals by the physical agency of electrical
currents. The brain-convolutions in reality consist of a number
of distinct mind-centres, spread out in a kind of vault over the
subordinate centres of nerve-action, which have the charge of
consciousness, and are arranged layer above layer." What a
boon this will be to a poor author, who has to cater weekly for
the gratification of the public, to find that when his ideas
are exhausted he can command a fresh supply by passing
electric currents through his brain ! He goes so far as to say that
the sensory ganglia take cognisance of sensuous impressions
and also of mental.states, thus endowing brain cells with the
mental faculty of cognisance. He also says that the brain
substance itself accomplishes the task of transmuting the
impressions of sense into ideas. The term idea has always been
regarded as synonymous with thought or conception ; they are
TIIE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 27
among the highest manifestations of the mind, and as yet it has
been found impossible to account for them by any physical
Jaws. Further, he draws the following conclusions from what
he considers the recent progress in scientific discovery : that,
with every expression of a mental state, and with every action
of the mind, some structural change occurs in the substance of
the brain."
We must protest against the acceptance of this hypothesis
as an absolute truth. Had the question at stake been less
momentous than that of the immateriality of the mind its
dissemination might have been of little consequence ; but when
the issue is so tremendous, it is right that the general public,
for whom the editor of the Edinburgh writes, and who cannot
be expected to be familiar with the principles of a recondite
and intricate science, should be cautioned against accepting
mere speculations as verified facts.
A brief consideration of the writer's conclusion will be
sufficient to show that it is another striking example ot the
petitio jprincipii fallacy. Neither the writer nor anyone else
has demonstrated that with every act of the intellect some
structural change occurs in the substance of the brain; that
mind-action is the result of chemical decomposition of brain-
pulp, or that the transmission of mind-force between the
several globules of the brain is effected in the same manner.
The brain is confined in a bony case which renders it impossible
to watch its vital operations through the microscope. We
must wait until the " cerebroscope" is realised before the
physiologists can be in a position to speak positively on the
point.
Dr Allman in his address, at the meeting of the British
Association at Sheffield, made a similar psychological blunder
as the critic in the Edinburgh Review. He said when a
thought passed through the mind it is associated, as we have
now abundant reason for believing, with some change in the
protoplasm of the cerebral cells. The fact is that we are
not yet in possession of data to substantiate such an
assertion, and it is of the utmost importance that a hasty
opinion should not be formed on a question so closely associated
with the independence of the human mind. This bold assertion,
which has been accepted by many as an established truth,
is the keynote of those who style^ themselves physiological
psychologists, and whose endeavour it is to materialise mental
phenomena, and identify mind with matter. In our waking
moments it has never been demonstrated that a thought effects
any change in the protoplasm of ganglionic cells of the brain;
how utterl}7 inconceivable it is then, that a subtle intangible
28 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
thought, such as flits across the mind in a dream, should produce
the slightest molecular alteration, especially at the very time
when the nervous system is recuperating itself by rest, and is
supposed to be least susceptible to impressions!
The doctrine of a correlation of force gives no support to
physiological psychology: Grove's doctrine is applied most
loosely. There is no evidence to show, as many assert, that
mental,-vital, and physical forces are identical. There is strong
ground for believing that Grove's doctrine of the correlation of
force applies to heat, electricity, chemical affinity, and motion ;
but there is no proof that it can be extended to mental or vital
phenomena. Before a correlation of forces can be admitted, it
is necessary, according to Mr. Justice Grove's explanation, to
prove a mutual convertibility?a see-saw sort of action. Thus
heat may mediately or immediately produce electricity, elec-
tricity may produce heat. With a total disregard of this clear
statement, modern writers speak of the correlation (forgetting
to add the word " force") of leaves and roots, of mental and
nerve force, of vital and physical force, &c. If we apply the
test of Grove's theory to the consideration of vital phenomena,
we shall not find that a single instance has been recorded
in which vital and physical force have been found inter-
changeable.
In the present day it is the practice of many scientific
writers to use the terms correlation, evolution, and potentiality,
to account for things that they cannot explain. They are
used in a sort of hocus-pocus fashion. For instance, if it is asked,
How did man originate ??the ready answer is, By evolution.
What is life ??The potentiality of atoms. What is mind ??A
correlation of magnetic and psychic forces.
The phenomena of insanity have been referred to on in-
sufficient grounds by materialistic physiologists in proof of their
theory. They refer to those particular cases of mental derange-
ment in which marked signs of brain disease have been dis-
covered after death. They also regard the beneficial effects
which often result from physical remedies, as confirming this
view. That bodily disorders will affect the mind is unques-
tioned, but the converse is equally true, that mental causes will
produce derangement of the bodily organs ; and the physiological
psychologists are asked to explain how it happens that in many
cases of acute mania, ending rapidly in death, a post-mortem
examination cannot detect any change in the substance of the
brain. The decided influence of the mind on the body is, how-
ever, patent to the most superficial observer. Is there any
cordial like hope to the poor sufferer prostrated by nervous
depression from domestic or other mental anxiety ? Or, will
not some moral shock, such as the sudden announcement of
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 29
misfortune or bereavement, shattering all hope of worldly pros-
perity or home happiness, convert a healthy man into a raving
lunatic ?
All those who have resided much with the insane can bear
witness to the intelligence and accomplishments frequently ob-
served in patients suffering from incurable brain disease, and
to the lighting up of the mind during the last moments of life.
One case especially occurs to me, that of an old lady who was
formerly under my care. She had passed the greater part of
her life in an asylum, and during that period had never been
for a moment coherent, yet just before her dissolution she spoke
quite sensibly.
It is a well-known fact that in uncomplicated cases of acute
mania, where death ensues rapidly from exhaustion, a 'post-
mortem examination detects no change in the substance of the
brain, although the membrane may be congested, a common
occurrence not peculiar to insanity. Again, in cases of mania
transitoria, how is it possible to associate the delirium, which
lasts only & few hours, with lesion of the brain ?
The phenomena of dreaming, which closely resembles some
forms of insanity, may be noticed here. The analogy between
the phantasms of the one and the hallucinations of the other is
very remarkable, and the rival schools of the subjectivists and
objectivists both claim these phenomena as evidence of the
truth of their respective theories. To us it appears that the
balance of the arguments are on the side of the subjective view,
for what can be less material than "the stuff that dreams are
made of"? In dreams, when the mind is uninfluenced by
external impressions, it is left to wander fancy free among the
images and memories of the past. Consciousness and memory
are not lost, and the emotions and imagination are in full
force.
The most obscure problem connected with sleep and dream-
ing, and the one respecting which there are such conflicting
opinions, is that which relates to the state of the mind in what
is called dreamless sleep. Some assert that at such times the
mind is a perfect blank; others, as it appears to me, with more
probability, that the profoundest gleep is not unattended with
dreams, though sometimes they are as utterly forgotten as if
they had never occurred.
With a view of throwing light upon the question of the
subjectivity of dreams, and of ascertaining whether the images
which occur in sleep are viewed by the " mind's eye," after
long deprivation of sight, or are merely automatic excitations
of a sense surface, I sought the experience of Dr W. A. F.
Browne, of Dumfries, who has been blind for seven years. Mo
living psychologist is more competent to give an opinion on
30 THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
this abstruse subject. He kindly sent me the following analysis
of his mental state during sleep, with permission to publish it.
He observes : " I have been blind for seven years, and being of a
nervous active temperament, there has been a continuous stream
of thought presented to consciousness. These thoughts have
consisted mainly, but not exclusively, in the reproduction of
former impressions. First, I have never experienced recollec-
tions of taste, smell, rarely of touch ; frequently of hearing, and
necessarily of vision. These impressions refer in great measure
to past time, and to the earlier portions of my life ; but a vast
portion do not. I have long since rejected the photographic
hypothesis. Secondly, because the mental conditions are
entirely new to myself; they are discoveries, creations. Thirdly,
where this is not the case, and these conditions are combi-
nations of familiar and unknown scenes or impressions, it is
obvious that the act of uniting them into a congruous whole
cannot be the effect of volition or any conscious mental opera-
tion, and is utterly inconsistent with any photographic mani-
pulation, or the fortuitous union of a hundred photographs.
Fourthly, independently altogether of visual impressions, emo-
tions and sentiments are experienced during sleep, such as fear
or hope, which may or may not be the natural results of the
existing mental state, and which cannot, in any sense, be of
photographic origin. Fifthly, it is worthy of note that, how-
ever distant the period at which the impressions may have been
received, say in early childhood, it is invariably the present
Ego which sees it, hears it, and is identified with it."
The new phrenologists having settled, to their own satisfac-
tion, that each faculty of the mind has a special seat of its
own in which to carry on its operations, it only remained to
explain its modus operandi. Each centre is supposed to be
under the control of a number of brain-cells?a sort of limited
liability company of molecules?which alone is responsible for
any evil thoughts it may engender. This little hypothesis
only requires us to assume, in the first place, that each cell is
endowed with mental attributes. This resembles the theory of
Leibnitz?that monads had perceptions and appetites.
It has never been proved that the cells of the brain are
exempt from that law of constant renewal which generally
obtains in the soft tissues of the body. The probability is,
from its delicate texture, that it is constantly in need of
renovation. Its fragility is conspicuous after death, for it is a
fact familiar to every student of anatomy, that it is one of
the very first parts of the body that decomposes. If, then, the
brain be of such a perishable nature, it is incredible that
images or ideas impressed by any merely physical process on
the cells of the brain could be vividly recalled after a long
THE COLLAPSE OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM. 31
period of time, when tlie matter of the very cells which were
supposed to have received them had been replaced by new
matter.
The last subject of physiological psychology we propose to
notice is that of unconscious cerebration ; it need not detain
us long. The supposed function of the brain was announced as
a new discovery by Dr Carpenter. It assumed that the human
brain is capable of carrying on trains of reasoning, of drawing
conclusions and forming conscious ideas without consciousness ;
in fact, that the higher faculties of the mind can be exercised
independently of the mind itself! If this were true, it would
reduce all human beings to mere automata; a very pleasant
creed for those who dislike mental labour, as it is supposed
to do a great deal of our thinking without any trouble to our-
selves, like the working of a steam engine.
Another incomprehensible notion allied to unconscious cere-
bration, is, what the advanced physiologists have named ideo-
motor actions, involuntarily performed under the direction of
ideas. As, therefore, the former relieves us from all responsi-
bility as to our thoughts, so the latter exonerates us from all the
blame of evil actions. Very comfortable doctrines these for
those who desire to follow the bent of vicious inclinations without
let or hindrance. The chief Tacts which gave rise to these
theories are those connected with walking, and with the rapid
movements of an accomplished musician's hands; and the
singular manner in which a person recalls to his memory a word
or thought that seemed utterly forgotten. As regards the first,
it is probable that when a command over any particular set of
muscles has been obtained, the amount of attention given to the
direction of the movements is so small, and the recognition of
it so faint, as to escape the memory. The second instance may
be accounted for by the laws of mental association.
A strong indication that physiological psychology has
broken down, is evinced by the circumstance that Dr Hughlings-
Jackson, one of its leading authorities and most strenuous sup-
porters, is at length compelled to admit that metaphysics and
physics are distinct branches of science, and must be kept apart.
He writes in the Medical Press for September 3, 1879 : "In
a scientific investigation of nervous diseases, it is essential to
keep distinct psychology and the anatomy and physiology of
the nervous system. ... I have been misled by not having seen
the distinctness of physical (nervous) states and psychical states,*
in my earlier studies, and thus I feel bold to point out the evil
* Another puzzled materialist, writing in the British Medical Journal for
November 8, 1879, flutters himself that he can get out of the difficulty by sub-
stituting the term psychological physiology for physiological psychology. "Strange
such difference should be 'twixt tweedledum and tweedledee."
32 THE COLLAPSE OP SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM.
results of the confusion of the two things." Dr Hughlings-
Jackson must not think that he has acted with extraordinary
boldness in making these remarks. He has not been the first
to mount the breach. I pointed out the fallacies of physio-
logical psychology in an article on Materialistic Physioloy
in vol. iii., new series, of the Journal of Psychological
Medicine.
The modern cerebral physiologists have been guilty of a
serious and culpable error in their attempt to explain mental
phenomena by a hasty generalisation from the very few facts
that are known respecting the nature and properties of the
ganglionic cells so extensively diffused throughout the cortical
substance of the brain. The mind is an entity?a first
principle?and it is as unphilosophical as it is inconceivable
that matter should think.
Their hasty and illogical conclusions would have mattered
comparatively but little, if the question at issue had reference
only to physical science ; but when their haphazard speculations
tend to shake a belief in the independence of the human
mind?a belief that has been upheld by the greatest philosophers
both of ancient and modern times?they might surely have
hesitated before enunciating doctrines which, if true, would make
man an irresponsible agent and sap the foundations of morality
and religion.
From all the facts that have been adduced, it must be
patent to every unprejudiced inquirer that physical force cannot
account for life; that neither bathybius nor spontaneous generation
can explain the origin of bioplasm ; that our first parents were
not grovelling savages; that evolution is not the First Cause ;
that physiological psychology has not solved the mystery of
the human mind; and that, when tested by the irrepressible,
inextinguishable, irresistible, inexorable logic of facts, the
pseudo philosophy of scientific atheism collapses?ignomi-
niously collapses.?Q.E.D.
