The Study of Medical Psychology? Circles of Mental Disorders? Modern Nervous Diseases? Education In Relation to Mental Diseases
================================================================================================================================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Art. I.? *
:Author: J. Crichton Browne, M.D., Edin., LL.D., F.R.S.E., Lord Chancellor's Visitor of
Lunatics.

The General Council of Medical Education and Registration, at
its recent session, declined to recommend the licensing bodies
of this kingdom to make mental diseases a subject of separate
examination for all degrees and licences to practise medicine;
and those who know most of the state of medical education on
the one hand, and of Psychological Medicine on the other, will,
I think, approve the decision at which the Council arrived.
The curriculum which a student of medicine has to pursue is
already so laborious and varied, that cogent reasons ought to
be adduced for adding in any way to its intricacy and burdens;
while the teachings of psychological medicine are still so ambi-
guous and unsystematic, that they can scarcely pretend to
supply either much useful instruction or a valuable discipline
to the mind. A speciality in medicine?and psychological
medicine is a natural and inevitable speciality?is a late differ-
entiation of professional knowledge, and implies skill and at-
tainments that should be sought for only after a liberal general
training is complete. To incorporate special study with general
medical education is, therefore, to do injustice to both; for
general medical education, which already fully occupies the
time set apart for it, must be detrimentally curtailed or com-
pressed to make room for the special study; and the special
study cannot be advantageously carried on while the foundations

* An address delivered at the opening of the section of Psychology, at the
forty-eighth Annual Meeting of the British Medical Association, at Cambridge.

on which it ought to rest have not been wholly laid down nor
thoroughly consolidated. Facilities for the special study of
medical psychology, and perhaps also some test of proficiency in
it., ought to be provided for those who propose to devote them-
selves to lunacy practice ; but no one should be encouraged to
avail himself of these facilities, nor submit to this test, until he
lias finished his general medical studies and surmounted his
examinations. For those, however, who look to general prac-
tice, such an acquaintance with insanity as may be obtained in
connection with the study of physiology, medicine, and medical
jurisprudence, should be considered sufficient, until the exigen-
cies of professional life bring with them their special and
inimitable training in this as in so many other subjects.
But, while we deprecate the introduction of the subject of
mental diseases into medical education and examinations, we
may, without inconsistency, applaud its recognition by this
Association, and the dedication of a Section to its consideration
at these annual meetings ; for this Association, representing as
it does the breadth and culture of the profession, its theoretical
scope and practical aims, could not, without grievous default,
ignore a department of medical science that is in intimate rela-
tion with philosophy, and a branch of practice that deals with
a large class of diseases, and in which a numerous body of able
and painstaking men are engaged. To overlook medical psycho-
logy at these meetings, and to relegate the consideration of it
to societies composed entirely of those who march under its
banner, would, it seems to me, be to inflict some deprivation on
medical psychologists and the Association generally. It would
be to deprive the former of the benefit they draw from con-
trasting their special experiences ; while at the same time they
come in contact with professional brethren of views and habits
of thought different from their own, and obtain a commanding
survey of the whole field of medicine, with its broad central ex-
panses and fringe of minor allotments. And it would deprive
the latter of the advantage it derives from bringing before its
members in a convenient way whatever advances are being
made in the knowledge and treatment of a group of diseases
that have an ever-growing interest for all who practise medicine.
Medical psychology is, as I have said, an inevitable speciality;
but it is a speciality that is broadly based on general medicine,
and that tends not, as some specialities unhappily do, to become
pedunculated into a quackery, but to increase the breadth and
depth of its attachments to the parent stock. It becomes daily
more and more apparent that a bodily derangement is respon-
sible for every mental disorder, and that a mental element
mingles with every bodily disease. Upon the medical psycho-
logist, therefore, it is incumbent to keep abreast of general
pathology, while upon the general practitioner it is incumbent
to know something of the progress of psychological medicine.
And how important to the public it is that the duty of each of
them in these respects should be diligently performed, becomes
apparent when we contemplate the number of victims of mental
disease that we have with us now, and of diseases which,
although they may not be designated mental, nor fall immedi-
ately within the province of medical psychology, are still in
close alliance with insanity.

According to the latest official returns, there were, on
January 1 last, 71,191 lunatics, idiots, and persons of unsound
mind in England and Wales, 9,624 in Scotland, and 12,819 in
Ireland?making a grand total of 93,634 persons labouring
under mental diseases or defects in Great Britain and Ireland.
Rut this grand total, we must recollect, represents only certified
or officially recognised lunatics and idiots, and corresponds with
an inner circle of insanity, marked off by an arbitrary and
somewhat shifting line, and outside of which lies a second circle,
embracing a multitude of persons who are subject to no legal
restraint, but still come to a large extent under medical super-
vision, and cannot be shut out from any scientific survey of in-
sanity. Within this second circle?the crazy circle, I should
be inclined to call it?fall lunatics whose mental disease,
although patent enough, is of so inoffensive a kind that it is not
thought justifiable to interfere with their liberty; lunatics
whose mental disease is concealed; and lunatics whose mental
disease is of a partial character, and is not, perhaps, popularly
regarded as mental disease at all. Here we have instances of
incipient insanity that has not yet expanded into dimensions
that are perceptible to the eye of the law, and of chronic
insanity that has crept out of its range of vision; and hosts of
eccentric, half-mad, crack-brained, and imbecile persons, who
move about in every grade of society. No census of the popu-
lation of this second or crazy circle has ever been attempted;
but that it is very great, may be inferred from a number of
circumstances. The late Premier told us that he had to keep
a capacious bag for the crazy correspondence from presumably
sensible people that was constantly pouring in upon him; and
the Astronomer-Royal, we are informed, has a row of pigeon-
holes, in which are stowed away the mad communications as to
perpetual motion, the squaring of the circle, and other obscure
problems, that reach him daily from unappreciated lunatics.
Our courts of justice are but too often engaged in investigating
crimes committed by indisputable lunatics, whose insanity was
not noticed until it culminated in violence or fraud; and our
coroners can tell a dismal tale of the consequences of mental
disease that has never secured official recognition. There are
now upwards of 1,700 suicides in England and Wales annually,
and of these not more than thirty occur amongst registered
lunatics of all classes; but in at least three-fourths of these
1,700 suicides, as appears from evidence given at the inquests,
there were distinct signs of mental unsoundness preceding,
often for considerable periods, the act of self-destruction ; and,
as suicide is but the crowning expression of melancholia of a
certain intensity, and is only resorted to by a small percentage
of those who suffer from mental despondency, the fact that
not fewer than 1,300 suicides of unregistered insane persons
take place in England and Wales yearly, reveals great un-
fathomed depths of mental unhealthiness in our community.

And the experience of medical men also points to vast reserves
of hidden and unauthenticated insanity. Of the patients whom
they are called on to certify insane, a large proportion have
been more or less mentally deranged for months, or even years,
before the date at which legal or medical intervention is
deemed requisite; and of the patients who seek their advice
for mere bodily ailments, a certain number prove to be unmis-
takably mad, even when they are figuring as useful members of
society, and are unsuspected, save by their nearest relatives, of
any mental taint.

With the view of obtaining an approximate estimate of
the contents of the crazy circle, I some time ago asked a few
of my friends, both lay and medical, to scrutinise for me their
own acquaintance, and to jot down, firstly, the number of
acknowledged lunatics within that acquaintance, whether in
asylums, boarded in private houses, or at home; and, secondly,
the number of individuals included in it who, although not cer-
tified or acknowledged lunatics, are still held in general
estimation to be non compos mentis?eccentric or half-mad.
Well, the result of that inquiry was that, within its range, the
half-mad were to the mad as two to one; from which we should
have to conclude that there are at the present time upwards of
180,000 occupants of our crazy circle in the United Kingdom.
Now, I am not inclined to adopt or defend that computation,
nor to attach undue importance to an inquiry so trivial in
character, and so beset with sources of fallacy. I only refer to
it as affording some corroboration of the belief that there is
much unrecognised insanity in the country, and that the crazy
circle is densely populated.

But if we had summed up all the constituents of the crazy
circle surrounding the circle of recognised insanity, we should still
not have exhausted the material with which medical psychology
is concerned; for, beyond the crazy circle, there lies another
and an outer circle, which may be named neurotic, and in
which are assembled the sufferers from all forms of nervous
disease that are not necessarily accompanied by mental dis-
order, but that must be placed in the same category with
insanity, and that in mauy instances tend towards it. These
are epilepsy and paralysis, locomotor ataxia, and every sort of
spinal mischief, neuralgia, hysteria, chorea, and, indeed, the
whole order of nervous diseases, which it need scarcely be said,
are widely prevalent amongst our population. The returns of
the Registrar-Greneral, which are unavoidably most imperfect
on this point, show that nearly 70,000 deaths are attributed to
nervous diseases in England and Wales each year; and as
these diseases are not all acute in their course, and are some-
times much protracted, this rate of mortality betokens that
the number of persons afflicted by them and living at one time
must be very considerable.

In the three concentric circles that I have enumerated,
the insane, the crazy, and the neurotic, interchange and cir-
culation is of course perpetually going on. They are incessantly
agitated by centripetal, and centrifugal, and rotatory currents.
A person who has been simply neurotic becomes suddenly
insane, and rushes into the central circle. A certified lunatic
recovers partially, and, being emancipated from restraint, steps
into the crazy circle. And a crazy being, with occasional acute
exacerbations of his craziness requiring temporary asylum
treatment, oscillates between the crazy and insane circles. And,
as I have already hinted, these circles are not sharply demar-
cated from each other. On the contrary, the whole mass of
mental and nerve disease is finely gradated from the centre
to the circumference, and the lines inclosing the circles into
which it is for convenience divided, are drawn in an arbitrary
manner, and are not by any means fixed and immovable.
Hence the difficulties that arise in determining whether the
contents of any of the circles are increasing or diminishing,
for the shifting of the containing line in the slightest degree
would obviously altogether vitiate any comparison of the quan-
tity of the contents of any two circles at two periods, one before
and the other after the shifting. With reference to the insane
circle, it is alleged that its radius, which is really the definition
of insanity, is of an elastic nature, and has been stretched in
modern times so that this circle now comprehends much that
formerly belonged to the circle of craziness. And thus an
explanation, that will not seriously alarm us, is offered of
the startling fact that the number of our registered lunatics
and idiots has nearly doubled itself in the last twenty-
one years, having increased from 37,762 in 1859, to 71,191
on the 1st of January last. Under the influence of the
lunacy laws, we are told, and of a more liberal popular con-
ception of insanity, a considerable belt of what was formerly
the crazy circle has been annexed to the insane one; and this
annexation, together with the enlargement of all the circles in
proportion to the increase of the population, will account for its
strangely increased dimensions, and for the enormous increment
of lunatics and idiots with which we have now to deal. For
my part, I am not able to credit this flattering tale, nor to
perceive any proof that the definition of insanity has been
extended in the manner alleged; but I cannot pause here to
examine this vexed and entangled question by the old methods.
I desire rather to call your attention to the dimensions of the
outer, or neurotic, rather than to those of the inner, or insane
circle; and in doing so I may, perhaps, throw some light on the
dispute as to the real or fictitious character of the enlargement
of the latter. For, probably, a certain proportion is maintained
between these two circles. Many nervous diseases lead up to
and eventuate in mental derangement, and the neuroses of one
generation are not rarely the insanice of the next. We should
expect, therefore, that any marked increase or diminution in
neurotic affections would be followed, after a time, by a corre-
sponding rise or fall in the rate of prevalence of affections of
the mind.

Well, the fact seems to be that neurotic affections are
increasing and multiplying on every hand. Dr Beard, an
American physician, who has studied the subject with much
ability, maintains that an entirely new state of the system, a
morbid nervousness, unknown to the ancients or to the fathers of
medicine, has developed itself amongst his countrymen during
the last half century. This state declares itself in neuralgia,
sick-headache, dyspepsia, hay-fever, and above all in neuras-
thenia or nervous exhaustion; and Dr Beard appears to think
that this it is that has set its stamp upon bodily configuration
?making the Americans taller, thinner, and lanker than their
original stock in England and Germany. The indications which
he adduces of the unprecedented nervousness of the inhabitants
of the United States, when that nervousness has not mounted
into actual disease, are their increased sensitiveness to cold and
heat, rendering them unable to live with comfort in rooms of a
temperature lower than 70? Fahr., their greatly augmented sus-
ceptibility to the action of stimulants and narcotics, the custo-
mary doses of which have had to be universally reduced in
modern times; the premature decay of their teeth, and their
inability to digest pork, which their grandfathers partook of in
large quantities with impunity. From his own observations,
and from the information which he has obtained from old and
experienced physicians, and from medical literature. Dr Beard
unhesitatingly concludes that all nervous diseases are on the
increase in America, that many bodily diseases are assuming a
nervous or asthenic type, and that nervous exhaustion is so com-
mon that it must be regarded as a distinct disease, of which
there are several varieties.

In this country nervousness has not certainly obtained the
ascendency that it is represented by American physicians to
have secured, at least in certain districts?notably in the Northern
and Eastern States?on the other side of the Atlantic. And
yet we are not without evidences that nervousness, that is to
say, the nervous temperament and diathesis, are much more
common in these islands than they used to be, and that in some
respects we are approaching the state of matters that exists in
America. It has even been maintained that in bodily habit
our people are visibly adopting the style of Brother Jonathan,
and that fat people are less numerous, and thin people more
numerous, in the well-fed classes of society than was formerly
the case. Allowing, it is said, for the effect of changes in diet,
and for the deceptions which changes of costume, like that from
crinoline to tying-back and Jerseys, may create, it is still mani-
fest that our nation is growing thinner as a whole, and that
plumpness is giving place to elegant attenuation. I daresay
many of us recollect Hawthorne's description of a middle-aged
English woman as she appeared to him in 1863. "She had an
awful ponderosity of frame," it ran, " not pulpy, like the looser
development of our few fat women, but massive, with solid beef
and streaky tallow, so that (though struggling manfully against
the idea) you inevitably think of her as made of steaks
and sirloins. When she walks, her advance is elephantine ; when
she sits down, it is on a great round space of her Maker's foot-
stool, where she looks as if nothing could ever move her." That
was a coarse and ungracious caricature to come from a pen
usually so dainty and kindly as that of Hawthorne, but it would,
I think, give comparatively little offence if published now,
compared with the storm of indignation that greeted it at the
date of its appearance, and simply for the reason that there
would be less truth in it. Very stout women, even middle-
aged, are, I fancy, less frequently met with than they formerly
were; while our young women, although, happily, far from
rivalling the slimness of American girls, are, on the average,
probably thinner than their grandmothers were at the same
age. If this is so, we can only attribute the change which has
taken place to the influence of the conditions of modern life
upon the nervous system, and through the nervous system upon
the nutrition of the tissues. The female sex is of nervous
temperament as compared with the male sex, and Laycock used
to say that feminine and nervous were synonymous terms. It
is, therefore, in women that we should expect to find the earliest
and most marked manifestations of changes in the nervous
system, influencing nutrition, like those just alluded to, and
also of changes establishing greater susceptibility in sensory
perception, which has also been pointed to as a sign of the
growing nervousness of the age. Our refined and nicely dis-
criminating nerves, it has been asserted, cannot, without dis-
comfort, endure the strong impressions that give to coarse
nervous organisations only an agreeable stimulus; and hence
the substitution in modern decorative art of delicate combina-
tions and neutral tints, for the glare of primary hues, of orange
and red and purple, which were in vogue in days less nervous
than ours.

All this, however, is somewhat problematical, and we are
not without more definite proofs that nervousness is increasing
amongst us. What might perhaps be regarded as the best of
all proofs of that proposition?an increase in the rate of morta-
lity from nervous diseases, the results of nervousness?cannot be
adduced in its support, for the returns show that nervous
diseases, as a whole, were as fatal twenty years ago as they are
now, and that the number of deaths ascribed to them has fluctu-
ated very little from year to year. But it is to be borne in
mind that the death-rate from nervous diseases, as officially
set forth, is but a fallacious guide to any estimate of their
prevalence, for a large number of the victims of nervous disease
succumb to inter-current maladies, which are registered as the
causes of death ; and nervous diseases might be disseminating
themselves widely amongst us, while nothing in the death-rate
gave token of the process. Then, analysis of the return of deaths
due to diseases of the nervous system reveals that, while that
return, as a whole, has undergone little change, remarkable
changes have taken place in the items of which it is made up.
A great reduction has taken place in the number of deaths
ascribed to " convulsions "?a term which used to cover a multi-
tude of infantile ailments, many of them not nervous at all, and
which is still too indiscriminately applied; while a compen-
satory augmentation has taken place in the number of deaths
ascribed to other and less obscure diseases of the nervous
system, about which there could be no mistake. As, then,
owing to increased care and skill in diagnosis, a large number
of deaths, which were formerly improperly classified under
diseases of the nervous system, are now classified under other
headings, and as, notwithstanding this, the death-rate from
diseases of the nervous system remains the same, we are entitled
to conclude that there has been an increase in the death-rate
from nervous diseases, although this is not apparent on the face
of the return.

It is not, however, in connection with the death-rate due to
diseases of the nervous system themselves, that the increasing
nervousness of this country is most clearly evinced. That
comes out most distinctly in connection with the prevalence of
other diseases not called nervous, but containing a powerful
nervous ingredient. In diabetes the nervous system plays an
important part, and the highest authorities are agreed that
it is often brought on by mental anxiety and distress, or by
sudden fear and shock. Well, diabetes is advancing with
rapid strides in this country. In the year 1863 it caused
27 deaths in every hundred thousand persons living; in the
year 1878 it caused 43 deaths in every hundred thousand
living, having advanced steadily year by year in the interim.
Dr Pavy, who speaks from an unique experience, and with un-
surpassed insight, is satisfied that these figures cannot he
explained away by supposing that there is a more painstaking-
search for, and a readier recognition of, the disease now-a-days
than of yore. He believes that the disease is decidedly more
common than it was, and he attributes its greater prevalence to
the increased wear and tear of these times. Kidney diseases,
including under these nephritis and Bright's disease, have also
advanced rapidly in recent years, having caused 338 deaths in
every hundred thousand persons living in 1878, against 215 in
the same number living in 1863 ; and in kidney diseases, we
are now taught to believe, conditions of the nervous system aie
often involved. Dr Clifford Allbutt has shown that mental
worry is the chief cause of granular kidney; and Dr George
Johnson, while not agreeing with Dr Allbutt on this point,
holds that there is a real etiological relation between mental
anxiety and some cases of albuminuria, and that mental emotion
often aggravates chronic renal diseases. Heart diseases are
year by year advancing all along the line, and particularly in
their neurotic wing. They caused 909 deaths in every hundred
thousand persons living in 1863, and 1373 deaths in every hun-
dred thousand living in 1878; and the movement must be
traced, in part at least, as Dr Quain and Dr Fothergill have
pointed out, to the operation of the conditions of modern life,
through the nervous system, upon the organs of circulation. The
deaths due to aneurism, which, in my experience, is as much
connected with mental as with physical strain, have increased in
proportion to the deaths from heart disease. Rheumatism, in
which there is unquestionably a nervous element, and gout, the
neurotic character of which lias been ingeniously vindicated by
Dr Duckworth, are both much more fatal than they were twenty
years ago.

But without any increase in the death-rate from diseases in
which there is a nervous element, or from nervous diseases
themselves, it is still possible that the latter might be multi-
plying amongst us in a disastrous manner. For there are
diseases of this class which do not shorten life. They cause
chronic invalidism ; they cripple power, and mar usefulness ;
they spread wretchedness around ; they embitter existence, but
they do not curtail it. Indeed, it might be argued that a few
mild types of nervous disease are favourable to longevity, by
imposing on those whom they afflict a strict regard to health, by
withdrawing them from participation in pursuits that are beset
with risks, and by creating a state of system that is indisposed
to acute inflammatory attacks. Many observant medical men
are of opinion that cases of the minor nervous affections, about
which no statistics are available, of hysteria and fidgets, herpes
zoster and urticaria, writers' cramp, and sick headache, are now
studded over practice with a profusion that was formerly un-
known. Premature baldness is far more frequent than it used
to be. Early decay of the teeth occurs in the rising generation
with painful frequency. Annual holidays have become a neces-
sity, instead of a luxury. A new literature of neurology has
sprung up of late years. New hospitals dedicated to the treat-
ment of nervous diseases have been established; a new set of
specialist physicians have adopted that line of practice. The
consumption of neurotic remedies, of morphia, hyoscyamus,
conium, chloral, the bromides, arsenic, strychnia, and gelsemi-
num, is enormously on the increase, as is also the consumption
of neurotic beverages like tea and coffee, and that great nerve
sedative, tobacco.

These facts and considerations, and many more of like import,
which might be placed before you did time permit, seem to
warrant the inferences that nervousness and nervous diseases
are increasing in this country, that the neurotic circle is enlarg-
ing out of proportion to the increase of the population, and that
the crazy and insane circles, which draw from it the bulk of
their constituents, are also probably enlarging in a manner
disproportionate to the increase of population.
To inquire fully into the causes of this increase of nervous-
ness and nervous disease would be to enter oil an investigation
of great interest but of vast extent. They may all, however, be
summed up under, first, the increasing complexity of the nervous
system, and, secondly, the increasing complexity of life. Neural
development is still going on in the brain. It is not improbable
that that organ is increasing in size in our race, and, of course,
an addition to its weight that would be imperceptible in the
scales might be of profound import in relation to its functional
activity. But without increasing its size, the brain may
elaborate its structure by putting forth new gyri, deepening its
grey matter, developing new cells, and laying down new commis-
sural fibres, to an incalculable degree; and this much is certain,
that whatever their nature be, organic processes are going on in
the brain, by which new impressions and new modes of action
are registered and transmitted from one generation to another.
Thus it is that we, who are of the latest birth of time, inherit
something from all past ages?a legacy which is paid not only
in wealth of printed books, in cultivated continents, in mul-
titudinous cities, in opulence of arts, in obedient armies
of machines and scientific instruments, but in the finer archi-
tecture of our brains, in the enrichment of our nervous systems,
in new phases of intelligence, and even in new proclivities
to disease. For it would seem that subtlety of the higher
nerve-centres brings with it instability, and that as brain-
substance grows finer in texture it becomes more explosive in
nature.

" Intelligence," says Herbert Spencer, "is the adjustment of
the inner to the outer relations." If, then, the outer relations
became more numerous, complex, and heterogeneous, the process
of adjustment must become proportionately more difficult and
hazardous. And outer relations have surely grown numerous,
complex, and heterogeneous in modern times. Our environment
has grown varied and intricate; and our environment it is that
contains these conditions of modern life, which, acting upon
complex and subtle nerve-centres, cause our increased nervous-
ness and increased liability to nervous disease. On every class
and on all ages, the pressure of modern life puts a severer
tension. Competition waxes keener; the struggle for existence
grows more exciting; and that this struggle involves danger is
certain, for statisticians tell us that annuitants, clergymen, and
the well-to-do classes who have to take no thought for the
morrow, live longer than shopkeepers, artisans and labourers,
who have to contend for daily bread. In this struggle, men
find it to their advantage to crowd into towns, and Mr. Bright
looks forward to a gradual diminution of the rural, and an in-
crease of the urban, population. Well, it is in towns that
nervousness and nervous diseases most abound, their growth
being encouraged apparently by the excitement of town life, by
the absence of the refining and tranquillising influences of
nature, and by the relaxation of those social restraints which
conduce to rectitude of conduct in villages and small com-
munities."

Of the many conditions of modern life which may be influ-
ential in promoting nervousness, and therefore in contributing
to the increase of nervous and mental diseases, there is just one
to which I would wish to direct your attention in the time that
remains to me, and that is education. Now, it is perhaps some-
what disquieting to be told that education may be a source of
disease. We have been accustomed to regard it as the panacea
against all diseases, and we have just adopted a national system
of education, and greatly improved our standard of culture and
machinery of instruction, in the hope that we shall thereby
abolish or mitigate most of the evils by which the body politic
is afflicted. Against the beneficial effects of education no
physiologist or medical psychologist can have a word to say.
They know well?none better?that it may be a safeguard of
bodily vigour and mental integrity. Undisciplined grey matter
is apt to be unstable grey matter, and the want of proper exer-
cise, when nourishment is abundantly supplied, favours a rank
and spongy development of feebly acting tissue. The brain
steeped in idleness may degenerate as well as the brain that is
worn and frayed with excessive toil; while ignorance is for ever
betraying the ignorant into a violation of those laws the
observance of which is indispensable to the well-being of the
brain. But, on the other hand, the physiologist and the
psychologist know also that education, while it secures many
and great advantages, brings with it certain dangers that are
peculiarly its own. They know that, under certain circum-
stances and in certain directions, it may be a menace to health,
and sow broadcast the seeds of disease. To them education is
the guidance of growth, and it may be good or bad according
as it is calculated to result in constitutional vigour and a har-
monious and well-balanced development of parts, or in consti-
tutional debility, and a disproportionate and irregular develop-
ment of parts.

The general tendency of education is unquestionably to
increase the activity and susceptibility of the nervous system.
It aims at establishing in the supreme nerve-centres certain
approved channels of least resistance and areas of ready
diffusion, and in doing this it has to modify the nutrition of
these centres and stimulate their growth. It involves increased
use of the brain, during which, of course, a larger supply of
blood is received, and the vessels become enlarged. In the
robust and enduring, this process, if wisely conducted, goes on
without detriment to health, and in certain temperaments even
with advantage to it. But in the fragile and sickly, in those
who are badly nourished or scrofulous, who are unprepared by
inheritance for brain-labour, or who are precocious and excitable,
it may work serious mischief, particularly if it be pushed on
with injudicious haste or ill-considered zeal. Then it is that it
not only quickens the action of the nervous system, thus causing
nervousness, but induces exhaustion of the brain, and even
structural changes in it.

Dr Treichler, of Bad-Lenk-Bern, in a paper read last year
to the Society of Natural Historians and Physicians of Germany,
called attention to the great increase of habitual headaches
which has, he alleges, taken place amongst hoys and girls,
and attributed this to the exhausting effects of excessive and
ill-directed brain-work in schools. The publication of an
extract of Dr Treichler's paper in the Times has led to a very
full discussion of the subject of which it treats by medical men
and educationalists among ourselves, and the result of that
discussion seems to me to be this, that Dr Treichler has ex-
posed serious dangers which lurk in our present teaching
processes. His estimate that one-third of the pupils attending
schools in France and Germany suffer from headaches, which
destroy much of the happiness of life, and blunt the acuteness
of the faculties, is probably an exaggeration. With us, at any
rate, no such proportion of children attending schools of any
class are subject to headaches brought on by over-exertion of
the mind or any other cause. But still an appreciable and
perhaps increasing number of school-children in this country
suffer from recurrent headaches which are dependent on the
toils and anxieties of school-life, and a great many are in-
juriously affected by these toils and anxieties in a variety of
other ways. Mr. Brudenell Carter long ago pointed out that
stupidity may be artificially induced by unintelligent and
injudicious teaching in schools ; and many physicians have
recorded cases in winch sleeplessness, night-terrors, somnam-
bulism, epilepsy, hydrocephalus, hallucinations, and other
maladies, have followed upon educational pressure unwisely
applied to weakly children.

It is, of course, difficult to measure, even roughly, the evil
consequences of educational pressure and brain-fatigue. Head-
aches may be unaccompanied by any very ostensible symptoms,
and may scarcely interfere with school attendance. The manu-
facture of stupidity may be carried on on a large scale, and
obtain no recognition in inspectors' reports, and tissue-degene-
rations and mental diseases may be separated by long intervals
of time from the premature or inordinate stimulation of the
brain, in which their roots really lie. It is only in exceptional
instances that that stimulation brings on at once disabling or
fatal disease. Some indication, however, of its effects in that
exceptional direction may be discovered, I think, in the curious
fact that of late years, in which it will not be denied that the
schoolmaster has been abroad, the increase in the number of
deaths from hydrocephalus has been not amongst infants under
five years of age, but among children and young persons from
five to twenty-five, that is to say, in the education and post-
education periods. Then, evidence of the more remote evil
consequences of intemperance in education may be seen in the
preponderance of nervous diseases in the refined and cultivated
classes, and in the parallelism which has been observed all over
Europe between the progress of education and the increase of
suicides.

If, then, education may have such pernicious consequences
as those just enumerated?and many more might have been
added to the list?it is clear that it must be carefully
guarded and regulated; but guarding and regulation such
as required can come only from the physiologist and psycho-
logist. The schoolmaster must therefore take counsel with
them, and they, on their part, must enter more deeply than
heretofore into the embryology and evolution of brain and
mind, so that they may be able to supply precise rules for
the guidance of growth. No doubt much valuable information
on this subject has been already accumulated, justifying the
promulgation of rules for the preservation of health during
education, and for the avoidance of its detrimental effects,
which are still but too little regarded. Our knowledge of the
growth of the body has enabled us to arrive at some safe con-
clusions as to the growth of the mind. But an altogether new
vista is opened up to us in reference to education by recent
discoveries as to the localisation of function in the brain ; and
no more important problem in connexion with education and
neurology now awaits solution than that relating to the natural
order of development of the various centres of which the brain
is made up.

The brain of a foetus differs from that of an adult not only
in size, consistence, and external configuration, being com-
paratively deficient in secondary gyri, but also in internal struc-
ture. Its cineritious substance is composed of an unvaried
nucleated network, the nuclei being rounded, and none of those
cells with intercommunicating processes being visible, which at
a later period are characteristic of the grey matter of the con-
volutions. As development advances, the brain increases in
bulk and density, the gyri become more complicated in their
arrangement, and layers may be distinguished in the grey
matter containing nerve-elements of varied appearance, in
which, moreover, cells of different shapes with numerous pro-
cesses are conspicuous. In the adult brain, as the admirable
investigations of Bevan Lewis and Clarke have demonstrated,
a structural differentiation has been established in different areas
of the hemisphere. In certain portions of their surface, the grey
matter is six-laminated, in other portions it is five-laminated, the
latter arrangement being more distinct in the parietal and frontal
convolutions, constituting the excitable or motor area of the
brain, where so-called giant-cells exist in irregular clusters or
aggregations.

Now, we are still unable to say at what stages of growth this
elaboration of cerebral structure takes place, but we have
grounds for believing that it goes on gradually, but not uni-
formly, the budding and branching of the cells commencing in
certain territories or centres, and spreading from them in
various directions. It is perhaps late in life before the multi-
plication of cells and the extension of their interlacements are
at an end; for it is certain that the brain may continue to
increase in size until upwards of thirty years of age, and that in
every nerve-centre, structural complexity may be augmented
long after the limit of bulk has been reached. Then there can
be no question that the functional activity of the different
centres is established at different epochs and perfected at dif-
ferent rates. The senses, the motor powers, the emotions, the
intellectual faculties, do not come all at once, nor drop in for-
tuitously now and again ; they present themselves in a definite
succession, and with a strict regard to evolutional precedence,
in the infant, the child, and the youth, from the most simple
reflex acts to the supreme efforts of will. Each centre emerges
from its " antenatal gloom " at an appointed time, and each has
a certain season prescribed to it in which to perfect its func-
tions. Reflex centres that have been long laid down, like that
for the respiratory process, are at once proficient in their duty;
but intellectual centres of recent evolution are only brought
tardily to do their work, under the direct influence of conscious
effect. And between these are innumerable centres which arise
in due succession into activity, and are engaged in training for
very varied periods. The foot and leg centres are in advance of
those of the hand and arm in their development, and the latter
again are in advance of those for the tongue and lips. Chewing
is commenced at the eighth or ninth month of life, but the
sexual appetite does not assert itself until the twelfth or four-
teenth year. Equilibrium is speedily acquired, but years are
spent in mastering the niceties of speech.

Now, in each nerve-centre there are two kinds of activity,
which must not be confounded with each other. There is
nutrient activity and functional activity, and the rule would
seem to be that these are generally in the inverse ratio of each
other. When nutrient activity is at its maximum functional
activity is at its minimum, and vice versa. When the brain of
the child is growing most rapidly, its functional manifestations
are not of the highest order; and when the brain of the man is
doing its best work, growth may be said to be over. Growth
precedes function, and yet function is, after a certain stage,
essential to growth, and it is while growth and function co-exist
that the opportunities for education occur. It is at the nascent
period in the history of each nerve-centre, when growth-activity,
although becoming less energetic, is still present, and when
functional activity, although still feeble, is gradually gathering
strength, that most may be done to make or mar it and other
centres with which it is associated. Then it is that, hy suitable
exercise and stimulation cautiously applied, it may be brought
to the highest development of which it is capable. By skilful
management this nascent period may be prolonged, and a supe-
rior anatomical substratum provided for subsequent develop-
ments ; but by undue eagerness or negligence it may be curtailed
or allowed to slip past unimproved.

The duration of the nascent period, as I have called it, in
which growth and function go hand-in-hand, varies exceed-
ingly in different centres. In those concerned with instinctive
operations it cannot be said to exist, for their growth is com-
pleted without functional stimulation, and they start at once
into full functional activity; but in those concerned in the
higher intellectual operations it may apparently run on until
late in life. But, whatever the duration of its nascent period,
each centre requires extrinsic stimuli to develop its structural
potentialities; and this is true of the lower reflex as well as of
the higher discriminating centres. Dr Allen Thomson hatched
a number of chickens upon a carpet, and they ran about on the
soft surface, and never attempted to scrape until a little gravel
was sprinkled over it. The moment this was done, however,
the appropriate gritty stimulus being applied to their feet and
an impression conveyed to the nerve-centre, vigorous scraping
commenced?a proceeding in which knowledge or discrimina-
tion took no part, for the object of scraping is to find insects or
seeds, and, for anything such inexperienced chickens knew, these
might be lodged in the carpet as well as in the gravel.
In higher and more complex centres we may discern the
influence of extrinsic stimuli, not merely in inaugurating func-
tion, but in promoting growth and sustaining structural
development. Chidden, a Swiss physiologist, has shown that
when the nasal organ of a young rabbit is closed, the olfactory
nerve and bulb of the same side are perceptibly atrophied
in six or eight weeks ; and that when the eye of a young
pigeon is enucleated or shut up from the light, the optic nerve
and anterior prominence of the corpora quadrigemina of the
same side waste very speedily. And similar consequences
apparently result in the cerebral centres of the human subject
when they are early cut off from functional activity, even in
the higher centres; for in two remarkable cases reported by
Dr Gowers and Dr Bastian, there co-existed with congenital
absence of the left hand, and with an aborted condition of the
whole of the left upper limb in two adults, an imperfect or
dwarfed condition of the ascending parietal gyrus of the right
side, in which gyrus the individual and combined movements
of the fingers and wrist are localised by Ferrier. Now, whether
we regard this gyrus as a true motor ceutre, or as a sensorv
region of the kinesthetic type, it is clear that its growth was
stunted by the curtailment of its functional activity during its
growth period. But surely we are at liberty to conclude that
had its functional activity been restricted in any other way
than by congenital malformation, its growth would still have
been restricted. We have long known that muscles when not
exercised do not develop, and we have now reason to believe
that the same is true of the highest nerve-centres. But
muscles that have been fully developed, if cut off from exercise,
waste and degenerate, which is not true of the highest nerve-
centres; for it has been shown, in cases noted by Ferrier and
others, that where a leg had been amputated in an adult who
had lived many years after the operation, there was no altera-
tion in the cerebral convolution corresponding with the limb,
but only atrophy of the lumbar enlargement of the spinal cord
on the same side. The lower and comparatively independent
centre, with a narrow functional range, had suffered wasting;
bat the cortical centre, with innumerable cerebral connections,
and its complex functions as a basis of motor ideation and of
organic memory, had not degenerated, after the restriction of
its fundamental activities by the operation.

These facts, that cerebral centres never properly exercised
do not develop, and that, once developed, they do not waste,
although cut off from those activities that insured their develop-
ment, strikingly inculcate the importance of educating every
centre at the proper nascent period, and the danger of neglect-
ing education until the nascent period is over. They give also
a new significance to physical education. Hitherto that has
been advocated as a mean towards the improvement of health
and the strengthening of the frame, and not as an instrument of
mental development. The notion has been that muscular
exercise expands the lungs, quickens the circulation, and braces
the nerves, and that notion is correct; but to it must now be
added the pregnant idea that it also contributes to brain-growth
and mental evolution. A large district of the brain is made
up of motor centres, and concerned in motor ideas, which form
a no less important element in our mental stores and processes
than ideally revived sensations. The growth of that district of
brain is apparently dependent on muscular exercise, and if that
be withheld at the growth period, the development of the brain
will be stunted, and perhaps the whole series of ideas connected
with form, distance, resistance, weight, &c., rendered faulty or
incomplete. And not only so, but this district is made up of a
series of centres in relation with different groups of muscles,
and each centre is dependent for its development upon its own
group of muscles, and the defective exercise of any group of
muscles during the growth period in its own particular centre
(the growth periods in most of the motor centres, having different
starting-points, although overlapping in various degrees) will
result in dwarfing of that centre, and a corresponding hiatus, or
a general weakness, must exist in the mental fabric.

From this we might deduce that swaddling-bands so applied
at birth as to restrain all muscular movements, and kept on
during infancy and childhood, would result in idiocy? a specu-
lation to which the wretched muscular development of most
idiots and imbeciles, and the fact that their mental training is
most successfully begun and carried on through muscular
lessons, give some countenance. We should also have to infer
that, in order to build up a sound and vigorous brain, we must
insure free exercise to the different groups of muscles in the
order of the development of their centres, and must in no
degree interfere with the natural sequence of their evolution.
That being so, we must necessarily ascertain what that natural
sequence is which is to be so important a guide to education ;
for, in our present ignorance of it, we may unwittingly be doing
much mischief. Suppose that we are encroaching on the time
at which the hand centres ought to receive their most valuable
education?their nascent period?and are devoting that time to
the cultivation of the tongue and lip centres, then we should
be impairing the full development of the brain?disturbing the
balance of mind, and sacrificing that technic skill in our arti-
sans of the future which is essential to the maintenance of our
national position. For the hand-controlling centre, if not fully
exercised at its nascent period, can never afterwards attain to
the highest cunning?witness the clumsy caligraphy of those
who learn to write in mature life, even when they practise with
more than boyish assiduity, and the inferiority of the work of
any craftsman who has not served a regular apprenticeship to his
trade. In these bewildered times, says Carlvle, all education
has run to tongue. But it seems to me, that not only tongue
but hand, and foot, and eye, and back, and every muscle in the
body, must be trained in due season, if education is to do what
we expect of it, and is to result, not in headaches, and imbecili-
ties, and nervousness, and insanity, but in well-balanced growth
of body and mind. The differences which we notice between
man and man in deportment and gait and expression are but
the outward and visible signs of individual variations in the
development of the motor centres of the brain ; and the stam-
merings, grimacings, twitchings, and antics which are so
common and annoying, are probably, in many instances, the
effects of neglected education of some of those centres, and
might have been abolished by timely drill and discipline. Of
these centres, one group?presiding over the hand?ought, I
think, to receive more attention than it now does amongst those
who are not called upon to earn their living by manual labour.
A cunning right hand is one of man's proudest possessions; and
I go so far as to say that every man, no matter what his rank
or fortune, would be mentally improved by learning a handi-
craft, and that every woman should be taught to use her fingers
deftly in technic work of some kind. The most learned Jews
have always followed trades; and Spinoza was not only a philo-
sopher, but a maker of spectacles. " When we begin," remarks
an eloquent writer," at all to understand the handling of any truly
great executor?such as that of the three great Venetians, of
Correggio, of Turner?the awe of it is something greater than
that felt from the most stupendous natural scenery; for the crea-
tion of such a system as a high human intelligence, endowed
with its ineffably perfect instruments of eye and hand, is a far
more appalling manifestation of infinite power than the making
of seas and mountains."

In the hurried glance at education in its relation to the
etiology and prophylaxis of nervous diseases, which has been
alone possible to me to-day, I have chiefly referred to the motor-
centres of the brain; but the principle of training in growth-
periods is, of course, as applicable to the sensory and other
centres as it is to them. The sensory centres are gradually and
successfully developed; and the future complexion of mental
life is in great measure determined by the impressions made
upon them when they are undergoing development.

Art in the nursery is a subject well worthy of consideration;
and efforts should certainly be made to put before children,
especially those pent up in towns, good and worthy and beautiful
objects at the time their minds are being formed. A little in-
trospection will satisfy most men that pictures and images and
forms presented to them in their earliest years enter largely
into all their subsequent mental commerce, and sometimes
influence their history for weal or woe. "The Edinburgh
Castle rock," says Ruskin, "had a daily influence in forming
the taste and kindling the imagination of every promising
youth in Edinburgh." " The plea for art," says Watts, " rests
on much wider and more solid foundations than mere amuse-
ments for moments of leisure. . . . Nothing is so likely to
cure the widespread habits of intemperance that disgrace the
nation as a taste for art and music generally developed."
I should have been glad to have spoken, of the acquisition of
speech, of the basis of attention, of the value of natural science as
a branch of elementary education. If I say nothing of these
subjects, nor of moral and religious training, it is not because I
underrate their importance in contributing to the harmonious
development of the brain, but because time does not permit me
to enter on so large a theme. As regards moral and religious
training, I would say just this, that no one can study insanity
?without realising that to make men prudent and just and
generous, is to protect them in great measure against those
moral contagia which float about in such varied abundance in
our social atmosphere, and which are so inimical to mental
health. And no one can justly study the constitution of the
human mind without, I think, perceiving that it contains
emotional elements and religious feelings which, when culti-
vated, contribute to its strength and endurance, but which,
when neglected, become sources of weakness and decay. To
discipline the natural forces of character, and to place over the
mind a pure and lofty ideal, is to take the best possible
measures to insure its prosperity and peace. " Three-fourths of
life are conduct," says Arnold, and three-fourths of conduct are
imitation; and it is surely better to imitate an ideal than the
men around us or the beasts that perish. In the former, we
may have bound up whatever of beauty and goodness the uni-
verse displays or it has entered into the heart to conceive; in
the latter we have a strange medley of good and evil, with
selfishness in the ascendant?for selfishness must ever be the
soul of the plot in that tragedy " The Struggle for Life," with
its hero "The Conquering Worm." But, besides the struggle
for life, there is the struggle for light?an inward struggle, em-
ploying no brute force, dealing no death around, but terrible in
its earnestness, and fraught with disaster to many minds. For
that struggle, as well as for the life struggle, the mind should
be prepared. It cannot be overlooked in any system of educa-
tion that aims at completeness. And it is at completeness that
all systems of education must aim. Only when that is attained,
when body and brain and mind are harmoniously developed,
shall we be able thoroughly to reconcile progress with health.
In the meantime, we must labour in that direction, and strive,
as best we may, in this dim dawn of biological science, by a
timely and well-adjusted cultivation of sense, motion, and
intellect, moral and religious feeling, to resist the inroads of
nervous and mental disease, and of every foe that may assail us
from without or within, and to secure to our country what is
stronger than fleets of ironclads, more inviolate than the streak
of silver sea?

A virtuous populace who rise the while,
And stand a wall of fire around their much-loved Isle.
