The Centralisation of Energy
==============================

201
Art. III.?.
:Author: EDWIN WOOTON, Hon. Lecturer on Physiology and Psychology to the Society of Science,
Letters, and Art of London.

No man can judge accurately of the consciousness of beings
other than himself, save from external phenomena. In saying
this, I do not mean to impeach that department of psychology
known as "mental communion," for this latter condition is
abnormal, and I am here dealing with the common life.

Language, in the ordinary sense of the word, is a gift enjoyed
by no earthly being besides man, yet the lower members of the
animal world exhibit phenomena which man ever recognises as
indicative of their mental state. The reason of such recognition
is very simple?immediately we advance our inquiries beyond
our own kind, we can only judge of mental states from analogy ;
nay, we are restricted to this when we are dealing with those of
our own species who are dumb and possess no means of verbal
communication.
Even in his highest condition man is constantly showing by
outward signs the thought or impression of the mind, and being
aware of the limited faculties of the brute, he confines his
expectation to its known ability of expression; in other words,
if the actions which in man are associated with some particular
emotion or sensation are performed by the brute, so far as its
ability permits, man attributes to the inferior animal the same
mental state.

Nevertheless, the analogical reasoning of many becomes
narrow, and of these some lay it down as an axiom that no
animal in whom a distinct cephalic ganglion has not been
developed can possibly appreciate impressions; others, not
embracing the above view, yet hold that where a cephalic
ganglion exists it is the sole seat of volition and sensation, and
assert that deprivation of such ganglion leaves the animal either
lifeless or a mere automaton?in any case, a non-sentient, non-
volitional piece of organic matter.

Two questions then arise for our consideration :?
First?Are volition and sentience faculties common to the
animal kingdom ?

And next?What organs are necessary for their manifestation ?
The importance to biological science of a correct solution
of these problems it is difficult to overrate. In animal
physiology?every fact discovered, every law demonstrated,
every secret wrung from the bosom of nature is a stone cut and
smoothed, and which will find its place and duty in the great
fabric which science is building in the very presence of, and as a
defiance to, the assaults of ignorance and disease.

It is then to the task of such a solution I have set myself,
not by the pursuit of a mere abstract argument which had
availed little or nothing to the discovery of the truth, but by
the patient study of experimental phenomena on which alone
true theories can be based.

For attacks and criticism I am prepared; I fear neither.
If my conclusions are false, in God's name let them depart to
" the limbo of forgotten errors." If true they will gather to
them supporters, and will prevail over all opposition, and thus
another beam of light from the sun of His wisdom shall scatter
some, at least, of the shadows thrown across the path of science.

THE CENTRALISATION OF ENERGY.

All bodies?animal and vegetable?are composed of a substance
termed Protoplasm; this is a chemical compound represented
typically by the following analysis :?
C
H
N
0
s
p
53-5
7-0
15-5
22-0
1-6
0-4

Physically the basis of life varies from semi-viscidity to the
hardness of ivory; the former is its simplest state, and that
which is always found in the least organised animals, the latter
condition and all intermediate states, are produced by the
addition to the protoplasm of various chemical substances.
Protoplasm exists in the form of minute circumscribed masses,
to which the term " cell" is applied. With our present knowledge
the least differentiated beings which can with certainty be
assigned to the animal kingdom are the Monera. These are
minute marine animals utterly destitute of organs: their
bodies are not homogeneous, but consist of two parts?first,
an outer, more dense and apparently structureless portion,
which answers to a membrane, covering, or cyst; and secondly,
the greater part of the body substance, which is granular, more
fluid and mobile.

It is in the Gregarinidse that we first see an alteration in
the animal structure. An adult Gregarinida differs structurally
from a Monerum in this respect only?there is in one portion of
the body of the former a harder particle, termed the nucleus,
enclosing another, the nucleolus ; of the purpose of these parts
we shall speak by-and-bv.
In the Amoebas there is added a contractile space, concerned
in the circulation.

The Foraminifera possess an external covering or shell.
The ciliated Infusoria have a permanent oral aperture and
digestive cavity, and the exterior of the body has at one or
more parts vibratile appendages termed cilia.
Rudimentary eyes make their first appearance around the
circumference of the necto-calyx in the Discophora. Rudi-
mentary organs of hearing are found in the same animals and
in the same region. The eyes, or " ocelli," are segmented cells;
the auditory organs, or " vesicles," are rounded sacs lined by
epithelium, and containing one or more solid motionless con-
cretions composed of carbonate of lime, immersed in a clear
fluid.

A differentiated nervous apparatus first shows itself in the
Ascidian Mollusc. It consists of one ganglion situated in the
neighbourhood of the mouth in the mantle, and giving off cords
which proceed to the sense and digestive organs, the muscular
sac and both orifices. Next above the Ascidians we may place
the Ctenophora, in which, within the apical pole, that is the end
farthest removed from the mouth, is the Ctenocyst, a
spherical vesicle ; this, which is a sense organ, rests on a small
ganglion giving off fibres. In the Actinidae there is a system
of branches supplying the ocelli, at the bases of the tentacles,
and also the muscular tissue. Mingled with these fibres are
cells or ganglia. The next well marked stage of development
may be seen in the Echinoidea. There is a ganglionated cord
surrounding the gullet, and sending off five branches among the
ambulacral spaces. The Annulosa have a chain of ganglia
running the length of the body and united by nervous cords.
At one extremity where the sense organs are situated, the last
post-oesophageal ganglion gives off two cords; these pass one on
either side of the oesophagus, and enter each a pre-(Esophageal
ganglion?the cephalic?this ganglion is generally double.
This description applies to all annulose animals, but the highest
members of the order?the Insecta, have two cords passing
backwards from the cephalic above the ventral ganglia, and
giving off branches to them and the body walls, &c.
This is the most rudimentary form of the cerebro-spinal
system.

The Vertebrata are animals in whom a vertebral column is
present. Such column may persist in the rudimentary form of
the notochord, or may be developed into a bony axis composed
of distinct segments. The body consists of two tubes; the
greater, the anterior?containing the viscera of digestion, excre-
tion, and circulation, and a lesser, the posterior, containing a
nervous cord which anteriorly is connected by nerves to organs
of sense. The vertebrate with the simplest nervous system is
the lancelet. The neural axis of this animal is a delicate tract
of nucleated cells surrounded by a coating of pi a mater. It
tapers to both ends, more, however, towards the posterior. Fifty
or sixty pairs of nerves are given off laterally. In the diodon
the cerebro-spinal column has its anterior extremity enlarged into
a distinct cephalic mass, behind this there is a portion of the
column, from four to twelve lines in length ; this shows trans-
verse white striae and contains grey matter ; it is a nervous
centre and a portion of the brain. The rest of the neural
canal is occupied by a "cauda equina." The lampreys and
hagfishes are of a higher nervous organisation than the above.
They have a cartilaginous cranium, and the spinal cord extends
slightly anteriorly ; but there is no bony spinal column, and the
notochord is persistent. The cord in the diodon is divided by
shallow anterior, posterior, and lateral fissures. The posterior
fissure at the cephalic extremity is deepened, and the halves
diverging expose grey matter.

In the cod and shark the posterior fissure widens and the
halves of the cord expand; the nerve tissue bounding the
myelonal canal becomes swollen and rounded, and the columns
diverging as they advance, expose an intermediate nodular tract.
Two lateral " vagal" columns also project into the ventricle
from the conjoined restiform and posterior pyramidal tracts.
The next structures added are a cerebellum and crura
cerebelli.

The primary division of the brain may be said to consist of
a medulla, a cerebellum, and one or two appendages of no great
importance. Relatively it is both larger and more complex in
fishes than the higher vertebrates. The brain is essentially the
developed cephalic portion of the cord.

The second division consists of the " optic lobes." This is
generally the largest division in osseous fishes. Beneath the
" lobes" are two subspherical bodies, "'hyproaria," separated
by walls containing a cavity, which is the homologue of the third
ventricle in man. This ventricle is prolonged downwards into
the pedicle of the pituitary gland and upward into that of the
pineal gland.

From the third ventricle fasciculi are continued forward to
the anterior aspect of the optic lobes, where they form two small
masses of grey matter: these are rudimentary cerebra. -
While the brain of the crocodile is scarcely larger than the
thumb of an adult human being, that of the bird has exnanded
both laterally and vertically, but is still composed chiefly of the
optic lobes and the cerebellum.

In the dog and in other animals the brain has advanced
more anteriorly, and the cerebra have coincidently developed.
The degree of such advancement and development being of course
collateral with the animal's degree of intelligence. This rule
holds sway even amongst the various human races.
It can with certainty be demonstrated that porosity is a
property or condition of all matter; contact is never absolute,
but always relative. The composite particles of the proto-
plasmic cell are, therefore, not in coaptation, but separated by
infinitesimal pores or spaces. The passage of material in a state
of fluidity through such spaces into the cell substance is termed
intussusception. The cell ordinarily maintains its existence by
means of this process. Under certain circumstances, however,
the protoplasmic cell, if capable of extension, as in the amoebae,
will flow round and encompass a solid particle of nearly its own
diameter; it will then accomplish the perfect digestion and
assimilation of its prey., The modification of protoplasm is
termed differentiation; the latter is both structural and
functional. As I have said,- the simplest cell presents merely a
slightly condensed margin and a granular homogeneous body
substance. But as the pedigree of the free cell lengthens,
canular spaces become marked out; the protoplasm bordering
these channels assumes a more active part: there is an increase
of energy in certain paths for the benefit of the whole body.
Thus, then, the simplest structural differentiation is the relative
consistency of the ectoplasm and endoplasm; the simplest
functional differentiation is their relative activity.
The functions of the nucleus and nucleolus are sufficiently
evident; by their segmentation they commence the process of
proliferation by cell division.

The contractile vesicle of the amoeba is the simplest form of
a circulatory apparatus to* be found in the animal kingdom ;
the fluid which it propels is the food of the animal derived from
the medium in which it is living.

The differentiation of function we have been hitherto con-
sidering is merely the increased localisation of contractility.
The latter condition might at first sight appear to be exem-
plified on the vibratile cilia of the monera, but this is not really
the case. The cilia of these animals are no more vital in function
than the remainder of the protoplasm, for they are retracted
and fresh portions of the body substance protruded. Their
movements are merely due to their relative length and fineness.
In a similar manner the emission of amoeboid pseudopodia can
be regarded only as a special manifestation of the vitality of the
whole protoplasm.

206 the centralisation of energy.

There is, and must be, in every animal the action of indi-
vidual parts for the benefit of the whole. What, then, is the
difference between the simple protoplasmic cell and a body
possessing the nervous-muscular and other tissues ?
The answer to this will appear as we proceed. Ordinary
protoplasm exhibits a gradually increasing localisation of energy
or function in certain parts and cells, producing a progressive
differentiation of structure to perfect nerve and other tissues.
Differentiation of structure then is the sequence and accom-
paniment of differentiation of function, and is produced by per-
sistent maintenance, with gradual increase of, function.
Objects external to any being possess the properties of form,
extent, specific gravity, density, temperature, colour, and
chemical constitution. They have position, and may give rise
to aerial vibrations.

Position is the one and only property of all matter. Size,
form, specific gravity, density, colour, temperature, and vitality
are merely due to the arrangement of the constituent parts.
Temperature is the result of the constant positing of mate-
rial to a greater or less degree; the positing varying as the
heat. Chemical combinations are, of course, the result of
position. Chemical elements are probably but one form of
matter, having their infinitesimal particles differently arranged.
These properties then constitute an objective differentiation,
and if there be a subjective differentiation of individual beings,
it must be correlated to the former. The sense faculty in man
is separated into five divisions?sight, hearing, touch, taste,
smell. The organ of sight can appreciate size, apparent den-
sity, and colour. That of hearing can appreciate sound only.
The organs of touch estimate size, density, and temperature,
and this last whether the skin come into contact with the
object, or the sensation be communicated by a medium. Smell
and taste distinguish empirically certain chemical states. The
latter being constant, the sensation excited is also constant.
Approval or dislike is merely a judgment on the merits of the
sensation.

The objective qualities of matter, its objective differentia-
tion, are always present. If we select a particle 100,000th in.
in diameter, we have a circumscribed portion of matter pos-
sessing form, gravity, density, colour, &c. We could not see it
if we hadn't it under the microscope ; but it is evident that the
simple free cell is possessed of a capability of appreciating the
presence of minute atoms, for the said cell captures and digests
the particle in question.

Probably the simplest sensation is touch; undoubtedly, as
shown above, the cell possesses this. Yet this sense must
differ in kind from our own. Contact must in the microscopic
animal of which I am speaking, excite a sensation of chemical
combination or condition, interpreted by the being as edibility,
for the cell will reject unsuitable food.

The qualities then required for a living sentient being of
the cell's anatomy, would be the capability of appreciating con-
tact with substances edible and inedible; i.e. with beneficial
and injurious objects. Now, since the animal does not show his
appreciation of objects unless he be in contact with them,
we must suppose contact the sole medium of sense. Now
contact can only give rise to an idea of the properties of the
article in contact, and of the parts in actual apposition. Wp
know also that sight depends on waves of air, and cannot be
communicated by contact of a tissue with a substance. Sight
may be a variety of touch, but we have no reason to suppose
that anything analogous to the sensation can be excited by
direct contact. Considering, then, the objective properties of
the particles constituting the cell's food, we may form a good
notion of the subjective properties of the cell. Thus then the
subjective is correlated to the objective.

We shall see that as the body becomes by hereditary educa-
tion more capable of appreciating the properties of matter,
separate cells become appropriated to the consideration of one
or more of these properties. The action itself modifies the
tissue into the form most suitable for it, and this by use is
elaborated, and by heritage perpetuated. Differentiation of
sense is correlative with differentiation of tissue. The former
being the starting point: life is the cause of organisation.
The nervous, muscular, and other systems are merely the
total assumption in an animal by certain cells of the common
properties of protoplasm. In any being, if we perceive pheno-
mena indicating the possession of sense, we must attribute
sense organs to that being. The whole body may be a
medium of sensation, in which case it is only perceptive by
immediate-contact. Yet we are not to assume that such struc-
tural differentiation must be visible to the eye. It may be
that certain cells or particles in a body may assume any one of the
common properties of protoplasm to a greater extent than the
remainder, without undergoing any immediate structural dif-
ferentiation/ Neither are we to assume that where an animal
can appreciate the presence of an object only by immediate
apposition, the tactile sense is so simple as on the epidermal
surface of man. On the contrary, we are forced to believe that
since the higher tissues of the vertebratse are merely the elabo-
rated protoplasm, so the differentiated senses of the former are
found in the latter, as embryonic undoubtedly, but more com-
plex than epidermic touch. Then is the protoplasmic cell per-
cipient ?

All tissues are composed of this substance in a simple or
modified condition. Now, all inquiry tends to show that per-
cipience is not a property of any tissue, but that it is merely a
via animi. Were, however, this opinion to be proved false it
would not affect the question. Percipience is not a visible
phenomenon, we judge of its existence in any being other than
ourselves merely from analogy. Again, the remaining proper-
ties of the tissues of the highest animals, e.g. assimilation,
contractility, and excretion, are performed perfectly by the
simplest protoplasm. Lastly, the protoplasmic cell is a living
individual, we must therefore bring the question of its possible
percipience to the test of analogy. If one drop of strong hydro-
chloric acid be added to about twenty of water containing
rhizopoda, the latter appear to shrink up, after exhibiting phe-
nomena indicative of violent stimulation, and the pseudopodia
are no longer emitted. If now to the liquid be added ammonia,
equal in strength and quantity to the acid, so as to neutralise
the action of the latter, the rhizopoda lose their contracted
appearance and once more emit pseudopodia, although these
movements are feebler than in unmixed water, thus showing
that the neutral fluid is an unhealthy medium for their exist-
ence. Now, in this experiment we have a perfect example of
reception of impressions. The cessation of movement is not
owing to destruction of life, neither is the shrinking of the
animal the mere result of chemical action, for if the experiment
be repeated with dead rhizopoda, the latter do not shrink up.
Of course if the strength of the fluid be sufficient in either case,
a process of cauterisation ensues, and the rhizopoda disappear.
We conclude, therefore, that the protoplasmic cell is per-
cipient, and that the tissues of the highest animals contain no
new property, but simply the elaborated and concentrated
qualities of simple protoplasm.

In the humblest cells, each has to digest its own food.
When several unite to form a being certain of them are set
apart to form the boundaries of a cavity and to fulfil the office
of digestion for the benefit of the whole body ; the other cells
or particles do not digest. There is a cessation of function in
parts, and an increase in others. In the same manner one or
more of the other faculties of protoplasm is assumed by sepa-
rate cells, excepting, of course, assimilation, which is the
common property of tissues. As these faculties become sepa-
rated the structure of the cells differentiates, special functions
producing and being assumed by altered structures.

Protoplasm, then, is capable of all the vital functions with-
out an absolute differentiation into separate tissues.
I have said that the simplest sensation is the tactile. The
five senses of man are differentiated forms of touch. The
difference in the sensations corresponds to the variations in the
stimuli which are capable of affecting the several organs.
Now "touch" is the power of appreciating contact, and such
contact may be aerial or direct.

Aerial contact is effected by waves of aether. Such waves
are continuous or vibratile.

Continuous waves in impinging on a sensitive apparatus
give rise to the sensation of the totality of the waves, or light.
Vibratile waves are due to the vibrations of material bodies, or
to obstruction to the passage of currents of air. Such waves
are interpreted as sound. Currents of air impinging in any
vertebrate on any part of the body not set apart for the appre-
ciation of vibrations are interpreted merely as contact?the
sensation affording no indication of the origin of the waves, or
the objects over or through which they may have passed. Aerial
motion then conveys to the eye the idea of the presence of
objects. Objects have their statical or passive quality, and their
active or vibratile quality. Vibrations cannot give rise to an
idea of their causes; this is the result of education. Still
there is a permanent distinction between vibratile and continu-
ous waves. Direct contact may be effected by the immediate
apposition of the object itself or of its gaseous particles with
the being. The former is the property of the simplest proto-
plasm. By inherited education the sense of touch becomes
refined; the protoplasm is at length percipient of the contact
of aether, of the continuous waves into which the vibratile
are merged and lost. As the protoplasm become thus sensitive
special cells?special points on the outer surface?are more per-
cipient than the rest of the body. Acted on by the aether the
molecules are forced into that position which the easier admits
of the impression of the external force; hence we obtain a
structural differentiation. Such alteration or modification of
tissue takes the form of ocelli for the continuous and of auditory
vesicles for the vibratile waves. The most refined form of direct
tactile sense is the olfactory. Minute particles of the substance
impinging on a sensitive apparatus give rise to sensation?which
is referred to the properties of the object from whence the gase-
ous particles were separated.

Taste is not nearly so refined a sense as the foregoing,
which, according to Valentin, can discern lu0^0i000 of a grain of
musk. Nevertheless they are both examples of sensation ex-
cited by direct contact, and they are never totally separated,
even in the highest vertebrates, although under ordinary cir-
cumstances the organ appropriated to each is enabled to act
independently. A differentiated apparatus for the appreciation of
the qualities of an object, as odour and taste undoubtedly makes its
first appearance in the form of antennae. But the only animals
"with antennae which in the present state of science we can
with certainty declare to be media of taste and smell are the
insecta. There can be no doubt that the antennae of these
animals are sense media. The arguments in favour of this
view rest on the following considerations. If in any insect
possessing these organs they be cut off close to their bases the
animal is unable to discover the neighbourhood of strongly
odorous saccharine material. The animal appears capable of
exercising little or no choice in the selection of its food until
the antennae are renewed. If a common butterfly be watched
after it has alighted on a flower, it will be seen that the animal
continually points the antennae at various parts of its banquet-
ing table ; depressing them until their apices are in contact
with the petals. Moreover, the antennae are raised and
depressed, adducted and abducted, until an apparent satisfactory
sensation is excited, when the animal follows the direction indi-
cated by the last position of the antennae.

The latter form, indeed, the insect's exploring organs, they
are far more important to its existence than an optical appara-
tus. It is a self-evident fact that the sense of smell among
the insecta must be remarkably acute. They can detect sac-
charine material of whose presence man is utterly unconscious.
They will be attracted by hundreds to a flower garden in the
midst of a sterile country. The one organ is probably capable
of transmitting the two sensations of odour and taste. The
difference as inferred above rests in the method of using the
antennae. When they are elevated and pointed in any direc-
tion smell is exercised ; when they are depressed and opposed to
any substance the sense of taste. That the insect can detect
the neighbourhood of its food by the sense of smell to a greater
extent than by that of sight is also sufficiently proved by the
fact that they will make their way to such food even when it is
placed in such a position and under such circumstances as en-
tirely preclude the possibility of its being seen by the animal.
Thus the blackbeetle will find its way to the darkened closet,
mount the walls, and proceed unerringly until it has arrived at
the provisions it is seeking. It is worthy of note that the
butterfly is a hater of gloom and a lover of sunlight, it seldom
finds its way into any dwelling.

Simple touch or contact is in man a property of the whole
external integument; in certain parts, as in the palms of the
hands and tips of the fingers, it is refined, and the properties of
an object can be much more readily estimated by these parts
than the general surface of the body. Indeed the extremities
of the digits are endowed with a sensitiveness which is differ-
entiated from that of the rest of the integument and may be
said to be the second step in the development of tactile power,
"which latter proceeds, as we have seen, to sight and hearing.
For these reasons, it is extremely difficult to say with certainty
what animals possess organs of simple touch or more definitely
where the simplest differentiation of tactile function is to be
found. However simple an apparatus may appear, it is yet
possible for it to be the means of conveying more complex
sensations than its analogues in the more highly differentiated
animals. Certainly the pseudopodia of the actinophrys sol are
organs of touch. Certainly, also, they are tolerably persistent,
and entitled, therefore, to be considered structurally differ-
entiated. Neither can there be any doubt that they form the
simplest example of structural tactile differentiation. The exact
estimation of the tactile power of these pseudopodia must, how-
ever, remain for obvious reasons an uncertainty. Of one thing
we may however rest assured : they are not sensitive to aerial,
but merely direct contact, Another fact is tolerably plain?
they are not excited by such contact in the form of gaseous
particles. The fact however remains that they can distinguish
between edible and inedible substances. Unless this be due
merely to the consistency of the latter we must suppose their
pseudopodia organs of elementary taste as well as touch.
The situation of nerve organs in an animal will materially
depend on its fixture or freedom. The spinal nerve organ is but
the continued differentiation which is seen in the mouth &c.
The sense organ will ever be developed on those parts which
are most called on for perceptive faculties in order to minister
to the welfare of the being. Thus the fixed animal will not
require special perceptive faculties at its base. Animals capable
of swimming swiftly forwards and of turning quickly, will require
only sense organs in the part of the body which lies in the
direction of movement. But animals cumbrous in their form,
incapable of swift motion, will require organs which shall inform
them of the neighbourhood of objects in every direction around
their bodies. Hence, in the ctenophora we see a mouth with
round sensitive lips ; at the opposite extremity a distinct sense
organ of sight. On the apical side of the equator Ctenophores arise.
These are not mere organs of locomotion, they are media of sense
protecting the sides of the oral pole.

In considering the physiology of the invertebrate nervous
system, we are brought at the outset to the question of the
possible conducting power of protoplasm. Organs of sense make
their appearance before nervous cords, but all analogy would
teach us that these sense organs are not themselves perceptive,
in other words, that they merely transmit the impressions they
rcceive to the body substance. Moreover, in an animal pos-
sessing ocelli, but no nervous cords, the body acts upon an idea
or impression received through these sense organs. Now, the
very fact that the animal has the power of controlling the move-
ments of differentiated parts is a sufficient proof that impressions
must be conveyed through definite tracts to distinct loci: in
other words that conducting power is assumed by cells prior to
their structural differentiation. For these reasons we may look
on ocelli and kindred organs as the primary alteration of
sensitive tissue or the simplest example of the alteration of
structure which protoplasm undergoes to meet the requirements
of perception and action.

It is not merely probable, but absolutely certain, that the
nervous system does not make its first appearance as an acephalic
ganglion. It would be very pretty and diagramatic to show that
it did, but it does not. After the establishment of an oral aper-
ture and ocelli, a small tract in the neighbourhood of the mouth
becomes altered in structure, it is a circumscribed rounded mass,
from which cords proceed to the sense and digestive organs.
This occurs in the Ascidian Mollusc. Because this ganglion
gives fibres to the sense organs, the only ones indeed that they
receive, and that they are not motor organs, it follows that the
ganglion must be a centre of sensation. But, taking into con-
sideration the small number of fibres distributed generally, it is
manifest that the nerves connected with this ganglion cannot
be the sole conductors, of sensation. In other words, the non-
nervous mass of the body is sensitive. Irritation of any part of
its body causes an immediate contraction of the muscular coat,
resulting in the passage of a jet of water from the orifices of
the body.

From the preceding considerations I am compelled to con-
clude, that solitary as the ganglion of the Ascidian is, the
energy of the body is not centralised in it. I summarise the
functions of the animal as follows :?

The organs of special sense, when present, transmit their
impressions to the ganglion.

The ganglion is an elaborating, a perceptive, and a dis-
tributing organ.

The whole body is sensitive.
Sensation is more exalted in the ganglion than the remainder
of the body.

It is a reflex centre for the digestive system.
The question now arises whether the ganglion is the simplest
form of the cephalic ?

It might be thought, perhaps, that the one part of its being
directly connected with the organs of sense, sufficiently indicated
the relations of the ganglion to the nervous systems of the
vertebrates. But if we consider that it is the-only nerve centre
in the animal, that it directly governs the digestive viscera and
the apparatus of motion, that the highest nervous systems
have for these and other offices separate and distinct ganglia,
we shall rather regard it as an undifferentiated analogue of the
whole vertebrate ganglionic apparatus. Just, in fact, as the
functions of the man are found in a rudimentary generalised
condition in the protoplasmic cell, so the specialisation of func-
tion has, in the ascidian, marked out a nodule which is the
generalised representative of the totality of man's ganglia, each
of which has special functions.

Before, however, such specialisation occurs, elaboration of
the sense media takes place. This occurs in the ctenophora, in
whom the ctenocyst is in direct communication with a nerve
ganglion. Multiplication of ganglia now sets in, and we can select
no better example of this than the Actinidae. Such multiplica-
tion is accompanied by a corresponding differentiation of gang-
lionic functions. Some are devoted to the purposes of sight,
others to controlling the muscular tissue &c. It is most important
to note that throughout the Protozoa, Coelenterata, Annuloida,
and acephalous Molluscs, whatever the arrangements of any
nervous or sensitive systems, there is no spot, nodule, or gang-
lion of supreme importance over others in the animal economy.
The ascidian, I have said, possesses the simplest nervous appa-
ratus, but with the increase in the number of ganglia which
occurs in many animals belonging to the above divisions there
is no persistent maintenance of a single ganglion connected
with organs of sense. Were it so we could only arrive at one
conclusion?that a cephalic ganglion was the first nervous
organ to make its appearance; that non-cephalic ganglia
Avere gradually produced, and that the cephalic ganglion was
the sole seat of sensation. But the anatomy of the Actinidae,
their scattered ocelli, ganglion, and fibres, bear incontrovertible
testimony to the diffusion of vitality in their bodies.
The first appearance of a cephalic mass has not hitherto
been detected in the form of a separate and distinct ganglion.
In the Echinoidea we see, perhaps, the simplest homologue of
the vertebrates?encephalon, in the form of a ganglionated cord
surrounding the gullet and sending off five branches. Thenervous
system is adapted to the general structure of the animal, that
is, it being desirable to obtain the greatest amount of nervous
power with the least occupation of space the ganglionic cord
surrounds the oesophagus, which is short. In this manner
also, the ganglia are the more readily enabled to supply the
ambulacral spaces. If we now suppose one of the ganglia to
retain its position on one side of the oesophagus, and the
remainder of the cord to be placed on the other side of the
digestive tube, but continuous and in a line with the solitary
ganglion, we shall have a diagrammatic representation of the
higher invertebrate nervous system, and shall understand how a
ganglionated circle surrounding the oral extremity of a diges-
tive tube, has one of its ganglia the homologue of the vertebrate
brain.

But not the analogue. Neither in the echinoidea nor in the
more highly differentiated nervous apparatus of the acephalous
molluscs do we see anything approaching in function to a
cephalic ganglion.

The nervous system of the annulosa consists of the double
chain of ganglia already described. The greater number of the
ganglia are post-oesophageal and represent the sympathetic of
the higher animals ; the pre-oesophageal ganglion being situated
on the superior surface of the digestive tube is the direct homo-
logue of the vertebrate brain. The insecta, which are, as I have
said, the most important members of this order, exhibit the
same type of nervous structure as its simplest forms; they,
however, besides the increase of the thoracic and the decrease of
the abdominal in size, exhibit the most rudimentary form of a
cerebro-spinal axis. There is a prolongation of the substance of
the cephalic ganglion backwards in the form of two cords above
and in contact with the non-cephalic ganglia. Functionally
these spinal fibres unite the ganglia and fibres into a composite
machine capable of obeying the dictates of any one ganglion,
but more especially of the cephalic. If such annulose animals
as the garden worm, in whom there are no spinal fibres, be cut
into several pieces, each portion will preserve the power of
movement for hours, provided each segment have a perfect
ganglion: we may cut the animal into as many pieces as we
choose, and each portion will preserve the power of movement.
If we now take an insect, such as the house fly, decapitate it,
the animal will be able to perform to a limited extent the action
synonymous with its name : it will walk, if placed on its back,
will regain its footing, and perform other actions presently to be
considered. Now cut the body into two segments, and what is
the result ? The animal lies motionless and dead. The con-
clusion is obvious: in the worm the separate pairs of ganglia
form an independent vital apparatus; in the insect they are no
longer independent but through the spinal fibres?inter-depen-
dent. Whereas the worm is multiple in its points of energy,
the insect is dual, i.e., it possesses cephalic and non-cephalic
apparatus, the non-cephalic having several distinct loci, stimu-
lation of anyone calling for the action of the whole non-ceplialic
apparatus.

The cephalic is the most important ganglion of the
worm, the whole body is capable of obeying it, but through
the non-cephalic ganglia. The impulse proceeds backwards
from ganglion to ganglion, and this is exemplified by the
animal's mode of progression. The worm moves by approxi-
mating the second segment to the first and the third to the
second, and so on : a gradual wrinkling, shortening and lateral
enlargement of the anterior portion of the body is seen, the
wrinkling and approximation proceed in a rhythmical order
from before backwards.

The approximation being complete, extension takes place in
the same order. Now, in such a high vertebrate as the serpent,
which, however, as it moves by undulatory motion may be com-
pared for one moment with the foregoing, there is no such
approximation from before backwards. Without necessarily
moving its head or fore part, the snake arches its posterior
extremity and an undulatory progressive motion proceeds from
behind forwards. The posterior extremity of the body acts im-
mediately in obedience to the anterior, and not by successive
transmission of the impulse from ganglion to ganglion.
But to revert to the insecta. It is owing to the very inter-
dependence of their parts?to the oneness in life of non-cephalic
ganglia that section abolishes such oneness and cessation of action
ensues. But were the nervous system not a dual?were it an
unit?had the spinal fibres commanded the ganglia only in
obedience to the cephalic ganglion, then on severance of such
ganglion all action would cease, but it does not. It is not a
question of the action of individual parts, but the whole body
walks, flies, and the limbs move in their regular order. The
animal acts as a being without a cephalic ganglion.

Let us? consider that reflex action takes place in obedience
to a stimulus at the periphery of a sensory nerve. When a
decapitated insect is on its back, what stimulus affects the
extremities of the legs to make it regain its feet ? Normally
the ganglia which are connected with the limbs are under the
control of volitional centres ; the animal, if walking, stops when
it pleases, so it does when decapitated ; ergo there must be a
volitional centre.

In the highest vertebrates bodily actions may be divided
into reflex and non-reflex. This, then, is the highest differen-
tiation of efferent action. Reflex movements may take place
through the brain, spinal cord, and sympathetic system. They
govern the visceral functions, and are concerned in many so-
called vQluntary actions of our daily life. So greatly is this the
case that the physiologist is apt to consider the reflex power a
property of the non-cephalic centres, which enables them to act
independently of the brain. How thoroughly erroneous this
opinion is the execution of criminals by the axe has sufficiently
proved. Death almost immediately follows such decapitation,
and no bodily reflex or other actions ensue. The conclusion is,
that these centres are directly dependent on the encephalon for
the maintenance of their energy. But if the domestic fowl be
suddenly beheaded it will often walk or run several paces, and
always manifests a greater amount of energy than the decapi-
tated man.

Here the conclusion is that the non-encephalic centres are
more independent of the cephalic than in man.

If the frog be subjected to the same experiment it will not
merely live for several hours but will strive to push away any
instrument with which it is touched.

In this case also the same law is pursued. In the insecta the
same phenomena are exhibited, but intensified.
The same may be said of the worm.

If we now pass through the series, from below upwards?
worm, insect, frog, fowl, man?we see more plainly how the
cephalic ganglion is gradually increased in motor and sensory
power, and the non-cephalic ganglion correlatively lessened.
The nervous system follows the law of specialisation.
The ganglia of the Ecliinoidea are reflex, and sensitive and
motor, without predominance of any one ganglion.

In the worm all the ganglia possess these qualities, but the
cephalic ganglion to a greater extent than the remainder.
In the Insecta the non-cephalic ganglia are combined by a
continuous cord into one sensitive and motor apparatus ; the
individual ganglia are reflex. The cephalic is sensitive, motor,
and reflex, and possesses the first two properties to a greater
extent than any other part of the body.

The same may be said of the frog, fowl, and man. There is
thus a gradual separation of parts for the more perfect per-
formance of distinct functions, which, in the lower forms, are
combined in a rudimentary condition, and are effected by
undifferentiated ganglia.

In the spinal cord of the insect we see a distinct addition to
the nervous system of the lowest annulose animals.
Now the cords can only be added for :?

1st.?Transmission of commands from cephalic to non-
cephalic centres, or
2nd.?Transmission of sensation to cephalic ganglion, or
3rd.?Differentiation of the ganglionic powers of the
simplest annulosa.
THE CENTRALISATION OF ENERGY. 217
With regard to the first hypothesis :?
Conducting organs cannot be added to a ganglionic mass
without special additions to that mass, for an increased con-
ducting apparatus can exist only when there is an increased
generating apparatus.

With regard to the second hypothesis, the same may be
said, substituting, however, the word 'sensitive' for 'generating.'
The cords then form the physical centre of a differentiation
of ganglionic powers. Is such differentiation motor or sensory
or reflex ? To answer this we must solve another problem?
Does the seat of volition correspond to that of sensation until
they become differentiated ?

In man the encephalon consists of the cerebral hemispheres,
the sensory ganglia, the cerebellum, pons, crura, and medulla.
The highest mental acts are Volition and Ideation.
Pathology has proved that these faculties have their seat in
the cerebrum.

In the frog ideation and memory are situated in the
cerebrum, but not volition entirely. Volition in this animal
occupies the whole spinal axis, increasing from below upwards.
So that it follows the course of sensation.

It is only in the highest vertebrates that we find ganglia
differentiated into sensory and volitional. We therefore con-
clude that among the humbler forms the sensory are volitional.
This leaves us reflex action?the ganglia are the seat of this.
Therefore the spinal cord of the insect is to be regarded as
a centre of common sensation ; it acts by itself without the
brain. Moreover, it acts as a whole; section destroys its
irritability, and occasions almost immediate death.

The mammalia, aves, reptilia, and pisces occupy this order
with reference to their brain development, and also to their
intelligence.

The average sizes of their nerve fibres are as follows:?
Mamfnalia . . . isas to eAo of an inch in diameter.
Aves .... 2000 ?> 3000 ?? ?
Reptilia (Frog) . . ? 22S0 ? ??
Pisces (Eel) .... ^3 ? ?

The nerve fibres in man are smallest in the brain and spinal
cord, in which they measure from 1 0 j,00th to T4^ooth in. in
diameter; in the trunks and branches of the nerves they measure
from ~2 0 0 0th to -joVo^ *n*' so ^hat the fineness of the nerve
fibre in man is correlated to the altitude of its functions.
The difference between the nervous power of man and of
the inferior animal, and the corresponding difference in the
size of the fibres shows that there is a general correlation or
nerve power to the fineness of the fibres.

The relative difference in size between the fibres of the
nerve branches and those of the cephalic ganglion, and between
those of the latter organ and of the spinal cord, decreases
as we pass downwards among the members of the animal
kingdom.

Among invertebrate animals the fibres are relatively fewer in
number and coarser than in the vertebrates. The fibres of the
cephalic ganglion, where present, are finer than those of the
nerve branches. The fibres are finer absolutely in the higher
than in the lower invertebrata. We can, therefore, judge of
the relative powers of parts of any animal's nervous system by
comparing the size of their fibres.

The general law of whose principles I have been speaking
may be thus formulated.

There is throughout the members of the animal kingdom
possessing a nervous system a gradual differentiation of nervous
cords to separate fibres. The differentiation is both absolute
and relative. Absolute as regards the relation of the fibres of
an animal to those of a member of a higher or lower order;
relative as regards the cephalic and non-cephalic fibres of any
one animal. The differentiation is greater in the former than
in the latter case.

Throughout the cold-blooded vertebrates the proportion of
the nerve centres to the nerve is much less than in the warm-
blooded animals ; there is thus a direct proportion between the
nerve totals or systems and nerve fibres.

Evolution or development then proceeds from generally
sensitive and homogeneous protoplasm to more sensitive spots,
which spots are concerned in the appreciation of special quali-
ties of external objects; these become elaborated into organs of
distinct special sense?ocelli and auditory vesicles.
Tracts of cells communicating with these sense organs are
enabled to conduct impressions and impulses through the body
substance, without an apparent structural differentiation of
such cells.

The latter condition, however, shortly obtains when we see
one or more ganglia sending fibres to the various body organs.
Multiplication of ganglia now occurs without the supremacy
of any one ganglion.

The next step is the establishment of the latter condition.
The further development is from the cephalic ganglion,
which sends backwards two communicating cords.
Elaboration of the cerebro-spinal axis now proceeds.
The qualities of the tissues of the highest vertebrates are
the differentiated properties of the simple protoplasmic cell.
To know the power of a being we have only to estimate the
individual functions of its differentiated parts?if any.
Where there is one ganglion it must be the seat of the
animal's highest powers.

Where there are ganglia in connection with sense organs,
and others in connection with muscular fibres &c., we have
ganglia of special sense (sight and hearing) and others.
The others must then represent the remaining powers of
protoplasm?immediate tactility?motor and reflex action.
Thus far then, there is only a differentiation of special sense.
With the prolongation backwards of the cephalic ganglion the
non-cephalic ganglia yield their properties of common tacti-
lity and volition to such process, retaining their power of
reflex action. This is the second nervous differentiation.
Such a cerebro-spinal axes makes its first appearance in the
insecta.

From this point the differentiation of nerve faculties is
absolute and in kind in so far as the cephalic ganglion is con-
cerned.

This becomes elaborated into separate ganglia having
distinct functions. But the spinal cord merely differentiates
in degree; it receives the power of reflex action, this increases
with the multiplication of the sympathetic ganglia ; at the
same time it loses by degrees its faculties of common sensation
and volition, which become centralised in the cephalic ganglion.
But with such centralisation there is a dependence of the cord
on the cephalic ganglion for the maintenance of its powers.
Hence it follows that separation of such ganglion by
severance from the cord increases the functional activity of the
latter, the extent of such impairment of energy being exactly
correlated to the cephalic assumption of the erst general nerve
properties.

If we represent the spinal power of the insecta by 100, and
its cephalic by 150, and supposing the frog lose three-fifths of
its energy when decapitated, we may roughly demonstrate the
change as follows-:?
Insects' normal spinal powers . . . . . . .100
? cephalic ? ....... 150
Total cerebro-spinal power ..... 250
Insects' spinal powers . 100 ?| (frog's loss) = 60 ? 100 = 40, frog's spinal power.
Frogs' cephalic ganglion = 150 (normal in insecta)+60 (gain in frog)
= 210, normal in frog.

Examples of such increasing centralisation have been given.
The action of the body in the lowest animals is effected by
simple continuity of its composite particles without reference
to linear transmission, or any other, save the diffused and
uniform. In the higher animals such action is effected by the
q %
220 the centralisation of energy.

continuity and differentiation of certain lines of cells and sub-
servience of the rest of the body to these.
The centralisation of energy is always regional at first ?
that is, it occupies a tract of the body substance, it is not inter-,
cellular, but, on the contrary, involves many cells. It becomes
intercellular by development.

The greater importance of the cephalic ganglion than the
remainder of the ganglion, is always proved when decapitation
impairs energy.

That it is not the sole seat of energy is always proved when
after such decapitation energy is preserved.

The development of the nervous system is in two directions :
first, towards the erection of a large complex cephalic ganglion
and spinal cord, and, secondly, the extension into the tissues of
ramifications from the nervous trunks.

Lastly, the fineness of the nerve fibres is correlated to the
altitude of the functions of the nerve organ in which they are
situate, and to the place and intelligence of the being in the
animal world.

The following is a classification of the chief points of cen-
tralisation of energy:?
Protoplasm. . . Homogeneous in simplest form.
Monera . . . Ectoplasm and Endoplasm.
[ ( Special sense
Cephalic ganglion ? 1 Ideation
Lowest Annulose -
' Memory >
I" Reflex action
'Reflex action
Common sensa-
tion
Volition, j
Non-cephalic ganglion?s Common sensation
[Volition.
Insect.
(Special sense
Common sensation
Ideation
Memory
Volition.
Spinal cord . . . }_?*? action.
Frog.
(Special sense
Common sensation
Memory
Volition
Reflex action.
{Volition
Common sensation
Reflex action.
Non-cephalic ganglia . Reflex action.
THE CENTRALISATION OP ENERGY. 221
Cephalic ganglion
Cock.
Special sense
Ideation
Memory
Volition
Common sensation
, Reflex action.

norJ ("Upper part: Volitional, and seat of common sensation.
? ? ? ? Lower part: Reflex action.
Such are the facts and phenomena I offer to the considera-
tion of physiologists, and from which I derive the following
conclusions:?

There is throughout the animal kingdom a gradually increas-
ing centralisation of energy in certain loci of the body. Such
centralisation is accompanied by structural differentiation of
tissue. With the former and latter condition there proceeds a
differentiation of originally combined protoplasmic faculties
into distinct and elaborated functions.

Percipience and volition are the properties of the simplest
protoplasm; they first find a differentiated locus in one or more
ganglia. They are then elaborated to a greater extent in one
ganglion?the cephalic. Such cephalic ganglion sending back
a process, forms with this latter a cerebro-spinal axis; this axis
now assumes the totality of certain properties lately common to
the ganglia. The axis gradually centralises these faculties in its
anterior extremity and cephalic ganglion. With this centra-
lisation the reflex function of the non-cephalic ganglia extends
into the cord, and a coincidental structural elaboration of the
whole nervous system occurs. Percipience and volition there-
fore are throughout the invertebrata and lower vertebrata not
confined to the cephalic ganglion or brain.
