Mad Artists
============

33
Art. II.?MAD ARTISTS.
An opinion has been prevalent that art is more conservative
of the stability and integrity of the human mind than are poetry
or light literature. This speculation, for it has never been sub-
mitted to analysis or demonstration, has probably arisen from
the knowledge that the senses and perceptive faculties are more
involved than the sentiments, or imagination, in painting. Cer-
tain it is that, while eccentricity appears to have been equally
shared by those who possess " the poet's eye and painter's
hand,"" there are fewer notorious examples of alienation among
the distinguished wielders of the brush than of the pen. It must
be borne in mind, however, that the errors, incoherencies, ex-
travagances, and puerilities of the writers of verse are more con-
spicuous, flagrant, and symptomatic of aberration than are the
quips and cranks and wanton wiles or impotent touches of the
painter. Another qualification must not be omitted, as every
educated or cultivated individual is now either initiated in one
or other of the departments of art, or at some period of his
life attempts to imitate in some way external and beautiful forms,
while to few are granted such fancy or inventive genius as can
clothe even commonplace thoughts in clumsy rhyme, or find
reputation in the corner of a provincial newspaper. While,
then, it may be conceded that poetci nciscitur, non fit, that
these Grod-gifted are few and far between, that every indi-
vidual makes himself, or conceives that he makes himself, a
Raphael or a Canova, or that the sum of these aspirants is
legion ; and while it would be vain to dispute as to the pro-
portion of these classes upon which the blight of mental disease
falls, it may be easily shown that of those who have received in-
struction in drawing, painting, &c. many become of unsound
mind but continue to exercise their acquired powers contem-
poraneously with the most advanced and appalling forms of
disease. There are before me three gigantic volumes containing
specimens of the pseudo art of lunatics in different forms and
phases of derangement. This collection was formed by the
medical superintendent of an asylum which received patients
almost exclusively belonging to the educated classes. These
attempts were made in pencil, ink, water colours, chalk, sepia,
and oil during a period of twenty years. The first volume is con-
fined to portraits in pencil of fifty-five inmates of the asylum, which
are described as having been in many cases striking likenesses,
and which, at all events, convey the impression of characteristic
PART I. VOL. VI. NEW SERIES. D
34 MAD ARTISTS.
displays of power or weakness, sentiment or sensuality. We are
not, however, left to conjecture the prevailing mental constitu-
tion of the individual depicted, as the species of alienation,
diagnosed l>y the attendant physician, has been appended to
each. The aspects of disease presented include monomania,
with delusions; ecstatic mania, theomania, dementia, &c., and
were any scientific object to be gained by such an addition, the
whole narrative of the case, from its beginning to its close,
might be accessible, and in this respect surpassing the illustrations
of mental diseases published many years ago by Sir A. Morison,
as the result of his observations on physiognomy in Bethlehem.
The author of these sketches had been originally an engraver. In
the second volume are found one hundred and twenty-four
sketches, embracing every possible object except the physiognomy
of the patients around. They were the work of persons labouring
under erotomania, dipsomania, furious mania, manias of sus-
picion, fear, vanity, and almost every known form of mental
disease except fatuity. The authors were, with two exceptions,
unprofessional artists, but have, apparently from their produc-
tions, received instruction in the development of some degree
of innate taste. The drawings, which are naturally of various
degrees of merit, consist in a few instances of landscapes from
nature but chiefly of copies from engravings or paintings of scenes
and subjects supplied by memory, or of creations of a disturbed
imagination. Placing out of consideration the marvellous
degree of beauty, accuracy, and delicacy in the execution, it is
worthy of special note that it is only when the creative .or
imitative power is guided by fancy or passion that the design
or the expression becomes altogether wild, absurd, or hideous.
It may be observed further, that the latter class, in which the
elements of the picture are either grotesque or degrading or un-
intelligible, have all to be referred to individuals animated by
gross and debasing tendencies?in other words, labouring under
sub-acute mania, of which appetite was the chief characteristic.
In three of the productions, representing spots and transactions
in the Highlands, and imbued with the most brilliant and blaz-
ing colours, the story told is merely stupid and Quixotic. In
two others the confusion resembles the chimeras of nightmare.
In one only of the whole series is there any approach to
obscenity. Of the artists of this condemned department, two
had been taught?one very imperfectly, one in an admirable and
successful school?the third was a man of lofty genius and varied
acquirements, but was altogether untrained ; of the three none
have, so far as we know, recovered. Among these melancholy
records of art in madness, as the volumes have been entitled,
are a number of bold, graphic, magnified delineations in chalk
MAD ARTISTS. 35
of small plates in Esquirol, Morison &c., thrown off from night
to night in order to become the illustrations of lectures on
alienation the following day. The chief interest hinges upon the
fact that the painter was himself a maniac, knew the nature of
the subjects with which he was dealing, the purpose for which
they were coveted, and caught the very attitude, feature, and
expression which was desired. With this exception, and those
previously enumerated, there cannot be detected in this large
collection a trace or allusion or revelation of the place or cir-
cumstances under which the work was undertaken, or of the
mental or moral lesion under which the workmen suffered. To
the third volume there are only five contributors. One of these
is a discharged patient, who sends exquisite glimpses of his
Canadian home; a second, who, in lucid intervals between
paroxysms of mania, executes several landscapes ; the third,
evidently a practised adept, presents several beautiful vignettes
of flowers on pieces of cardboard; a fourth adds several highly
coloured sketches of the seaboard; and the fifth, the most
interesting of the whole, traces, from its zenith, the decline and
fall of his genius. His first picture is that of an ancient
cathedral in pen and ink, so minutely drawn that the very
stones, their sizes, number, and junction can be followed, but so
delicately and exquisitely finished that, in place of a mere archi-
tectural plan, you have before you a splendid, solemn, mediaeval
pile. The second is the view of a castle, a river, a village, and
all the sweet accompaniments of a spot remote from public view.
Passing over a series belonging to the same gallery, differing,
however, in attractiveness, we arrive at a positive deterioration,
where the artist illustrates his letters to his betrothed by means
of mere morsels of landscape, suggestive, but misplaced and in-
appropriate. Very speedily these pictorial epistles betray bad
spelling, the omission of words, syllables, and letters. The ardent
communications to the lady give place to mere scratchy out-
lines, and, subsequently, as if there was an inability to complete
any lines but those in the execution of which his hand mio-ht
be guided, there were produced hundreds of figures of domestic
articles in which, although a family likeness be seen, there is a
certain amount of individuality. Grreat unsteadiness and in-
definiteness of object are perceptible as we descend in the series,
and the last scene of all is reached, consisting of a scarcely
decipherable scrawl, announcing the writer's impending dissolu-
tion, and bequeathing all his property to her who appears to
have been the cynosure of his existence, the idol to whom all hia
efforts for many months had been devoted, but of whom nothing
more is known than that she appears as a Lilliputian figure in
the great proportion of his drawings.
D 2
36 MAD ARTISTS.
Tliis distinguished landscape painter laboured under general
paralysis during the whole of the course which we have so briefly
endeavoured to indicate, and died of the disease almost contem-
poraneously with the bequest of his means, and while engaged
laboriously in the completion of a large landscape, when his
muscles, rather than his mind, failed to obey the inspiration of
his imagination and the suggestions of his will.
James Barry. Born 1741, died 1806.
We have had poets who " lisped in numbers for the numbers
came," and it would appear that great artists have handled
crayons when mere children, or, at so early a period of life,
that the commencement of their effort had escaped the memory
of their family. It is known that West, when denied the
long-recognised camel-hair brushes as the insignia and the
instruments of his mind, as a truant boy abstracted the brush of
the domestic cat in order to supply his wants. It is further
known that Canova stole from the domestic churn the butter,
of which he modelled the statuettes which were the forerunners
of his future fame. In like manner Barry, though not accused
of infantile felony, is recorded as having been carried away
on a long voyage by his father, in order to substitute a trade
for what the burly sailor naturally regarded as a mere pastime.
Either through the instrumentality of that which is said to be
an antidote to patriotism and courage as well as love?sea-sick-
ness?or under the equally potent spell of genius, the experi-
ment failed, and his parent, abandoning further opposition to
what even his marine eyes may have recognised as a natural
bent, the boy was allowed to return to prosecute his studies.
These events appear to have preceded his scholastic days, and we
may seek an interpretation for his intractable and isolated position
among his fellows, and when actually subjected to instruction, in
the course prescribed to him being as repugnant to his disposi-
tions and tastes as was his life on shipboard. There is more
quaintness than truth in the quotation "that as the twig is bent
the tree's inclined ;" for where the twig does not snap asunder,
in a very large number of examples the bending, the training,
the trimming utterly fail in accomplishing the object proposed,
and are, in fact, invariably frustrated, unless there be some in-
clination, some instinct or idiosyncrasy, which renders the
bending applicable to, the twig, or the twig predisposed to the
bending. In Barry's progress it would appear that a duplex course
of instruction was going on continuously. In school he would
be compelled to acquire the ordinary amount of classics and
mathematics, but his nights were spent in drawing and what
MAD ARTISTS. 37
was, in all likelihood, very promiscuous and very profitless
reading. His pocket-money was expended in candles and
pencils, and he resolutely resisted all invasion of his sanctum, by
his mother or the servants, for the purposes of cleansing and
comfort. His perversity and stubbornness even then attracted
surprise, particularly when manifested in peculiarities of dress
and in asceticism, which rivalled that of the religious orders.
The latter habit may have been contracted in imitation of the
practice of his mother, who was a zealous Romanist, and with whose
Church he for a brief time fraternised. Notwithstanding his oddi-
ties, his inflexible temper, and somewhat repulsive manners, he
was regarded by his companions as a prodigy of learning, a leader,
and one who stood apart from themselves both in the eccen-
tricity and the superiority of his talents and acquirements. It
may be that at this juncture, or even earlier, the penumbra of
the total eclipse, which long subsequently obscured the light of
his genius, passed over his ripening powers, and that his perti-
nacity of purpose, his frugality and whimsicalities were but the
revelations of that very marked and very morbid character which
made him what he was. The first intimation of his special voca-
tion, apart from the drawings of colossal figures which almost
frightened his skipper father, were etchings of a volume of tales
so obscure that it has never been traced. But the more public
and picturesque disclosure of his ambition and powers occurred
in an attempt to exhibit a picture of " St. Patrick's Landing on
the Coast of Cashel," in the Dublin Institution for the Encourage-
ment of Art, which produced so striking an impression upon its
admirers that the name and appearance of the painter were de-
manded, who stood forward, a poorly clad and humble boy, and
bearing such traces of his actual condition that his claim was
discredited, and he rushed from the room burning with shame
and bursting into tears. This affecting incident was witnessed
by Edmund Burke. " There is a tide," says a great psychologist,
" in the affairs of men;" there are epochs, say we, in the
history of all erratic men, utterly inconsistent with the modern
doctrine of the regular evolution of the mind, and with the
permanent localisation of faculties, formerly so generally
believed in, but which cause the essential elements of character
to stand out in bold and painful relief. The climax now
alluded to powerfully influenced the course of Barry. He became
subsequently and for a long period deeply indebted to the friendly
countenance and pecuniary aid of the eloquent senator, and
was by his means supported during his early studies in London, and
was subsequently sent to Naples and to Rome. His destination to
the latter school was, in part, determined by the remark of Sir
J. Reynolds that, in order to gratify his ambition of becoming an
38 MAD ARTISTS.
historical painter, he must live in the Sistine Chapel. But,
although he passed many studious days amid the glories and
triumphs of Raphael and Michael Angelo, the presence of their
works brought to the surface other qualities than admiration or
imitation. He was disappointed, he questioned their eminence
and ability, he was a critic rather than an academician. He was
not impressed with the atmosphere in which he breathed, he was
roused to irritability and hostility by what generally calms and
elevates. He engaged in intrepid but rash controversies and
quarrels, and to such an extent that it would be difficult to say
with whom or with what he agreed. He carried home this dispo-
sition with him, and, although there were happy and harmonious
intervals, his life might be styled an antagonism. His temper has
been compared to a tornado, his oaths to horrible thunder. When
entering upon the practical work of his profession, he devoted his
taste and experience to what has been called his Grecian style,
but the public was not tempted to reward his exertions, and
poverty, if not want, began to add to the difficulties by which
he was surrounded. He abandoned the class of subjects upon
which he desired to build his fame, and addressed himself to
what has been absurdly called his historical method. This was not
merely a failure, but it betrayed in a wild, even ludicrous
manner, the mental perversion of the artist. He depicted the
" Battle of Quebec and Death of Wolfe," but the combatants were
all represented in a state of nudity, and the British regiments
recognisable by their standards, were stripped of everything else,
and resembled in all but colour the North American Indians,
At this period three features marked, in a very conspicuous
manner, his general bearing. He was sunk in poverty, and
naturally became irascible, peculiar, solitary, eschewing even the
friends and companions who might have assisted him, but sternly
and scrupulously honest. How far the contributions of his more
affluent friends may have prolonged his endeavours is not known ;
and it is fair to infer that his resources were limited by the sale
of his pictures, or to such illustrations as " Paradise Lost." But
almost contemporaneously with the impersonation of the deliri-
ous fantasies in his American picture, the walls of his bare and
spare dwelling, we cannot call it gallery, presented such exquisite
subjects as "Orpheus," " A Harvest Home, or Thanksgiving to
Ceres and Bacchus," and the " Victors at Olympia," and others.
The real merits and reputation of these productions led, it may
be believed, to his appointment as Professor of Painting.
Moreover, at this, which may be called his full tide of fortune,
the Society of Arts had indulged him in granting him two ex-
hibitions of his paintings, which produced, in clear profit, ?500.
Although living in extreme penury and obscurity, it may be
MAD ARTISTS. 39
understood that from such sources his natural parsimony had
accumulated considerable hordes. The amount of his treasures
was disclosed by the success of a party of burglars, who de-
spoiled his humble domicile of ?400, which was never recovered.
As invariably happened when the very hidden and equable
course of his life became rippled and ruffled, the disordered
elements were thrown up, and the impure taint came to the
surface. His chagrin and disappointment over his misfortune
tempted him to accuse certain of his brother academicians of having
committed the theft. This monstrous calumny, followed as it
was by the publication of an allegation that the same gentlemen
were in the habit of dividing the funds of the association amongst
themselves, provoked a prompt and somewhat illegal retaliation
by which he was summarily expelled from their body. Notwith-
standing, and during, this internecine conflict, Barry, fast hasten-
ing to the culminating point of his career, produced what has been
regarded as one of his most famous productions, " Pandora."
Alienation?it might be called ingratitude?sometimes separated
him from his early and munificent patron, Edmund Burke. But,
when, apparently in the lowest depths of poverty or absurdity, it
is related that the great moral hero condescended still to associate
with his protege, and even to partake of his hospitality, if the
following description can be called such hospitality. Burke joins
him in his home, which had formerly been a carpenter's shop, of
which it still retained traces. The walls were divided between
the artist's paintings of the " Adelphi " and " Pandora " and the
labours of the spider. All around, and in confusion, were straining
frames, old sketches, and a printing press, from which he threw
off his own engravings. The roof and the windows contributed to
ventilation; but amid much dirt and disorder, the fire burned
brightly. The artist welcomed the senator, placed a pair of tongs
in his hands, enjoined him to make himself useful, and to cook a
juicy steak from Oxford market while he ran for the porter. He
presently returned utterly disconcerted that the wind had scat-
tered the ambrosial foam from the pot in which he felt con-
vinced his guest would have revelled. This curious example of
scanty means, of friendly kindness, and of capacities which might
have converted their possessor into a millionnaire, presents a
painful contrast to the dastardly, shabby, almost dishonest greed
of even a greater master in art, Rembrandt, who would have
grasped and exacted from his pupils what might have satisfied
his desires. " I visited Barry in his den," says Southey,
" and have been admitted in his worst (that is to say his
maddest) days, when he was employed upon his ' Pandora.' He
wore at that time an old coat of green baize, but from which
time had taken all the green that ministrations of paint and
40 MAD ARTISTS.
dust had not covered. His wig was one which you might sup-
pose he had borrowed from a scarecrow ; all round it there pro-
jected a fringe of his own grey hair. He lived alone, in a house
which was never cleaned, and he slept on a bedstead with no
other furniture than a blanket nailed on one side. I wanted
him to visit me. ' No,' he said, ' he would not go out by day,
because he could not spare time from his picture; and if he
went out in the evening the academicians would murder him.'
In this solitary, sullen life he continued until he fell ill, very
probably for want of food sufficiently nourishing, and, after
lying for two or three days under his blanket, he had just
strength enough left to crawl to his own door, open it, and lay
himself down with a paper in his hand, on which he had written
his wish to be carried to the house of Sir A. Carlisle, in Soho Square.
There he was taken care of, and the danger from which he had thus
escaped seems to have cured his mental hallucinations. He cast his
slough afterwards, appeared decently clad, and in his own grey
hair, and mixed in such society as he liked."* Although a relapse
of his unhealth must have taken place, a brighter sunrise seemed
about to dawn in the generous act of Sir Bobert Peel by the pur-
chase of an annuity from funds collected by subscription ; but the
boon arrived too late, and Barry, taken ill in a chop-house, died
alone after a solitary death-watch of forty hours' duration.
It would be difficult to unravel the tangled yarn of this man's
mental constitution. He was a compound of morbid tendencies and
of distinguished talents and taste. He resembled those chronic
lunatics, once educated men, who preserve the form and sequence
of words without their coherency. He never said a foolish
thing, yet never did a wise one. There were associated in his
heart the greatest and grossest qualities, sublimity, and absur-
dity. Either he realised Talleyrand's definition of the use of
language by applying his genius, in order to conceal his mad-
ness, or he possessed two natures?deux times, as Pascal some-
where says?which, though strikingly incompatible, and uncon-
nected generally, ran in parallel courses, though sometimes
crossing and commingling. If placed at the bar of a court of
justice, he would have been condemned as unsound and irrespon-
sible, and acquitted as possessing abilities denied to the wisest
and the best of his fellow men.f
William Blake. Born 1757, died 1827.
There are many individuals who pass through a long life of
brilliant distinction or mold-warp obscurity without betraying
* Life of Sontkey, Vol. vi. p. 54.
f Cunningham's Lives of British Painters. Contemporaneous Memoirs.
MAD ARTISTS.
41
puzzlement or perplexity, folly or feebleness, but who, towards
its close, lose a clear sense of their personality and surroundings,
conceive that they are in want and misery, that they are no
longer inmates of their familiar home, that they are deserted,
shunned, and must wander elsewhere and sink into that " last
scene of all and mere oblivion," senile dementia. There are
others who, in the very midst and zenith of a busy and useful
course, burst into paroxysms of fury or droop into decay and
oppression, but from whom the storm or the cloud may pass away,
leaving the mind calm and clear and serene. There are still
others, whom, from causes and in circumstances which afford
no cue to the crisis, become haunted and hunted by phantasms
which flit and flash before the eye, by threatening and dis-
gusting whispers or noises which assail the sense of hearing, by
imaginary sappers, savers, and irritations of the skin, all of which
may pass away and be forgotten. But we have never encoun-
tered an example, until we studied the biography of William
Blake, where, throughout a long career, varied by humble though
diversified incidents, there was an uninterrupted succession of
delusions, hallucinations, and wild imaginings; where there was
scarcely a phase in the constitution of his mind which was not
modified by perversion, nor a pursuit in which the real could
be certainly and satisfactorily separated from the unreal, the
internal impression from the external hobgoblin. Contumacy or
the inborn inflexible impulse to rise above present circumstances
is a first quality recorded of the boy William Blake. He resisted
the desire of his father to make him a hosier, in order to become
a Da Vinci, and astounded that "citizen of credit and renown "
by preferring the highly coloured daubs which appear in book-
sellers' windows to worsted. His mother, more gentle, or dis-
criminating, believing that the angels had whispered to the youth
his future and his fate?and in this superstition may be traced
many of his subsequent mental peculiarities?favoured, and, it
may be, encouraged his taste. Her apartment naturally very
soon became his picture-gallery, where his first efforts in drawing
and versifying met her admiring eyes. He was a quiet, docile
boy, and developed into a polite, courteous, meek artist. It is
fondly affirmed that at ten he became a poet, and at twelve an
artist; and it is certain that his father, detecting in his first essays
the germs of latent excellence, or wearied into humouring him,
caused him to be bound as an apprentice engraver at fourteen.
In respect to his poetic effusions, it may be confidently asserted
that the " Songs of Innocence " were composed while he was in
his teens ; but though rough, they are so vigorous as to promise
that future excellence and greater melodiousness which were
afterwards realised. The apprenticeship did not suffice, as
42 MAD ARTISTS.
his master did not prove to be a teacher, and although he
worked hard mechanically in his professed vocation, lie sought
for instruction and inspiration under Flaxman and Vuseli. It
is impossible to fix upon the precise date of that mental
state in which he seemed to stand in relation to the unseen
and supernatural. But, subsequent to a marriage, which offended
and caused his separation from his father, to a partnership
with a fellow-enthusiast and a brother as a print-seller, and to the
failure of this enterprise, he reappears as an engraver. It
must be noted that his wife, a humble but sensible companion,
efficiently assisted him iu working-off and colouring the
impressions of his plates, made drawings in imitation of her
husband's compositions, and is supposed to have rivalled him in
almost all materialistic operations, although not in conjuring
up those fantastic, or fearful, or simply fanciful phantasms by
which he was surrounded. Hero-worship must have animated
this ductile and imitative helpmeet; for, when dazzled and
distorted by the pyrotechnic absurdities of Rousseau, he resolved
to live in a state of nature, she followed in reducing herself to
a state of nudity, and creating a back court into a
garden of Eden. From this era the biographers of Blake
portray him as living in two worlds, one the visible and
palpable and rather sordid dwelling which he inhabited, and
the other an ethereal and supersensuous region peopled by what
to others were " airy nothings," but were to him real and substan-
tial and even familiar beings, who were recognised by him not as
the creations of his own morbid or mystic imagination, but as
individuals with whom he had, or could at will have, constant
communication, whom he not only saw and heard and understood,
but whose lineaments, expression, and dress he could and did
transfer to canvas. Poems published by him and designs
expected to captivate the taste of an artistic public proved to be
unproductive speculations; but, although not utterly prostrated
by these failures and compelled to subsist by the labours of the
graver, he became melancholic, avoided intercourse with friends
and fellow-men, and lived as a recluse in that London which to
the penniless and the powerless is as much a desert as the
Thebaid was of old to the vision-seer, St. Anthony. Frugal
and, perhaps by necessity, abstinent, and self-denying, he re-
ceded more and more into that imaginative paradise where
were supplied all the luxuries, enjoyments, and glories which were
unattainable in his ordinary career, where his associates were
the poets, the heroes, the saints, the hierophants of former ages,
all of whom his fancy endowed with living and breathing forms and
attributes, and in whom he, by mental concentration and subjec-
tivity, began to believe were actual and substantial companions,
MAD ARTISTS. 43
and as truly present to his external senses as were his wife
and other relatives. Sometimes the phantoms took the form
and were accepted as relatives, and established personal and
practical relations with him. A notable example of this
personal and practical interpellation is afforded when, con-
scious of the presence of his brother, or of his shade, he
sought counsel and obtained such instruction from his super-
natural visitor that he achieved great improvement in his mode
of engraving or stereotyping both his poetry and figures. The
drawing was made on the copper, on the suggestion of his
spiritual instructor, by means of a certain liquid, the nature of
which was never revealed. Whatever may have been the nature
and circumstances of this consultation, the novel manipulation
proved a success. The suggestions or revelations of actual or
imaginary guides did not invariably eventuate so happily. It
would appear that about the same time Barry and Stothard
commenced a drawing of the " Canterbury pilgrims," when a
suspicion, even an accusation, of plagiarism arose. But a con-
troversy and alienation between the fellow-labourers occurred :
when the explanation or unravelling of the mystery was
found in a commission conveyed by Cromec, but which was
altogether visionary and imaginary. The finished subject of this
embrogliement, with sixteen others, was exhibited in his brother's
house; but whatever their merit might otherwise have been, the
effect was destroyed by an accompanying catalogue crowded with
wild fancies, absurdities, and a railing against the demon
Correggio. But such miracles or mirages were not confined to
the foggy atmosphere of London. Invited to Sussex to illustrate
his edition of Cowper, he was met on the downs and breezy up-
lands by Dante, Virgil, and Homer, whom he describes as
coloured shadows, and with whom he held high converse, watching
fairies and their funerals, and all the milder and gentler forms
of demonolatry. For years he had sighed for an interview with
Satan, whom he had considered to be a grand and splendid
spiritual existence; but at last, unannounced and unexpected,
when Blake was going up the stairs of his house, a light streamed
around him, and he saw the fiend glaring upon him through the
grating of a window, when, opportunely, his wife conceiving
that he was visited by a poetic vision, supplied such materials as
enabled him to execute a portrait of his infernal visitant. This
was assuredly not the first transcript of the lineaments of his
infernal or supernal associates. In connection with this
apparition we have to recall his trial for high treason,
originating in a struggle with a soldier, in which he conquered,
as he conceived, in virtue of the strength imparted to him
hy a demoniacal force. If his atelier was not crowded with
44 MAD ARTISTS.
the hideous martyrdoms of primitive times, preserved in Belgian
galleries, with the majestic warriors and weird wizards who
fought for or frightened the lieges in the middle ages, with the
drunken and frolicsome boors of Ostade and Tenniers; his easel
ever bore the features or the figures of the continuous procession
of his ghostly or ghastly companions, while every morsel of
canvas, every scrap of paper, was covered with glorious or
grotesque representations, with " quips and cranks and wanton
wiles," either poured forth by his own prurient capacity or
borrowed from the authors with which he interlarded poems
of his own composition. Except in the curious work by the
Eev. Robert Kirk, entitled "The Essay of the Nature and
Actions of the Subterranean and Invisible People," which
described the whole parish of which he was minister as teeming
in its glens, caverns, mounds, with fairies, ghosts, goblins, &c.,
can there be found any description of so grotesque and numerous
a commonwealth as crowded around the painter. It is sad and
sweet to learn that the vision of his boy brother was almost in-
cessantly present to him. These pictures of an ideal world, and
sometimes of known and historic personages, attracted so much
attention and admiration that orders for such portraits consti-
tuted part of his occupation. Upon one occasion compliance with
a request to supply a likeness of Sir William Wallace presented
considerable psychological difficulty. Receiving the order, and in
the presence of his employer, his passion for heroes burst forth
in the exclamation," Sir William Wallace ! There ! there ! I see
him in all his glory ! " and forthwith he commenced the drawing,
but suddenly paused, and when inquiry was made for the cause
of the interruption, he replied, " I cannot finish him, Edward I.
has stepped in between him and me." What shadow, sentiment,
or visible object intervened ? Blake himself had no theory as
to this phantasmagoria, the creations came and went unheeded ;
he believed in their existence but had no creed, and was not
a propagandist; but still, notwithstanding the simplicity
and sincerity of his nature, there gathered around him a
certain number of proselytes, who conceived that what he saw
was not fancied but seen, and that the paintings which clothed'
his walls were true and trustworthy images of beings who were
positively present, and with whom he held communion. But
others, suspecting that these apparitions, whether summoned by
his will or not, were photographs from external objects or mental
conceptions, and observing his absorbed and abstracted expres-
sion while gazing on his lay figures, suspected that he might be
acting under the influence of opium. The suspicion that
he reproduced merely what had been deeply and lastingly
impressed upon his brain is corroborated by the experience of
MAD ARTISTS. 45
Sir J. Reynolds, who, after passing a day in dwelling upon faces,
carried them with liim into the darkness. The theory of narcotic
inspiration is borne out by the experiments of Moreau and the
consumers of Cannabis Indica, and we ourselves noted in
the conduct of a celebrated lecturer upon astronomy, who sup-
ported an intensely nervous frame by opium, that upon
one occasion, having swallowed too much or too little of the
drug, imagining that he had drawn a figure on the black board
before him, but upon which he had left no trace, he continued
during the whole evening to see the supposed figure in his
own mind and to demonstrate to his audience as if it were in
their mind.
Prolific as Blake was in his art productions, these were
greatly exceeded by his poetical compositions, of which he left
one hundred MS. volumes ready for publication. Certain of his
more enthusiastic admirers have ranked the following as equal to
Shelley or Byron :?
Tiger, tiger, burning bright,
In the forest of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Framed thy fearful symmetry?
In what distant deeps or skies
Burn'd the fervour of thine eyes?
On what wings dare he aspire?
What the hand dare seize the fire ?
And what shoulder, and what art,
Could twist the sinews of thy heart?
When thy heart began to beat.
What dread hand form'd thy dread feet ?
When the stars throw down their spheres,
And sprinkled heaven with shining tears;
Did He smile his work to see?
Did He who made the lamb make thee ?
When aged seventy-one he passed gently away from this region
of shadows to that of which they are but the reflections. Not-
withstanding a full consideration of all the portions of his
history laid bar.- to the public, one of his biographers has ven-
tured to propound the interrogatory, Mad or not mad ? Sceptical
himself as to any deviation from normal mentalisation, further
than the phenomena seen by the special faculty of imagination
being accepted as realities, he furnishes a catena of discriminating
authorities, who, he conceived, supported this opinion. But on
an analysis of an estimate arrived at by these critics, it will be
discovered that, while one defines him as an eccentric,
another as a visionary, a third as an enthusiast, a fourth
as a superstitious ghost seer, all feel it expedient to mollify
or to apologise for modes of action inconsistent with the
46 MAD ARTISTS.
habits of other healthy men ; it may be safely affirmed that
if he was not insane in conduct, Blake betrayed undoubted
symptoms of his mental malady in painting. Many of his
drawings and engraved illustrations are extant, and while we
may merely smile over " the ghost of a flea " as a freak of fancy, or
experience awe on tracing the lineaments of the long dead
Wallace, of Edwards I. and III. &c. as, to his conviction, living
and animated before him; we cannot restrain our pity and
sympathy for the vagaries and heated fancy of the author of the
"Inventions of Job," "The Milton," and "Paradise " which, with-
out a key, is incomprehensible, and his mystical and allegorical
writings.*
Benvenuto Cellini. Born 1500, died 1571.
It would be charitable to conceive that Benvenuto Cellini was of
insane mind from the period of his first resistance to his father's
will and wishes in early childhood. Yet, with the advantages of
education, with a profound and ever active veneration for
Catholic rites and observances, if not for Catholic religion; with
exquisite taste and refinement in the departments of art, in
which he excelled and to which he owes his fame; with the im-
pressions received from the society and intercourse of the prelates
and high dignitaries of the Church to which he belonged; and
of sovereigns, courts, and camps?wherever, in fact, discipline
and polish were accessible?he was a villain and a vagabond.
Not merely querulous, ambitious, quarrelsome ; not merely an
irritable intriguer ; not merely of dissolute and degraded morals ;
he confesses to have been thrice a murderer, in other words, to
have assassinated rivals or enemies, who had thwarted or frus-
trated his desires or designs. His life, which is a romance of
genius, crime, and superstition, through which there runs a
poetic current of dreamy delusion, commenced in 1500, in Florence.
He was the son of an architect who had an hereditary predilec-
tion for art and music. The first instructions received by
Benvenuto Cellini were from his father in flute playing, but so
strong was the aversion of the pupil to such studies, and so
strong was his preference for modelling and drawing, that a
compromise seems to have been arrived at, and the boy was
made apprentice to a jeweller. In the phraseology of the present
time, he became a silversmith; but instead of spoons and salvers,
the occupation of artificers of this class was then directed to the
cutting, carving, or sculpturing gems and the precious metals,
to the production of chalices for the churches and of ornamental
* Biographical Notices, passim. Life of William Blake, by Alexander
Gilchrist, 1863.
MAD ARTISTS. 47
plate for the tables of tlie noble and the affluent. As a sculptor,
properly so called, his most famous works are the figure of
Perseus and the head of the Medusa; but in his earlier career,
and, indeed, throughout life, he was more celebrated and more
patronised for his production of sacramental cups, embossed or
embosomed in scenes in relief, of crucifixes and other sacred
ornaments and emblems connected with worship, and of chased
dishes, salt cellars for domestic purposes, in the style of the
Renaissance, but so exquisite in design and execution as to be
held in high esteem at the present time. The first independent
adventure of this brilliant youth was by proceeding to Rome,
where, although he must have lived in the very atmosphere of
the fame and achievements of the immortal Raphael, and where
he must have heard of, or witnessed, the pomp and pageantry
of his apotheosis, he never mentions his name nor his sacred
mission in ornamenting the noblest shrine of the Deity in the
world. This silence cannot have sprung from jealousy, as the
course of the greater and lesser genius lay in opposite directions,
but from the reticence or forgetfulness engendered by the
egotistic absorption of selfish ambition. In the course of a few
years he is again found in the Eternal City engaged at his trade
as a jeweller, and apparently under the patronage of the Pope
(Clement VII.) and the nobility. In one of his residences there,
which occurred during the sacrilegious sack of the city by the
Constable of Bourbon, he acquired, or imagined lie had acquired,
a new and great distinction by having shot that celebrated
marauder during the assault. Be this a fact or a fancy, he flies
to Florence and then to Mantua, being constantly employed in
imprinting the suggestions of his imagination or the truths of
Christianity upon vessels or ornaments of gold or silver. He was
subsequently recalled to Rome, not merely to exercise his craft
but was appointed to make dies for medals and for Use in the
mint, and was ultimately elevated to the dignity of the Pope's
mace-bearer. These duties and honours seem to have been con-
tinued under the subsequent Papacy of Paul III.
Yet, notwithstanding his apparent elevation and aggrandise-
ment, he appears to have been in constant flight from one town
to another, a restlessness which was partly the consequence of
his violent temper and of the quarrels and difficulties into which
he was plunged by this infirmity, partly of his impecuniosity, but
mainly, it is conjectured, by mental unsteadiness and visionary
projects. After receiving the countenance of many royal and ducal
personages, he is installed in the favour of Francis I. of France.
This king who confided to him the execution of various objects
of art and the ornamentation of the palace of Fontainebleau,
rewarded him by letters of naturalisation, an annual pension
48 MAD ARTISTS.
of seven hundred scudi, and a small estate. This connection
was dissevered, it is suspected, by his own defects, as well as by
the intrigues of enemies or rivals, and he is next encountered in
Florence, under the auspices of Duke Cosmo de Medici, where,
in addition to his professional vocation, he cast his celebrated
figure of Perseus which still remains as a monument of his
genius. His return to Florence and to the munificence of the
family of Medici was signalled by his being ennobled by the
reigning Duke, and by his name being inscribed on the golden
roll of that proud city, by the donation of a house, and by other
acts of lordly favour. This epoch in his history must have
been critical, and perhaps the commencement of serious dispo-
sitions and moral respectability, for we now hear that he enter-
tained intentions of entering the Church to which, amongst all
his vagaries, he remained attached; and actually received the first
tonsure. But his aspirations after sacred or sacerdotal functions
must have been dulled or misdirected by another ardour; for his
marriage is next announced. Beyond his death, which happened
in 1571, and the bequest of his property to his three legitimate
children, nothing remains to be recounted, for of his numerous
illegitimate offspring or of their ultimate fate we possess no in-
formation. That the mind of Benvenuto Cellini was at all times
superstitious and credulous, as well as irritable, impetuous, and
imaginative cannot be doubted. His was an age of marvels and
miracles, and he, perhaps, did nothing more than concur in a
current belief when he accepted necromancy, and trusted to
incantations for the discovery of events in which he was deeply
interested, but which were shrouded in the future or designedly
concealed from his knowledge- There are grounds for supposing
that his highly wrought and inflammable fancy led to exaggera-
tion, to the mystification of commonplace circumstances and to
the confession of crimes which were never perpetrated, and of
conduct which disclosed the reign of his passions and propensities,
but could not redound to his reputation even in mediaeval Italy.
He was, besides, the sport, the victim, or the favourite, as his
position may be estimated, of spiritual or supernatural visitants.
One portion of his unsettled progress places this characteristic
very broadly and distinctly before us. With a sort of dramatic
injustice he was accused of embezzling jewels placed in his
hands, and committed to the castle of St. Angelo. Although
the governor was friendly to him, regarding him as a good
Catholic, he was consigned to a miserable dungeon half-filled
with water, while tarantulas and other noxious creatures crawled
around him, and where his only comfort consisted in a rotten
mattress. It is true that this severe discipline followed an
attempt to escape, in which he broke his leg. But, under all this
MAD ARTISTS. 49
wretchedness and ignominy, and after he had so nearly effected
suicide as to become insensible and to appear actually dead, he
is visited in dream or delusion by a beautiful angelic youth, who
reprimands him for his desire to die, to maim and mutilate the
body given him by Grod, and to escape from the destiny appointed
for him. So solemn and effectual were these heavenly counsels
that he resolves upon repentance and reform, and records his
resolution in the best way he could. This record assumed the
form of a penitential dialogue between the soul and the body.
But, although in poetic measures, bears no marks of a seraphic
origin. At a juncture when the vengeance of the Pope might
be dreaded he is again visited by his invisible but audible
monitor, who urges him to engage in fervent devotion, during
which he was brought into the presence of the Supreme Being
and conversed with Him. Again, after prayer and an ardent
petition that he should receive some intimation of Divine favour,
such as seeing " the full Lord's sun even in dream," he is
led by a spiritual guide, who hurried him like a whirlwind to a
spot where he was unveiled and presented the aspect of a youthful
and beautiful being, showed him the whole race of mankind who
had preceded him on the earth, then conducted him by various
devious ways to a position whence he gazed upon the sun, whose
resplendent lustre dazzled his eyes, although the whole force of the
rays fell to the left side, he, at the same time,addressing the lumi-
nary in words approaching to worship. Forthwith the sun appears
to swell and to burst and thus disclose the crucifixion, which
gradually becomes a representation, first of the Virgin and Child,
and then of a priestly figure; this revelation or phantasmagoria
ministering more and more to the intensity of his wonder and
piety and faith. The visionary delusions are not entirely con-
fined to religious subjects or the interposition of spiritual visi-
tants, as he becomes impressed with the belief that a murderous
design is formed to destroy him, and the means devised seem
appropriate in the case of a lapidary, by the administration of
diamond dust, which, it was calculated, would gradually and
secretly accomplish the purpose in view in five months. The greed
of one of the conspirators frustrated the plot, by substituting the
powder of a false for that of a true jewel. Upon another occa-
sion he escapes disease and death threatened by the climate of
Ferrara by a remedy nearly as singular as the poison alluded
to, in fact by confining his food exclusively to the flesh of wild
peacocks. In whatever light regarded, either as a superstitious
seer or a victim of suspicion, or a valetudinarian or hypochon-
driac, this artist affords another illustration of the union of
genius, depravity, and delusion.*
* Memoirs of Benvenuto Cellini, a Florentine Artist; by himself. Translated
by Thomas Eoscoe. 1847. &c.
PART I. VOL. VI. NEW SERIES. E
50 MAD ARTISTS.
Benjamin Robert Hatdon. Born 24th January 1786,
died 22nd June 1846.
"Tiie coroner's jury found that the suicide was in an unsound
state of mind when he committed the act." Such was the
verdict of upright?and it may be acute?men, who knew
nothing of the misfortune, the disappointed ambition, the mis-
applied talents of the man of genius of whom they spoke. It
may have been a tribute to the observation of a brilliant imagi-
nation ; it may have been a shroud to cover and conceal the
wreck and decay of a Hercules in art; it must have been, like
similar verdicts, a judgment founded upon a single and final act
of the individual. It would be preposterous to expect analysis
of character or profound perspicacity in such a court, but, in
consideration of a true estimate of the reputation of the
deceased, of the feelings of relatives, and above all of the
interests of science, it would be infinitely preferable to avoid
all conclusions which involve a theory or a presumption.
Psychologically it should be recorded that, long previous to the
commission of the fatal act (May 2, 1821), the shadow of self-
destruction had darkened the gloom when he felt " fardels he
could not longer bear." It is true that throughout the whole
of this artist's life there swept a deep tumultuous current of un-
health, of impetuous impulses of self-will and self-reliance, of
miscalculated powers and pretensions, and of wild and Utopian
projects rivalling the enormous breadth of his canvas. It is
true that his course was ever interrupted and distracted by
accidents over which he had little control, by improvidence,
over which he might have exerted some influence, for while he
spent much of his time in the King's Bench we hear of his
honourable liberation; by the lack of that co-operation and
patronage and promotion of his views as to the supremacy of
art which he had deceived himself into expecting, and by the
acerbity, irritability, and misery which a strong man feels
when he is firmly bound by what he regards as the cobwebs of
sophistry, of selfishness, and of national blindness.
It is a trite truism that the boy is father of the man, but
there is more unepigrammatic truth in the fact that in the un-
conscious or unbridled petulance and peculiarities of the child
maybe traced the moral forces which are to be dreaded or directed.
Benjamin Robert Haydon is portrayed as intensely self-willed, as
animated by paroxysms of ungovernable rage, which could,
however, be allayed or arrested by the sight of a picture book.
Sent to school at six, his principal characteristics seem to have
MAD artists; 51
been improvising drawings of the guillotine from the descrip-
tion of French prisoners then in his native town of Plymouth ;
and in substituting for the commonplace mischief of a school-
boy the persecution of his teacher, himself a painter, by blurring
and mutilating his productions?acts, however, which may have
lighted up the fire of genius within his own heart. Having
passed through the Grammar School, where he seems to have
acquired a taste for, as well as a knowledge of, classical literature,
which he ever afterwards cherished, he is nominally bound as an
apprentice to his father, a bookseller, but regards such a fate with
repugnance?detests, ridicules, caricatures the details of his
occupation?denounces them as unworthy the attention and
ambition of an enlightened and gifted mind, such as his own,
and at length, by long-continued, determined, dogged resistance
he burst the bonds which connected him with his home and
hereditary profession. During the estrangement which followed,
and the progressive expatriation?first from shop, then from
parlour, to his ultimate destination, the garret?he appears to
have worked with irrepressible and indefatigable energy in the
study and prosecution of art, and, with an intuitive tact as to
what should form the basis of figure painting, to have
ransacked his native town for anatomical books. Either wearied
out by continued resistance and by the failure of parental
discipline and persuasion, or adopting the policy that the pro-
clivities of the boy should be indulged, perhaps utilised,
Benjamin Robert Haydon triumphs over domestic rule, receives
?20, and starts for London.
We next find this aspirant after fame, or it would be more
correct to Bay after the due appreciation and recognition of art,
in the London Exhibition, gazing in enthusiasm and envy on the
speaking walls, in possession of the long-coveted Albinus, the
purchaser of various models of arms and legs which he studies,
sketches, dotes upon from morn to night; or rather inter-
minably, for his day lasted nearly 20 hours; divided between
anatomical study and drawing, so intently and silently prosecuted
that upon one occasion his gums became ulcerated from the
pressure of his teeth. It is important to note here that he had
an opportunity of attending the lectures of Sir Charles Bell,
and that his study at all times was severe though spasmodic.
He became acquainted with a large group of distinguished
painters, the protege of some, such as Fuseli, who petted him ;
the admirer of Northcote, who was surly and snappish; the
friend of Opie and Jackson ; and the familiar and lifelong
friend of Wilkie. His meeting with the great Swiss painter
of Satanic hobgoblins is more interesting from the impression
which the surroundings must have produced upon a timid,
E 2
52 MAD ARTISTS.
nervous hoy, than from the presence of his insignificant patron.
The walls of the gallery into which he was ushered were covered
with " Galvanised devils, malicious witches brewing their in-
cantations, Satan bridging Chaos and springing upwards like a
pyramid of fire, Lady Macbeth, Paolo and Francesca, Falstaff
and -Mrs. Quickly?humour, pathos, terror, blood, and murder
met one at every look." That these gratifications were glittering
rather than gilded may be gathered from the fact that, in order
to enable Wilkie to accompany him to a first view of the
Academy pictures, the coat of the one is put in requisition to
clothe the other respectably. He is at length recognised as a
neophyte of this sacred fane, but all these brilliant and promis-
ing prospects and preparation were for a time interrupted by
the serious illness of his father. With his characteristic reverence
he rushed to the sufferer's bedside, where this powerful, almost
typical, element of his mind, as well as his strong family attach-
ments were brought to bear against his original predilections, and
to win him back to his home, and the more homely, and perhaps
healthy avocations which it afforded. In 1807 his first pro-
duction was admitted into the Exhibition, bore so many
marks of genius, and obtained such unqualified laudation, as
amply to reward the author for all former difficulties and delays,
and to stimulate and support him in the conception and execu-
tion of his next picture, Dentatus. The sudden death of his
mother evokes that intense filial veneration, almost worship, to
which we have before adverted; his profound sorrow finding
expression in pathetic regrets, in clinging to or kneeling beside
her coffin in the family vault, and in all those manifestations
which a deeply attached and devoted child feels for her who
has been the guide and guardian of youth. His return to his
favourite pursuits brought him into contact with the Elgin
Marbles, his admiration of which amounted to idolatry, and
his vindication of the beauty and influence of these forms
involved him in a controversy with a patron, in which his pride
is said to have been magnified, his purse and interests mini-
mised. His first picture of decisive merit seems to have been
a scene from the Flight into Egypt; and in the course of
following years he created the works upon which his reputation
rests?Macbeth, the Judgment of Solomon, Christ Blessing
Little Children, Lazarus, Jerusalem, &c. In connection with
the execution, the completion, and the fate of these, there fall
to be especially noted two circumstances: his habitual piety and
devotion, of the genuineness of which there can be no doubt,
and his inexplicable impecuniosity, constantly involving him
in debt and difficulty, rendering him the beneficiary of cha-
ritable persons, and even of loans from his pupils, upon
MAD ARTISTS. 53
whom he had no claim, depending upon such sources even
for a dinner. This sincere devotee was known to pray daily, or,
more frequently, in bis studio, whether in the Protestant fashion
of a general supplication or as a special petition for help and
hope on the work on which he was engaged, cannot be deter-
mined, for, with the exception of the last spasmodic and
agonised utterances on the morning of his death?" (rod forgive
me. Amen " Finis of B. R. Haydon;" " Stretch me no longer
on this rough world." Lear; " End of 26th volume,"?although
some of his orisons have been preserved, they do not refer to
specific objects of desire, and we possess little evidence of the
awful and mysterious intercourse of this sufferer with his Grod.
It would be rash to affirm the existence of superstitious feelings
from his scrupulous regrets in having executed a semblance of
the Arch-demon. Other artists of heated but healthy mind
are reported to have sought inspiration or assistance from the
Source of all creative power. Painters have not only prayed
for guidance and governance to a noble end, but, after the
realisation of their design, have regarded the beautiful object
which had risen into being under their hand as transcendental
and supersensuous, as a reflex or transcript of a heavenly image
which had by a Divine will passed through their spirit, and as
deserving and receiving a sort of worship or cultus from them-
selves. The most celebrated of this class is Fra Angelico, who,
although almost confining himself to religious subjects, never
touched his canvas until he had said or seen Mass.* In like
manner the Spanish painter, Vicente Joanes, well understood
the dignity of his task, and not seldom applied himself to it
with a zealous fervour worthy of the holiest friar. Like Fra
Angelico at the dawn of Italian painting, he was wont to pre-
pare himself for a new work by means of prayer and fasting
and the holy Eucharist. The life of Luis de Vargas was as
pure as his style; he was accustomed to discipline his body
with the scourge, and, like Charles V., he kept by his bed-
side a coffin, in which he would lie down to meditate upon
death.f Although the balance sheet of the monetary affairs of
Hay don be not before us?although we are familiar with the
irregular and precarious incomes of such men?it is patent that
he obtained large sums, from ^100 to ^300, from the sale or
exhibition of his pictures, but that he was ever poor, borrowing,
desperate ; that his repeated incarceration in the King's Bench,
from which, however, he was invariably discharged without
opposition, scandal, or stain; that the presence of bailiffs in
his humble and otherwise happy home ; that his rejection from
* Donniston's Dukes of Urbino.
f Annals of Artists of Spain. By W. Stirling.
54 MAD ARTISTS.
the sacred and coveted precincts of the Academy, where not a
vote was tendered in his favour; that the ill-success of his
fresco designs, must have all pressed heavily, even morbidly,
upon so sensitive a nature ; but there exists no proof that either
his courage or his artistic powers broke down under this inces-
sant accumulation of misfortune and misery; nay, apparently
supported by the grand Utopia of his life, the elevation of
art to its legitimate rank and influence, he seems to have cast
off these assaults as the rock baffles the spray of the summer
sea, and to have stood unmoved by all evils except the frustra-
tion of this cherished vision. In illustration of this it should
be recorded that a picture, the Mock Election, prized and
purchased by the king, was suggested and sketched during one
of his compulsory visits to prison, and is a graphic transcript
of some of the persons and events witnessed there. It is highly
probable that the persistency or obstinate prosecution of this
cherished project, it may be almost called a monomania; its
introduction in season and out of season with those in the
possession of power and eminence, with those who could appre-
ciate his plea although they could not forward his plan, and
with those who treated both as a crotchet, was the cause, or
one of the causes, of his unpopularity, and of his being shut
out from the ordinary avenues to honour and reward. It is
next to certain, however, that his conflicts with the Academy,
with certain of its members, and with the opponents of his
cherished schemes, must have inflicted deep and dangerous
wounds in a spirit so sensitive as his. That he was a man of
decided genius cannot be denied ; for, although this is no suit-
able sphere for art-criticism, the favour with which many of
his productions were received by competent judges, by exacting
patrons, and by the general public, afford sufficient guarantees
both of the promise and the fulfilment of great imaginative
efforts. Even the abstention of the Academicians from giving
a solitary recognition of his talents, and of the reputation he
had already achieved, cannot be accepted as a final judgment
upon the subject, as we find him at the very time when this
fiat was pronounced surrounded by groups of admiring and
advanced pupils; potentially distinguished artists, including
Landseers, Eastlake, Bewicke, Harvey, Chatfield, and Lance,
who sought instruction and guidance from his words and works,
although they may not all have followed the path which he
encouraged them to pursue. Another illustration of the
powers and versatility of this man may be gathered
from his triumphant progress in Scotland. There his
reception amounted to an ovation; there the golden shower
fertilised his path to the extent of ?3,000. He became the
MAD ARTISTS. 55
friend of Scott, Wilson, Raeburn, and their hospitality was only
exceeded by the respect and admiration which the efforts of his
imagination called forth; and even his journey with Wilkie to Paris
and the Continent in earlier life could not have conveyed to him
such important impressions. When necessity compelled him to
abandon the grander efforts of his fancy, the heroic department
of his profession, as it has been designated, he condescended
to paint portraits and small pictures in order to supply his
immediate wants ; and by another downward step he became a
lecturer on art in general; but so great was his eloquence and
success that it may be affirmed he only then attained to the
zenith of his fame, and only then found free scope for the
development and exhibition of that intelligence which had
hitherto been confined, his admirers would have said cramped,
by being limited to a special exercise of power. Once again he
visited Scotland ; once again his efforts were rewarded, but then
as an orator, his dissection of the hard and rigid plates, published
by a northern anatomical Professor, have been described to us
by a listener as more like the incisions of a scalpel than as the
touches of an artist, aided as his scathing exposure was by his
recollections of his old friend Albinus and by his wonderful
illustrative dexterity by means of coloured chalks on the black
board. This unfortunate man of strong will and perseverance,
amounting to obduracy, long sustained by a sincere though per-
haps a vague religious sentiment, in the possession of a home as
happy as was consistent with penury and the ever-recurring ebb
of fortune, this Avatar of a new and animating creed, which was
met by scorn or scepticism, fell a victim to disappointment in
-the failure of his cherished theory and in the judgment pro-
nounced against his pictures of Aristides and Jerusalem,
and died by " the visitation of God." Is it philosophically cor-
rect to accept suicide as a sign or a synonyme of madness ? *
Edwin Landseek. 1802-1873.
It is instructive that the best established illustrations of the
hereditary transmission of qualities should be afforded by mental
disease and mental distinction, by mental capacity or incapacity.
It is not incumbent here to demonstrate either the real existence,
the origin, or the laws of the descent of mental or physical qualities.
Public and professional opinion have declared strongly in favour
of the belief that health or disease in various aspects or degrees
may pass from sire to son through many generations, and even
for centuries. He would, indeed, be a bold disputant who could
* Biographical Memoirs, Haydons Autobiography and Journals.
56 MAD ARTISTS.
deny the -probability of such a hypothesis when the genealogy
of such a man as Sir Edwin Landseer is presented to his notice.
It would appear that this gifted genius represented, either
directly or collaterally, by consanguinity of family connection, a
long succession of distinguished engravers, whose work and fame
could be traced back for nearly three hundred years. It is true
that the transcendent eminence of our countryman was achieved
by the brush rather than burin, by painting chiefly and not by
engraving; but the investigations of Galton justify the opinion
that it is the general power, play, or inspiration of imagination
which is handed down, and that its special direction or applica-
tion is determined by the mental constitution, the education, or
even by external circumstances. That Edwin Landseer was not
deficient in the family talent and characteristic was proved by
several successful essays in engraving executed in early life, but
that his predilection for painting was called into existence
even before these attempts were made and almost in infancy, is
demonstrable. In precocity Sir T. Lawrence somewhat antici-
pated him ; as it is recounted that this prodigy could declaim
in eloquence and could execute correct likenesses when five years
old. As in other instances of a powerful inherited tendency,
Edwin Landseer was precocious, and it is narrated that so soon
as his tiny fingers could hold a pencil, he was led or allowed to go
into the fields to sketch the sheep that pastured there, and that
his drawings were executed with wonderful fidelity. This
occurred when the child was five years old, and the spot conse-
crated by these efforts of infantile genius can still be pointed
out and still contains an old stunted oak tree, under the shade
of which he sat, but which his hand does not seem to have
immortalised. The locality has been identified from informa-
tion derived by W. Howitt from the artist's father, but is
now perhaps covered by some of the stately or unsightly piles of
houses by which the metropolis is rushing into the country.
From this, the beginning of his career to its close, he imitated
or anticipated the principle and practice of his friend,
W. Hunt, in copying invariably from nature, even when
a pin was the object. The ordinary, or even common-
place objects selected afforded great facilities for carrying this
golden rule into effect, as his first essays, and some of them were
excellent, generally embodied the heads of hounds, asses, and
other domestic animals. Subsequently, as a boy or lad, he fre-
quented Exeter 'Change in order to study the features and man-
ners of the lions, but, as a child, his aim was less ambitious, and
it is interesting to note that he etched one of his own produc-
tions, the head of an ass, when only eight years old, thus out-
stripping in prematurity his great parallel, Lucas van Leyden,
MAD AKTISTS. 57
who etched designs of his when nine years old. About
the same period Edwin Landseer painted a terrier with
a rat in his mouth, which was sold for what was then
esteemed the magnificent price of sixty-eight guineas, but
which would now secure treble that amount. Even when still
a boy, and when scarcely recognised as having attained the full
stature of an artist, his prolificness was extraordinary, and
copious catalogues have been made out ranging from a stag's
head to dogs and rabbits, which must have been painted when
he was about twelve. The number of pictures of almost
priceless value, which he perfected with a facility peculiar to
himself, are so far explained by his extreme rapidity of execu-
tion acquired by severe study, incessant practice, and the
sameness of the subjects embraced. The brief time consumed
in the production of his works has been exemplified by
his having completed a full-length portrait of a noble lord at a
single sitting, and a characteristic group of some of his
favourites within the time of morning church service. It is
likewise probable that his training under Haydon, who in-
structed him not only in the physiognomical peculiarities but in
the anatomical structure, and consequently in the movements of
the objects of his study, may have contributed largely to the
celerity with which he committed his conceptions to canvas.
Having first secured much admiration for his representation of
a St. Bernard dog, he became an exhibitor in the Academy when
thirteen years old, and from this time throughout his life his
works appeared in rapid succession on the same walls, or on those
of the British Institution. The efforts first exhibited were
pictures of a mule and a dog, and at once attracted attention, or
rather commanded the admiration of competent judges. But
not only was the public taste appealed to in these galleries, but
multitudes of his productions were sold and circulated to
connoisseurs and patrons ever rising in rank and affluence, and
ever offering rewards, in his modest and uninstructed eyes often
excessive, but ever in their increasing magnitude keeping pace
with his fame and the fertility of his genius. But his reputa-
tion was widened by the distribution of engravings of his
performances, inserted in sporting and other magazines, among
classes which otherwise might have been excluded from be-
coming acquainted with his triumphs in a popular department
of art. To the ability of his brother (who likewise
possesses the merit of introducing to Englishmen the works
of Rosa Bonheur) in engraving many of his finest pieces he was
indebted for the almost universal knowledge of his perform-
ances ; for it should be remembered that even to the present
day vast numbers of our countrymen have never seen even
58 MAD ARTISTS.
a drawing by Sir Edwin Landseer, but are familiar with " Bolton
Abbey" and similar plates. It would appear that at a
certain stage of his career a cloud passed over the sunshine
which seemed to surround the most trivial display of his powers,
by his failure in certain portraits, and his attempt to diverge
into genre objects by the introduction, for instance, of a hat and
gloves into a composition more congenial with his recognised
style and taste ; an attempt which originated a violent contro-
versy. But this dispute aided rather than arrested the current
of general approbation, and he is found, even as a youth,
adventuring upon large pictures and producing lions and
animals of similar proportions. Contemporaneously appeared
from his hand the Larder Invaded, for which he received from
the directors of the British Institution the premium of ?150 ;
the Catspaw, with an estimated value of ?3,000; the Prize
Calf, calculated at ?1,890 ; and of Two Dogs, which rose in
price from ?300 to ?2,415. We have traced this original
genius almost from birth to the most eventful and brilliant
period of his career : it would be tautological and tiresome to
enumerate here the description, even the names of those works
which rose under his hand, rendering his name a household
word, and his creations, shrines, in almost every hall and hut in
tbe kingdom. In the first stages of advancement the subjects
chosen were almost exclusively domestic animals placed in
familiar circumstances. To a citizen almost imprisoned in
London such a choice was natural, but his feelings drew him in
the same direction. He not merely admired animals and
studied their ways and character, but he loved them intensely.
They were to him companions, intimates, relatives, and by that
sympathy and reciprocity of affection which establishes a sort of
kinship and understanding between the two species,the tie of love
and confidence seems to have been mutual. So that from the
almost historic Brutus to the veriest mongrel which he has com-
mitted to canvas it is evident that Edwin Landseer was not merely
the painter, but the deity of the animal. Further, it has to be
remarked that his success and fame were built up on his
exquisite representations of their humbler models, and that he
became an Academician, a celebrity, in virtue of such pictures as
the Catspaw, rather than of the development of his abilities
in what may be esteemed the highest range of his imagination.
This flight occurred subsequent to a visit to Abbotsford where,
as has been said, he was sure to get on well with " the author of
Waverley, and the Doggies." His beautiful preservation of
" Maida," so intimately connected with the writings and private
life of Sir Walter Scott, may be held as the commencement of
his new or romantic style of painting, in which stags and
MAD ARTISTS. 59
hounds, deer-stalking, the wild scenery amid which the game is
pursued, and the animating incidents which attend the life, the
manners, the death of the king of the forest, and of all the
other kinds of game in the Highlands, take the place formerly
engrossed by curs of low degree. As works marking this epoch
may be mentioned the King of the Glen, the Chief's Return
from Deerstalking, the Challenge. The scene where a deer and
a hound are precipitated over a cliff, the latter being saved by
an aged stalker. This view rises almost into the region of
historical painting, the drawing is dramatic and reveals a
romance as well as a glimpse of the mountain and the
flood and their inhabitants. While of independent mien and
moral bearing, Sir Edwin Landseer stood in a peculiar relation to
his father, who for a long period acted as his guide and guardian
and factor, not merely acting for him, but in many circumstances
apparently thinking for him. They loved each other, but the
son evidently regarded his parent with awe and diffidence, and,
although reluctant to separate from him, must have lived in a
kind of subjection or tutelage. Ultimately he formed a distinct
establishment more ample and suitable than the obscure corner
to which he had formerly been confined. He there saw and
entertained his friends, formed new connections and attach-
ments, and greatly enlarged his circle of acquaintances, both
within and beyond professional limits; but of his intercourse
under his own roof it is not our object to speak, nor is it neces-
sary to say more of his mingling with general society, than that
his worldwide fame, his elegant person and manners, as well as
his amiable disposition, brought him into contact and personal
friendship with the highest and noblest in the land, with those
who were gifted with lofty position and bearing, with know-
ledge, or wisdom, or virtue. At many points his association
with the upper and polished ranks might afford illustrations
suitable to our present purpose, but we shall be content
with one, as it affords a curious proof both of manual
dexterity and what may be called duality of will and constructive
power. While present in an evening party of the upper ten
thousand an idle observation was hazarded by an empty-minded
lady of distinction as to the impossibility of doing two things
at once, he accepted the remark as a challenge, when he said,
" Oh, I can do that; lend me two pencils and I will show you."
The pencils were got, a piece of paper was laid on the table, and
Sir Edwin, a pencil in each hand, drew, simultaneously and with-
out hesitation, with one hand the profile of a stag's head and all
its antlers complete, and with the other the perfect profile of a
horse's head. Both drawings were full of energy and spirit,
and although, as the occasion compelled, they were not finished
60 MAD ARTISTS.
sketches, tliey were, together and individually, quite as good as
even the master himself was accustomed to produce by one at a
time, and with his right hand alone; the drawing by the left
hand was not inferior to that by the right hand. We have all
been apprised by popular rumour that Sir Edwin Landseer died
of one of the neuroses, and details are not wanting of the pro-
gress of the calamity ; but the precise signs or symptoms of the
decadence and of the sad end have, we think, with commendable
feeling and delicacy been withheld; and a veil has been drawn
between the gradual culmination and the public gaze. Imitating
the course adopted by his biographers and adopting their words,
we shall now close this psychological sketch. " A Kind Star
illustrated a Highland superstition, but in such a manner as
proved that the designer's mind was not in its usual fine tone
when this work was conceived. The superstition is that hinds
are under the protection of beneficent stars : a hind lies dying
on the banks of the lake. So far nothing could be said ; but
the introduction of a spirit with a star in its hair to bend over
the poor beast was of quite another order of invention. The
production of this idea was the first decided sign of decay in
the powers of our artist. Those who owed him so much delight
for so many years past stood aghast before it. Some of these
tried to ascribe its exhibition, and even its production, to
obedience to some unfrequent impulse?deference to some
inferior mind, subservience to some vulgar taste. However this
might be, there, unfortunately, it was."
" So far the critic and the writer see no reason for changing
their opinion of this masterpiece of Sir Edwin's (Flood in the High-
lands). If it was not his finest work it was at any rate his culminat-
ing one ; he painted none which was nearly so good afterwards??
indeed, even before this picture was finished, the painter, always a
man of nervous susceptibility, had hints of no mistakablekind that
the human mind and the body which surrounded it are mortal.
He was constitutionally subject to nervous depression, but these
attacks had accumulated force as years went on with him, and
threatened the end which came at last with all its painfulness.
We remember him during the painting of this picture,
especially on the Tuesday before it was sent to the Academy?he
was then putting a few last touches on the huge canvas. He looked
as if about to become an old man, although his years by no
means justified the fact. It was not that he had lost activity, or
that his form had shrunk, for he moved as firmly and swiftly as
ever; indeed, he was rather demonstrative in this matter, step-
ping on and off the platform in his studio with needless display,
and his form was stout and well filled. Nevertheless, without
seeming to be overworked, he did not look robust, and he had
MAD ARTISTS. 61
a nervous manner remarkable in so distinguished a man, one
who was by no means unconscious of himself, and yet, to those
he liked, full of kindness and genial in an unusual degree. Even
in 1867 there was little outward change, although not long after
that date the attacks occurred with fewer and briefer intervals.
These intervals caused the reports which flew about in the terms,
4 Sir Edwin is better,' 4 much better,' as some would have,
and, anon, ' much worse,' as many said."
" The closing years of Sir Edwin's long, otherwise not un-
happy, and generally laborious life, were darkened in the
manner we have already indicated rather than described. He
died on the morning of October 1, 1873, and was buried in St.
Paul's, with honours, on the 11th of the same month."
A friend has reported to us that when visiting this great
animal painter he found him on his death-bed, supported by
pillows, but as busily engaged and interested as a tremulous
hand permitted in drawing. The subject purported to be " The
Death of the Prince Consort," but, " the ruling passion strong
in death," he devoted his last touches to a dog which was to
form one of the sad group. We do not know whether this expiring
effort was ever finished, nor in what state it remained if un-
finished.*
George Morland. 1763?1804.
Is there such a disease as moral insanity? It has been
sought for and promptly found in those whose crimes are so
sanguinary and monstrous as to exceed the credence and con-
ception of even the deeply erring and evil. It has been found
where aimless untruthfulness and dishonesty impart a colouring
of mendacity and insincerity to every act, so that it becomes
doubtful alike to the actor and others whether he has been
actuated by ordinary motives or moral obliquity. It has been
detected as the origin of innate flagitiousness, dissoluteness,
and degradation which are inconsistent with the sense, the
sentiments, and interests of the perpetrator; it has been shown
in petty peccadilloes, in absurd or detectable thefts, in offences so
minute and so contrary to all the surroundings of the offender
as to create a suspicion either of practical joking or of con-
temptible chicanery. But this tendency has not been suspected
where it forms an element either in the commonplace characters
which form the great mass of the community where it may
influence, without detection, the conduct, nor has it been
identified when, in rarer cases, it has been associated with great
* Memoirs of Sir Edwin Landscer. By F. G-. Stephens, 1874.
G2 MAD ARTISTS.
mental power or imagination or elevated feelings, nor generally,
except where there is, in addition, present some unequivocal
indication of moral or mental perversion. It is not here
agitated as to that amount of moral feebleness or peculiarity
which would condemn an individual in a court of justice or to
protracted seclusion to an asylum, hut exclusively to those
degrees or forms of such an infirmity as may be mistaken
for mere human corruption, may be branded or pitied as vice,
and where they dim, but do not altogether obscure, the healthier
emotions or qualities, or the intellect or imagination. These
remarks exclusively apply to morbidity of the moral sense and
conscience, and to such imperfection or impairment of the will
as to render both the warnings of conscience and the suggestions
of reason ineffectual. Even the confessional might fail in
laying bare those courses of conduct which are attributable
to such a disease, or to distinguish them from those which
are the result of deliberate delinquency; but when we can
trace to the very fountain-head the polluted stream; when
we can follow throughout a long, and what might have been a
prosperous and distinguished, career, an incessant, what may be
called a consistent, preference for what is vile and vicious, and
vulgar pursuits utterly incompatible with the higher nature of
the individual associates who might minister to the vanity, the
appetites, or the necessities, but who could scarcely appreciate
the powers of their companion ; and when we find the close of
these scenes the wild delirium of dissipation, and death in a pot-
house, we cannot refrain from extending sympathy rather than
condemnation to the victim of brutal and fatal propensities.
The subject of this memoir affords evidence of a combination
of gross livelong immorality with marked though limited
genius, of a correspondence between the habits and taste of the
painter and the subjects of his pencil; and it is highly probable of
a mutual reaction between these two factors of his character. He
was the son of a painter of some talent, who, it is surmised, was
a selfish taskmaster, who attempted to curb the inclination of his
child for painting, removed him from the Academy of which he
was a pupil, and all legitimate sources of improvement, in order
to confine his exertions to his own department, and to augment
his own gains. Whenever his apprenticeship terminated he
emancipated himself from the slavery which it had imposed,
and gave full scope to his own tendencies by becoming a painter
of animals. Although, like Rosa Bonheur, he was partial to the
horse, his greatest efforts were expended upon dogs, donkeys,
and, alas ! upon pigs. The interior of their dwellings, likewise,
were favourite objects of representation His sheer mannerism,
and perhaps his happiest efforts, were confined to sketches of
MAD ARTISTS. 63
pollard oaks or other rugged trees which had, in his eyes, a
picturesque aspect. His fertility and facility in the reproduc-
tion of his favourite scenes was such as to have given rise
to the extravagant calculation that he had executed four thou-
sand pictures. This estimate may have been countenanced
by the constant almost insatiable demand for his paintings,
and by the innumerable imitations appearing in the market
which the peculiar sameness of his style and the iteration of the
stunted or pollarded tree rendered so easy and truthlike. He
worked faithfully, but so often in order to meet the orders of
those who had advanced him money, that his labour was the
result rather of compulsion and necessity than of the prompt-
ings of imagination. This drudgery and dependence may
have contributed to debase and soil a disposition not, perhaps,
originally of a noble type, although it is affirmed that he was
heir to a baronetcy which lack of means or ambition pre-
vented him from claiming; and further that the sordid and
selfish associates with whom he was brought into contact, and
his exclusion from all the refinements and redeeming influences
of pure society must have corrupted whatever capacity for ele-
vation originally existed in his nature. This is, however, merely
humane speculation, for, coeval with our knowledge of the man,
or rather of the boy, he seems to have become the victim of
every form of dissipation and defilement; to have chosen as
his intimate associates jockeys, hostlers, prize-fighters ; to have
lived in constant fear of arrest from the exacting and heartless
dealers to whom he had become indebted, or rather to whom
he had pledged the offspring of his imagination. He seems
to have been a sot and a stupid when intoxicated, unlike
poor Sherwin, the engraver, who is described as mad with drink,
and exhibiting his exhilaration in uproariousness, and by dis-
charging pistols from the windows. The market, indeed, which
these brain-suckers could command is said to have been enor-
mous, that immense numbers of imitations were manufactured
in order to meet the demand ; so that there may be not only an
exaggeration of his prolificness, but his memory may be burdened
with the defects and blemishes of those who took advantage of
his reputation. There is no relief to this sad narration; no
family tie ; no helping friend ; no period of busy industry; no
quiet repose in declining years in a home consecrated by time
or kindly offices ; no falling asleep gently and recliningly at the
close. There is an uninterrupted course of debauchery, wretch-
edness, and squalor, until ruined in health, in purse, even in
the productiveness of his art, he at last died at the early age of
forty-two in a sponging-house. So far unhonoured and unsung,
64 MAD ARTISTS.
that while the man is utterly forgotten, his works are still valued
and valuable.*
The Cat Raphael (Gottfried Kund?) 19th Century.
To those who are conversant with the work of Fordere, or of
more modern historiographers of the population inhabiting
elevated or insalubrious regions, especially the grand mountain
range in Central Europe, the appellation of Cretin, Cagot, &c.
must be familiar. Even the writers of fiction and of popular
tours have introduced members of this degraded and unfortunate
class in order to impart to their narratives a piquant or philan-
thropical flavour. Except from observers in Switzerland, where
this physico-psychical degeneration is endemic, and in France, we
have as yet obtained but little information as to the etiology or
precise phenomena of this extraordinary type of degradation.
In certain localities large numbers of the poorer ranks are
affected, although the affluent are not altogether exempted, and
large numbers of the same family may be implicated, but when
a whole generation is affected by the scourge, it becomes extinct.
The malady is manifested in various degrees of intensity, is
occasionally limited to bodily deformity and infirmity, or to
mental hebetude and imbecility, but may involve both of these
conditions. In districts where the affection is prevalent, is
developed in an aggravated form, and renders the sufferer
incapable of engaging in some occupation or means of self-
support, hospitals, or lazar houses, have been provided where
the diseased and debased invalids may obtain greater comfort
than in their own sequestered and squalid homes, and may
sleep out an existence which places them in very few and feeble
relations with the external world or their fellow beings. It was
at one time propounded that change of residence and general
surroundings if accompanied by such means and measures,
educational, medical, or otherwise, as were calculated to stimulate
and develop the nervous system, while they promoted the
growth, health, and strength of the body generally, would greatly
alleviate, if they did not eradicate, the taint in the individual.
This proposition was actually carried into effect, but proved
from some cause or other very imperfectly successful. The
attempt was probably suggested or encouraged by the display
of certain capacities or dexterity in the higher order of Cretins,
such as may be seen in simpletons, imbeciles, faibles (Vesprit, or
decided idiots. There may shine forth from the general and
permanent gloom and inertness of the mind a single luminous
* Articles and Biographical Dictionaries, &c. Art in England, by Dutton
Cook. 1869.
MAD ARTISTS. 65
ray of intelligence which redeems the individual from utter
degradation and places him to a certain extent in relation to
human kind. Those who are thus partially endowed may
become shepherds, hewers of wood, or drawers of water; even
carpenters, although their art may be confined to the con-
struction of a single article or portion of an article; but most
frequently the solitary and limited taste or talent is directed to
the fabrication of small and simple articles in metal and wood,
such as parts of the watches of which Geneva was at one time
the emporium, or of the marvellous toys and grotesque figures,
the actual creators of which are unknown to the possessors. It
is rare that this dexterity ascends above the cunning of the
hand, rarer still into the regions of fancy or imagination; but
there are a few exceptional examples of extreme cleverness and
ability, and the subject of this paper may obviously be included
in such a category. The accessible notices of his history and
performances are fragmentary, and while authentic not au-
thoritative ; but, although even his name be somewhat doubtful,
and the narrative of his proceedings after mingling with the
outer world somewhat contradictory, the following facts may,
we think, be relied upon :?
G-ottfried Kund belonged to cretinoid family, and was of low
type. He is described as "a queer roundabout manikin, with a
large pyramidal head, thatched with long masses of hair, an oval
face, small round eyes, widely separated, a short squat body
with a vast paunch, resting upon dwarfish legs, which almost
described semi-circles. His chin was globular, but unbearded ;
his thumbs and fingers were rounded knobs, and in front of his
throat and pendulous over his breast hung a tumour of more
life-like colour than his sallow cheeks. Neither this goitre
or bronchocele, nor rachitis, is an invariable sign or concomitant
of the physical deterioration, although the former is so frequent
that glandular swellings have been observed in the lower ani-
mals. It is understood that Gottfried Kund was deaf as well
as a dullard ; he spoke little and inarticulately, and exhibited
few manifestations even of natural language, except in con-
nection with his favourite and famous pursuit. Yet to this
decrepid and imperfect creature might be applied the epithet
used by Dr Johnson in speaking of Goldsmith, that he was
" an inspired idiot " ; that he possessed powers almost unrivalled
or unequalled, but exercised in so narrow a circle as to betray
their morbid origin. He loved and lived with and painted
cats from the time he was a child until the time his memoir
was written, when he was thirty years old. He drew thousands
of these creatures; he scratched figures like theirs with flints
upon the rocks and the ice, almost as soon as he could walk.
PART I. VOL. VI. NEW SERIES. F
G6 MAD ARTISTS.
"Whenever lie knew the use of charcoal and chalk, he destroyed
every wall and board with similar drawings ; and when he got
paper and colours he produced figures of the same animals
almost without a lesson, and without any copy but the creatures
whom he fed. He painted large cats and little cats, white
cats and black cats, young ones and old ones, sitting, sleeping,
climbing, leaping, fighting, and love-making, but nothing save
cats. There were cats in sorrow and in anger, sensible cats and
foolish cats, cats of character and imbecile cats, and even a cat
with a goitre, but all bore a strong though faint resemblance to
a typical cat, which was in all probability the first or the
fairest individual which had arrested his early and plastic
perception. These paintings were not mere imitations or
caricatures in outline; they were portraits, resemblances de-
picting not merely the form, and feature, and attitude, but
the physiognomy, expression, and moral attributes of the
original. When observed perched at his rude easel and engaged
in representing a cat at her ablutions, he looked so rarely at
the animal sitting for the likeness, that it was fair to conclude
he was calling up creations from memory and fancy, for it is no
heresy to suppose that imagination may twinkle in the rudi-
mentary mind somewhat in the same manner, and according to
the same laws, that it enlightens, like sunrise, the wider realm
of genius. While thus employed he was said to have grouped
around him numbers of his favoured species of all sorts and
sizes, not as lay figures or copies, but as friends who reciprocated
his attachment. It has been believed, perhaps fancifully, that
creatures possessing the higher instincts or propensities cling-
to human beings of the lower types, and prefer as their guides
or guardians the weak to the strong, the imbecile to the intel-
ligent. Under this law it may be, or under the relation
where love engendereth love, did the tie between the Cat
Raphael and his companions subsist. He not merely admired
cats, but he loved them, associated with them, and seemed to
regard them with more vivid sentiments than the men and
women around.
That his portraits were not mere daubs, but lifelike and
artistic representations, may be inferred from the general
demand for such curiosities, and from the facts that they
secured considerable prices, and that specimens are still to be
found in the galleries of Dresden and elsewhere, and might,
without derogation to the repute of rivals, be fairly attri-
buted to the Flemish School. We are informed that he made
occasional visits to Berne, in order to dispose of his produc-
tions, and that his great delight during these visits was to
fraternise with the bears kept as living examples of the can-
MAD ARTISTS. 67
tonal crest, in a pit on the ramparts, and that he sustained a
sort of conversation with them by growling as they did.
There are appendices to his history current, in whole or in part
apocryphal it is suspected : 1st. That at some stage of his
existence he was placed at school by some sympathetic admirer,
either to rouse and stimulate his whole mind, or to stimulate his
solitary talent; but that, disliking the discipline, he made his
escape and concealed himself in the adjoining woods; 2ndly.
That he was placed under the care and patronage, or surrep-
titiously appropriated by the cunning, of some one in Berne,
who profited by his works, but maltreated or neglected him.
It is surmised that he died in that town.
Joseph Mallord William Turner. 1775-1851.
There are before me six memoirs of this extraordinary man.
The biographers seem to have been perfectly competent to judge
of the painter's works, are all enthusiastic admirers of his
genius; yet the wide difference, the absolute discrepancy,
betrayed in their mode of treating the subject, and in the impres-
sions conveyed as to his life and character are, I think, without
parallel in the whole field of literature. In one narrative, which
may appropriately be designated as colourless, Turner is treated
as the author of a series of magnificent paintings in oil, water-
colours &c./but there is not a single allusion to those peculiari-
ties which separated him from ordinary men and even from the
most erratic and extravagant of his brother artists. Another,
while fully appreciating his marvellous imagination, his mas-
tery over the secrets of colour and form, the artistic mind
which worked through and by the hand, gives a prominence
to eccentricities and absurdities which, when unrelieved, is
deceptious and revolting. A third, utterly perplexed by the
inconsistencies of his manners and mode of life, and foiled in
reconciling the grandeur and glory of the conceptions of his
fancy with the pettiness, paltriness, degradation, and moral in-
compatibilities of the man, has recourse to what he designates
a dualism of character which, though utterly inexplicable
according to the recognised laws of the human mind, imparted
an individualism or personality to this mixed and mongrel
being, this hybrid between misery and meanness and lofty aspi-
rations. A fourth, attempting to hold the scales of justice with
a steady and equable hand, presents the two sides, or rather the
many sides and multiform aspects of liis hero in parallel
sketches, without any attempt to amalgamate and harmonise
what are on the surface such heterogeneous qualities. But
startled, it may be discouraged, by his failure to give a unity
F 2
G8 MAD ARTISTS.
of design to bis portrait, lie appears to have obtained a glimmer-
ing or suspicion of tbe real truth. One of these writers has
produced the following opinion, which will be regarded as an
eloquent criticism, or as a mere laudatory rhapsody, according
to the opinions of the reader.
" Glorious in conception, unfathomable in knowledge, solitary
in power, with the elements waiting upon his will, and the night
and morning obedient to his call, sent as a Prophet of Grod to
reveal to men the mysteries of the universe, standing like the
great angel of the Apocalypse, clothed with a cloud, and with a
rainbow upon his head, and with the sun and stars given into his
hand." Parenthetically, Turner's own comment upon these
laudations was : " Kuskin knows a great deal more about my
pictures than I do ; he puts things into my head and points out
meanings in them that I never intended." A second says,
" Stumpy, slovenly, lame, often not over-clean in dress, awkward
and unconciliatory in habits, diabolical in looks, and suspicious
of pseudo friends, greedy relations, selfish legacy hunters, and
concealed enemies, he had not the manner of one who
either could or cared to win the favour of the general world."
And, as another observer says, " His reasoning faculty was less
than human." A fourth affirms, " In all business transactions
he was, as a rule, ungenerous, and sometimes dishonest;" and it
is well-established that he often acted in the spirit of a petty
tradesman, and with distrust of the wondering world expressed in
the words " cheat the geese." Yet all these were eulogists, critics,
worshippers of this puzzling but self-sacrificing saint in the
hagiology of art. Were it necessary to pass over to the antagonists
and detractors of Turner, to the unscrupulous critics " who saw
nothing in his representations of earth and ocean but soapsuds
and whitewash "?although the enthusiast had, in imitation of
a great prototype, caused himself to be lashed to the mast of
a boat during a storm, in order to watch and make himself master
of the real features of the weltering waves and tempest winds ; who
laughed to scorn his fleet of boats, pursuing different courses in
the same breeze, or ridiculed his mistakes in placing the sun
and moon in impossible juxtaposition, the same perplexity of
analysis may be detected. In fact, friends and foes alike failed
to discover the key to the mystery, to apply the true solvent to
that compound of crudities and jewels which constituted the
nature of the man with whom they were dealing. That key and
solvent are to be found in unhealth and unsoundness of mind
pervading his whole career, but becoming more prominent and
palpable at certain periods and under certain influences.
Joseph Mallord William Turner was the son of a barber, of
narrow means and narrower mind, who is said never to have com-
MAD ARTISTS. 69
mended his child, except for the saving or hoarding of a half-
penny ; and of a mother of fierce temper and passions, which ripened
into maniacal fury, necessitating her confinement in Bethlehem
Hospital. He seems never to have been a boy, and we hear
little of the pranks of merry mischief-making childhood, or of
the precocity which foreshadows fame. He was either never at
school or was so imperfectly taught that he grew up a waif and
a starveling, not merely in all kinds of knowledge, save one, but
in the everyday acquirements of even the uneducated. He
could never spell, but his defective orthography was equalled by
that of President West. He could rarely write lucidly, or even
intelligibly, in his own language; and it is affirmed, that
although many of the clauses of his last testament were reversed
upon public grounds or because they were impracticable, other
provisions were passed over or negatived because the terms of
the bequest were incomprehensible. His early home was, if not
poverty-stricken or positively sordid, as may be apprehended,
very humble ; but in one of its apartments he contrived to
immure himself in order to prosecute his favourite occupations,
refusing access to all applicants, and concealing the work upon
which he was engaged; thus, at a very early age, displaying the
love of seclusion, the suspicion and secretiveness, which, with
slight modifications, marked his whole life and even his death.
He was observed when young to trace figures with his finger on
a wet tea tray. This incident and a drawing attempted when
nine years old, probably suggested to his parent whatever subse-
quent direction may have been given to the lad's pursuits and
the choice of that style of training which he actually underwent.
At once unselfish and discriminating, the father taught the boy
reading, but not writing; sent him to school for a brief period ;
devoted a legacy which had been bequeathed to him in order to
secure the instructions of a trustworthy architect, instead of
placing the boy under the tuition of another, who had offered
to take him gratuitously. It would appear that shortly after-
wards, but not until the pupil had imbibed that taste for archi-
tectural drawing which long influenced his productions, he is
found in the school of a floral drawing master, then under a
perspective draughtsman, then as a member of a drawing school,
and ultimately affiliated with the Academy. In all likelihood,
however, the most efficient cultivation and growth of his powers
were the outcome of his spontaneous efforts in his garret, where
he threw off drawings, which, whatever might be their demerits,
were exposed for sale in the windows of his father and others, found
ready and numerous purchasers, and contributed, it may be, the
nucleus of that vast accumulation of property, it cannot be called
wealth as lie never enjoyed it, or even expended it; but by which
70 MAD ARTISTS.
lie vainly proposed to immortalise his name, his individual
distinction, and the importance of his art. While improving
his manual dexterity in his secret studies, and in the curious
manipulation of lines, scratches, and blots, which are asserted to
be the legerdemain of his art, it may be believed that his love,
his admiration of external nature, contracted and cherished,
as it at first was by rambles in the purlieus of the Metro-
polis, promoted and perfected the education of his imagina-
nation more than any other agency, although the companionship
with the pure and the beautiful was at all times greatly dis-
figured by the carnal and corrupt elements of his nature.
Many of his glimpses into the phenomena and beauty of the
external world were obtained incidentally while in prosecution
of his favourite, all but fanatical, partiality for angling. In
fishing he was an adept, and although provided with the rudest
of trouting gear, as much of a zealot as Izaak Walton. To
the gratification of this passion may be attributed his fine series
of landscapes, "The Rivers of England." But streams and
ripples and pools and reaches, and romantic scenes, were not
needed to minister to his indulgence, for he is depicted as seated
during a whole day on the margin of a pond, under an umbrella
to protect himself from the rain, which descended in torrents,
with his feet upon a board for further protection, perseveringly
devoted to the capture of wretched perch and carp. But with
advancing years these opportunities of developing and cultivat-
ing his powers were greatly increased by pilgrimages to Scotland,
France, and Italy, really in search of the picturesque, from which
he gathered at once copious contents of portfolios, to be utilised
and retouched in the future; but likewise that familiarity with the
lights and shadows, with the forms and aspects of the countries
through which he passed, which ultimately became one of the many
characteristics of his art. A popular opinion has prevailed that
Turner possessed intuitively, or acquired, a special capacity for
penetrating into the secrets of nature; that the results of this
intuition were discoveries, and that his marvellous management
of the effects of contrasted colours, and his production from the
slightest and least promising materials signal and novel features
even in commonplace objects, should be traced to a gift, an
innate talent, and not to the real sources of his success, the
true and correct perception of which he saw, and the idealisation
of what he felt: of the impressions, in short, imparted to his
imagination. To the stimulation and exaltation of this single
faculty all his energies were incessantly directed, and all his acts,
arrangements, ambitions contributed, to the exclusion of other
and ennobling emotions, sentiments, and trains of thought.
This mono-ideasm, this worship of the Sun-God or of his
MAD ARTISTS. 71
rays shed upon the earth, animated him, not merely when
among the mountains of Switzerland or in his studio when
consigning the outlines and effulgence of these mountains and
their corresponding lakes to his canvas, but in his everyday life
when contemplating a modern mansion ormausoleum, and survived
all other considerations and ties. On the very verge of death
his choice of a dwelling fell upon a shabby cottage so situate that
it commanded a view of the sunlight on a river, and so constructed
that from its flat roof he could witness, and did witness, until
his eyes closed in darkness, the glories of sunrise. It is remark-
able when the intensity and elevation of his admiration of
nature in her grandest features and attitudes is analysed that
it did not pass into adoration, and that the devotee did not
create for himself, a faith, a religion, a worship. But that he
never reached even to Paganism may become explicable when it
is understood that he seems to have remained ignorant of the
laws and revelations of Grod, of the dictates and duties of even
worldly morality, and of the higher, the happier, and holier
instincts, supports, and aspirations of the human heart.
The most propitious event in his youth was his pupilage or
association with Sir Joshua Eeynolds, to whom he was-much
indebted for the practical details of a high and attractive style
of painting; but deeper and more inspiring impressions were
imparted by his study of works by Vanderveldt and Claude, and of
water-colour drawings by English Masters, with whose modes of
execution and successful achievements he maintained, it is affi rmed,
a prolonged and imaginary warfare in competition or in imita-
tion, or in fathoming the depths of their dexterities and beauties.
Of his proceedings as a student in the Academy we know little,
but in manhood and in old age, and perhaps in youth, it was his
only source of happiness, his home, his altar, where he sacrificed
his life, his love, his labours ; whose members were, with one
exception, Lord Egremont, his only familiars and friends ; and
the dinners and lunches there accessible were the only means
of hospitality which he prized or enjoyed. It may be surmised
that these festivities proved a snare to an individual who shut
himself out of society, who was by nature and training solitary; who
is described as hiding himself because he could not mingle with
his fellow men on terms of equality ; who could not converse and
spoke only by his brush; and ministered to a craving for stimulants
originating elsewhere, but indulged in and encouraged as a mere
coarse propensity, or as a stimulus to prompt or rouse his flagging
or fatigued imagination. It is told that during his daily and
long-protracted routine of painting in his gallery, he kept
beside him and so far depended upon a bottle of sherry, the
filth and ugliness of which disgusted his visitors more than the
I 2 MAD ARTISTS.
A
pernicious effects of its contents. It is likewise told that when
going to sea with fishermen in order to note the features and
caprices of the waves and clouds, for he was indeed a " cloud-
compeller " as well as a Pantheist, he carried with him a flask of
gin, that he might see or feel under an excited nervous system.
A cloud of witnesses, moreover, deposed that even upon what
are called varnishing days in the Academy he was visibly
under the effects of wine, and often kept a decanter
of sherry while engaged in correcting or improving his
pictures, or when, as often occurred, commencing and completing
a production already hung on the walls of this Pantheon,
although only in outline, and lastly, in remodelling or retinting a
finished work in order to counteract, or when in an amicable
humour, to enhance, the effects of the surrounding specimens
of art exhibited. Towards the meridian and evening of life
this destructive habit with the debasing concomitants with
which it is invariably accompanied, obtained a mastery over pru-
dence, sound taste, and whatever principle may have from time
to time influenced his contracted mind and conscience, which
have been rashly pronounced by an analyst as " less than
human;" for when his weekly toil, or what was to him his
delightful pursuit, was brought to a close on Saturday, he thrust
a five-pound note into his pocket, rushed to some of his vile or
vicious haunts in Wapping or Kotherhithe, and there wallowed
in mad or maudlin gratification until summoned by his better
genius to exercise his heaven-born gifts. These repulsive narra-
tives are not given that the Bacchanalian may be condemned
or moralised over, but as symptoms of disease, as indications of
brutal appetites, which could not be controlled, and which
simultaneously betrayed and fostered that lack of self-control,
intellectual resource, and native dignity, which may be detected
in almost all his manifestations unconnected with his professional
instincts and faculties. But the Academy conferred upon
him greater benefits and advantages, if such they were, than
consociation and conviviality. It was to him a palatial resi-
dence, enriched and ornamented with what he regarded
as the most beautiful and precious objects in the world.
To one whose paternal home was obscure, penurious, and un-
suggestive, and whose nominal residence in St. Anne Street was
a dark, dingy, dirty, and fourth-rate workshop, undusted and
unwashed for years, and presenting, except on the walls of the
picture gallery, unpleasant evidence of neglect, desertion, and
dilapidation, the large and lofty and cheerful saloons of the
Academy must have proved cheering, even exhilarating. Yet
in this dark and dingy den, as it has been called, were afforded
traces of redeeming qualities; occasionally a beggar was spasmodi-
MAD ARTISTS. 73
cally relieved, on its portal lay a pampered pet cat, and in
one of the deserted rooms, furnished from a pawnbroker's, was
a large menagerie of cats protesting in favour of his reputed
love of animals. This temple of art, the Academy, must have
served to him as a club, as the chief point at which he came into
contact with his fellowmen, as a school for thought and informa-
tion,yet he was deplorably ignorant on common topics; but neither
here nor in his studio, where he laboured incessantly and promptly,
but where he was never seen at work, manifesting little or no pre-
paratory cogitation, nor the restlessness or indecisionofincubation;
could he be said to have lived. In fact his most prized allies had
no conception of his exact abode, and at last he disappeared
altogether, literally leaving and taking precautions that he
should not leave a trace behind, and was accidentally discovered
on his death-bed. His absence was not caused by the pursuit
of either art or amusement. It may have been connected with
certain of his immoralities, but to us it appears as a sign of that
morbid self-absorption and secretiveness which marked and marred
his whole career. His preference of solitude, his coldness and
repulsiveness even to his peers, his self-negation merge, at least,
upon one occasion when in the spirit of mental masquerading
he concealed his identity and resorted to impersonation, by re-
peatedly representing himself to the same person as a Master in
Chancery. But in addition to intercourse with kindred spirits he
owed to the Academy all the insight into literature which he ever
obtained. His intimates are confident that he never read any
other book closely and carefully than Ovid's Metamorphoses,
that from this source flowed many of his inspirations; but to the
Catalogues of the Annual Exhibition have been referred both
the subjects and the titles of many of his productions, and to the
scraps of poetry by Pope &c. which their pages contain have
his acquaintance with works of imagination been limited, while
with them have many of the passages of his own absurd, or rather
grotesque poem of the " Fallacies of Hope " been identified. But
although this effort of one who has been distinguished as the
" dumb poet," as being able " to think only with his eyes," as well
as other writings, exhibits great ignorance of his own language,
he is reported to have attempted a speech ; to have enjoyed
animated and controversial discussion, when confined to art
or collateral matters; even the prattle of children, of whose
presence and manners he was tolerant, if not positively fond ; in
strange contradiction to his repulsion and rudeness towards all
except those belonging to his own specialty, and even to relatives,
whom, however, he may have suspected of sinister and greedy
expectations. His feelings were at all times roused by appeals
to pecuniary considerations recalling the economy and penurious-
74 MAD ARTISTS.
ness which may have been at some time imperative, but which was
undoubtedly an hereditary moral taint. Instances are met with
in his transactions of his squabbling over a few shillings, the
price of a packing-box, at the very time he was accepting the
liberal, perhaps lavish price of one of his pictures. One of his
associates, more disposed to sneer than to compassionate, gave
as an example of his generosity, that Turner upon one occasion
paid the half-penny toll at Waterloo Bridge for him. Were
this tale and its obvious inferences substantiated, it might be
counterbalanced by many anecdotes of self-denial and kindness,
chiefly to associates, and especially in rendering manual or
mechanical advice or assistance in the completion and hanging
of their paintings. It is not necessary here to deal with
his discharge of the bills of symposia or orgies with his
fraternity, as it might find an explanation in the excite-
ment by wine; but we are called upon to mention his
splendid donations of ?20,000 and ?5,000 to friends or patrons
whose resources were at the time exhausted, and of ?300 to an
individual who had explained to him the mysteries of the
Daguerrotype. It must be confessed that these acts have been
doubted, or where admitted they have been denounced as loans,
as investments, where there was a certainty of repayment, if not
of gain. But even recognising these transactions as emanations
of gratitude, it is suspected that they may have been dictated by
that combined meanness and munificence, which has been detected
in diseased and contracted minds where a momentary, perhaps a
sinister impulse, may override or overturn the habits and motives
which regulate conduct, even in rejecting the tributes and
triumphs offered to his genius. When he received two offers of
?100,000 for his works hoarded in Queen Anne Street and
?5,000 for his two pictures of Carthage; and above all, when he
was waited upon by Mr. Griffiths on behalf of a distinguished
committee, among whom were Sir Robert Peel, Lord Hardinge,
&c., with an unconditional offer for the purchase of his whole
collection on behalf of the nation ; while it is possible that his
prompt rejection was connected with his cherished projects of
erecting a retreat for decayed and disabled members of his own
guild, and of erecting a monument for himself in St. Paul's, we
can likewise see in it that appetite for hoarding, that tendency
to keep whatever has belonged to the individual, whatever has
been made, touched, or coveted by him, displayed by many
lunatics and by many others who are not insane. It is narrated
that he disputed with a shopman in order to repossess himself of
a scrap of paper which had been attached to one of his parcels.
Mr. Tremblay, the flower painter, for example, who died a
few months ago, who lived in a needy condition, and was sup-
MAD ARTISTS. 75
posed to be poverty-stricken, was found on his death to be in
possession of a trunk which was filled to the brim with gold coins,
chiefly of the reigns of Napoleon I. and Louis XVIII., but, as a
numismatic collector, would have undergone the severest priva-
tions rather than part with one of his treasures. In like manner
Turner felt the pang of a parent parting with a child on dispos-
ing of a picture, declined to sell many, bought back others, and
although he has been accused of raising the price of those exposed
to auction by proxy bidders, it may be surmised that his object
was to enhance his reputation, or even to defeat an appreciating
customer. It is certain that his retention of so many household
gods around him cannot have been for the purpose of admiring
them, as very many stood with their backs to the light in his
gallery and covered with the accumulated dust of scores of years.
Indeed, so prolific was his imagination and powers of produc-
tion that it cannot be believed his Polytheism extended in
memory even to a portion of the objects of his solicitude and
worship, as in twenty years alone, eighty of his pictures were
exhibited in the Academy, and, in the same time, 500 engravings
were published from his drawings. It has been the fashion with
the followers and partisans of this great leader to express sym-
pathy with him as an unfortunate, disappointed, ill-used man.
With this estimate I cannot agree, as, apart from the possible
hardships of his youth, his own misdoings and misadventures,
his unfruitful love passages, which are purely conjectural, and
the non-recognition of his claims to the Presidential Chair of the
Academy, which, however, it is confessed that he was both by
mind and manners ill-fitted to occupy; there is little to mourn
over in his lot. He was in truth eminently favoured, and
fortunate, and successful; he created surroundings in keepingwith
his tastes and tendencies. He was the idol of all who could
appreciate his powers, even of those whom he shunned, repelled,
and insulted. He accumulated the enormous sum of ?140,000
in cash, apart from the value of his property in pictures, and he
had attained to the very pinnacle of human fame and glory.
His decline both in the exercise of his talents and in his frame and
health was gradual and palpable to the few with whom he latterly
came into contact . He disappeared for months, is supposed to have
become more and more addicted to stimulants, and died in an
obscure suburb under the pseudonyme of Admiral or Puggy
Booth, conferred by the gamins of the street, but not repudiated
by himself.
(Authors consulted : Monkhouse, Thornbury, Hamerton,
&c. &c.)
