On General Paresis
===================

99
Art. V.? *
:Author: A. E. MACDONALD, M.D., New York.

Gentlemen,?We are to consider to-day the fourth and last of
the forms of insanity embraced in the classification which we
agreed at our first meeting to accept, and it is not alone the
last, but, to my thinking, the most important of those forms,
and I have more than one reason for thinking so. In the first
place, it is more recent, at least in its recognition, if not, indeed,
in its origin, than the forms which we have discussed. Our
knowledge of its course and causes and symptoms is much more
limited and much less positive; and there is the further reason,
which may increase the importance of the present opportunity
of study to many of you, that, though prevalent enough in this
neighbourhood, it is comparatively unknown to those localities
to which you may propose, after the completion of your studies,
to remove.

I speak of paresis as a comparatively newly discovered form
of insanity, and you will remember that we found its name to
be a comparatively recent addition to the three forms of insanity
of which Pinel's " natural system" of classification was
originally composed. Now that the disease is recognised, and
that opportunities for its study are ample, we see that its
symptoms were observed and recorded long since ; but so rarely
were they observed that they were not held to constitute an
individual form, but were simply regarded as accidental compli-
cations of one or other, indifferently, of the forms already
recognised. Indeed, the date of its promotion abroad to the
dignity of a distinct disease is within the present century, while
in this country but little over thirty years have elapsed since
its first appearance or identification ; and although, since that
time, the number of cases presenting its characteristics has in
this neighbourhood greatly increased, its extension toward the
interior has been gradual, and there are still many localities,
especially in the west and south, where it has not yet appeared.
That it will do so the history of the disease and its geographical
progress can leave no doubt, and hence my belief that it is
especially important that you should study it here where it is
common, in order that you may recognise it if you go where it
is now unknown but will surely follow.

I speak to you of the disease by the name commonly applied
* Read before the Commissioners of Charities anil Correction at the New
York City Asylum for the Insane.

to it in this country?" General Paresis." English writers, as a
rule, use the longer term?" General Paralysis of the Insane "?
while individual authors have each their own designation,
" Paralytic Dementia," " General Incomplete Paralysis," " Pro-
gressive Paralysis," among the number.

The use of the word " progressive " in one of these designa-
tions is a happy one, for progression is a principal characteristic
of the disease, exaltation being another. In effect, general
paresis may be defined to be a form of insanity in which there
is an association of mental and physical evidences of which pro-
gression and exaltation are the leading characteristics. As the
patients in the different stages of the disease are presented to
you, you will observe how constant and uniform these charac-
teristics are. You will see, first, that they are?at least those
in whom the disease is of relatively recent development?men of
apparently strong frame and vigorous health. Paresis does not
find its victims, as do commonly the other forms of insanity,
among those who are weakened by constitutional defect or by
disease, but selects them from among the active and vigorous.
Nor does it go to the extremes of age, but to the prime of
manhood.

I will anticipate the appearance of the patients by giving
you a brief summary of the leading symptoms of the disease
and of its course, and as the patients are brought before you,
you will recognise these symptoms and others which are less
uniform in their presence.

As a rule, then, paresis makes its appearance in a man of
middle age who has apparently been possessed of a strong con-
stitution and of robust health. It is quite possible?probable,
indeed?that he has been somewhat inclined to dissipation or
excess in various ways; but it has not gone to the point of per-
ceptibly affecting his health, or appearance, or business capacity.
The change which comes over him is rather a more sudden one
than in most forms of insanity, excepting acute mania, and it is
somewhat of a question whether the mental or the physical
symptoms have precedence. Generally, in the statements of
friends, the first place is assigned to the former, but they are
plainer and more likely to attract the attention of the laity;
and it is probable that if all cases could be carefully observed
and the two sets of symptoms appreciated, they would be found
to appear and advance coincidently. As regards the mental
evidences, as in the approach of other forms of insanity, a period
of irritability and depression may be expected ; but it may be
but slight and transient, and attract no attention. Then the
element of exaltation asserts itself; the patient is lively and
excited ; he feels well in body, happy in spirits, hopeful and coe-
fident in business. He is disposed to enjoy life, to eat, drink,
and be merry, and to make his companions and acquaint-
ances share in his enjoyments. He becomes speculative and
reckless in his transactions, extravagant and wasteful in his
expenditures and his bounties ; and before his condition is fully
recognised and his property protected, he is apt to hopelessly
embarrass his affairs. Increase in these tendencies, loudness in
speech and manner, eccentric dress, indecency of language and
demeanour, and possibly acts of violence, pave the way for posi-
tive delusions, and, as I have said, the main feature of these is
their exaltation or exaggeration. In whatever field the patient's
fancies may wander, they carry him far above his fellows. He
is the richest, or the most powerful, or the most learned; or if,
as sometimes happens, a melancholy tinge is imparted to his
thoughts, he is the most abused and the most wretched.

All this time the physical symptoms have been appearing
and progressing, depending upon increasing loss of power of co-
ordination in the voluntary muscles. The muscles of the tongue
and lips, as those most delicate in their functions, are the first
to suffer or to show it, and there are, as a consequence, altera-
tions of speech. At first it is but a slight hesitancy or catching,
but it becomes thicker and more drawling, and the enunciation
is indistinct and halting, despite the patient's manifest efforts
to speak with distinctness and deliberation. At the same time
the muscles of the lips are tremulous, and the patient has diffi-
culty in protruding the tongue, and while it is out it quivers
and jerks, and may be suddenly withdrawn without his volition.
There is evident failure, too, in the co-ordinating power of the
muscles of the extremities; but these, as well as characteristic
alterations in the conditions of the pupil, can be better shown
to you from the patients themselves.

From this beginning the patient goes on surely, but more
or less rapidly, through increasing exaggeration of delusions
mentally and increasing paralysis physically, to the end. I
may say now, before the patients come, that they may not hear
me, that this end is death. The list of therapeutic agents has
been ransacked, the pathological appearances studied, but as yet
to no useful purpose. It is true that recoveries have been re-
corded, but they are at best insignificant in number, as well as
doubtful in authenticity. Nor is the inevitable end long of
being reached when once the disease is fully established. Three
years is a long limit for most cases, though some have passed
it. The longest period elapsing between development and
death, in a case coming under my own care, has been short of
six years. In these cases death occurs from the disease uncom-
plicated, and may either result from the gradual increase of tbe
paralysis and its extension to the muscles concerned in degluti-
tion and respiration, or from the convulsive seizures which come
on in its course. In other instances, pulmonary complications
arise and end the patient's life.

Phthisis is a not uncommon complication of general paresis,
as indeed of other forms of insanity, and when it is present it
seems to have an effect in shaping and colouring the delusions.
It is in such cases that you will find the tendency towards
depression that I have spoken of as occasionally existing. It
stops short of the depression of true melancholia, however, and
only modifies without supplanting the delusions of greatness or
wealth. The patient may tell you that, through the machina-
tions of his enemies he has lost his kingdom or his fortune ; but
he will tell you, too, that his loss is but a temporary one, and that
he will soon be more powerful or wealthier than before, and as,
at any time the ravages of the pulmonary disease may be tem-
porarily arrested, the original delusions will return.

Case I.?The patient whom I first present to you will show
excellently the physical marks of the disease. In his case the
progress of the malady has been rapid, but seven months hav-
ing elapsed since its appearance. He is thirty-two years of age,
and has evidently been a man of fine physique. You do not
get many mental symptoms from him, for he has already passed
from the lively and talkative into the dull and stupid stage ;
and besides his speech is so stammering and incoherent that his
answers to our questions are scarcely intelligible. You see very
plainly here the tremulousness of the lips and tongue of which
I spoke. He can only protrude the latter with the greatest
difficulty, and has little or no control over it. His hands and
limbs are equally independent of his will; the former tremble
and jerk about, and his gait is so unsteady and tottering that
he seems in constant danger of falling.

You notice that there is a decided inequality of his pupils,
the left being much dilated and failing to respond to light, while
the right is about normal in size, and does so respond. This
is a lesion which is almost characteristic of general paresis, and
which, when associated with the mental evidences of which we
have spoken, may be taken as settling the question of diagnosis.
It is true that unequal pupils may be found in other cases, and
even in sane people; but in the latter a history of mechanical
injury, or of strain by excessive use of one eye, as in the case
of engravers, may generally be found to account for it. In the
case of paretics, at the inception of the disease, there is usually
intense and equal contraction of the pupils?" pin-hole " pupils,
as we call them?but subsequently they dilate, and dilate un-
equally. They are apt to* lose their shape, too, and become
irregular, from lapping over of the edge of the iris. In some
cases the right pupil is the more dilated, in others the left;
and a curious fact in this connection, first recorded by Dr.
Austin, in England, and verified by observations in this asylum,
deserves to be mentioned. This is that where there is any
tendency toward melancholy or depression, the left pupil will
be found to be the larger, while where the opposite tendency
exists, as it does in the great majority of cases, the right pupil
will be the more dilated. I do not venture to account for this
relation, but it certainly seems to exist, as you will see, I think,
from the patients before you.

I may speak to you now, as well as at another time, of the
probable causes of paresis. Of the general type of persons from
which its victims are selected we have already spoken, and it
will prepare you for what follows. The assigned cause in the
case of the patient before you is excessive sexual indulgence, and
in my experience it is the assigned or assignable cause in the
great majority of cases. There is the source of error to be feared
in this case which affects all attempts to ascribe causes to attacks
of insanity of any kind?the doubt as to the real relations of
cause and effect. Hence, if we get concerning a paretic the
history of excessive venery, we may, especially if the history is
only of recent indulgence, suspect that the excess is due to the
disease and not the disease to the excess, and we may admit at
once that we do have cases of paresis where there is not only no
reason to suspect over-indulgence, but where the negative
evidence is so conclusive that we have to seek for other causes.
But in the great majority of cases, at least of those coming to
this asylum, there is a straight history of inordinate venery,
and strong corroborative evidences and appearances. With this
we get too, in most cases, a history of hereditary tendency to
insanit}', and of intemperance in the use of stimulants; but this
is true, too of the admissions generally, and not alone of those
suffering from paresis. Other assigned causes are sunstroke,
syphilis, and injuries to the head; but, as compared with the
cause I have cited, they are infrequently advanced, and this
leads me to say a word regarding the question of sex in the
matter of liability to this special form of insanity. It is an
undoubted fact that excessive sexual indulgence is less disastrous
in its effect upon the female than upon the male, and, therefore,
it it is really the principal factor in the production of paresis,
we should find that disease much more prevalent among men
than women, and this is exactly what we do find. In this
asylum, which, as you know, receives males exclusively, there
are now probably a hundred cases of paresis. In the correspond-
ing asylum of the department devoted to the care of females.
although the entire number of patients is much greater than here,
there are, according to the report of the Superintendent, not
more than three or four; and, by way of further confirming the
theory advanced, it is recorded that, where women suffer from
paresis, they are generally those who have led dissolute lives as
professional prostitutes.

It is noticeable that, when paresis first makes its appear-
ance in a given locality, its victims are exclusively males. As
time passes on, a few cases are found among females, and there-
after their proportion increases as the disease spreads.
Case II.?This is also a comparatively recent case of
paresis, the invasion of the disease dating back only five months.
He is a younger man than the other, about 27, and you
see that the physical disturbances are by no means so far
advanced. In fact, at first glance, as he sits there, he appears
a well-nourished, healthy young man. But as he rises and
comes towards us we see that his gait is perceptibly affected,
that his hand is tremulous, and that his pupils are unequal, the
right being this time the larger. When he speaks, the diffi-
culty of articulation is marked; but we can understand him
distinctly enough, and learn the drift of his delusions. They
are, as is commonly the case, at least in the commencement of
the disease, connected with his former pursuits in life; they
are limited in number, and are by no means as exaggerated as
those shown by some, or as they are themselves likely to become
as the disease advances. He was, prior to his admission, a
professional billiard player, a champion in one branch of the
game, and but recently engaged in a tournament in this city.
Accordingly he accounts for his residence here by telling us
that this is a large hotel, that he has charge of the billiard-
room, with a fabulous number of tables, from which he derives
a large income, and that the only feature of the establishment
to which he objects is the fact that the door of the bar-room
is always kept locked, and that he cannot get access to it. As
it happens, there is another patient in his ward, a paretic also,
who was likewise a billiard champion, or thinks he was, and
these two worthies spend much of their time in discussing the
preliminaries of a grand championship match which is to settle
the question of supremacy between them. It is needless to
say that the stakes are something enormous, and that each is
sublimely confident of his ability to win them.

Now, here are two patients, the delusions of each of whom
depends largely upon belief in the entire truth of the delu-
sions held and enunciated by the other. This is a peculiarity
which you often find among patients with paresis, and do not
find among patients with other forms of insanity. You will
remember that at our former meetings, and especially when we
had the maniacal patients before us, there were often implied,
and sometimes audible, expressions of dissent on the part of
other patients from the views of the particular patient who
happened to be addressing you, and these views were often
ridiculed and laughed at. As a rule, an insane man appreciates
the falsity of the beliefs of other insane men around him, while
cherishing beliefs equally false himself. And this is a fortu-
nate thing for the officers of asylums, for it prevents the
association of patients in schemes for attack or escape. Should
one patient invite the co-operation of others in a plan to
escape, the chances are that they would inform upon him,
believing him quite unfit to be at large, while each consi-
dering for himself that his own detention is quite unwar-
rantable ; and where a patient attacks an officer, it is quite
common for other patients to interfere for his protection.
There is, then, usually but little confidence between the insane,
and but little acceptance of the delusive ideas of one
by the other. But the paretics are in some measure an excep-
tion to this rule. It is by no means uncommon for one of them
to uphold the correctness of the assertion of his fellow-patient
almost as loudly as his own, unless, indeed, those views clash
with his, in which case, of course, the other man is all wrong,
just as in the case of sane people.

This patient, and the other of whom I have spoken, hold
each the delusion that he is going to win money from the
other, because he believes the delusion of the other that he has
got money to lose. Similarly, a patient who was formerly a
professional gambler plays cards with his comrades industriously,
cheats incorrigibly, and flatters himself that he is rapidly
absorbing the millions they claim to possess; and in more
legitimate business there are transactions made and copartner-
ships formed that are quite dazzling in their results, and always
equally productive to both parties..
Case III.?This is an exceptional patient in oneor two respects.
In the first place, he is much beyond the usual age of paretics,
being aged sixty-six; and in the second place, the disease has
lasted an unusually long time to have reached only its present
stage, for he has been an inmate here for five years. You see
that he is a lively little old gentleman, fat and good-natured,
very talkative, and with a disposition to assume the direction of
affairs and generally assert himself. There is surprisingly little
physical disturbance for one in whom the disease has endured
so long, and whom it has at times affected so hardly?for he
has more than once been at the point of death from the epilepti-
form attacks which are incident to paresis. The affection of
106 ON GENERAL PARESIS.
the speech and gait, though perceptible, are not marked,
and the difference in his pupils is the only decided physical
symptom present. The right pupil is again in his
case the more dilated, and he feels that there is some
trouble with his vision, and he is constantly asking for
spectacles, which, of course, fail to correct it. But, if the
physical symptoms are absent?or in abeyance, for be has shown
them decidedly enough at other times?there is no lack of the
mental ones. His delusions cover every conceivable subject,
and reach quite inconceivable heights. There is no difficulty
in eliciting them either, for he is very garrulous, and always
glad to have an opportunity for speech-making. He has been
brought before classes so often now that he is quite prepared for
it. Often, as I pass through his ward, he asks when he is to
have an opportunity of delivering himself; and he is constantly
preparing discourses upon the most diverse and abstract topics.
In all the insane, the delusions, as we have seen, relate to them-
selves, and first to the condition of their own bodies and minds.
You will remember this in the maniacal and melancholic classes,
and you will discover it in this patient and in his class. He tells
you that he is the strongest man in the world, that he has defeated
all the noted pugilists, none of whom could strike him a blow ;
and he offers you an opportunity, which we will waive, of seeing
how easily he can defeat myself. His health, he tells us, is
" first-rate," and it is a singular thing how commonly paretics
will answer the same inquiry with the same expression. Sankey,
an English alienist, first called attention to this curious little
point; I have often, in trying it, got the answer first-rate "
from eight or nine out of ten patients addressed, and
I think you will be able to verify the result if you try
the experiment for yourselves when we come to pass through
the wards. This feeling of well-being and health marks
the paretic to the end, and his contentment and happi-
ness render his disease the least trying, although the most fatal,
of the forms of insanity. Up to the last moment, when the
patient cannot rise in his bed or move a limb, or swallow, he will
tell you that he is first-rate, that his remaining in bed is only a
matter of choice, and that he could rise and take part in the
most active pursuits, if he so willed it.

In the patient before you the delusions by no means limit
themselves to his strength and prowess. He is of great beauty
and strength, to be sure, and has lived for millions of years, and
made millions of money, part of which is invested in the build-
ing in which we are now visiting him. But it is rather upon
his intellectual and artistic abilities and achievements that he
prides himself. Apart from painting the works that have been
ON GENERAL PARESIS.
107
erroneously ascribed to Raphael, and with the exception of the
Bible, which he wrote to oblige his friend Martin Luther, the most
satisfactory outcome of his genius has been a series of plays which
he published under the nom de plume of " Shakespeare." He
tells you this with all earnestness and gravity, and proceeds to
quote from his works, commencing rightly enough, but soon
wandering off into disconnected nonsense. It does not do to
accuse him of this, however, for he demands, with great prompt-
ness and some asperity, whether, having written the work in the
first place, he is not privileged to alter it as he may see fit ?
He is a linguist too, as well as a litterateur, and boasts a
thorough acquaintance with all the known, and several of the
unknown, tongues. To Grermans or Poles among the patients,
lie will occasionally address himself, using the most absurd
gibberish, and complacently attributing their inability to
understand him to their ignorance of their own language.
He has matrimonial aspirations too: offers himself and
tempting settlements to any lady who visits the ward, and
justifies himself to us by asserting that his first wife?
Queen Victoria?is undoubtedly dead, she having been stolen
from him by the Pope some centuries since. For the rest, he is
now the contented, self-satisfied man that you see, though at
one time he was noisy and destructive and filthy. He imagines
that he leaves the asylum whenever he wants to, and gives cir-
cumstantial accounts of his excursions and adventures. His
imagination transforms the asylum dinner into one of many
courses and ample accompaniments, and there is nothing to mar
his happiness. He has the usual history of excessive venery, as,
indeed, had the patient who preceded him.

Case IV. ?This is the last patient that I shall introduce to
you here, for I think that it will be more to your profit to spend
the time remaining in the wards, in closer examination of indi-
vidual cases. I present him only that I may have a text for
briefly calling your attention to a couple of points, in relation
to the disease, which the other patients did not specially call
out. In the first place, this man comes to us not simply as a
patient committed for treatment and care, but as a prisoner
under indictment. The crime charged against him is forgery,
and it was not until his trial was in progress that suspicion of
his insanity was suggested, and he was sent here for examination
and report. He is a paretic, evidently, and his forgery, which
was of a note or cheque, was, no doubt, committed under the in-
fluence of delusions as to his wealth, which he now manifests
plainly enough. Many of our paretic patients come to us after
arrest and appearance before the courts, and some after
sentence even. The evidences of paresis, as you have seen, are not
greatly unlike those of drunkenness, and they sometimes lead to
mistaken diagnosis upon the part of the finest police force, and
even to misdirected therapeusis in the matter of clubs.
"Where graver crimes have been alleged against them, they
have usually been those of arson or of false pretences. The
paretic is very apt to set fire to his residence with the view of
replacing it by one better suited to his newly acquired wealth
and position ; or he may obtain goods upon false representa-
tions as to his solvency and ability to pay for them.

You will observe that this patient does not give a very
definite summary of his wealth ; he indicates its extent rather
by comparisons than by dollars and cents. This use of the
comparative is a common thing among paretics when they are
speaking of their powers, or attainments, or possessions. They
are richer than Rothschild, or " biger men than old Grant,"
and they are very apt to spell it with one " g," too, for the
evidences of their disease find their way into their letters very
speedily. Apart from the alterations in the handwriting con-
sequent upon the loss of co-ordinating power, there are lapses
in spelling and grammatical construction, even on the part of
those who were before the most accurate. This, of course,
comes from the lapse of memory, upon which the delusions
also largely depend.
