On Slight Ailments; their Nature and Treatment
================================================

By
Lionel S. Beale, M.B., F.R.S., &c. London: J. & A.
Churchill. Philadelphia: Presley, Blackiston.
These valuable lectures by Dr Beale have supplied a great
want in medical literature. The sum of human happiness is
chiefly made up of small things, and small ailments go far to
destroy the comfort of life; anyone, therefore, who can lessen
these, does the public a service, and it is gratifying to find one
of the most scientific physicians of the day giving us the results
of his experience as to the treatment of many of the innumerable
ills that flesh is heir to.
The author introduces the subject to his class with the
following sound remarks :?
310 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
" It therefore follows, and this will be strongly impressed upon
you when you come to work carefully at the important subject of
diagnosis, the detection of disease, that many of the apparently
slight disturbances or ailments may be due to some grave
pathological change, which would be entirely passed over by
one who had had little experience in medical observation, but
would be full of significance to the well-informed practitioner,
and that apparently serious illness may be due to temporary
and functional derangement only. Do not, therefore, be too
hasty in giving an opinion concerning the import of uncertain
and indefinite symptoms. We should remember that the most
perfect machines sometimes go wrong without a flaw being
detected just before the occurrence, it may be, of a complete
breakdown. The tissues and organs, and the marvellously
minute and delicate structures of a living organism may fail
in a hundred ways without giving any notice to its owner,
while the most careful scrutiny and minute examination may fail
to demonstrate any fault or flaw ; nay, even after the body has
ceased to work, after its death, the changes resulting in its
destruction may elude the most careful scrutiny."
"Medical advisers of purely anatomical and pathological
habits of mind are apt to offend unscientific patients, and,
without deserving it, gain for themselves the unenviable repu-
tation of being thoughtless and unkind?regardless of others'
suffering, and if not objectionable, very far from agreeable
ministers of relief. People do strongly object to follow the
advice of such advisers, however correct it may be; and perhaps
the least unfriendly among the patients of such a doctor would,
in confidence and in the most quiet manner, recommend him as
soon as possible to change his vocation."
" It has been my lot to study, on more than one occasion,
the well-turned phrases and persuasive sentences by which
popular prescribers of decillionths of grains, brimful of tact,
managed to bring conviction to the minds of people of intelli-
gence, and at the same time to impress them with their profound
knowledge and intelligence, though all the time they were
writing nonsense, and probably knew that they were doing so.
But, as is well known, cleverly-stated nonsense often hits the
mark, and will continue to do so for many a long year. Men
high among the most intelligent and most learned?nay, men
who have been looked up to as men of the world, have often
been humbugged in matters medical, and even profound lawyers
have failed to distinguish medical nonsense from medical sense,
and mere sham from real scientific knowledge. Those who are
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 311
always gauging the value of evidence, and devoting themselves
to the extraction of truth, seem specially susceptible to medical
and scientific imposition. But there is hardly a department of
human endeavour in these days in which you will not find
audacious humbugs influencing opinion, and gaining for a
time notoriety and renown at the hands of their dupes. I
know persons who would be easily influenced by what the
quack says, who would go away from the honest, well-informed
medical practitioner, with the idea that he knew nothing what-
ever about his business, and was quite ignorant of the nature
of the changes taking place in the organism, and of the method
by which these changes might be modified when they were not
properly performed. This is unfortunate, but there is no help
for it. Every upright practitioner has been placed in this most
unhappy position more than once in his life. Should you find
yourselves so situated, the best thing is to say very little, and
be as patient as possible, leaving matters to be set right by
time. But, while doing our utmost to preserve and extend the
high repute always enjoyed by medical practitioners, we must
be careful not to play into the hands of pretenders, and this
we shall certainly do if we needlessly offend fanciful and
crotchety patients. By so doing we practically dismiss them to
be preyed upon by quacks."
It is not to the general practitioner only that this work will
be found useful ; the psychologist, too, will meet with much to
arrest his attention, especially what the author says on the sub-
jects of hypochondriasis, hysteria, vertigo, wakefulness, and
drowsiness, &c. The following extracts will show the author's
manner of dealing with some of these important symptoms:?
" In this way," by constipation, " that unpleasant condition
known as hypochondriasis in the male, and as a form of hysteria
in the female, very often commences. There is even the possi-
bility that a condition of disease, bordering upon insanity, may
be brought about by long-continued improper action of the
bowels. Patients will often come to you complaining of very
great discomfort. They tell you they feel more or less oppressed,
and heavy and overwhelmed; some complain of an unpleasant
sensation all over the surface of the abdomen : and when they
have taken food, instead of gradually disappearing, it seems as
if it went on accumulating and distending the stomach; the
patient is blown up with wind; and many persons who suffer
in this way soon lose their healthy complexion and become more
or less sallow and pasty. Indeed, it is quite extraordinary how
many different derangements of the health may result from im-
perfect action or a torpid state of the secreting and expelling
structures of the large bowel. Imperfect action of the descending
312 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
colon may cause violent and persistent nerve pains, referred to
the back or hip or groin. Certain forms of sciatica are due to
this cause; violent lumbar pain is also not unfrequently caused
by sluggish action of this part of the alimentary canal."
" Vertigo, swimming in the head, or giddiness, is an indica-
tion sometimes of disturbed action of the stomach and liver,
and sometimes of deranged circulation and disturbed heart's
action. But this symptom may be also due to affections of the
nerve structure of the brain or the small arteries which supply
it. The exact seat of the lesion varies, but in animals injury to
the crus cerebri, as well as certain injuries to the cerebellum
are followed by vertigo. For one case, however, which is due
to serious disease of the brain or its vessels, we shall meet with
a large number which depend upon temporary derangement of
the digestive organs."
" Drowsiness.?Patients sometimes come to consult us in
consequence of a persistent sleepy state. They will tell you
that they could sleep all day as well as all night. If they sit on
a chair for a few minutes they drop off to sleep ; if they take
up a book or a paper, it soon falls from their hands in conse-
quence of drowsiness coming on; even if they go out for a walk
they soon begin to experience an almost irresistible tendency to
lie down and yield themselves to sleep. Patients who suffer in
this way sometimes come for help to their medical adviser.
They may feel pretty well in health, with the exception of this
irrepressible drowsy feeling, and they ask you what they can do
to get rid of a tendency so very troublesome and disagreeable.
" In many cases this state seems to depend upon some imper-
fect action of the digestive organs. Sometimes it may be
traced to over-feeding. Sometimes to taking too large a meal
in the middle of the day. Sometimes beer is the cause of it, or
a too liberal allowance of wine. If you give mild purgatives,
and mineral acids and saline medicines which act upon the
intestinal canal, you will often get rid of the condition, and
cure the patient. When the liver is at fault, as is not infre-
quent^ the case, you will find the advantage of giving a small
dose of calomel, blue pill, or gray powder every third or fourth
night, for three or four courses.
" Cold bathing, also, is often useful. As soon as the patient
rises in the morning he should have a cold shower bath. There
is no need of a large quantity of water. A shower bath of two
or three pints will be sufficient. If the drowsiness is very
troublesome, two moderate shower baths a day should be tried?
one at about eleven, the other at four o'clock?cold or tepid,
according to the time of the year. In some cases, in addition
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 313
to the cold bathing, a mild purgative every night for a week
will be found useful."
" Wakefulness and Restlessness.?The very opposite condition
to drowsiness afflicts some patients. They come to you com-
plaining that they cannot sit still or rest quietly for a time.
They experience a strong desire to be continually walking
about. They cannot stay for long in one place, and do not feel
satisfied unless they get constant change of scene. You inquire
if there is any cause for this restlessness, but, as a rule, the
invalid assures you that everything is going on in its usual way.
But he cannnot feel satisfied, quiescent, or composed. Some
suffer from vague frights. When they go to bed at night,
instead of dropping off to sleep in a natural way, they lie tossing
about. The pillow is not comfortable, and soon gets too warm
for the head. A most uncomfortable night is passed, and the
patient only gets a little sleep towards morning, and wakes up
from this, feeling tired, exhausted, and unrefreshed. The
mental disturbance in these cases depends upon some temporary
derangement which cannot be accurately defined. If upon
inquiry you learn that the restless state has existed for any con-
siderable time, you must tell the patient to thoroughly change
his mode of life. If he is in business, you must recommend
him to get away for a time. Send him to some place where he
will get complete change of scene for a month or more. The
diet should at the same time be carefully regulated, and in all
probability the patient will return home well, and able to go on
with his round of daily duty just as steadily as before the
occurrence of the illness."
The work is not only a guide for the management of slight
ailments; it teems throughout with original physiological and
pathological observations, which greatly enhance its value, and
prove the profoundness of the microscopical researches of the
author. It is impossible for us within the limits of a review to
do more than indicate a few of the valuable medical aphorisms
with which these lectures abound.
