Commission of Lunacy on the Rev. W. Basset
===========================================

136

An inquiry into the state of mind of the Rev. Walter St.
Aubyn Basset, of Treharrock, St. Kew, instituted by Mr. Gr. L.
Basset, of Tehidy Park, near Camborne, brother of the alleged
lunatic, was opened on Tuesday, February 3, before Mr. W.
Norris Nicholson, Master in Chancery, at Brislington, near
Bristol. The petitioner, Mr. Gr. L. Basset, was represented by
Mr. Arthur Charles, Q.C., and Mr. Pitt Lewis, of the Western
Circuit, who were specially retained by Messrs. Domville,
Lawrence, and Long, of London. The respondent was repre-
sented by Mr. Bucknill and Mr. Kingdon, of the Western
Circuit, who were specially retained by Mr. Greorge Browne
Collins, solicitor, of St. Colomb. The Rev. St. Aubyn Basset,
the respondent, occupied a seat in court, and was accompanied
by Mrs. Basset. The witnesses in attendance filled a large
room, and among those who were subpoenaed were Lord Fal-
mouth, the Hon. and Rev. J. T. Boscawen, Dr Barham, and
many other well-known persons.

The Master opened the case by briefly informing the jury
that they were empanelled to decide whether Mr. St. Aubyn
Basset was of unsound mind and incapable of managing his
affairs; and they must decide " yes " or " no " upon the whole
question. Their verdict must be that of at least twelve (among
twenty-one), and they would have the advantage of a personal
interview with the alleged lunatic.

At Mr. Bucknill's application all witnesses, including the
professional men subpoenaed, were ordered out of court. Mrs.
Basset, by consent of counsel, retained her seat.

Mr. Collins, in stating the petitioner's case, said the
defendant, the Rev. Walter Basset, was born in December
1835, the fourth son of Mr. John Basset of Tehidy. In July
1843 Mr. John Basset died by his own hand, and his eldest son,
Mr. John Francis Basset, entered into possession of the
estates, and remained in possession until February 1869. He
was succeeded by the second son, Arthur, who had been in the
army; but for thirteen years before the time when he succeeded
to the estates had been under restraint at the asylum of Dr.
Newington, in Sussex. He died in May 1870, and Mr.

Gustavus Basset came into the property, and was still in pos-
* Royal Cornwall Gazette, February 6, 1880.
session. At the time of Mr. Arthur Basset's death Mr. Walter
Basset was rector of West Buckland, Devon. He resigned his
living, was married in December 1872 to Miss Ellen Pyne, and
in January 1873 bought the estate of Treharrock, in North
Cornwall, where he resided in October 1879. Mr. Grustavus
Basset married, in 1873, Miss Ellenhurst, and an heir to
the estates was born. In March 1879 the respondent began
writing a series of letters, chiefly to the family solicitor,
Mr. Lawrence, which contained very remarkable disclosures.
He was under the belief that he was being followed about by
enemies of his family, and that his mother's family and other
relatives were inimical to him; that a large number of persons
in the kingdom were emasculated and sought to reduce others
to the same condition; that a person named Arch, well known
in connection with agricultural disputes, and other persons, of
both sexes, were employed by persons who were in a conspiracy,
the object of which was to lead people to reduce themselves to
idiocy by excesses, and that they were hanging about his place
with designs on him. He said Dr Newington, of Ticehurst,
Sussex, employed these people with the object of getting people
reduced to idiocy, and that Lord Falmouth was in league with
them with the object of ruining the Basset family. The
defendant wished Mr. David Bain and Mr. Hendy, county
magistrates, the Hon. and Rev. J. Townsend Boscawen, Lord
Falmouth, and others, to be put under restraint. He said he
believed his second brother was alive. On the 8th of April he
asked the family solicitor to send some one to Tehidy to inquire
into the state of mind of his brother, saying that his brother
was being reduced to idiocy, but that nothing would be said
until his son came of age, and then he would be declared an
imbecile. He wrote to Dr Newington saying he had been
annoyed by a person he called the "Kitten," saying she had
threatened his wife's life. He also wrote to the family lawyers
saying he wanted the conspirators " respectively " killed. He
sought to obtain the insertion of an advertisement in the Times
cautioning householders against persons he called Hazier, the
Kitten, and others, who, he said, gained access to houses with the
object of making disclosures respecting members of the household.
He wrote a letter to be sent to the Bishop of London, warning
his lordship of a social evil. Other letters contained warnings to
his brother that relatives were engaged in the same object as that
of the conspiracy, and in one he said his brother, if he would not
take his advice, ought to be made mad as fast as possible. Arch,
he thought, " should be killed," at a cost of about ?20. In a
letter to the Chief Constable of Cornwall, he asked that, as he
had made a communication to the Home Secretary respecting a
138 COMMISSION OF LUNACY ON TIIE REV. W. BASSET.
family of high position in the county, a policeman might be
placed at his house. This state of things continued till October,
and defendant then applied for summonses against Lord Fal-
mouth and others for the alleged conspiracy. He next called on
another clergyman, and warned him of Lord Falmouth as having
been concerned in the death of two of his daughters who had
died abroad. Subsequently lie went to a dangerous cliff on the
coast, near his house, and searched it for the " runners," armed
with a pistol and knife, and also sent to a huntsman asking him
to bring over the hounds to find out where they lay. He even-
tually went to Tehidy, and there used expressions which justified
the belief that he was dangerous to his nephew. Medical men
were then consulted, who certified him to be insane.
The defendant was here questioned by the Master, and he in
effect reiterated the curious statements made in the letters.
He talked connectedly, and explained that the only expression
he had used with respect to his nephew was : " This property
will come to me when that brat is dead." The " runners," he
informed the Master, went about in towns with hoods over their
heads. He had not been persecuted since he had been at Dr.
Fox's, but he believed the people were still about.
William Fleet, inspector of the Cornwall police, stated that
in July 1879 Mr. Walter Basset came to his station and said
he wished his premises at Treharrock watched, as there were a
lot of people about who wanted to do him an injury. He said
they were always about, inside and outside of the premises, at
night, particularly moonlight nights, and that he could not
understand how they got there. He said he knew one who
came there, and it was a previous owner of Treharrock,
Mr. Hambly. Witness replied, " I understood that he was
dead," and defendant said, " It's nothing of the sort; he is
about my premises every night. It was reported he was dead,
and there was a funeral ceremony, but the coffin did not contain
Mr. Hambly." On the 26th of July witness, in consequence of
a telegram he received from respondent, went to Treharrock.
The respondent repeated his former complaint, and said one of
the surveyors of the Ordnance Survey was at the head of it.
He said he had a brother who was under restraint, and that the
keeper ill-used him.

Cross-examined by Mr. Bucknill : Treharrock is in a lone
part of the country. There was nothing unusual about his com-
plaining that there were persons about the house. Others have
made similar complaints. Mrs. Basset confirmed Mr. Basset's
statement as to that.

Whether right or wrong, then, she confirmed her.husband's
statement??She did.

Cross-examination continued: I did not communicate these
tilings to tbe petitioner's solicitors until tliey came to me.
There were persons surveying in the neighbourhood who would
be about the house ; it was their duty to be there. Had these
not been Government men it would have been curious. I never
heard that they took the keys of their own accord and W3nt
about the place. Mrs. Basset did not tell me they took the key
of the garden and walked about where they liked. She did say
they went just where they liked. Had known Mr. Walter
Basset three or four years, and never heard him use a threaten-
ing expression to anyone. I knew before July that Mr. Basset
was eccentric, and of late he had become more so.
Re-examined by Mr. Charles: I saw Mr. Walter Basset
frequently, and I think he has been getting worse lately. He
did say that the chief surveyor was a man named Elford, one of
his late father's former keepers.
Defendant, contrary to the advice of his counsel, persisted
in making a statement. He quite denied ever having said any-
thing about Mr. Hambly, or, as far as he could remember,
mentioning his name to the policeman. There was a joke in
the house which he did not believe in, which was that Mr.
Hamblv's ghost was in the house. The chief constable of Corn-
wall was a friend of the Boscawen family, and this man had
been got to cook up a story.

Mr. J. E. Collins, solicitor, of Bodmin, and clerk to the
Treague Divisional Bench, in the county of Cornwall, stated
that on the 2nd of October Mr. Walter Basset came to his office
and said he wanted some people summoned. He sat down at
intervals, and at intervals walked about the room, at the same
time making a disconnected statement to the effect that Dr.
Newington, of Ticehurst, Sussex, was employed to get him put
into a lunatic asylum; that he was followed about by a woman
whom he called the " Kitten," and a man named Hazier, who
were trying to find out his mode of life, and using means to get
him put under restraint. He said Lord Falmouth lived at
Mercy worth, near Ticehurst, and used to drive over with his
friends and have the lunatics exhibited for their amusement,
and that his brother Arthur was subjected to that. He wanted
summonses against Lord Falmouth and the Hon. and Eev. J. T.
Boscawen, as they were conspiring to get him under restraint.
He made other statements respecting the Hon. and Eev. J. T.
Boscawen and Lord Falmouth, and said the Marquis of Camden
and Ching got up charges of treason felony against rising young
men to get rid of them ; also that various other persons had
been got rid of. He then stole away into Mr. Collins's private room,
and when witness followed him he was looking under the bed?
and gave as his reason for going there that he was looking for
Arch. He named various persons who had died very mysteri-
ously, said he would spend a lot of money to get Dr Newington
killed, and that people of his had been about Treharrock all the
summer. Dr Newington, he said, cruised on the coast in a
yacht during the daytime, and landed at night. He wished
to prosecute for conspiracy to get him and his brother under
restraintj and included his brother's servants. He also stated
that Mr. E. C. Marriott, the agent of the Basset family, was put
into a position of trust in connection with the estates to do them
harm, and that he introduced his eldest brother to loose people
for that purpose. Witness humoured Mr. Basset as he had a very
solid horsewhip with him. He suggested to him to state all the
facts in a letter and received a letter naming the following
persons whom he wished to be examined :?Dr Newington and
party, the "Hare," "Bogus" Noakes, Mr. Hazier, the
" Kitten," and others; the Elmhursts, Mr. Moreton, two Misses
Price, Lord Falmouth, the Hon. and Eev. J. Townsend Bos-
cawen, Mr. Marriott, and Mr. Greorge Williams.
The defendant again sought to make a statement, but was
restrained.

Mr. Bucknill: These facts are come upon us entirely by
surprise, and you can well understand my client, the only person
who can put the other side of the matter, wishes to make a
statement. It is an extremely painful and unfair position for
my client to be in.

Mr. Charles : I cannot allow you to make that remark.
Mr. Bucknill: You cannot stop me.

Cross-examined : I am a nephew of Mr. Collins, who is
solicitor for Mr. Walter Basset. I did think defendant might
do me harm if I annoyed him.
Did you look on him as a dangerous lunatic ??I thought if
I had treated him brusquely he would not be able to control
himself.

Can you give me any reason for not disclosing to your uncle,
Mr. Collins, who you knew was Mr. Walter Basset's solicitor,
these facts which you knew would be important ??I mentioned
this matter to him, offering to go into the whole matter, but he
said he had heard enough about it. I also spoke to Mr. George
Collins's managing clerk.

Do you think it fair to Mr. Basset to come here and make
this statement ??I don't offer any opinion. I understood from
Mr. Walter Basset that he was under fear of being under
restraint, and also of personal injury. He said he would spend
a lot of money to get Dr Newington killed.
Did you then think it necessary to communicate to any of his
COMMISSION OF LUNACY ON THE REV. W. BASSET. 141
friends after lie had made such a statement as that ??I con-
sulted with my father on the subject, the communication being
made to some one at Camborne.
Bid you not, after this extraordinary communication to you,
write to Mr. Walter Basset expressing your willingness to take
his case up ??I don't think I did. I never intended to do any
such thing.

Did you write to Mr. Basset offering to take his case up ??
I think not.
Would such a letter appear in you press letter-book ??I
don't know that there is such a letter ; if you had given me
notice I would have produced the book. I am quite sure I
never seriously intended to do any such thing. There was a
letter from Mrs. Basset saying I had better not move in the
matter at present.

The Rev. Gr. H. Somerset, Rector of St. Mabyn, said he
knew nothing of Mr. Walter Basset until October 1. It was
about eight o'clock in the evening when Mr. Basset called. He
said there were a great many people going about after him,
talked very incoherently about Mr. Boscawen, and charged Lord
Falmouth with being concerned in the death of eight persons,
including his own eldest son. He also said if he caught any of
the people who were about him he should murder them. He
had received no letter from Mr. Basset since he had been at
Brislington.

Mr. Charles : It was not sent.
Mr. Bucknill: Does not the Act say that all letters of a
private patient addressed to any other person than the Commis-
sioners should be forwarded, unless it was prohibited and endorsed
to that effect by the proprietor of the licensed house ?
The Master: That has nothing to do with this inquiry,
I think.

Mr. Bucknill: With my client's case it has. If the Act has
not been complied with, who knows what letters have been sent
or what letters suppressed ?

The witness went on to state that in consequence of the
defendant's threat he warned the relieving officer of the parish,
whose duty it was to bring before the magistrates persons sus-
pected of being wandering lunatics. Knew the defendant had
a home and that he lived with his wife at Treharrock. Thought
he was dangerous, and told his servant to see him safe out of
the plantation. Did not communicate with anyone but the
relieving officer. The relieving officer brought the defendant
before the magistrates, but he was not sent to an asylum.
Robert Hudson, M.D., of Redruth, stated that, in compliance
with a telegram he received from Tehidy on October 21, he
went there. He saw the defendant outside the house, and
defendant told him there was a conspiracy against him, between
Mr. Greorge Williams, Mr. Boscawen, and others. An interview
followed between Mr. G-ustavus Basset and the defendant, and
the latter insisted on his staying. Defendant said he thought
it his duty to warn his brother that Lord Falmouth, Mr. Bos-
cawen, Lady Molesworth, and others, were in a conspiracy
against them, and had bribed all his servants with the object of
making them idiots, and then locking them up in asylums.

He also said Arch, the agricultural labourers' delegate, was in
the same conspiracy, and that such wretches ought not to be
allowed to live, as they were draining the life-blood of the best
families of the country. Afterwards defendant requested him
to take notes of what had taken place, as he intended shortly
to take steps against his brother, and it would be very im-
portant.
In your professional opinion, is it safe for defendant to
be at large ??I don't think I had sufficient opportunity of
saying that. There were dangerous tendencies when I saw
him.
Cross-examined: The defendant was outside the door when
I saw him, and the door was locked in his face. The brothers
met affectionately, and there were no dangerous tendencies
about him. I have heard that a few days after this interview
two keepers and two policemen went to the defendant's house,
and took him to an asylum. I was asked to communicate what
passed to Dr Barham. Before I saw Dr Barham I was asked
to certify defendant a lunatic, and I did not. Both Mr.
Grustavus Basset and Mrs. Basset asked me. I do not know
that Mrs. Basset first suggested it. The certificate as to the
defendant's condition was partly filled in by me, partly by Dr.
Barham, and partly by Dr West.

Have you heard that Mr. Basset was extremely anxious to
prevent the defendant from going to live near Tehidy??
Witness, after the question had been repeatedly put, said there
was a rumour of the kind.

Ee-examined: I did not certify the defendant, because I
thought it desirable that those who knew him best?one an old
family friend and the other his medical attendant?were the
best persons to do that kind of thing.

Dr Barham, a doctor of medicine of the University of
Cambridge, said he knew the defendant as a mere boy, but for
some years saw nothing of him, as he was away from the West.
On October 21 he had an interview with the defendant at the
Eoyal Hotel, Truro. After a few minutes' ordinary conversa-
tion he said there were emissaries of the mad doctors all over
tlie country, seeking to inveigle persons into asylums, and that
there were parties of them around Tehidy and Treharrock. He
was of the opinion then, which he still retained, that the de-
fendant was of unsound mind. He seemed to have very few
ideas but these groundless and insane ideas, of the truth of
which he was perfectly and honestly convinced.

Mr. Pitt-Lewis : Having these ideas, do you think he would
be likely to act on them ?

I think persons actuated by the belief that others are in-
tending to do them bodily injury would seek to protect them-
selves. A man seeing another man behind a hedge might take a
shot at him on the supposition that he was one of his enemies.
Cross-examined: The defendant asked me to come and see
him again. He wrote to me afterwards, offering to give me a
window as a gift to a scientific society I am connected with.
He sent a poem on the death of the Prince Imperial at the
same time. He has always been more or less of a poet. Ever
since I knew him as a grown man he has been eccentric. I
don't know that it was not until he came to live near Tehidy
that those who advise his brother sought to put him under
restraint. I have had experience of cases of madness. Hal-
lucinations or delusions may exist at the same time with
sanity.

Charles Augustus West, M.D., of Bodmin, said he had been
the defendant's medical attendant for the last seven years. On
October 23 he visited him at Treharrock. Defendant came in
with his dress covered with mud, and said he had been search-
ing for men who were constantly about his premises, who hid in
clefts of the walls, were ubiquitous, and followed him about.
Hearing that defendant had a pistol and knife in his possession,
he said that made him dangerous, and that if it came to the
knowledge of the parish officers it would be their duty to inter-
fere. On Sunday, the 5th, he was summoned to Treharrock,
and the defendant told him he had been searching for Arch and
the other men under the cliffs.

By Mr. Bucknill: When I saw him on the 23rd, I had been
asked to go and see him with a view to certifying him insane,
and had arranged, but I went there on Mrs. Basset's invitation.
I thought he was dangerous, because he had been searching on
the cliffs for some one he thought dangerous to him, with a knife
in his possession. Mr. Bolden, the Tehidy agent, asked him to
sign the certificate, and he had received the fee. I did go to
the house on the 23rd, when I went to certify, under the
pretence of seeing Mrs. Basset. I saw her as a medical man,
and she introduced Mr. Basset, being at the time quite in
ignorance of the object of my visit.

As a matter of gentlemanly feeling, do you think that was
quite the thing for a family doctor to do ??I knew Mrs. Basset
would resist. I may have accepted their hospitality on that
occasion. The delusions I have mentioned are not those on
which I certified that he was incapable of taking care of pro-
perty. There were other evidences. He told me on October 1
that he had bought an estate and had no money to pay for it.
That is not an evidence of lunacy, I hope ??He had no
money.

Do you know that when he went to Treharrock he farmed
and managed an estate of 300 acres ??He did.
Have you any reason to say he farmed like a lunatic ??I
don't know how he farmed.

Do you know he conducted the transfer of the estate him-
self??I don't know who did it. The reason lie could not pay
for the estate was that he had two estates on his hands at the
same time. I don't know whether he managed the household
affairs himself. Knew he formed a drive and improved the
estate of Treharrock. He was a hunting man, but witness could
not say whether he carried a gun until two years ago. Attended
defendant in 1874, 11 times; in 1875, 14 times; in 1876,
5 times; in 1877, 16 times; in 1878, 4 times: and 1879,
6 times. I should say any person having a persistent delusion
or hallucination would be insane. A person who fancied he heard
voices would, in my opinion, be insane.

The foreman of the jury here communicated with the Master,
and then stated that the jury were of opinion that enough
evidence had been offered on the petitioner's side. They would
be glad to hear Mr. Bucknill, and to know whether he could
bring forward any medical evidence.

Mr. Bucknill declined to make any statement of his case
till the counsel on the other side had concluded theirs.
Mr. Charles, after the expression of opinion by the jury,
consented to call only one more witness.

Dr George Henry Savage, medical superintendent and
resident physician of Bethlehem Hospital, London, and lecturer
on mental diseases at Guy's Hospital, stated that on the 16th of
January he saw defendant alone for an hour and a quarter at
Dr Fox's. During that time he told him Lord Falmouth never
changed and would go on living for ever, and on that based
another assertion. He thought it an extraordinary thing that
the friends of Lord Falmouth died, and referred that to the same
origin as the juvenescence. He said his brother Arthur was sent
to Ticehurst and made insane while there. He also said he was
annoyed by the "runners" from Dr Newington's. He argued
that it would be to Lord Falmouth's interest that the Basset
COMMISSION OF LUNACY ON THE REV. W. BASSET. 145
family should be ruined, and said means were by one family
ruining another by gambling; and said there was a conspiracy
between Lord Falmouth and Dr Newington. The opinion
witness formed was that the defendant was suffering from a
chronic incurable form of insanity, and that he would be
dangerous to anyone he fancied was injuring him.
Cross-examined: Supposing Mr. Basset to be subject to
these delusion for several years, but had ridden on the cliffs and
carried a gun there, that would not shake my opinion that he
would be a dangerous lunatic. If a man had been subject to
these delusions for years, and had done no harm, my general
opinion would be shaken. If he had conducted the affairs of
his estate of 300 acres for years satisfactorily, I should say he
was not insane. Notwithstanding this may be shown, I should
consider Mr. Walter Basset to be a dangerous lunatic. In this
case I do prefer my own opinion to any facts that may be proved.
Delusions are not proof positive of insanity.
Re-examined : It would quite agree with my own opinion
if I were told defendant had been getting much worse of late,
Mr. Bucknill said it would enable him to condense his case
if the inquiry were now adjourned. He assured the jury that
he would be able to satisfy them that, whether he had these
delusions or not, the defendant had been managing his own
affairs in a reasonable manner, and was still capable of doing so.
The Master adjourned until Wednesday morning.
Second Day.? Wednesday.
Mr. Bucknill opened his client's case with an earnest and
impressive appeal to the jury to consider the matter before
them, with special reference to the doom with which bis client
was threatened. No man out of an asylum could imagine the
agony of mind of one believing himself _to be sane, who was
placed in a madhouse. Ten thousand times worse than a gaol,
the unhappy patient herded, slept, sat, and ate, side by side with
raving maniacs, idiots, and imbeciles. To suggest that the
fancies which had taken hold of his client were anything but
fancies would be an insult to common sense. But the under-
current of the whole of the letters which had been so much
relied on was this, " I am afraid my brother and I are to be
deprived of our liberty." There was always the warmest affec-
tion between the brothers, and there could be no doubt that in
much of what had taken place the defendant had been actuated
by a strong nervous sensibility lest the helpless invalid his
brother was should be removed to an asylum. Throughout the
letters, however, there was apparent not the intention to do
injury to these persons he suspected, but the fact that he invoked
the assistance of the law. What stronger negative evidence
could they have that he had never intended to attack any
person ? The statute never suggested that a harmless lunatic
should be confined in an asylum unless he became a wandering
lunatic, dangerous to himself or others. Lord Campbell said
the Act was rather against than favourable to persons, physicians
or not, who simply, because a person was of unsound mind,
caused him to be confined in a lunatic asylum. A person to be
placed in that position must be dangerously mad, and unfit to
manage his own affairs. An inmate of the Agapemone was put
into an asylum as of unsound mind, but was not dangerous;
and she recovered damages for incarceration. Now, if he showed
them further that since 1872 the defendant had managed his
business affairs sensibly and straightforwardly, he apprehended
they would willingly come to the conclusion that he must be
set at large. Mr. Bucknill then proceeded to comment on the
evidence, and in conclusion he appealed to the jury not?upon
the evidence of opinion which had.been described as the wildest
and most worthless of all evidence?to consign his client again
to the asylum. He sincerely hoped it would be in their power,
and he was sure it would be a pleasure, to relieve him from that
terrible position. He had done no harm to anybody ; let him
go back, as was his wife's wish, to reside with her.

Hannah Netherton, a charwoman, who had worked at
Treharrock ever since the defendant had lived there, said that,
as far as she had seen, he had always conducted himself to
everyone courteously and kindly, and had always been able
to manage his own affairs.

By Mr. Charles: In September I went to live at Treharrock
as a servant. Before that I worked there occasionally. Some
time before Mr. Basset was taken away he was under the im-
pression that there was somebody about who was going to do
him injury. A day or two before he was taken away he went
on his hands and knees in the kitchen with an open knife in his
hand. He did not say he would murder anyone. He remained
in the kitchen, and sent some one to the mistress. Mrs. Basset
said Mr. Basset got the knife in Truro to prune trees with.
Had never told Policeman Thomas that Mrs. Basset said her
master had been going all over the house with a knife in his
hand. Had never heard such a thing said.

Re-examined: It is a lonely house. I have seen nobody
about; but somebody threw a stone through a glass door into the
study on Christmas Day.

Mrs. Emily Eoberts, who resides at Trevinnick, St. Kew,
COMMISSION OF LUNACY ON THE REV. W. BASSET. 147
said she frequently visited at Treharrock, and had frequent
opportunities of seeing Mr. Basset. She had never seen any-
thing in his demeanour or behaviour to alarm her, and thought
he was quite capable of managing his own affairs. She had
never been afraid of him, and she often took her grandson there.
Mr. Basset was very kindly disposed, and the child was very
fond of him. The children went there of their own choice
Had many times seen defendant take part in the service. Had
heard him say there were men lurking about the place.
By Mr. Charles: There was one of Mr. Basset's sermons that
gave some offence to one or two parishioners. That was more
than a year ago, and he had not preached since.

Mrs. Edith Basset, wife of the defendant, described Trehar-
rock as a lonely place, surrounded by shrubs and woods. In ail
matters of business connected with the estate, and all money-
matters, Mr. Basset acted on his own behalf. The statements in
counsel's opening address as to details of work she corroborated.
She produced his farm book, kept by himself, and a number of
letters written by him. Kemembered going to Cambourne,
when her husband went to Tehidy on the 21st of October. She
remained there, because she was not on visiting terms there.
The only objection there was when the estate at Crelloe was
bought was that it was only six miles from Tehidy. Up to the
time Mr. Basset bought a pistol he had no weapon but a large
stick in the house. She thought something of the kind neces-
sary. She had known of persons being about the house, and
their house dog, her own dog, had been poisoned. Her husband
was very distressed, when he returned from Tehidy, with regard
to his brother's state. He used no threat whatever either against
his brother or nephew; he was too grieved, and did not speak.
When her husband was taken away they were on the point of
going to Torquay. The chaise was at the door. Three men
came up and asked to see Mr. Basset. She said, " He is writing
letters," and showed them into the study. Mr. Basset showed
them the means by which he thought persons got into the
house. The servant said, " There are two or three other
carriages there." She went outside and sawT Dr Fox and Mr.
Bolden, the agent of the Tehidy estate, and another man. She
had never seen him before except on the previous Sunday. The
six persons went into the drawing-room and said, "We have
come for Mr. Basset." She had had no previous warning. Mr.
Basset was present. She sought to prevent his being removed.
He was sitting in his chair, and the whole six appeared to take
hold of him at once. They dragged him out of the house, threw
him into a carriage, and drove off. She followed, and at Bristol
asked Dr Fox where he was going to take her husband. He
then gave bis card. When they took him certificates were
asked for, but they did not produce them. She and her husband
both asked for them. She denied telling Dr West that her
husband had a pistol and knife in his possession. He had no
pistol, and she knew him perfectly well. She denied in toto Dr.
West's statements on this subject. It was not the fact that her
husband's clothes were covered with mud, or that she said her
husband had been on the cliffs, with a pistol and a knife, looking
for men he thought were there. From the time she first knew
her husband until he was removed she never knew him threaten
any person whatever; quite the reverse. She was never away
from her husband but one day from the time of their marriage
to the time of his removal.

Cross-examined: On the Sunday before her husband was
taken she did send two persons to search for her husband, who
she was told had not been to church; but she did it because
she was alarmed at Mr. Bolden, the agent of the Tehidy pro-
perty, and a gentleman and lady in a carriage having been to
the house. She sent for Dr West, and did tell him that her
husband had left the house to go to church, but had not gone.
She denied telling Dr West her husband had been wandering over
the most dangerous part of the cliffs. Denied having gone to
call up the groom to come to Mr. Basset a night or two before he
was taken away.

Re-examined : I was not on good terms at Tehidy. It ap-
peared to me Mr. Bolden came for some evil purpose. First he
wanted to prejudice me against my husband, and then to get me
to pity Mr. Grustavus.

John Beddoe, M.D., F.R.C.P., physician to the visiting
magistrates of the Gloucester Asylum, said he visited Mr. Basset
as to his mental state on Monday last. He found him expressing
some views which he would call delusions. From what he saw
the defendant was not a dangerous lunatic. It was possible for
a gentleman to be possessed of the ideas Mr. Basset had for some
years. If it were proved to his satisfaction that Mr. Basset had
been in the same state since 1872, and had not grown worse,
then he was capable of managing his own affairs. In his
opinion it was possible and probable that Mr. Basset would hurt
no one.

By Mr. Charles : It is pretty common for disease of this kind
to be stationary. The disease itself is not uncommon. Did
not know the fact of defendant having tried to institute pro-
ceedings would affect his belief. If defendant said, "I want to
get these people respectively killed," he must know his meaning
before he altered the opinion he had formed. If he had written
that in July of last year, and had never written anything of the
kind before, he would suppose the disease was progressive.
Re-examined: If I were told he said in all these letters
which had been quoted that the defendant expressed a desire to
take legal proceedings, I would be of opinion that he was the
less likely to do harm. I carry a knife.

Dr Brittan, M.R.C.S. and M.D. of Dublin, said he had con-
siderable experience in matters of mental alienation. He saw
the defendant with Dr Beddoeat Brislington House. He made
statements respecting the conspiracy and delusion. Witness
questioned him about it, and cross-questioned him, almost lead-
ing him up to it, to see if he could evoke any expression of
malevolence or intention against the persons named. All he
elicited was rather a feeling of extreme fear than the desire of
revenge or the intention to injure. The general conclusion he
came to on the case was that Mr. Basset was a man who from
an early period had not unnaturally had a dread of falling into
the same condition as had been the case with certain of his
family. Probably the morbid impression had got hold of his
mind that there was a design to reduce him to the same state.
He thought one must discount everything he said by the peculiar
characteristic which marked the whole of the delusions. The
expressions wishing certain persons to be killed or poisoned he
thought were merely another form of saying he thought they
ought to be put out of the way. If he thought them guilty of
these crimes, he would say they ought to be put out of the way.
Might have said certain persons ought to be hanged.
By Mr. Charles : I have experience of alienation. I am the
inspector under the Irish Court of Chancery for patients in the
Brislington Asylum.

Are you of opinion he is of sound mind ??No ; certainly
not.
Would you take the responsibility of saying he ought to be
without control ??I should like first to know a great deal more
than I have seen at present. Nothing I have seen or heard
would cause me to say he ought to be under control.
The Master remarked that he should tell the jury the ques-
tion was, whether Mr. Basset was of unsound mind. If the jury
found him insane he might be placed under the care of a com-
mittee, who would have full discretion.

Mr. Henry Rogers, solicitor, of Helston, said he knew Mr.
Walter Basset. He held a sale at Crellew in July 1879. Mr.
Basset attended, acted on his own behalf, and carried on the
business of a bidder the same as any other gentleman, without
advice. Saw nothing to induce him to believe that Mr. Basset
was of unsound mind. Mr. Basset bought the property for
?2,255, which was not more than half its cost, and was a rea-
sonable price. Had seen nothing of Mr. Basset before, and did
not imagine there was anything wrong. On the 7th of October
he received a letter from Mr. Basset saying his brother, Captain
Basset, or rather his brother's wife, Mrs. Captain Basset, objected
to his being so near them, and proposed to withdraw ?300 if he
persisted in the purchase of Crellew.

Mr. Charles Pollard, of St. Kew, master of the North Corn-
wall hounds, said the defendant had been in the habit of hunt-
ing occasionally with his hounds. He behaved in the same way
as other people. At the Wadebridge Farmers' Club dinner in
1878 Mr. Basset returned thanks for the clergy.
By Mr. Charles: He was not out last season or this. Tn
1877 and 1878 he was only out two or three times.
Re-examined : When he was out he appeared perfectly sane.
Mr. Wesley Grose, churchwarden of St. Kew, said Mr.
Basset had been a subscriber to the North Cornwall Hunt up to
this year. His behaviour when he was out was that of a sane
gentleman.

Mr. John Vivian, St. Kew, said that at the sale of farm stock
at Treharrock, on Lady-Day 1877, Mr. Basset was present and
behaved as other people did. At church witness sat next him,
and his behaviour was that of other people.

Cross-examined: Mr. Basset spoke in church one Sunday,
and a Miss Woollcombe left the church.

Re-examined: She was hysterically inclined, and being
amused by some one speaking, she could not suppress her
laughter, and went out.

Mr. John Seldon, jun., collector of taxes for St. Kew parish,
said he was collector 1877, 1878, and 1879. He called on Mr.
Basset, who paid him by cheque. He once objected to the
amount, but, when it was explained, paid. He also subscribed
to the ploughing match.

Cross-examined : I saw him once a year.
Mr. Wesley Stephens, of St. Kew, had known Mr. Basset for
about twenty years. In March 1878 he held a sale of furniture
and farm stock for him, and received his instructions from him.
He settled afterwards, and appeared to be well up to his busi-
ness. There was nothing peculiar about him. Had seen him
repeatedly since, and knew about his purchasing a horse.
Mr. Thomas Olver, J.P., a member of Olver and Sons,
land surveyors and auctioneers, of Falmouth, was called, but
the jury intimated that they had heard enough general evidence.
Mr. Olver was withdrawn, and
Mr. Coleman, the tenant of Treharrock Farm referred to,
was called. He said Mr. Basset conducted his own side of the
bargain, and did it in a thoroughly business-like way. Did not
get the best of it in that case.
COMMISSION OF LUNACY ON THE REV. W. BASSET. 151
When did you best him ??Not at all, sir. (Laughter.) He
looked sharp after his own interests. I am always very pleased
to see him.

By Mr. Charles: He has not been exactly the same this
last year or so; but there has been very little change. For four
or five years he has gone about just in the same way.
Mr. Bucknill asked if the jury would hear Mr. Collins's
managing clerk, who had conducted business affairs with him
for years. The jury consented, and
Mr. James Nicholls, who had been thirty years in Mr. Collins's
employ, said he had seen a great deal of the defendant up to
the last two or three years. In 1878 Mr. Basset brought his
bank account, and said he thought there was an error, as it did
not agree with his own account. He went to the bank and
found by examining many hundreds of cheques that there had
been an error. On another occasion he brought a complaint
that Mr. Coleman had broken the covenants of his lease by over-
cropping. He held several letters of instructions, which were
perfectly lucid. In autumn of 1878 Mr. Basset instructed him
about selling Treharrock. He sold it because the money would
produce s?400 a year, whereas the farm was only rented at ^300.
Witness produced the letters Mr. Basset had written since he
had been at Brislington, which were handed to the foreman;
and stated that in raising loans on his property, and also in
every other business matter, he was very capable of managing
his own affairs. He was a very good accountant.

Cross-examined : I saw him often, and he never alluded to
the beliefs of which I have heard here.

Mr. Bucknill, in summing up his client's case, read letters
written by Mr. Basset since he had been at Brislington, in one
of which he said he should be prepared to go to any reasonable
expense in this trial, as he was being tried for his reason.
Mr. Charles, on rising to sum up, said that but for an
allusion by Mr. Bucknill to the action of Mr. Gustavus Basset
in the case he would not have felt called on to make a state-
ment which he now must make; but the reason why the defen-
dant had been able to present his case with the advantage of
such ability as that Mr. Bucknill had employed in his behalf
was the generosity of Mr. Gustavus Basset himself.
The Defendant: He advanced ^300 on my bond because I
could not sell property. Certainly I should have been other-
wise in a very awkward position, and it would have been very
unfair.

Mr. Charles rejoined that it would have been very unfair.
Proceeding to comment on the defendant's case, he upheld the
action of Mr. Collins, of Bodmin, against the attack made on
him, and said Mr. Collins offered liis uncle (defendant's solicitor)
the information, and it was not accepted. It had been urged
that defendant had done no one any harm, but he asked if every
lunatic was to be left at large until he had done harm, and
what the position of the family at Tehidy would have been
when that happened. The impression on Mr. Somerset, from
one interview, was such that if Mr. Basset's relatives had not
taken care of him, he must have been placed in the county
asylum. Why was it, he asked, that no person of Mr. Basset's
own rank was called on his behalf ? In the interests of his
brother, Mr. Grustavus Basset had felt it his imperative duty to
take the steps he had taken, and whatever the decision of the
jury, he would accept it freely.
The Master asked if the jury would care to re-examine Mr.
Basset ?

The jury thought it unnecessary.
In a very brief summing up, the Master said that if the
defendant was found of unsound mind there was no necessity for
his being placed in the asylum. The Court would appoint a com-
mittee, and they might decide what measure of liberty he should
exercise.

The jury, after a not very lengthy consultation, gave, as their
unanimous verdict, That Mr. Basset is of unsound mind, and, as
the opinion of sixteen, that he is also incapable of managing his
own affairs.
