Psychology in its Relation to Medicine
=======================================

89
ART. IV.?
BY MAJOR GREENWOOD, M.R.C.S.E., L.R.C.P. Lond.
Of all the sciences none have made more progress during the
last few years than Psychology, the subject of this paper.
Deep into the mists of time must we go back if our endeavour
be to discover the earliest epoch when the problems of mind
first began to perplex humanity. The ignorant savage who in
the earlier eras of the world pondered with awe over the various
phenomena of nature, fabricating for himself rude theories of
natural theology, was in his way as much a student of
Psychology as the savant of the present who eagerly seeks to
read in the ever-growing resources of cerebral pathology the
wide and varied world of mental phenomena. The latter
possesses the basis that the former lacked, and already the Archi-
median lever has been applied to a universe of false doctrines
and ideas, with what result a few more years will show.
None can consider of small import this, from the one point
of view, most modern, from the other, most ancient of sciences,
dealing as it does with the highest emanation of life without
which Biology would be poor indeed. To the student of medi-
cine the history of all the phenomena of life must be of the
greatest importance; and although it is to the objective aspect
his studies are usually applied, and not unjustly?for here the
ground is much more open and clear, many facts have been ascer-
tained and upon it the lamp of science throws its strongest light?
still he must not altogether disregard the subjective ; this side
of life will reveal a field equally spacious, and its study, though
more complex, yield scarcely inferior rewards. To many the
interest of the pursuit will be enhanced by the mystery envelop-
ing it, and by the thought that perchance through its paths
they may approach more nearly to the secret of life than by
any other.
Psychology is not by any means a new study; in all ages it
has had its votaries, and many of the old philosophers who
stand high in the history of the world for pre-eminence in
other branches of learning have left enduring records of having
thought long and deeply over the wonderful problem of mind.
No science has suffered more than this from ignorance and
90 PSYCHOLOGY IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE.
superstition ; and as a perfect freedom of thought was essential
for its development, it is only comparatively recently it can be
said to have been established on a scientific basis. It is not
here attempted to deal with Psychology in a strictly scientific
manner, nor to discuss the more modern views and theories
relating to its phenomena, interesting as it would be to trace
its history from the time of Aristotle, more than 2,000 years
ago, when the first great theory was evolved, through the many
modifications that have sprung from this as the thoughts of the
great Greek were acted on and remoulded by the minds of many
and diverse ages. This would be far beyond the scope of a
single paper, and I shall only briefly allude to it. The
definition also of Psychology cannot claim to be exhaustive,
but only to serve as an introduction to a few remarks on its
study; when attention will be almost exclusively given to
that branch which is more intimately connected with medicine,
viz. mental pathology, if so fine a term may be applied to a
few crude remarks on certain aspects of insanity.
Psychology, as the term implies Xoyo?) is the science
of mental physiology, that is, the study and examination of
those phenomena which from the earliest times have been
regarded as depending on some entity distinct from the animal
organism to which the Greeks applied the term Psyche, and
whose nearest equivalent in our language is the soul.
This has always been regarded as the impassable line
between humanity and the lower animals; for although it is
recognised that man in certain conditions of disease may lose
these special attributes of the Psyche and differ in scarcely any
respects from the beasts of the field, no instance has ever been
on record of any animal other than man possessing these pre-
eminently distinguishing characteristics. No doubt the careful
observer has for many years been cognisant of the fact that as
we ascend in the scale of life we meet with a more and more
highly developed type of nervous system, and we see the
animals in these latter classes endowed with qualities resembling
more and more those relegated to the Psyche, and, in fact, it is
generally considered that the difference between the meanest
creeping thing and the most highly organised animal is simply
one of degree; only is it when we come to compare this latter
with man that the real difficulty commences, and that dispute
and division wax strong in the army of scientific thinkers, and
the Psyche comes forward with its apparently insurmountable
difficulties.
With the Psyche too are linked all the beliefs and theories
of the past and present as to a future existence after the decay
of our animal organism. It was this entity that Pythagoras
PSYCHOLOGY IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE. 91
believed was continually passing from body to body; nor was
tlie transmigration confined to men, for not a few believed that
in some cases the Psyche at death passed into the bodies of the
lower animals, and strangely enough this belief has found a
place in the mythology of most nations. Plato first taught its
essential immortality, and its perfect entity and existence apart
from tlie body, together with its limitation to man, form one of
the fundamental doctrines of Christianity.
Science, however, has little to do with the past theories of
the ancients on the nature of psychical philosophy : they were
the emanations of the ages that produced them, and often help
to throw light on the history of those times, but as scientific
deductions are now dismissed to the region of poetry and
imagination.
Tlie first difficulty that presents itself on entering into any
discussion on the subject of Psychology is to define its boundaries
and limits. Here, as in nearly all natural sciences, we find it
by no means an easy matter, and the maxim, " Natura non
habet lineas," was never better exemplified than in this instance.
At the commencement of our study we find ourselves
mentally drawing a sharp and rigidly defined line between the
physiology of the human mind and every other science in
nature ; we think of it as the ancients did, as something quite
distinct from everything we can possibly be acquainted with ;
we assume almost at once that the laws which hold sway and
cannot be disregarded in other natural sciences in this avail
nothing.
Acting thus we should progress but little, and were the laws
and conditions of Psychology of such a kind they might justly
be dismissed to the unknowable; and with that science can
have little to do : it deals with the unknown, not the unknow-
able.
The fact, however, that the physiology of mind is now
allowed by most to be fitly placed in the ranks of natural
science ; that is to say, to belong to a philosophy that claims as
its only right of existence a basis of undisputed facts, many of
which have taken ages to discover and elaborate, but when once
discovered are for all time. This, I think, is great progress on
the time when mental philosophy was supposed to be governed
by no laws, but was placed on an arbitrary pedestal by itself.
As in our study of the animal organism we distinguish two
branches of physiology, viz. that of health and that of disease,
so in our study of mental phenomena we may with great utility
make for ourselves a similar distinction ; and as our facts
increase in number and our theories arise where one branch fails
us, the other will often supply what is wanting to complete the
92 PSYCHOLOGY IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE.
chain; and, moreover, with regard to the body, it is often
impossible to say when we reach the limits of health and disease
begins, still more difficult is it to tell among all the diversities
of psychical phenomena the exact period when the healthy
mind becomes invaded by disease. Often, indeed, when it is
advanced the character of the phenomena becomes less complex
and more intelligible ; they appear less anomalous, and we find
ourselves grouping their causes in separate classes with almost
as much certainty as if we were dealing with the better known
diseases affecting the organs of animal life. This, however, is
not the case in the earlier stage, as the physiology of the mind
in health is still in its infancy, its early pathology is still less
understood; in an advanced stage it may afford no trouble to
the physician to recognise it, and he may diagnose widespread
devastation going on in many of those intricate centres of which
so little is known, but on the healthy condition of which so much
of the greatness of life depends.
As in the case of organic disease, it is not difficult to trace
its symptoms when the functions of some important organ have
become almost annihilated, and the labour and skill consist in
observing at the earliest possible stage when these functions
become altered and vitiated; so must our endeavour ever be to
discern if possible when the first small cell becomes altered in
character, and to read in the psychical symptoms it presents,
and which are to be discovered, the indication thereof, as it
will often be then, and then only, that our remedies will be of
any avail.
Not that I mean to say among all the Protean aspects in
which the human mind appears in different individuals it
would ever be possible to draw a hard and fast line between
what is pathological and what physiological, as it is extremely
probable that what is physiological in some may in others be
incipient disease, and many of the qualities ranked as virtues
among mankind when carried to excess become disease. At all
ages men of great imagination and creative genius, such as
poets, and in early times soothsayers, prophets, and the various
ministers of the old superstitions, have been regarded with some
degree of suspicion as to their soundness of mind by many of
the outside world who have been unable to comprehend them.
True it is that at first this scepticism did not exist, and
then in the fullest sense imagination, healthy and morbid, bore
the utmost sway, a grossly ignorant world putting down as
heaven-inspired whatever they did not understand, and too often
hearing the oracles of Grod in the ravings of madmen. Hence the
respect of the ancients for those of unsound mind ; and these,
at a period when medicine could scarcely be said to exist as a
PSYCHOLOGY IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE. 93
science, not unfrequently were the physicians of the community.
This relic of the past still exists among oar aboriginal savages,
where we often find the fetish, or medicine-man, in the ranks
of the insane.
All, however, changed, as the world's education advanced,
and the above-mentioned scepticism took the place of the old
superstition.
John Dryden has said :
Great wits are sure to madness near allied,
But thin partitions do their bounds divide ;
and when he wrote these lines he was expressing a belief that is
as common and widespread now as it was two centuries ago.
Of course, among unimaginative people it is only natural to
have doubts as to the mental soundness of the writers of senti-
ments they cannot understand. They read the words, but the
thoughts that the words are intended to convey strike no
responsive chord in the minds of the readers; the language in
which they are put is their own mother tongue, and they think
if the sentiments were not irrational they must comprehend
them. Hence, they are often put down as " poetical nonsense,"
" mere imagination," and in their own minds they consider them
the outcome of a species of mental unsoundness, not that they
would tell you the writers, perhaps men of worldwide fame and
reputation, were in the least degree insane. No, the opinion of
society has too great an influence upon them, and impresses
them unknowingly, so that they take in faith that such a senti-
ment or thought is sublime when to their own minds it is simply
unintelligible.
But, apart from this, it is also a question whether " great
wits are ' not' to madness near allied;" and as evidence in
favour of this may be brought forward the tendency to insanity
shown by many of those in whom the imaginative genius has
been most pre-eminent. It will here be naturally urged that
these in their pursuit of fame threw much more strain on their
mental faculties than others, and as is a well-recognised fact
in every animal organ overwork is too frequently followed by
some form of degeneration, hence that the overworked mind
was naturally prone to disease. In some cases this is undoubtedly
a true explanation, but it does not afford a reason why the same
deterioration of mental faculties does not follow the mental
labour of great thinkers, mathematicians, and others, in whom
brain-work is probably still more excessive, with anything like
the same proportional frequency.
Is it that through the imaginative faculties we approach
more easily to the boundary where mental health ceases and
94 PSYCHOLOGY IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE.
disease begins than by any other way ? Is it possible that the
wonderful imagery often seen in the creations of the poet may
be somewhat allied to the delusions of a madman ?
Perhaps Psychology might show that they depended on not
altogether different changes of brain matter. It may be said that
the former controls, while the latter is ruled by his imagination,
and this in a certain sense is true ; but an old saying that one
may be carried away by the imagination is often more literally
correct than is supposed, and very few could be really said to
control it, although extremely probably is it that every thought
or image formed by the mind depends on cerebral changes, as
definite as are now considered to accompany every voluntary
movement of the limbs so readily under control. Whatever
may be the changes upon which the faculty of imagination
depends, in all forms of insanity they must be greatly multiplied,
and the psychical phenomena resulting from this are among the
first symptoms of mental disease. Thought and imagination
during sleep are normally absent or present in a very modified
degree ; very suspicious therefore is it of commencing disease
when dreams?that is to say, morbid imaginations?appear
more and more vividly at night, and force themselves more and
more on the attention of the patient; and in proportion as his
attention is fixed by them, and they appear to him real and
natural, we recognise the near approach of mental unsoundness,
for we have direct evidence of his imagination getting more and
more out of his own control, the servant becoming master. As
a consequence of this, sleep cannot take place, for it is essentially
an abeyance of the imaginative faculties, a time during which
changes that have occurred in the brain cells, due to their dis-
charge of function, undergo a reparative process, and are reno-
vated for fresh exercise. This reparation in a great degree can
only occur during sleep, and if sleep be withheld morbid
mental changes may arise de novo, or if present make rapid
progression : hence the importance of procuring sleep in the
early treatment of these diseases. Another important symptom
of mental disease, and one which is often present many years
before disease is marked, is what is familiarly known as eccen-
tricity ; not that every eccentric individual is to be regarded as
insane, or necessarily will ever become so, but it is very probable
that among this class their eccentricity is too often a psychical
symptom of some deviation from health having taken place in
their higher centres. These morbid changes may be of the
most trifling character, destined never to become greater, but
they may also be early symptoms of advancing disease.
General pathology teaches that morbid change in all organic
tissues has a tendency to increase, and hence eccentricity may
PSYCHOLOGY IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE. 95
be said to bear the same relation to insanity as a slight amount
of arterial degeneration to apoplexy; they are both probably
among the earliest symptoms of their respective diseases, but
the relationship of the latter is more readily understood because
far more is known of the physiology of body than of mind.
Mental disease, in which eccentricity is a prominent symp-
tom, not unfrequently culminates in suicide, and although
juries may invariably pronounce in their verdicts, " Death
during temporary insanity," there is great question as to its
temporary nature. Mental disease must, indeed, be somewhat
advanced when delusions or morbid imagination have gained
such control over the individual that the first law of nature, self-
preservation, under their influence is disregarded.
It is an .interesting fact that many forms of eccentricity are
hereditary ; that insanity is so likewise is unquestionable, and
with regard to its hereditary nature and the subtle and latent
forms it may assume through several generations, it may be
with intermissions but often with ineradicable obstinacy, much
has been said and written. I would specially instance suicide as
one of these forms of hereditary taint, and I might further add,
suicide without any apparent reason for the mental condition
from which it springs; for men under the influence of violent
passions, or stimulated and goaded by the spur of misfortune,
tend to lose much of the self-control on which a healthy condi-
tion of the mental faculties depends. Hence in those constantly
subject to such depressing influences, a natural weakening of the
higher centres of the brain, results from frequent over stimula-
tion, as is the case in all the organs of animal life, and in this
way self-control becomes permanently weaker as the centres on
which it depends undergo degeneration.
In these cases disease is more marked and intelligible; it
progresses much more slowly, and suicide is only one out of
numerous symptoms that are the usual manifestations of
deficient self-control and growing weakness of mind. Our patient
will often take to drink, and by slow or rapid strides become a
confirmed drunkard ; or he will be noted for abnormal shortness
of temper, with often more or less change in his moral cha-
racter ; his memory becomes faulty, and there is often a notice-
able falling off in his intellectual vigour. But, as I before said,
I would draw more especial attention to a form of insanity,
probably more or less hereditary, in which suicide, apparently
uninfluenced by any of the above causes and perpetrated with
appalling completeness and design, is the first observable symp-
tom. What could be more instructive than the case of Prevost
Paradol, that occurred two years ago, and which excited so much
wonder at the time, as was evinced by the lengthy notices in the
96 PSYCHOLOGY IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE.
daily press ? A young man in the best society of Paris, whose
life was only just beginning, talented, possessed of a large
circle of friends, and as far as was known, unburdened by
a trouble, is found one morning to have destroyed himself,
and evidently by design. True, it may be said, none can know
what motive he might have had ; a cheerful face and disposition
have been known to mask the most bitter mental anguish;
but when the rest of the story is told, and we also learn, as a
coincidence, that at almost the same age and under similar cir-
cumstances his father, a rising statesman and then French
Ambassador at Washington, died by his own hand. Surely this is
more than coincidental! Here was a symptom that existed in
the father and was transmitted to the son. Had this disease, so
insidious, no other symptoms ? None were observed .or reported ;
but granting that the suicide was a symptom, is it in accordance
with the analogy of organic disease for one so gross to be the
first indication of aberration from health ? Had the Psyche
been more closely questioned it is by no means improbable that
much more might have been ascertained as to the mental con-
dition of these men : eccentricities that none had dreamed of,
or if noticed, put down as nothing, might have been the first
physical signs of the final catastrophe. In such cases as these,
it is not too much to say that treatment might be everything,
and what cases are there in which this is more urgently needed ?
the very essence of their fatality lies in our ignorance as to
their history. The mental unsoundness, as a whole, of these
individuals cannot be so hopeless, or how explain the accuracy
with which the ordinary duties of life have been conducted by
them up to the time of their suicide ? Surely if disease were
very rampant symptoms would be noted by some of the many
who must have had business relations with them, and met them
frequently in the everyday affairs of life; for the men I speak
of have not always been noted for their retiring and seclusive
habits; many have been most active, and in the case of some
it would seem that they might have rushed into body and mind
engrossing pursuits with the object of guarding against some
special form of mental activity that they felt was fated to be
pernicious to them. If we take this view we have at least a
plausible hypothesis to work upon, and we are led to consider in
our minds as to the nature of this " special and probably vary-
ing form of mental activity." This is the" enemy we have to
combat, doubly dangerous because so subtle and difficult to
discover.
Now, as the tendency of these psychic forces is to pervert
the healthy action of the organism we may consider them under
the head of delusions, but it is of the utmost importance when
PSYCHOLOGY IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE. 97
we use this term to be aware that delusions may be of the most
varied character. We are all familiar with the story of Lord
Castlereagh and the little woman in the red cloak that used to
appear to him exciting various impulses; but delusions are
seldom so material as this, and when they are they occur in
patients whose disease it is not difficult to recognise. Delusions,
in a practical point of view, are only important as far as they
originate impulses, and these latter may be divided into two
classes according as they arise from healthy or morbid mental
action. Now it is obvious that it would be impossible to draw
an exact line between these two classes, although none can
over-estimate its advantage practically if such could be done ;
and as the science of Psychology progresses and its laws become
more understood, such a division will be more accurate and
valuable.
Who among us can claim a mind that has never acted
morbidly, or, in other words, has never given rise to impulses
at the bidding of delusions ? What difference is there in kind
between a delusion that makes us do some trivial, purposeless
action and one that, perhaps by a much more complicated series
of impulses, instigates self-destruction. Here, it may be said,
we have the two ends of the chain, and the intermediate points
represent a huge field open to the researches of the physician,
and varying considerably in extent and intricacy according to
the character of the mental calibre of the patient.
In all cases of mental disease statistics from our asylums
tend to show that in proportion as they are treated early the
prognosis is favourable, and becomes rapidly bad and hopeless
with their chronicity in this point as in nearly every other
according with the pathology of animal life. Insanity is said
to be on the increase, and hence it behoves still more the
practitioners of the future to be cognisant with the chief facts
of Psychology, as they are quite certain to meet with and have
to treat many cases of this kind. Macbeth asked Avith bitter
irony of his physician,
Canst tliou not minister to a mind diseased ?
The physician of the nineteenth century can answer such a
question with far more confidence than was possible in the
sixteenth ; and a time will certainly come when mental patho-
logy though more complicated, will be no less material and
intelligible than that of the organic system. Who can
reasonably doubt now that the brain which we can see and feel,
and whose weight not unfrequently corresponds in some
measure with the intellect of the individual, is an organ in all
respects comparable with the liver and kidney, differing only
PART I. VOL. VI. NEW SERIES. II
98 PSYCHOLOGY IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE.
from them in respect to our relative ignorance of its function ?
If our patient suffer from jaundice or uraemia we invariably see
in our mind's eye clearly which is the offending organ and,
much as we may differ in our way of doing, know well what
must be done before health can again be established.
Let us thus regard the maladies of the mind. Instead of
liver and kidney disease we are now dealing with brain disease,
and when we have a patient brought who tells us he is
constantly hearing voices at night prompting him to various
acts, or that a mysterious stranger is ever dogging his footsteps,
let us as surely conclude that certain cerebral elements, we
know not what or how many, have become functionally or
organically deranged, as from the yellow skin and black urine
of the jaundiced patient we know the functions of the liver are
diseased.
Of one thing we may be quite certain : we cannot study
organic disease in all its aspects, disregarding the mental
condition of our patient. Probably there is no disease but has
its reaction on the mind, and would afford psychical symptoms
if they could be observed. It is in the experience of all how
deeply at times the bodily condition will affect and give
colouring to the mental; many are the diseases in which this
has been recognised for generations, and as we should expect
the nearer they are, and the more they attack the great nervous
centres, the more prominent'become the psychical phenomena.
It is the same throughout the physiology of life, the mind
grows and develops with the body as it likewise decays and
degenerates with it. The external world acts equally on both,
and although their reactions may appear different, they are
bound together indissolubly ; we may separate them artificially,
but neither in health nor disease can mind or body be properly
studied alone.
