The Relation of Psychology to Social Service
=============================================

By Marie Louise Hubbard, A.M.,
University of Pennsylvania.
It is rather unsatisfactory to make an attempt to state the relation of one object, concept, or activity to another object, concept, or
activity until each has been clearly defined. Much confusion and
strife are caused by fuzziness of thinking, vagueness of ideas, and
indeterminate boundaries of subjects under discussion. To begin
with, then, let us ask ourselves the question, "Just what is Psychology, and just what is Social Service?"
The relation of a planet to the sun, the relation of a man s
ability to deal with space relations to an architectural career, are
likely to call up in the minds of different people concepts sufficiently
coincident to permit of an intelligible discussion. But when we
employ the word Psychology in casual conversation with travelers
on the highway, we find that to one the word means a Jesuitical
knowledge of human nature; to another, a study of mental phenomena; and to still another, the application of the law of suggestion
to daily life. That is to mention only three, and the concepts vary
almost as do the travelers. One soon learns to determine just which
part of the elephant his friend is talking about?ears or leg or tail
before discussing shape of tip or girth or flexibility. To change the
metaphor, Psychology is an embryo, not yet formed, in which some
see a puppet, others the ruler of beasts, and still others a shining angel.
Or would it be better to say Ps3rchology is a sea, with a fog thick
upon it, and explorers in rowboats let down their little buckets to
draw up cold water, warm water, phosphorescent animalcule, or
devil-fish? Be that as it may, in common parlance Psychology always
does mean something pertaining to the human being, so let us decide
arbitrarily, and as definitely as possible, just what we mean by the
word in this particular discussion. Let us define it as a scientific
investigation of why people behave as they do, embracing a study
of instincts, motives, and mental abilities.
If we find difficulty in selecting and outlining a crystallized idea
of Psychology, we find our difficulties not diminished, but multiplied, when we turn to Social Service, that irregular mass of heterogeneous activities, stuck together by common consent. If, in despair
before our own helplessness of formulating even a tentative definition
of Social Service, we appeal to authorities whom we think ought to
(109)
110 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
give us at least crumbs, we become interested in the diversity of their
opinions, or, more correctly, perhaps, in the diversity of their manner
of approach. If we take refuge in an encyclopedia?the Americana,
for example?we find the following ponderous sentence: "Social
Service is the modern study of people and conditions looking toward
the betterment of mankind: a forward movement dealing with life,
occupation, and environments, embracing the observation and investigation of the relations between employers and employees, cooperation, labor legislation, hours of work, wages, industrial betterment,
child labor, factory sanitation and inspection, safety appliances,
improvement of civic and municipal conditions, civil service, public
ownership, the initiative and referendum, tax reform, marriage and
divorce, housing, temperance, pauperism and crime, defective and
delinquent children, education, institutional churches and the like."
If we turn to the International Encyclopedia, we find listed the
American Institute of Social Service, which defines its object as "social
and industrial betterment;" its method, "to place human experience
on file so as to make it available for all who wish to profit by the
experience of others;" and its functions, " (1) to gather facts bearing
on social conditions and whatever is being done to improve them;
(2) to interpret these facts by learning their causes and effects; (3)
to disseminate the resulting knowledge in every possible way for
education of public opinion." The National Social Workers' Exchange of New York City offers, in place of a definition, an outline
of the activities it would cover, consisting of six major divisions and
a total of fifty-seven sub-divisions. A practical worker in the field,
tagged with the label Social Worker, when asked for her definition
of Social Service, replied: "Getting in touch with all possible sources
of help and making an adjustment." The lay mind is quite hopeless.
To it we find the term Social Service often suggests either the giving
of money or the playing of Lady Bountiful in some other way?from
just the proper height. If, with interest still further aroused, one
goes into a public library, takes down one book after another, and
skims through it, noting the date of publication and author's preface
in particular, he can not fail to realize that the thought of service to
humanity runs like a thread throughout, no matter how much the
ideas strung on the thread may differ. In many of the books published about 1900 the religious note is definitely sounded. Reference
to religion steadily decreases through the succeeding twenty years,
but the thought of service is persistent and insistent. Has Social
Service been shifted from a religious basis to an ethical one? Perhaps
not a real thought, but just the shadow of a thought, falls athwart
our consciousness, that it would be well not to make too hasty and
RELATION OF PSYCHOLOGY TO SOCIAL SERVICE. Ill
vigorous a denial of religious motives until religion is defined, because
the definition of religion is in process of undergoing a profound change.
However, that is another subject. It is sufficient to note that the
word "betterment" is a key word. No matter how much our authorities may disagree in choice of words, they all do agree that Social
Service deals with the bettering of the human being and thereby
social conditions, or the bettering of social conditions and thereby
the human being. If we go back to our first encyclopedia and accept
the first part of its definition, of which the entire following portion
seems but an amplification, "the modern study of people and conditions looking toward the betterment of mankind," we can re-word it,
and say that in this discussion we will consider Social Service to be
any work with individuals or with groups of individuals, whose
specific aim is the betterment of society. Not that this definition
has clearly defined boundaries. It hasn't. It leaves plenty of room
for such challenging questions as "Is the office of the Confessional
that of social service? Is it social service to pick up a piece of broken
glass lying in the street?" But it becomes something whose relation
to Psychology can be discussed. The subject of our paper now
becomes the relation between the study of why people behave as
they do and a work whose aim is the betterment of the behavior of
these people. Discussing the relation of Psychology to Social Service
means discussing the relation of why man behaves as he does to a
work involving an improved change in this behavior.
The units with which Psychology concerns itself, individual
persons, are also the units with which Social Service works, but the
points of view are not the same. Psychology is interested in the
individual as the object of a scientific study. Social Service is interested in these individuals in their interactions with other individuals.
Ihe interactions of two or more individuals depend upon the personalities of each. A change in economic and moral conditions must
be brought about by a working knowledge of the individual units
whose changed interactions will bring about the changed social conditions. The relation between Psychology and Social Service is that
Psychology devotes itself to finding out the principles, which it then
turns over to Social Service for practical use. Psychology supplies
Social Service with some of its most useful tools, not all of them,
because other sciences, such as the biological sciences, also furnish
tools. To reverse the statement, Social Service takes the facts
discovered by Psychology and applies them as working principles
in accomplishing its aim. This relationship is, in general, recognized,
as one may notice from various evidences. For example, in a recent
book dealing with vocations for women, thirty-four of the hundred
112 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
and seventy-three discussed, mentioned Psychology as a requisite
study in the preparation for that particular calling, and all except
one or two of the thirty-four vocations also find a place under the
outlines of Social Service.
Professor Ell wood, in his book "Sociology in its Psychological
Aspects" makes several observations which have a direct bearing
on this subject: "A psychology of human activities or behavior will
supply the missing key for the interpretation of social phenomena.
. . . Reflexes and instincts lie at the very basis of mental and social
life. . . . Interactions between between individuals, all social structures and institutions rest finally upon the basis of instinct. . . .
Society is made up of and ruled by psychic elements such as impulse,
instinct, habit, emotion, desire, interest, sensation, imagination, and
reason. . . . Mind indicates that it has been developed in and
through social life-process, every aspect of consciousness is tinged
with social life.. . . The activities of the organism spring from its own
organic needs, such as nutrition and reproduction, and are directed
to the satisfying of those needs. ... If the ground for the beginning
of the act is within, it is not less true that the act is developed with
reference to the environment, and through the stimuli which the
environment affords. . . . The process of building up habits out
of instincts (through the mediation of consciousness) constitutes the
essence of mental growth both in the individual and in society. . . .
The building up of new habits, the breaking down of old ones, the
adjustment of the countless number of habits to each other, give
rise to the most striking social phenomena. ... In the social life
the emotions powerfully reinforce habits and customs which are
based upon native impulses. . . . The intellect is directly concerned
with environmental factors. . . . Reason is the most complex of all
the devices of consciousness for aiding the organism in adapting itself
to its environment. . . . Consciousness is deeply tinged with the
social life around. ... It is certain that all human consciousness
is socially conditioned. . . Each of these sentences quoted from
Professor Ellwood forms a nucleus for a chapter of knowledge which
ought to be understood by any one attempting the "betterment of
mankind."
Since Social Service is admitted by the leaders within its ranks
to be an aggregate of activities with a common aim rather than an
integrated or dynamic whole, it would seem legitimate to pick out
several of these activities separately for purposes of illustration. Let
us choose Medical Social Service, the Housing field, the field of the
Americanization problem, and service to the Child.
RELATION OF PSYCHOLOGY TO SOCIAL SERVICE. 113
Here is an arresting statement made by Dr. Richard C. Cabot
of the Massachusetts General Hospital: "Habits, economic and
moral conditions, cause the illness of nearly two-thirds of the patients
who are subjects of charity at our hospitals. This is as true of the
well-to-do patients as it is of the poor. I often regret that they, too,
cannot have the assistance of a social worker." In the same paragraph Dr. Cabot says: "He (the doctor) may know that the moral
situation, some crime or some error committed in the past, has so
changed the situation that there must be moral relief before there
can be physical. But he has no time to look into all these attendant
causes of illness." Dr. Cabot's statements are startling because of
the high percentage of sick who need psychological treatment rather
than medical aid, and because of the emphasis placed upon the need
of a highly trained specialist other than the doctor himself. Certainly a woman fitted to bring about moral relief must understand
the primal instincts of the race. She must understand the respective
parts that habits and emotions play in an individual s life. She
must understand that a man's volitional act is far less an expression
of his free will and far more dependent upon his environment and
past experiences than is generally supposed. From a study of
psychology she understands these things, and from the same source
she has learned how to guide the building up of new habits, how to
arouse a new motivation, and how to be a new factor in the patient's
environment which will change the resultant direction of his volitional
act. Mental suffering is intense, and a nervous patient needs a
chance to reveal in the full light of day the cause of that suffering to
some one who can see it in its true perspective and point the way to
controlled thought and emotion.
Under "every form of housing abomination," Elmer S. Forbes
lists "dark rooms and halls, unventilated closets used as bedrooms,
damp and decaying cellars, hideous sanitary accommodations, dangerous fire risk, dirt, filth and dilapidation." What is the psychological effect of herding human beings in droves into such surroundings
as those just named? "Two-thirds of the delinquent children, onethird of the mentally deficient, one-third of the shiftless mothers,
and two-thirds of the deserting fathers, come from homes where
dirty and ill-ventilated rooms predominate. To bad living quarters
can easily be attributed two-thirds of the necessity for much that
we call 'problems' in our reform work." The worker striving for
housing reform sees only too clearly the relation between the environment he is fighting and the criminal and mentally deficient recruits
who fill'ourlinstitutions.
114 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Frank E. Spaulding presents the problem of the education and
assimilation of the immigrant as being one of the most interesting in
Social Service. From all the nations of the world they are coming
to us, bringing what assets they have, for every nation has something.
What are we doing to welcome them? What are we doing to tiy to
understand them and to govern them to their best advantage and
ours? When the immigrant comes he wants work. All he can get
is unskilled labor. He has to begin at the very bottom, which is not
a misfortune, but who is interested in helping him make the next
step upward? What our great industries want them for is the cheapest grade of labor with no chance for advancement, and the conditions
under which we keep them, keep them alien. Psychology teaches
us that man is a social being. When a newcomer arrives, he is compelled to seek quarters with people of his own race. He needs those
who will understand. A little group of Greeks, for example, forms a
nucleus which in time becomes a foreign section as fresh newcomers
seek refuge with them. This section is like a little bit of the old
country transplanted and into which American ideas and influences
do not penetrate. Americans take no trouble to understand them
as human beings nor to make them understand our institutions.
This isolation of the foreigner, this segregation of different nationalities, leaves both American and immigrant in ignorance of each other.
The strikes of foreigners have revealed how dangerous this mutual
ignorance may be. Spaulding does not make mention of the psychological element which enters here, but it is hardly necessary to
mention how important it is to recognize the psychological basis of
race misunderstanding. It is the aim of Social Service to avoid
strikes and antagonism by making use of psychological knowledge,
by enabling the newcomer to gain the American point of view, and
by implanting in him a motivation which will result in cooperation
and not resistance. No one is more receptive to just and scientific
handling than the immigrant.
Doubtless, the most varied activities of Social Service are carried
on with reference to the child. Playgrounds, child labor regulations,
vocational guidance, juvenile courts, and child caring work all make
social betterment an aim by putting environmental factors into the
child's life which will result in improved volitional behavior when
the child has become adult. When Social Service steps into a
tangled situation and touches a child who is a trouble-maker at
school and is bound headlong for the House of Detention; or a child
who doesn't get on in school and doesn't hold his own at home; or an
abused and neglected child; or a child leaving school to find work,
it finds indispensable the services of the refined technique and experiRELATION OF PSYCHOLOGY TO SOCIAL SERVICE. 115
enced interpretation of that particular branch of Psychology called
Clinical. By the functioning of the Psychological Clinic, Social
Service may determine whether the child presents a problem of
disordered motivation or deficiency of mental abilities: it may
determine in which vocation or choice of vocations a child may win
success: it may determine what measure of responsibility to put
upon him. Likewise, a knowledge of why people behave as they do,
dependent upon inherited instincts, acquired habits, and environment, is of great importance to one whose aim is to change the trend
of that behavior in dealing with either pre-adolescent or adolescent
children.
By the very nature of their subject-matters, Psychology and
any form of Social Work or Study are connected. In the words of
Professor Ellwood, "With the fuller knowledge of human nature
and human society ... it will be possible for humanity to control
its own social progress."
