A "Slow Normal"  Developing a "Failure Morale"
==============================================

Clinical Reports
By Sue H. Bean, A.B.,
University of Pennsylvania.
Richmond came to the Clinic near the end of the Summer School.
Because he had failed his work in a regular seventh grade the previous
year he was a pupil in the Demonstration Class, conducted by the
University of Pennsylvania during the summer session. In the
Demonstration School his work was no better than it had been
during the regular school term. It was, therefore, considered advisable to have a clinical examination made to discover, if possible, the
cause of his consistent failure in school work.
At the beginning of the school year the principal of the school
he attended faced the problem of placing the boy. He had not
been a success in the grade he had been in the previous year. There
were two alternatives. The first was promoting him to the next
higher grade, where several new subjects were taught. It was
thought that these new subjects might claim his interest and attention and that with the assistance of a private tutor to give additional
drill in the work covered he might be able to follow along in the
grade. The second alternative was demoting him to the next lower
grade. As he is a big boy of fifteen, very tall for his age and very
sensitive and self-conscious, this seemed inadvisable. Putting him
back into a class where the boys were much smaller and younger
might have a very bad effect upon his general morale. So he had
been tried in the higher grade, but the experiment was not successful.
He continued to fail.
His greatest defect, as shown by the clinical examination, was a
deficiency in persistence of attention. His intellectual level was
very low, also, as was evidenced by the fact that he made a Binet
Intelligence Quotient of only 80. Clinic teaching was recommended
by the examiner.
The clinic teaching was begun with the idea of determining
whether his deficiency, as shown in his school work and also in
some of the clinical tests was a result of lack of competency or due
to some other factors which might be overcome.
The first ten lessons were spent on algebra and arithmetic, as
mathematics was his weakest point. The outlook at first seemed
(281)
282 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
most unfavorable. His extreme fluctuation of attention, amounting
many times to an apparent absence of anything in consciousness;
his inability to do any kind of independent reasoning; his spineless
dependence and absolute lack of self-reliance;' the slowness of his
mental reactions as far as mathematics was concerned and the
absence of even the fundamentals in the subject; his poor retentiveness; these all made rather a gloomy picture.
It was soon apparent, however, that all of these deficiencies were
at least partly due to another cause. He was suffering from a mild
form of fear psychosis?fear of failure, fear of being "dumb"?and
this was paralyzing his mental efforts. The great problem was to
overcome this long-established habit of failure by getting a habit of
success started, and thus to initiate some self-confidence. It was
necessary during the first lessons to continually jolly him along and
to lay a great deal of emphasis on everything he did correctly and
to cover up the failures as much as possible, very much the same as
it is sometimes necessary in breaking a young colt to harness to keep
him turned around so he can't see his own shadow.
I would not be willing to make a final diagnosis or prognosis on
the basis of these twenty lessons?a fifteen-year-old boy is too complicated an animal for that?but I feel sure these things are true:
His deficiency in persistence of attention is not incompetency,
but simply inefficiency; he has never been taught to concentrate or
to study effectively.
When he entered school he was probably a normal boy as regards
scholastic competency, but a "slow " normal?that is, more repetitions
were necessary to form the association bonds, and he has lost out,
step by step, because he was hurried on to new points before the
old ones were fixed and so never gained the fundamental background.
In this way he has acquired also a habit of inattention through
continually sitting in classes where the work was beyond him, and
worse still, a habit of failure.
He must be helped, most of all, to build up a habit of success
to replace the very strongly entrenched habit of failure for his moral
as well as his intellectual good. The irritability, indifference and
impertinence which he exhibited at times last year in school were
exactly what one might expect. A boy of fourteen, very large for
his age, placed in a class with boys much smaller than he (with the
added fact of its being a co-educational school), and continually
failing in all the work of the class; the natural reaction is nervous
irritability, and a covering up of his sensitiveness by an assumed air
of indifference. He is, like many boys of the early adolescent period,
A "SLOW NORMAL" 283
a strange mixture of manly braggadocio and awkward self-consciousness and sensitiveness.
His trainability is good; he can be made efficient?trained to
get and retain knowledge and to reproduce it in an examination.
He has a satisfactory degree of intelligence, but I am unable to determine at this time what is his possible ultimate intellectual level; he
may have almost reached it, or it may be far above where he now is.
He should not spend four years in a purely academic high school,
even if he can be trained to do the work, for he will get very little
real mental development that will help him in his life work. The
process would be very much like training an animal to do certain
stunts. Unfortunately it is rather difficult to find a high school
that is suitable for this kind of normal wn-academic boy. There are
enlightened spots in parts of the country, however, where educators
are beginning to ask, not "How can this boy be put through this
course of study?" but "What kind of a course of study must the
school provide to fit this boy for life and service?" In such a school
only can boys of this type get an education that will really function.
He is the type of boy that offers a strong argument for at least
three things:
1. The psychological examination of every child before he enters
the First Grade, to determine his competency, and his assets and
liabilities.
2. Auxiliary teachers, to give individual study and attention to
slow normals and problem children that will save many of them if
given in time. Salary for these teachers could be saved by the
automatic cutting of the list of "repeaters" which would inevitably
follow such a step.
3. A study of the psychology of success and failure practically
applied as an efficient educational guidance and training for the boy
who leaves school at sixteen years, that will send him out to his
life work, not feeling that he is already a failure, but with the enthusiasm and will to do that comes from success and a knowledge
that he can do something well.
