The School Psychologist
========================

:Author:  R. B. W. Hutt, M.A.,
Psychologist for Montgomery School for Boys.

The function of a Psychologist in a school containing subnormal
children is fairly well understood. Segregation and special training
have been practiced rather widely during the past decade. In a
school for normal children, however, the function may not be so
clear, unless it be to safeguard the interests of the differing degrees
of normality by prevention of pace-setting by either the dullard or
the exceptionally gifted group. The definition of the word normal,
as used above, must be expressed in terms of educability. A line
which occurs in the English Mental Deficiency Act of 1913 should
suffice as a satisfactory definition:?"Persons"?who do not "appear
to be permanently incapable of receiving proper benefit from the
instruction in ordinary schools." (Quoted and abridged from Tredgold's "Mental Deficiency," page 91.) It is evident that all children
who conform to the above definition are not necessarily of equal
competency or proficiency. It is also obvious that there may be
temporary and remedial incapacities. If the school does not set
an arbitrary standard of normality for itself and demand that all of
its pupils conform to that standard or else withdraw, it must note
the individual handicaps and endeavor to correct or meet them. The
latter plan demands a flexibility of teaching methods and of curriculum. It also demands the services of the Psychologist. The detection and correction of these temporary and remedial incapacities
and the educational guidance of those so handicapped, is the function of the Psychologist in the school for normal children.
There are bound to be children in every school who fail to conform to the ordinary school norms or standards of scholarship and
deportment. Usually the superficial causes are apparent. Gross
lack of interest, of prerequisite training, of adequate health, and of
concurring parental discipline stand out as such causes which most
educators can readily detect and meet. But these arc not always
gross and, besides, there may be underlying causes which are more
elusive, and the ready application of the terms "can't "and "won't"
are frequently productive of injustice. It used to be considered that
the indolent boy needed the rod. Nowadays an injection of beneficent colon bacilli has been found more effectual in many cases.
Children are occasionally excluded from school for scholastic or
deportmental reasons because the school has failed to understand
the individual problem and to solve it. This injustice, the Psychologist may prevent. He may find that the "can't" and "won't"
should be resolved into the term "doesn't," and that the child both
can and will if the case is properly approached.

When the author undertook the work of Psychologist in a private
school for boys, he made a complete analytic diagnosis of every boy
in the lower grades to fix the school norm. Random cases from the
upper grades were similarly examined as a check on the established
estimate. The tests varied according to the ages and the difficulty
of individual cases. For the lower grades the following sufficed:
Witmer Form Board, Witmer Cylinders, Auditory Memory Span
for Digits and Syllables, and selected parts of the Binet-Simon Tests.
As the ages increased or when the solution of the problem was complicated, Healy Construction A and B, Knox Triangular and Moron,
Dearborn Construction and the Design Block Tests were used. In
some cases the Courtis Tests were used as were sample lessons from
the school textbooks in those subjects which gave the child particular difficulty. In several cases Diagnostic Teaching was resorted
to as a check. The School Physician and the Scholastic record were
always consulted in cases of doubtful nature.

With a tentative norm once established, the intensive study of
referred cases began. Masters reported cases of non-conformity and
the Psychologist analyzed the case. In every case considered to
date, the application of the Psychologist's recommendations has
resulted in some degree of improvement. The following abridged
reports will indicate the varying sorts of cases which must be met
by schools endeavoring to educate the individual boy.

"H" was considered feebleminded by the faculty. Apparently
H's parents feared the same. He is an overgrown boy of sensitive
nature, slow in all of his reactions and easily given to discouragement. His was a history of ill health necessitating frequent prolonged absence from school. Upon examination the suspicion of
feeblemindedness was laid to rest. His course of study was so
altered as to enable him to have a larger share of study time. He
was given and is still receiving special training in his poorest subject,
mathematics, and he is now producing satisfactory results. The type
of problems he is now solving were utterly impossible for him a year
ago. What appeared to be a judgment deficiency was largely due
to lack of adequate training because he was too slow to profit by class
instruction where the pace has been set by more brilliant students.
"A" failed in his studies and was a perfect nuisance in the classroom. He was a frequent visitor in the office of the headmaster
where sundry punitive methods were applied. His seemed a hopeless
case. His mother asked that he be given a psychological examination
because she felt that something must be wrong. She suggested that
he suffered from an "inferiority complex." In fact, the boy was
convinced that he could not do better. The head of the school he
had previously attended was inclined to agree that the boy had the
right solution. It took less than two hours to find a cure for "A."
After a period of directed study and encouragement, he was convinced
that he could concentrate his attention on the task in hand and that
he could do what was expected of him. He found a real interest in
his work and had no time for mischief. He learned to like success.
Imagine the surprise of one of his teachers when the class pest of old
asked permission to do extra work in order to erase the record of
failure. In his last examinations, a year after the "cure," he received
three grades of eighty and above. Occasions for discipline are
decidedly few.

"R" could not spell. Work done in class was abominable.
Examination papers could not be deciphered. However, work done
at home was perfect. There is no doubt that R has the competency
to do the work required of him. He also had the ability to persuade
his father to give him such a large measure of assistance at home that,
as the father himself suggested, after a conference with me, "It seems
that I should be credited with the home work grades." Perhaps
this case should not have been reported until change could be noted,
which prolonged absence has made impossible, but I offer it as an
example of how, by the process of elimination, the Psychologist was
able to trace the trouble to its source. Where no work was done,
no improvement in spelling could be expected.

"E" failed in every one of his examinations last December.
Inasmuch as his class work had been fair, no one had foreseen the
possibility of such a disaster. Naturally, his parents wanted an
explanation. "E" showed splendid mentality and this complete
failure seemed like a reflection upon the school. Upon examination
it was demonstrated that "E" was good for real work in small doses
and that an hour of consecutive work?a half hour of consecutive
work was out of the question. He was found to have a serious
stomach disorder which resulted in deficient energy for sustained
effort and he has been withdrawn from school until well enough to
carry on a normal amount of work. He had managed to keep up
his class work only at the expense of sleeping time which practice
had not helped his physical condition.

M' failed to do satisfactory work when transferred from the
lower to the upper school. The trouble was that a tutor had guided
all of "M's" study while in the lower school and the boy did not
THE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST. 51
know how to dig for himself. A little transitional training has
solved the difficulty and "M" is going along splendidly.
And so the cases go. Simple in their solution when the facts are
known but baffling when it is not clear that it is not a case of "can't"
or "won't." Sometimes an inadvisable promotion in earlier years
leaving essential groundwork unlearned; sometimes new outside
interests encroaching upon study time; sometimes plain discouragement because the child is left to flounder in waters which are too
deep when a little help would carry him through?these things may
be the deep underlying causes which defy detection by means of
superficial observation and, even, of careful study unless all doubt
as to competency is first cleared away. Thus the school master,
'though he feels that the boy is lazy or distracted or what not, cannot act with such measure of assurance as would be his were he
certain of the facts. A mistake might do irreparable harm. When
the facts are known, however, there is no need of uncertainty and,
when the proper methods are applied correct orientation results and,
instead of an unhappy failure, we have a boy radiant with the flush
of success.

It is the function of the Psychologist to discover the facts of
mentality in the individual and to explain the deviations of behavior.
It is his function to find and, occasionally, to apply the cure.
