Patsy
=====

By Margaret C. Brooke,
Department Social Service, Psychological Clinic, University
of Pennsylvania.
Patsy was piloted to the Clinic because of "Behavior" which,
being interpreted, meant in this instance, stealing, impudence, utter
disregard for authority, lying?in fact his sins of commission and
omission were many.
To look at him in the Clinic anteroom one naturally thought of
saints and cherubims. He gave the impression of a chap who hadn't
the ambition or "pep" to start anything. Nothing seemed to
challenge or interest him and his attention was apparently fixed on
space. His school and family records however were not so unevent-
ful as his composure indicated.
He was one of a family of eleven, five of whom, including trip-
lets, died at birth?the remaining members ranging in age from eight
to twenty-five years. The father and mother were foreign born, the
former an ordinary day laborer but reported as dependable, reliable,
trustworthy and good to his family.
It takes no great amount of imagination to realize that the
home was not meeting the necessary requirements, nor challenging
any particular interest for this boy of twelve. At school he had made
friends with several other boys whose opportunities at home were
commensurate with those at school, while Patsy had to make up
for that lack in some original way. He was properly clothed and fed
but, to a youth of this age, these material things are taken for granted.
Patsy, on order to let off steam, began a series of misdemeanors
which he managed to camouflage for a considerable time. Finally,
before his departures became too non-conformed, he was taken in
tow by one of his teachers who does missionary work, before, during,
and after, the prescribed schools hours. She, realizing that the situa-
tion called for the advice and interpretation of an expert, made an
appointment for a psychological examination.
So Patsy, aged twelve years two months, doing fifth grade work,
found himself before the bar of justice. He had no medical history
other than measles and chicken pox although an automobile injury
resulted in a fractured skull necessitating hospital care for one
month. The history of his babyhood was negative.
His mental age, on the Terman Revision of the Binet Simon
Tests, was 13 years 2 months; his intelligence quotient 108.2. It
(41)
42 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
is not surprising that he was seriously handicapped in this test because
of a very limited vocabulary, perfectly obvious in view of home
environment. He passed all the tests at the twelve and fourteen
years levels, except the vocabulary.
His performance on the mechanical tests were especially intelli-
gent?analytic and persistent concentration of attention, likewise
his coordination, being very significant. His reaction on all tests
proved him to be well equipped mentally and from school reports
and his conduct, after thawing out in the Clinic, he gave every indi-
cation of good social orientation.
Fortunately Patsy's school life is ideal in that he is a part of an
up-to-date suburban school, well equipped and not over crowded,
with a corps of teachers who are interested personally, as well as
academically, in their charges. Had he been identified with an
over-crowded school in a congested district the complaints against
him would doubtless have been more complicated and involved.
The Clinician talked with the boy in a very personal way,
finding out his likes and dislikes, "chumming" up to him generally
and then dismissed him with the following challenge: Return to me
here in just one month, in the meantime make weekly deposits in
the school bank and refrain from lying. This ultimatum was ad-
ministered, not in the form of a rebuke, but as an appeal. Just one
week later his teacher reported that the results had already been
more than their fondest hopes?he had reacted like magic to the
appeal on the part of the Clinician. At the end of the month his
report was not entirely beyond reproach but, at this time, the Ex-
aminer stressed only the favorable points with no reference in any
way to his one failure, viz., regular and systematic bank deposits.
He complimented him repeatedly on his successful efforts and dis-
missed him for another month with the tactful request that he then
bring his bank book showing school deposits. The irregularities of
these deposits were accounted for by reason of numerous expendi-
tures for petty articles. The Examiner had been apprised of this
during a private conference with the teacher but had discreetly
refrained from alluding to it. The boy gave him a critical, searching
glance but, seeing no change in his friendly attitude, did not challenge
the inference.
Reports from his teachers and principal during the second month
of probation were most encouraging, terminating with a visit to the
Clinic that was like a triumphal entry. Patsy was wreathed in smiles
and so spic and span that he shone. When ushered into the august
presence of his Adviser he lost no time in producing a bank book
showing regular and larger deposits. Immediately his teacher
PATSY. 43
reported his last mark for conduct was 100 per cent?the only one
in his grade?his work in school, excellent and that, for three weeks,
discipline at home had been unnecessary.
At this moment?the psychological one?the Clinician shook his
hand and, in no uncertain terms, told the boy how delighted he was
to see that "he had the real stuff in him." Beaming from ear to
ear, Patsy left the Clinic as monarch of all he surveyed. He is to
report again in the Fall and there is every indication that he will
present a clear record. How many square pegs are trying to fit
round holes when often all a "feller" needs is a friend who will take
a real interest and make a friendly appeal.
