A Social and Psychological Study of a Mountain Community
========================================================


The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1923, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XIV, Nos. 8-9
January, February, 1923

By Rose M. Stewart,
Latimer Junior High School, Pittsburgh, Pa.
The Southern Highlander has been the target of much literary
effort in the fields of romance, history, theology, and, more recently,
of psychology. He has been represented as chivalrous, treacherous,
devout, heathenish; scrupulously honest, shrewdly over-reaching;
kind, cruel; keen-minded or half-witted. In short, he is shown in
every conflicting and contrasting phase that some idly curious traveler, hotly partisan defender, or too aggressive sociologist has discovered in the individuals he has been able to approach.
The controversy over his mental capacity has waxed so hot
since the army tests that the writer, who has known the mountain
people fairly well for upward of a dozen years, was moved to do the
sonal investigating reported in this study. The method of
ctpproach differed from that of the Army examiners in that the examiner met the subjects in their own environment, becoming a familiar
figure and winning their confidence and friendship before attempting
the tests at all.
The ground of approach was the district school, the examiner
spending ten weeks as teacher of the intermediate grades. The subjects, with two exceptions, were members of the fourth grade, ranging
in age from eight to fifteen years, and in social status from the best
type of mountain aristocracy to the most neglected and abandoned
waifs. The most serious difficulty was the exaggerated suspicion of
the people toward anything unusual, and especially toward any
discussion of themselves. They wish to be taken as they are, not
analyzed, accounted for, or even defended. The children, however,
are used to the individual recitation, and accepted the tests as part
of the school program. The test used as a basis was the Stanford
(225)
226 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Revision of the Binet-Simon with the Healy formboard A, the Pictorial Relations Test, Monroe Reading, Ayers Spelling, and Courtis
Arithmetic Tests for side lights on the individual study.
The study has been undertaken with no desire to combat or disprove the results of the Army tests, but merely to discover why certain types of failure invariably occur. More or less definitely an
answer was sought to the questions:
1. To what extent is this apparent mental deficiency really
educational deficiency?
2. What proportion, and what type of failure or incorrect response, is traceable to peculiarities of environment?
3. What specific instances can be found in which native shrewdness and thinking power compensate the lack of the experience on which the test is based?
It can be readily seen that the answers cannot be found in the
tests themselves, very little in merely questioning the children, and
not at all in the mass of literature dealing with the mountaineer.
Accordingly, the examiner literally walked, talked, worked, ate, and
slept with the people until they paid her the highest compliment
they know?You're just as common as we are." The services of the
Public Health Nurse and the head of the Community House were
enlisted, and every detail of life and conversation was noted with
care. Sometimes it seemed that this piece of work could never be
written for publication?as though it would be a betrayal of the
friendship of those who shared their bread and salt with the stranger.
But the thought that the children of the highlands must be known in
order to be given a fighting chance makes it possible to go on.
The people of this community received their land in return for
services rendered during the Revolutionary War, and some families
still hold deeds to parcels of land in the County of Kentucky, State
of Virginia. They came inland from North Carolina, taking their
grants of land unseen. It was poor enough soil, but with a thousand
acres of it, the pioneers could make shift to support a family and even
maintain the degree of civilization which they brought with them.
By the time, however, that the land was divided among an average
family of ten and similarly subdivided by the recipients among their
numerous progeny, the third and fourth generations are reduced to
a state bordering on abject poverty. Isolated by impassable roads
from all competition with the outer world, they lost the incentive to
keep up any of the niceties of life. Adherence to the Union cause
during the Civil War antagonized their lowland neighbors and stimulated the morbid pride which forbids acceptance of help from outside.
Thus we find the mountaineers half a century behind us.
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 227
Physically the children are nearly all below standard. Case 7
is the only child in the fourth grade not under weight. This is not
surprising when one studies the conditions of life. The food is poor
in quantity, quality, and variety. Corn pone, made only of coarsely
ground corn, water and salt, is the staple breadstuff, beans of all
descriptions, cooked with quantities of fat, are often the only vegetables; pork, locally called hog-meat, usually appears once a day,
and buttermilk or black coffee sweetened with sorghum are the usual
beverages. Case 3 seldom brought any lunch to school, and was
reluctant to accept any offerings, fasting from a five o'clock breakfast
until supper, which occurred "along about dark." Case 12 carried
a small tin pail and a spoon which rather puzzled the teacher, until
she summoned courage to explore the pail, discovering a small cube
of corn pone over which a cupful of sour milk had been poured.
Case 15 seldom carried more than a green apple or two; and as he
did the cooking for a family of five, it is doubtful if the other meals
did much to atone for this noonday insult to his digestive apparatus.
In the crowded cabins which serve as homes, going to bed is
merely a matter of lying down. Lack of privacy and lack of extra
garments foster the habit of sleeping in full dress and arising ready
for the day. Sanitary arrangements are absent to a degree inconceivable to outsiders. Only one house in the district has even an
outside toilet, so all disease are rampant. The Community House
introduced the drilled well, and a few families followed suit; the
usual source of drinking water is a dug well or an open spring. Every
child in the school probably has hook-worm, but the overburdened
nurse asks, "What is the use of subjecting them to the torment of
removing these parasites when they will be infected again in a few
weeks?"
Quarantine is unknown, so every one flocks to visit the sick,
regardless of whether the ailment be a broken arm or smallpox.
Epidemics are therefore uncontrolled. Decayed and infected teeth
are the rule rather than the exception among adults; and bad tonsils are appallingly prevalent among the children. Pellagra is not
uncommon, and some syphilis is found. Perhaps these conditions
serve as a sifting process, but they are indisputably a handicap in
life's race.
For four years the Community Nurse has cared for the women
in childbirth, giving the babies a better chance than when some
ignorant neighbor officiated. She has also organized the children
as Health Crusaders, and conducts a dispensary for minor ailments,
besides going into the homes to care for those who are seriously ill.
For two years skilled surgeons and dentists from the large cities of
228 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the state have given their services, holding clinics in the CommunityHouse for all who will submit. Year by year, the number will increase
as it is seen that the victims do not die, but attain a greater degree of
health and comfort. Perhaps in a generation we shall find a people
more physically fit, but just now we must read each child's intelligence test in the light of his physical condition. Health was an
almost negligible factor in the Army tests, since the seriously unfit
were sifted out before they reached the camps, but in the school and
community it must be reckoned with.
Educationally the mountain child has had even less chance than
physically. The rural school term is six months at best, beginning
in July and closing at Christmas, when the mud and half-frozen
water become impassable. About half of the parents are illiterate
and therefore unable to help or stimulate the children outside of
school. Many adults say sadly, "I don't know a letter in the book."
They want their children to have "learning," but despite good intentions are prone to keep them out of school to work. One reason why
group tests were impossible as a foundation for this study was that
the group was scarcely the same on two consecutive days.
Imagine yourself three or four miles from the school, over roads
so steep and rough that the uninitiated have to use hands as well as
feet to climb, and with no means of transportation except your own
bare feet. Then ask whether zeal for knowledge, or an unenforced
attendance law would take you over that distance twice a day.
Even these children across the mountain are better off than those
on the wrong side of the creek: for these latter must cross the streams
once or twice on frail rafts, or wade knee deep in the cold water. A
heavy rain effectually interrupts their course. As will be shown in
the case descriptions, the ability of the child in tests dependent on
schooling is largely determined by the distance from the school
house.
Even when they reach the schools, what do they find? The
buildings are as rude as seems possible. Usually there is only one
room, even when the district affords eighty or a hundred children.
If two teachers are provided, movable partitions are sometimes used,
or one teacher may conduct classes out of doors. One school in the
district has no windows, depending on the open door for light. In
one, openings were provided, but no glass, until an enterprising
teacher walked fourteen miles to the railroad, carrying back two
complete sashes in order that they might arrive intact. One building visited had no door, another no steps; none had enough seats or
desks to accommodate much over half the pupils enrolled; and
equipment is almost entirely lacking. No building has a foundation,
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 229
but each stands upon posts high enough to provide convenient
shelter for the smaller specimens of live stock which roam the countryside or accompany the children to school. No books or supplies
are furnished by the state, though the children are far too poor to
buy such things. Hence many of the lessons must be taught by the
method of dictation and repetition.
Charity would suggest that we omit the teachers from the discussion; but we are considering conditions as they are. The writer
attended a County Institute for four days, gaining thus an opportunity to study the members of the profession. In response to the
question, "How many of you have had as much as one year of high
school? " only those connected with the Mission Centers arose. Had
the question been, "How many have passed the sixth grade?" it is
doubtful if all could have qualified. Some of nature's noblemen were
there, knowing little, but faithfully teaching that little to the children in their schools; but far too many were mere time servers,
hearing classes at the rate of ten minutes each, amid din and
confusion, knowing little and caring less. One man in an advanced
stage of tuberculosis lay all day on a bench, calling the children
around him to "say their lessons" within reach of his careless expectoration.
The wonder is, not that the people are ignorant, but that they
know anything at all. A man who has labored faithfully for the
cause of education says, that the summer of 1921 will always be
remembered as the time when six schools had real teaching for two
months. Even with all the missionary zeal in the world, it is almost
impossible for an outsider to teach a school out of riding or walking
distance of a Community Center or Mission Station. He would soon
perish of hardships, gastronomic or entomological. The hope of the
mountain school, therefore, is in the boarding schools conducted by
various Church Boards to train leaders.
From a moral and social point of view, the environment is little
better than from an educational and physical. When a mountain
community worker returns home, he is often asked, "What large
town were you near? " As a matter of fact, the place of this study is
a long day's journey from any town of any sort, and except in good
weather is completely cut off from the railroad. The mail comes
through as often as it can, sometimes in a springless wagon, sometimes in sacks on a mule or two. When the creeks are swollen everybody, including the mail carrier, remains where he is until the flood
subsides, as bridges are a curiosity and fords beset with perilous
quicksands. Often the road lies along the bed of the stream for
miles, as this is the only level spot. In winter the high water and
230 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
seas of sticky mud maroon the people for weeks at a time. A sort
of innate refinement and a strange but definite code of ethics have
withstood the strain of conditions for over a century, and returning
soldiers have brought new ideals; so the Southern Rip Van Winkle
is fast overtaking the world.
The cardinal sins of the mountaineer are three in number; disregard for liquor laws, for human life, and laxity in sex relations.
Let us consider each in the light of his living conditions.
Corn is the staple crop of the mountains, growing on almost
perpendicular hillsides and cultivated entirely by hand. Every one
raises it, so it cannot be sold to the neighbors or at the country
store. The trip to the railroad consumes an entire day, with the
risk of upsetting and losing the whole load. After reaching the train,
a journey of many hours is necessary before coming to a market, and
by that time the profit has vanished. Convert this same corn into
whiskey and you increase its value more than ten times, while its
bulk is diminished to one-fourth, and the product finds a ready
market. The economic problem is exactly the same as that of
Western Pennsylvania in the whiskey insurrection.
As to the second sin, we who are accustomed to call the law to
our assistance can scarcely grasp the situation until we have experienced it. One night last summer a man considerably illuminated
with the product of his own still, attempted to discipline his wife
with lead. As he was using two revolvers, no one was eager to
attempt the task of disarming him; so the Community workers sent
for the sheriff. He returned word that he was in bed, and anyway
saw no cause to mix in a family disagreement. The same timidity
on the part of officers of the law is nearly always exhibited; so it is
no wonder that vengeance becomes a private matter. The feudist
considers himself an administrator of justice and not at all an outlaw.
When the people of Kentucky entered the mountains they
brought with them a Calvinistic faith, but as isolation rendered an
educated ministry impossible, they have drifted off to various irregular
sects which recognize the only type of preaching available. Often
no preacher visits the remote hamlets for two or three years at a time.
The journey to the county seat is formidable beyond belief. Hence,
very often, marriage consists simply of going to house-keeping, with
the often forgotten intention of "getting married" when the itinerant
preacher next appears. The tie thus easily assumed is easily broken,
and separation and remarriage of one or both parties occur without
recourse to church or court. On the whole, these irregularly assumed
relations are about as faithfully kept as are the marriage vows of
many who are more favorably located. Something over half of the
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 231
people in the county where these tests were taken are of illegitimate
birth, but this number includes children of couples entirely faithful
to their irregularly assumed relations. Moreover, more than half of
these illegitimates are adults, showing that the evil decreases as travel
becomes easier.
In this particular district, one prominent man has lived with three
women besides his legal wife, and has contributed the only serious
cases of mental and moral delinquency observed during this study.
Five of his illegitimate children are called by his name, and one of
them was reared by his wife along with her own children, becoming a
leader in every movement for good. Two are called by the name of
their mother. One of these, a son, is an average citizen, but the
daughter, until lately has been a woman of evil life, mother of three
illegitimate children, one by her own half brother. Two of the old
man's legitimate daughters have borne illegitimate children, but
both seem to be reformed and are satisfactorily married. Case
15 of this study is the old man's son, while cases 3 and 13 are his
grandsons.
This, however, is not the usual thing. Moonshine and much
unchaperoned roaming are responsible; and by no means the smallest
contribution of the Community House to the cause of righteousness
has been in providing a safe and wholesome good time for the adolescent boys and girls. The kindness of the mountain folk, the passionate love of children, however come by, and the fact that the child
is frequently called by the father's name and freely acknowledged by
him, lighten the burden of the sinner. Here in the North, the rural
school is often the hotbed of obscene speech and licentious writing
and drawing. In the mountains not one trace of this was found,
though the children were perfectly frank about the facts of life, even
about the irregular relationships mentioned above.
A separate study could be made of linguistic peculiarities. This
phase of the subject has been very fully treated by Dr, Horace Kephart, so only a few examples will be given here, to illustrate:
1. The unusual extent and nature of children's vocabularies.
2. The tendency to coin new words or adapt them to new uses.
3. The condensed figures of speech in common use.
4. The reflection of past and present experiences.
In spite of retarded school progress and illiterate homes, less
than half of the subjects showed a vocabulary score below their
chronological age, none were seriously deficient, and almost onethird were markedly superior. Several words near the top of the
columns were missed because the content is not in the child's experience: as, lecture, majesty, treasury, brunette, Mars. On the other
232 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
hand, several children knew the correct meaning of swaddle, and
almost all knew drabble. Unusual or obsolete meanings occur in
tap, a kind of screw; plumbing, measuring a wall with lead on a
string, or measuring the depth of water; stave, a wagon stave, or to
go yelling along the road; fen, a snare for fish; puddle, to stir;
shrewd, the wind is shrewd; and the old-time simile, dark as a dungeon. All these are recognized by the unabridged dictionary.
Archaic expressions outside of the Stanford vocabulary list are: a
pied calf, starve in the sense of need, as "I'm starved for water," and
the prevalent use of the dative case, as "I got me a stick" or "Here's
you some blossoms."
A noticeable tendency is to coin words or use them in unfamiliar
and irregular ways; as, "The lawyer came to law the man who shot
him;" the king "heirs" it from his father; they "footed" over the
mountains; they "mellowed" the clay; that is a good "woman nag"
(horse for a woman's use); "I'll insure it is true" (give assurance).
Asked about his health, our mountain friend is spry, peart, stirrin',
survigrous, puny, pindling, tolable, has a misery or a hurtin', is
hearty, ailin', or not much stout, as the case may be.
Much imaginative power is shown in geographical nomenclature,
both common and proper. Thus a small stream is a branch, tributaries of the creek forks or prongs, according to size. Blue Grass,
Pennyroyal, Brush, and Sticks designate sections of the State by
their characteristic vegetation. Proper names are no less picturesque. Thousand Sticks Mountain, Troublesome, Kingdom Come,
Hell for Sartin, Cutshin, and Squable Creek are not products of John
Fox's imagination, but are the condensed experience of the pioneers.
Saw Mill and Meetin' House Branches are named for their first buildings. Flockey, a corruption of flaxy, is named for a leading product.
Often a stream received the name of the first animal encountered
upon its banks; as, Buffalo, Coon, Bear and Wolf.
Expressions of extent in either time or space are vague, owing to
absence of means of measurement. One old woman says her grandfather was given "all the land from W? Creek to Coon Creek, along
Cutshin, and as far back as a man could ride around in a day."
Case 18 says that Case 8 lives "a sight" from her house, meaning as
far as one can see. Often distance is expressed as "a holler" from
here, or as far the voice will carry. A mile (pronounced mild) is as
far as a child walks in about half an hour, and varies considerably
with the topography. In the absence of clocks, time is designated
as before day, about sun-up, the edge of dark, an hour in the night
(an hour after dark), high twelve (noon), low twelve (midnight).
The school children ask "How long till books?" (till study begins)
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 233
and dismissal is always referred to as "when school turns out."
Seasons are indicated by some characteristic; as, blossom time,
when snow flies, sugaring off, corn planting, foddering.
The remote experience of ancestors is reflected in the word tide
for a flood in the creek, though the people who use the word are four
generations removed from the sea-coast. The expression to pack
a baby, pail of water, or other load harks back to the journeys over
the portages. Any secular song is a ballit or song-ballit, because
English ballads were and still are the most popular form of music.
A social gathering is still called a working quilting, raising, or other
laborious title, though the work accomplished be negligible or absent;
because the residue of Calvinistic conscience will not admit mere
pleasure.
To nearly every child, a "muzzle" was put on a horse or mule
when working corn, or on a calf being weaned. Only one had ever
associated it with dogs. Roar elicited: "the creek roars," "the wind
roars," "thunder roars." One child had heard enough fairy tales
to associate roaring with lions. After an aeroplane flew over the
mountain, airships were admitted to the category of things that
roar. Charity always produced a quotation from I Corinthians 13.
Bonfire meant burning papers for the teacher. Members of the
Christian Endeavor Society knew charter, treasury, and conscientious (which occurs in the pledge). Ramble was applied to straying
cows or to children's journeys in search of the beasts. The people
go to "preaching" on Sundays, if any is available, church as either
a building or an organization being unfamiliar. Case 3 knew balloon
and tiger, having run off to a circus fourteen miles away.
Certain tests were entirely outside of the experience to which
the children had been exposed, and were therefore a dead loss in
score. The test of 60 words in 3 minutes was abandoned in favor of
the Puzzle Board, form A, because of the extremely deliberate speech
of the children. They would scarcely utter more than that number
of words in the time even in conversation. The formboard took the
emphasis from vocabulary, in which none were seriously deficient,
and explored the realm of motor co-ordination, visual and kinesthetic memory, and learning by experience. The clock problems
were given to only a few who did not have a clock at home. The
problems of fact, XIV, 4, required a good deal of imagination.
Policemen are unknown, and even the substitution of the nearest
equivalent, sheriff, conveyed little, for, as noted above, the sheriff is
a poor refuge in trouble. Part b is little better. There is one doctor
in the county, so his presence suggested illness or accident. Lawyers
are seldom found away from the county seat, except during election
234 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
campaigns. The preacher is the real poser, for the genus pastor is
unknown, even funerals being conducted months or years after the
death of the person concerned, according to the visits of the traveling
evangelist. As for part c, no one was found who had ever seen even
a picture of a bicycle. The arithmetical problems, XIV, 5, involve
division which is still in the future for the children of any age whose
schooling does not exceed fifteen to twenty months at the veiy best.
Hence, nearly all the children lost eight months' credit in year XIV.
The absurdities presented no serious difficulty, except part d: in
which the conclusion always was that forty-eight people couldn't be
killed at once. Nor could they by any method known to these children. A bit of native shrewdness appeared in dealing with b of
the absurdities test, when several subjects asked, whether the train
was going up hill or down, a question which had not occurred to the
examiner. In XII, 7, the slight exposure to history or geography
rendered the picture interpretation difficult, especially as little
visual material is used. Keen observation and reasoning as to what
was going on compensated the lack of data, however; and every one
came out strong on the post office, having seen the paper read aloud
to illiterate neighbors, and eggs brought in for sale almost daily.
Evolution and Revolution, in XVI, b, cut that test to three points,
all of which must be made. Possibly some of the children know
evolution now in the light of recent legislative controversy in the
State. As very few of the subjects had done any drawing, except
the aimless scribbling of small children, all the drawing tests ought
to be scored in the light of obvious intention, rather than of execution. Some even failed in the ball and field test, and the designs in
year X, who could go up into the adult tests in other lines.
As previously stated, all the subjects, except Cases 1 and 9,
were in the fourth grade. Case 1 had been a puzzle to his teachers,
because, as the test indicated, he was of a different ideational type.
It therefore seemed desirable to test him before sending him away
to an agricultural school. He himself was much interested in the
test and really grasped the fact, that he could learn by visualizing.
He writes that this knowledge has enabled him to lead his class of
thirty, in a strange school several miles from home. Case 9 was
playing outside the open door while her sister was tested, and asked
if she might not do the puzzles too.
"Fourth Grade" needs some explaining. The law provides for
only six months of school each year in rural districts. Frequently no
teacher can be found to stay the full term; so this is often cut to
four or even less. The boys over ten are absent most of the month
of September to pull fodder, pick the ubiquitous beans, and otherwise
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 235
prepare for winter, while the older girls lose much time owing to the
advent of the almost annual small brother or sister. If the last
month of school is missed, the pupil fails of promotion, and starts
back over the old work the next July, unless some teacher is daring
enough to ignore promotions and try out ability. For six or seven
weeks each summer, the school at the mouth of the creek, as it is
called, usually has the benefit of a volunteer worker seeking novel
experience, material for a thesis, or a chance to do good; so the intermediate grades have fairly adequate teaching. But after the first
of September, two teachers struggle with eight grades, so the less
advanced pupils seldom have over thirty or forty minutes of actual
instruction in a day, spending the rest of the six hours wrestling
alone with tasks, trying to absorb something from the recitations of
older groups, or entertaining themselves in ways not likely to draw
fire from the teacher. By consulting old record books, a reasonable
estimate was made of the actual time each pupil had been in school.
Let us now consider the individual cases:
Case 1 is a boy of 18 years, 5 feet 7 inches tall, and weighing
140 pounds, which is 5 pounds above standard. He is a blonde of
pleasing appearance, clean cut and without defects. He walked at
the age of one year, but the mother cannot remember when he first
talked. He has had no serious illness, but had tonsils and adenoids
removed in 1920. He is rather silent, but anxious to please and
eager for popularity. His feelings are easily hurt, and a rebuke
throws him into an emotional state expressed by violent weeping, if
he can get to a hiding place, or by gloomy silence if he cannot. A
word of commendation usually restores his customary good spirits.
He is decidedly lacking in executive ability. When sent away to
school, he studied well under direction, but forgot half his personal
effects when packing to return home. He is fond of athletic sports
and succeeds well in both basket ball and baseball.
From the standpoint of heredity, he has little to depend upon.
His mother is illiterate and of low mentality. She has been twice
married, but this boy is illegitimate, born during the interval of her
widowhood. His supposed father is of somewhat higher mental and
social status. As is often the case, the boy is called by the father's
name. The mother's children by the first husband are not conspicuous in any way, a son by the second husband is in the second
grade at the age of fourteen, and shows a marked speech defect. A
step-sister, daughter of the mother's second husband, has contributed three illegitimate children to the oddly assorted family,
crowded into a two-room cabin. This boy has been handy boy at
the Community House for four years, and is therefore much ahead
236 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of the rest of the family. The difference is apparently due to more
healthful living conditions, better food, more regular schooling, and
association with people of wider experience. He has been in school
seven years, or about thirty-eight months altogether.
The tests show that the teacher's estimate of "dull" is due to
his being a conspicuously eye minded child in an ear minded group.
He eagerly seized the suggestion that he visualize all material to be
learned, either in words or in pictures, and has used the method successfully as noted above. His chronological age was 18 on the day
of the test, his Binet mental age 17-1; which, counting his age-base
as 16, gives an I. Q. of 107. His school progress is only that of
thirteen years under proper conditions, but his thinking power is
commensurate with his age.
Memoiy tests were all handled by visual methods, the digits set
into window panes and the code held as an after image. Linguistic
ability was good, everything being fully, expressed aloud as the arithmetical and clock problems. Vocabulary score was fifty-two words,
good considering that some of the comparatively easy words were
outside the boy's range of experience. This is the only subject who
gave our meaning for plumbing, having seen lead pipes at the boarding school. Unusual meanings given were tap, a screw socket, and
fen, a snare to catch fish. On the ingenuity test, XVIII, 6, he failed
to comprehend the problem, but after the first was explained, did
the others very quickly. He objected to the wasted effort of dipping
up water and pouring it out again, appreciating the difficulty more
than one who is accustomed to draw it from a hydrant. His reasoning is good. For example, in the pictorial relations test, he said
aloud. "Now this fellow is scared, I must find what scared him,"
and "the cat would go for the milk, so this with its back turned isn't
the right one."
His mental age is highest of the group, and his I. Q. fourth.
The outstanding discoveries were:
1. Memory strongly visual.
2. Language adequate and well chosen.
3. Reasoning clear, though slow.
4. Ability to learn by experience.
5. Test range confined to years XIV to XVIII.
Case 2 is a boy of 12 years, 4 feet 11 inches tall, weighing 803^2
pounds, which is 83^ pounds below normal. He appears anemic,
very pale with bluish circles around the eyes and a slightly pinched
expression about the mouth and nostrils. He walked at the age of
15 months, and talked at 18 months. Though he has had no serious
illness, he is characterized by his grandmother as "never much stout"
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 237
and often has violent nasal hemorrhages after unusual exertion. He
is very fond of playing ball and other sports, but has to be restrained
from violent exercise. Several relatives have "bone tuberculosis,"
but no evidence of this is manifest in the boy. His family and former
teachers considered him a poor student and of an "ill" disposition;
but during the summer of 1921 his school progress was remarkable
and he was only once known to fight. On that occasion he administered a well deserved trouncing to the school bully, much older and
larger than he, for calling him "woods colt," a reflection upon his
family history. He is afraid of a storm, but of nothing else so far as
discovered.
He is of a family once distinguished, but now badly run down.
He stated quite frankly, that he was an "outsider" and that no one
was sure of his father's name. His mother is now married, but the
boy remains with her parents and is called by their name. His
home conditions are about average for the community, perhaps a
little cleaner than most. Being the only child in a household of
grown-ups, he is a little better cared for than the children of larger
families. As his home is over three miles from the school house, his
progress has been retarded by absence. Starting at the age of eight,
he has attended parts of four years, repeating only the first grade.
Although his actual schooling was only eighteen months, he was put
into the fifth grade with satisfactory results.
His chronological age of 12 years the week of the test, compared
with his Binet mental age of 12-8, gave an I. Q. of 105. He could
probably have done all the digit tests had they been given, but lost
the division problems and the clock question, XIV, 5 and 6, as they
were outside his experience. The memory span included six digits
reversed, and appeared to be auditory, as he repeated the digits in
direct order and with the precise intonation of the examiner, and
then reversed them. The vocabulary score is 41 words, or normal
for his age. Some ordinary words, as lecture, skill, and majesty,
were unknown, while drabble and swaddle were correctly defined, and
plumbing was given the correct, but unusual meaning of measuring a
wall with a weight on a string. Shrewd was confused with rude. In
other linguistic tests he expressed himself well. He showed the
effects of teaching in defining abstract words and giving the differences between president and king; while experience figured in his
explanation of the canoe picture as "some folks moving across the
river," his mother's household goods having gone over the creek in a
boat. None of the fables had been heard before, but 1, 2, and 5,
were correctly generalized, while the others were given the right
meaning in concrete terms.
238 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
In the relations test, he reasoned somewhat as did Case 1, but
less exactly. His cat faced the wrong way and his window was whole,
but no absurd blunders were made.
His scores in Ayers Spelling, Monroe Reading, and Courtis
Arithmetic tests were normal for fourth grade, or high for his actual
schooling. In Arithmetic, he was highest of the fourth grade group.
His I. Q. is seventh of the group, and his mental age fifth, one other
being the same.
Outstanding facts are:
1. Deficiency in tests dependent on schooling.
2. Good vocabulary and linguistic ability.
3. Reasoning commensurate with his age, and above his
school status.
4. Reflection of experience in responses.
5. No test required below chronological age.
Case 3 is a boy who more nearly represents pure native ability
than any other of the group. Even his age is a matter of conjecture.
His mother remembers that he was born in cold weather, while the
mother of Case 13 says he was born the same year as her son, so we
guessed his age as 10-6. His sister, aged about 17, remembers that
he had whooping cough and chicken-pox, and that he walked before
Christmas, but did not talk until "blossom time" (spring). He has
never been seriously ill, though he goes barefoot in the snow and is
often without food for a day or more at a time.
He is 4 feet 4 inches tall, weighs 61 pounds, and looks like a small
brownie, being tanned dark mahogany, with a shock of nondescript
hair, bright hazel eyes, and an elfish grin, displaying strong little
teeth set wide apart.
By nature he is a rover, seldom playing truant from school, but
often from home, sleeping in fodder shocks, and eating what he can
find, though he has not been known to steal.
His mother is the illegitimate daughter of the patriarch referred
to in the general discussion and he is one of three illegitimate children.
The mother's half-brother is the father of the older sister, and may
be of this boy also, but no one seems to be sure. The mother washes
for the Community House and boards two children besides her own
in her one-roomed windowless cabin. The older sister who has been
four years at a Mission Boarding School, has made valiant, but
rather futile efforts to clean up the home, and has done a good deal
toward keeping this boy in school.
The boy has attended school spasmodically since the age of four,
when he began going with his older relatives. He seems to have been
allowed by the teachers merely to sleep and play for about three
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 239
years, for he is enrolled in the Primer Class for that length of time,
but has won promotion every year since. He learns easily and enjoys
the process for a few hours, after which no punishment which the
teacher has either the heart or the muscle to inflict can keep him
from escaping to the swimming hole at afternoon recess. The object,
therefore, is to reward his diligence by letting him go when his work
is finished. Because he is small, quick, and responsive, he has been
rated very bright by his teachers. His Binet mental age is 10-10,
and his I. Q. 103.
The memory type is auditory, any repetition of digits being
instantaneous and almost phonographic. The Memories, in X, 4,
were given verbatim. The vocabulary score of 30 words is normal
for his age, and other language tests were satisfactorily performed
up to his chronological age. The absurdities called forth interesting
responses. In b, of this test the boy asked whether the train was
going up or down hill. In c he scarcely waited for the last word
before exclaiming, "No, sir, she never done it herself," and in e, he
said with withering scorn, "Now you koow he was already dead."
In the matter of information the things he did not know were quite
as surprising as what he did. He could not recall having heard the
names of any months outside the school term, and could not repeat
in order the names of the six he had seen written.
The drawing was a failure, partly because, like all the children,
he was unaccustomed to such exercise, and partly because it was
done on an unsteady pile of lumber in a flea infested shed where we
took refuge from the rain. The comprehension tests were well done,
as were the similarities. The weights were tested with one hand
only, but correctly arranged the first two trials. The formboard A
was fitted together in 2^, 1 and Yi minutes; first by trial and error,
second by conscious memory, and the third apparently from habit.
The pictorial relations were rather beyond him, but he did some
strange reasoning, such as putting a blank block in the window space,
being used to a wooden drop shutter.
He ranks eighth in I. Q. and fifteenth in mental age, but seventeenth in chronological age.
Notable factors are:
1. It was necessary to go back to VIII for a basal age,
because of failure of designs in year X and the date in
year IX.
2. Tests involving information depended entirely on the
chance of his having heard or not heard the facts.
3. The range of tests passed was from VIII to XII.
240 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Case 4 is a boy 12 years 4 months old, weighing 73 pounds, or 16
pounds under weight. He is a wiry, active child, with bright red
hair, clear brown eyes and numerous freckles. He is not known to
have had any serious illness, walked at the age of about one year,
but did not talk until almost two years. He is cheerful, a willing
worker, and religiously inclined. His extreme conscientiousness and
desire to please sometimes lead him into strange blunders and obscure
his common sense, as he tries to make the response he thinks will be
most acceptable. He is fond of athletic sports and does good team
work.
He is a full cousin of Cases 10 and 11, and more distantly related
to Case 7. In common with his full cousins, he has a strain of Indian
blood, but is a descendant of one of the foremost pioneer families.
His grandfather and several uncles are moonshiners "of sorts."
His paternity was not revealed, and he is called by his mother's
maiden name. She is since married to another moonshiner, and has
by him two children of much the same characteristics as this boy.
One aunt is tubercular, and the grandmother died comparatively
young, probably of the same disease. The other relatives seem
healthy, though all of lank build, and apparently undernourished.
The home is slightly worse than average in comfort and cleanliness,
but the children are kept clean. His schooling extends over five
years, about twenty-eight months, with grades 2 and 3 repeated.
Owing to his age, hard work, and remarkable auditory memory,
the teachers have considered him brighter than is shown by the test.
His mental age is 11-3, and his I. Q. only 91; but he will probably
make his way successfully. Language is not a strong point. The
vocabulary score of 31 words is below normal, only two of the abstract
words, XII, 2, were defined with any approach to correctness, the
dissected sentences were a complete failure, and there was some
difficulty in expressing his ideas on the pictures, XII, 7. Memory
was good for syllables and on digits forward, but not backward.
The same good auditory memory is shown in school work, with
ready learning of the forty-five combinations, multiplication table,
and whole chapters of the Bible. Good reasoning and observation
were apparent in the similarities, and in the canoe picture, when he
said, "The boat is going down stream by the way water is going."
The formboard A was easily handled, but the pictorial relations
aroused little reasoning. Another day, however, he asked for the
picture puzzle and corrected most of his errors, having apparently
thought it out at leisure. The tests did not scatter much, all successes being in years X and XII, the next year being quite beyond
him. His rank was fair in the silent reading test and up to sixth
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 241
grade standard in the Ayers spelling, but very low in arithmetic,
because of very slow reaction. He was third from the last of the
group in I. Q., and over half-way down in mental age.
Facts noted are:
1. Small span of tests achieved, and none above the chronological age.
2. Direct auditory memory very strong.
3. Slight linguistic deficiency.
4. Earnest effort and desire to please.
Case 5 is a girl, whose age is 9 years 8 months, height 4 feet 2
inches, and weight 55 pounds, only 3 pounds under weight. She is
a clean, attractive child, usually of a pleasant disposition, but occasionally a bit sulky. She was eager to take the test, and stuck to
business despite some interruptions in the shape of an obstreperous
mule and several inquisitive pigs. She walked and talked both,
about the age of one year, and has had no serious illness, though
subject to severe headaches, possibly due to eye strain. Teeth and
tonsils are good. She has been nervous and inclined to cry easily,
especially when awakened from sleep, ever since a night fire which
destroyed the home in 1920.
The family all have good health and the home is much better
than most in the neighborhood, both physically and intellectually.
None of the family are illiterate. One sister has been five years in a
Mission School, and is now in her third year of high school. One
brother has been general helper about the Community House for
some time, and has completed a vocational course at Berea College.
Case 17, a brother two years older, is in the same grade at school.
This child is a remarkable reader, standing highest in the group in
the silent reading and very well in spelling. In arithmetic her
ability is less, but she arrives if given abundant time. Her schooling
covers about sixteen months over a period of three years.
Her mental age is 11-3, and I. Q. 116. Her immaturity is
shown in the fables, two of which she did not interpret at all and one
in concrete terms. For the same reason, she failed to define the
abstract words. Familiarity with pictures and stories made her
successful in picture interpretation, reading ability was apparent
in the reading and report test, X, 4, and in the dissected sentences.
Repetition of syllables was entirely correct, but five digits reversed
was beyond her. Three of the similarities were passed, but the likenesses were such as a child would express, as the rose, potato, and
tree "all have green leaves." The Healy formboard was done in
35, 10, and 5 seconds respectively, much the fastest rate achieved
by any of the group. The relations test showed fair reasoning, the
242 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
right object appearing in every blank, though not always in the
proper position. The drawing in the ball and field is extremely poor,
though evidently with the right intent; but the lines in the designs
show great firmness. Her mental age is eleventh; but as her chronological age is seventeenth, her I. Q. ranks second. Facts learned
from the test are:
1. Evidence of superior opportunities.
2. Lack of scattering, all achievements being in years X
and XII.
3. High reading ability.
Case 6 is a boy 11 years 6 months old, of especially pleasing
appearance, with finely cut features, and firm, erect carriage.- His
weight of 58 pounds, is 14 pounds below normal for his height of 4
feet 6 inches, but being of light frame, he does not look gaunt. Early
development was normal, as he walked at the age of 1 year and talked
soon after. Up to the time of the test he had never been seriously
ill. Immediately after that he had quite a serious time with convulsions, following excessive indulgence in green apples. He is a
silent, self-contained child, very observant and never satisfied until
he knows the reason for everything, including the Binet test. He
was the only subject who associated it with the Army tests of which
he had heard from his brothers. He is popular with his companions
and leader in play.
The mother is a woman of superior intelligence, and keeps the
home far above the average. She continues the household industries of spinning and weaving, is spotlessly neat, and sets an excellent
table. The mother's husband was killed in a drunken carouse, and
the older brothers are of alcoholic habits. When sober they are fine
men, but when drunk usually have sense enough to keep out of
sight. An older sister is working her way through a good secondary
school, and none of the family are illiterate. The home is about one
mile from the school and on the same side of the largest creek, so the
entire family have been able to attend school regularly. For the
first two years this boy apparently did nothing in school, but after
that has made his grade each year. He possesses remarkable power
of concentration and sustained effort, never giving up a problem
until it is correctly solved nor making the heedless blunders of more
scatter-brained children. He is original in methods and has great
intellectual pride, refusing help both at home and at school. Teachers
regard him as superior.
Though called by his mother's married name, he is illegitimate,
his birth occurring in the second year of the mother's widowhood.
Neighborhood gossip fixes his paternity upon the county judge,
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 243
though whether this has real foundation or is based merely upon a
startling resemblance to the judge's youngest son is uncertain. As
the mother is by no means a woman of loose life, this is a real tragedy.
His mental age of 147 months ranks seventh in the group, and
his I. Q. of 107 shares fourth rank with Case 1. In linguistic tests
his achievement fell below the examiner's expectation, the vocabulary score of 3(5 words carrying him back to year X, and the dissected
sentences failing to awaken thought. Comprehension tests, fables,
and similarities were slightly above average. The picture interpretation showed imagination, the president and king were correctly
differentiated, two 'of the problems of fact were correct, and the rule
for the induction test came with the fifth trial. The arithmetic
was a failure, as was the clock question, though there is a clock in
the home. The Healy formboard A was done in 30, 10, and 5 seconds, without error. He stood second in both reading and arithmetic tests, Case 5 excelling in the former and Case 2 in the latter.
The relations test was fairly well done, but slowly and with less zest
than was shown by the others.
Outstanding facts are:
1. Performance was uneven, spreading over years X to XIV.
2. Ability in ingenuity, reason, and information excels
that in language and memory.
3. Home and school opportunities were better than most.
Case 7 is a little girl, the youngest of the group, being only 8
years and 2 months old. Her height is even 4 feet and weight 5634
pounds. She is the only child in the fourth grade who is not under
weight. She is pretty, sweet-mannered, and well kept, a pronounced
blonde. Her tonsils are bad and she is subject to violent headaches,
but has had no serious illness. An older sister and younger brother
are infected with syphilis, and the mother has had two miscarriages
in three years which may be related to the same cause, The Wasserman test is negative for this child. The disease probably comes from
the father, who has been employed at various times at the mining
towns where venereal diseases are not uncommon. The little girl
walked at twelve months, and said words at ten months.
Before her marriage, at the age of fifteen, the mother worked
out at domestic service among superior people. Hence she has insisted upon a fairly comfortable house and some slight degree of
sanitation. The children are not only comfortably but daintily
clothed and fed. The maternal grandmother, one of the few women
of her generation who can read, was the source of much local history
used in this study. Cases 4, 10, and 11 are second cousins on the
mother's side, though this family does not share their Indian ancestry.
244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Living near the school and within call of the Community House,
this child has had very superior advantages, which enable her to
reach the fourth grade at the age of eight. As a matter of fact, her
schooling of twenty months exceeds that of many older classmates.
Last year she attended school at the county seat after the local school
closed.
Her school performances are immature and uneven, but memory,
reading, ability, and the use of past experience enable her to make
up for undeveloped reasoning. Her school ability is greater than that
of her ten-year-old sister.
Her Binet mental age of 132 months is thirteenth in rank, but
as her chronological age is two years less than any other, her I. Q. of
135 is much the highest. Auditory memory is good in school work,
but she failed to reverse digits. The vocabulary score of 34 words
is superior, and the definitions were well given and related to experience, but the dissected sentences were beyond so young a child. The
similarities were thoughtful, picture interpretation was good, and the
reading and report exceptional. Four of the absurdities were quickly
detected, and the Puzzle Board was put together in 90, 60, and 15
seconds. She ranked high in the reading and spelling tests, but
could do nothing with Courtis arithmetic tests, because of the time
element.
Personal experience was reflected in her interpretation of the
Dutch picture: "The little girl tried to stand on a chair to see out
the window, and got whipped for it," and in "Ramble means to run
around and get into things." In the Colonial home "pictures of the
old folks on the wall," her home being the only one blessed with
enlarged photographs. Character and training show in the definitions: "Civil is nice and kind"; polite, "not nice and kind"; regard,
"have regard for old folks"; charity, "be good to people for love";
misuse, "not be kind."
Significant facts:
1. Basal age is nearly two years above the chronological.
2. Experience and character are plainly shown.
3. Superior ability very evidently due to environment.
Case 8 is a girl who bears an ecxellent old English name. She
is 14 years 5 months old and physiologically mature. Her height,
5 feet 6 inches, is that of a grown woman, but her weight is 29 pounds
deficient, or 93 pounds. This deficiency is partly due to her sudden
growth of over half a foot in a j'ear at the beginning of the pubertal
period. Bad tonsils and overwork are also to blame. Development has been normal, with walking at one year, talking soon after,
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 245
menstruation at 13, and no serious illness. She is a fine, reliable
worker.
The parents are of ordinarily good health, and four other children are in good physical condition. One sister, Case 9, is delicate.
The home surroundings are above average. The house has three
rooms and is weather-boarded, and the family possessions include a
cook-stove, a lamp, a grandfather clock, brought from North Carolina, a wagon, two mules, a raft for crossing the creek, and some other
articles of comfort and rude luxury. The school is three miles distant, and this girl is obliged to help at home a great deal, on account
of numerous smaller children. Hence her reported six years of
school are really only about twenty-two months, and fourth grade
is not bad progress. She is a slow, but faithful student, accurate
and painstaking. An effort has been made to send her to a boarding
school, but so far her people have not been able to spare her from
home.
Her Binet age is 163 months and her I. Q. 94, but this does not
seem to represent her real ability. In the test of five digits reversed,
the first and third trials were correct, the second contained one transposition. From the reading and report, she retained fourteen
memories verbatim. The Healy formboard was done first by trial
and error, then by careful observation and visual memory, the time
being 60, 30, and 15 seconds respectively. The vocabulary score of
45 words was below the chronological age, but about normal for her
mental age and superior to her school status. The dissected sentences were beyond her in the time given, but the fables, abstract
words, and picture interpretation showed thought and were well
expressed; as, "Charity is Christian feeling for a person," and the
story of the donkey teaches us "just to do what seems right, and not
listen to others."
The absurdities and problems of fact were passed, though the
serious accident and the bicycle were beyond her experience. In
the Comprehension test c, she said, "If he doesn't act right, his
words aren't true." Having a clock at home, she was able to reverse
the hands, but failed in the arithmetic.
Summarizing:
1. The mental age is below the Chronological, but above
school advancement.
2. Memory and language are good.
3. Her range of tests spread over years XII to XVI.
Case 9 is the younger sister of Case 8. Her height is 4 feet 10
inches, and weight 763^ pounds, or 10 pounds below normal. She
is 12 years 3 months old. Her tonsils are extremely bad, but the
246 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
father has not yet consented to have them removed. Her only long
illness was typhoid fever at the age of ten; but she often complains
of a pain in her side which suggests appendicitis. Development
has been normal to date, though she is immature.
In school work she is flighty and inattentive, but can do well
when she tries. She reads with great expression but not very accurately, substituting pussy for cat and similar errors, showing that
her mind runs ahead of her eyes. She loves to dramatize, memorizes remarkably well, though her attention span is short.
Like her sister, she missed one test in year XII, but not the same
one. She got the dissected sentences, partly from her habit of gathering an idea and putting words to it, where her sister's painful accuracy
was a hindrance. She failed, however, on the abstract words. Her
similarities were original; as, a knife blade, penny, and piece of
wire are "all shiny when new." She also did well on the pictures;
as, "It is market day and they are bargaining for the old man's
eggs." In the fables she was less mature than Case 8, and she
missed the clock problems, as well as the difference between president and king. Otherwise, their performance was almost alike,
though her vocabulary score was only 40 words to her sister's 45.
Her mental age is 142 months, and her I. Q. 963^. In mental age
eight of the group excel her, and in I. Q. ten are higher. Her schooling is about twenty months, or nearly as much as that of Case 8.
Notable facts of the case are:
1. Exceeds the teacher's expectation, because the tests were
brief enough to hold attention.
2. I. Q. is better than her sister's, because of greater opportunities compared with her age.
Case 10 is the oldest of the fourth grade subjects, and has had
the greatest amount of actual schooling. His height is 4 feet 9
inches, weight 71 pounds, or 15 pounds deficient for his height and
age of 15 years, 2 months. He is active and more lithe of movement
than most of his companions, possibly due to his strain of Indian
blood. This race is also suggested by his keen dark eyes and straight
black hair, narrow hips, and method of walking with toes straight
forward. He is silent, repressed, at times almost sullen, but cooperates well when appealed to. Occasionally, he plays truant from
school or Sunday School, but is severely punished if his father discovers the delinquency. No serious illness was reported, and he
walked at the age of one year, but like case 4 did not talk until
almost two years old. He suffers from an almost chronic cold in the
head, and was quite feverish on the day of the test.
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 247
On the father's side, this subject is a full cousin of Cases 4 and
11. His mother died in her early twenties, of no acute illness so far
as could be learned. After her death, he lived with the father's people for some time, and still takes refuge with them when he fails to
"get on" with his step-mother. A half sister five years younger has
a weak heart. The father is a moonshiner and rather wild character, but wants the children to do right and have a chance. They
are better provided for than the majority, but have a hard trip to
school. He repeated grade 2 and was taking grade 4 for the second
time, hence seemed better to the teacher than is warranted by his
I. Q. Reading comprehension is his weakest point, and arithmetic
his strongest. All sorts of expression are very hard for him. His
time in school was about 28 months, but he has frequently dropped
out before the end of the term.
His Binet mental age is 143 months, and his I. Q. 80; seven of
the group excelled his mental age, and only one had a lower I. Q. His
vocabulary score was only 32 words, as it was exceedingly difficult
to get responses. On the other hand, the abstract terms and similarities called forth some unusual expressions, as, "Revenge is to
take your hardships out on anybody," and wool, cotton, and leather
"all have little fuzzes when torn." The picture descriptions were
brief, but all had some one superior feature, as, "George Washington
and the little dog are going off." One fable was correctly generalized and two others explained concretely. Memory included five
digits reversed, and ten memories from reading and report. All the
dissected sentences were correct, though he is a wretched reader.
The only test passed in year XIV was the president and king, which
he had heard explained at election time. The formboard was better
done the first time than the second, but the third trial was without
error, and all three consumed only Zx/i minutes. In the Courtis test
this boy was slow but accurate, in the Ayres he was letter perfect to
the sixth grade standard, but in reading his achievement was scarcely
that of third grade.
Significant facts are:
1. Maturity shows in tests where experience counts.
2. Memory is good for both related and unrelated material.
3. Repression and habits of silence affected linguistic tests.
Case 11, on the father's side, is a full cousin of Cases 4 and 10,
and more distantly related to Case 7, although closely associated
with her by proximity. She is 10 years 5 months old, weighs 55
pounds, which, for her height of 4 feet 2 inches, is 9 pounds deficient.
Whooping-cough and tonsilitis are the only diseases recorded for her.
Tonsils were removed in 1920, improving her health, but failing to
248 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
remove a speech defect, apparently due to a malformed palate. She
reversed the usual order by talking at eleven months, and not walking until two months later. She is an affectionate child, of considerable poise and pleasing manners. Although silent, like her cousin,
Case 10, she shows no trace of ill humor. She is a real student, very
conscientious and religiously inclined, and seems too sedate to play
much.
The mother having died at the child's birth, she has been brought
up by an aunt. No child in the school has been more tenderly
loved and cared for, often being indulged beyond her own best
interests. The home was poor enough?a mere s ack?but nearness
to school and Community House compensated for the immediate
surroundings. Lately the father has failed to provide for her support, and the aunt has been obliged to go out to domestic service.
The child was placed in a boarding school; but in mountain vernacular, "Couldn't get satisfied," so she is sojourning alternately with
her grandparents, whose home is described in connection with Case
4 and in the family of Case 7. Her actual schooling has scarcely
exceeded sixteen months, but she reads excellently, writes and spells
as well as fourth grade children elsewhere. Number work is harder
for her, but if given time she gets results.
Her mental age is 132 months, sharing thirteenth rank with Case
7, and her I. Q. is 106, with five subjects above her.
Memory for unrelated material showed poorly, but from the
reading and report she retained 13 memories, and evidently carried
a visual memory of the drawings in year X, though her execution
was poor. In school work she memorizes remarkably. The vocabulary score of 35 words is good for her age and advancement; three
abstract terms in year XII were correctly defined; and three of the
similarities were also correct. One fable was generalized and two
explained correctly. Absurdities and pictures presented no difficulty.
Summarizing!
1. No tests were needed below the child's actual age.
2. Good care and superior influences were apparent.
3. The successful performances were all included in the
years X and XII.
4. She shows remarkable similarity to Case 7, probably
owing to the same influences.
Case 12 is a most winning little boy, aged 12 years, 1 month.
His height is 4 feet 5 inches, and weight 60 pounds, which is 10 pounds
below the standard. Like Case 11, he talked before walking, but
both began about the age of one year. He has had no illness except
bad colds all winter every year. This, with exceedingly poor food
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 249
and exposure to all sorts of weather, depletes his vitality, although
no actual disease is apparent. He is a genuine boy, fond of vigorous
sports, a good team worker, and popular with other children. On
the other hand, he is unfailingly courteous, kind to his little sister,
and a most painstaking student.
The father is a lay-preacher or exhorter, with the instincts of a
gentleman and ambitious desires for his children. He writes a fair
letter, legible and well expressed, though his schooling includes just
twenty-one days. According to the mountain custom, he accepts
no money for his ministerial services, but makes his living by weaving
baskets and farming a little. He describes his health as "never
much stout," hence the children do most of the farm work, and are
consequently irregular in school attendance. The mother, a fagged
little woman, illiterate and indifferent, has "just quit trying to be
anybody," as she says. The house is not even weather-proof, all
the farm work is done by hand, and the children are obliged to wade
the creek to reach school. The food is meagre and badly prepared,
and none of the children have sufficient clothing for decency. This
boy, J., has had about sixteen months in school, but does well, as do
an older brother and sister, and a little sister in the second grade.
No opinion was formed of the intelligence of the adult brothers.
The whole family are rather fanatical in their religious beliefs and
practices, touchy and hard to guide into better ways.
In the Binet test his I. Q. is 111, and mental age 161 months.
In both his rank is third. Unrelated memory included six digits
reversed and seven direct, and in related matter ten memories were
reproduced from the reading and report. Visual memory seemed poor,
the formboard requiring experiment each time, and the second
design being a mere scrawl. The vocabulary score of 40 words was
normal for his age, and much superior to his school status. Sentences in IX, 5, were well done, rhymes correct, abstract words
defined and distinguished, pictures well described, and three fables
correctly generalized. An odd mistake in the Dutch picture was,
"I guess she is Japanese by her queer shoes." This boy grasped the
absurdity in the railroad accident, and knew all three differences
between president and king. Unusual expressions or unexpected
information appeared in "Africa is a Southern country;" forfeit is
"to lose to another;" crunch, "to eat out loud." Evidence of home
training appears in "Before undertaking anything important, be
sure whether it is right to do it;" impolite is "not to take off your
hat to a lady;" and "the preacher came to pray and make him
feel satisfied." The induction test was comprehended at the fifth
cutting.
250 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Outstanding facts are!
1. Unusual power of expression.
2. Several unusual items of information.
3. Experience and home training traceable in responses.
4. Wide spread of tests over years IX to XIV.
Case 13 is the least mature of the group in school work. His
only serious illness was influenza in 1918; but his weight, 65^
pounds, is 5 pounds below normal for his height of 4 feet 6 inches,
and age, 10 years 9 months, although he is better fed than most of
the subjects. Tonsils and teeth are good. He walked at eleven
months, talked at thirteen months, and seems in every way normal,
though childish. He is flighty and erratic in school work, lazy and
rather spoiled. After trying every way to escape a task and finding
his will opposed by a stronger one, he howls dismally until exhausted,
sulks a while, and finally submits to the inevitable. Most of the
time he is cheerful and pleasant.
He is a cousin of Case 3 and nephew of Case 15, a grandson of
old A, the much married patriarch referred to above. The mother,
one of the old man's legitimate children, is of unusual intelligence, a
good housekeeper and thoughtful reader. The grandmother makes
her home with the family, and in some ways is a helpful influence,
though reactionary toward improvements. Many of the old industries are kept up in the home, such as weaving, spinning, and the
making of cane molasses. The father is alcoholic, and is employed
away from home most of the time. Two older brothers were in the
Army and seem to be decent citizens. One older sister has heart
trouble since having influenza, but three others seem normal, as also
a younger brother. The house is rather well built, clean, better
furnished than most, with some attempt at adornment.
Because of his disinclination to work, this boy has been considered dull in school, an opinion not supported by his I. Q. of 95, nor
his attainment of fourth grade at the age of 10. He lives only a
mile from the school, and has access to a boat for crossing the creek,
so he attends school regularly.
His Binet age is 123 months, the lowest of the group, but only
eleven excel his I. Q. of 95, one other being the same. His range of
tests was from VIII to XIV. Most light can be gained by taking
his failures and successes year by year, since one is fully as surprising
as the other.
In year VIII, all tests were passed with nothing remarkable,
except the use of the genus "thing" in definitions. In IX, everything
was correct, except the weights, which were correctly arranged the
first time, dumped down at random the second and more carefully
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 251
compared in the third, though with one transposition. In year X,
only the vocabulary score and comprehension were correct. The
first two absurdities were grasped but the others brought the irrelevant replies (c) "She was silly;" (d) "They couldn't;" and (e) "It's
too bad." The drawings showed no conceivable resemblance to the
designs, the reading left only seven memories, though the time was
a full minute. The formboard was put together correctly the first
time in three minutes, the second in two, and the third time he
gave up after innumerable errors. The unusual vocabulary score
of 36 words was probably due to the mother's habit of talking and
reading aloud to the children.
In year XII, he succeeded in defining pity, charity, and justice,
gave four similarities satisfactorily, and produced a superior plan
for the ball and field. Failures in this year were: dissected sentences,
no response; digits reversed, no resemblance to series given; pictures, mere enumeration; fables, no real explanation, as, "Carry
pail," "wheels sank," and "be kind to donkey."
In year XIV, the first two problems of fact were correctly explained, partly because he had heard about legal division of property.
Summarizing:
1. Good linguistic achievement due to home teaching.
2. No reasoning, judgment, nor learning displayed.
3. Good starts, poorly sustained.
Case 14 is a boy the same age as Case 13, and closely associated
with him. He is slightly smaller and lighter, being 4 feet 5 inches
tall and weighing 623^ pounds. His deficiency in weight is 5^
pounds, the same as Case 13. No one could tell with certainty just
when he walked and talked, but both were given as about one year.
He has had no illness, teeth and tonsils are good, and no defects are
apparent. He seems to have about the same native ability as Case
13, but is a more willing and patient worker. In contrast to the
other boy, he accepts no help, and never gives up what he undertakes. His school work is considered poor.
He has many relatives in the community, but none included in
this study. His people are average citizens according to local
standards and the brothers and sisters make good school progress.
One sister, after spending a year in a Mission School, made serious
efforts to clean up the home, but finally succumbed to inertia in the
form of marriage to a rather dubious character. All are regular in
school attendance, though living across the creek. The mother is
rather a nonentity; the father operates a small grist mill, and helps
with a still across the mountain. He is commonly sober, but violent
252 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
when drunk. This boy, W., has been twenty months in school,
repeating the first grade, but making promotion each year since.
His Binet age was 125 months, with fifteen of the group above
him. As this is also his position in chronological age, he is not badly
misplaced; and his I. Q. of 98 is exceeded by only half of the subjects.
The vocabulary score of 30 words just met the requirement of his
age, but his performance showed some absurd blunders; as, Mosaic,
"to mosey along;" noticeable, "runs on wheels." He failed in
year X on designs, and on reading, in which he consumed two minutes and made four errors, but retained nine memories. Year IX
was his base, with nothing noteworthy except a peculiar transposition of digits,4-9-3-7 being reversed as 9-4-7-3. "The boy lost his
ball in the river" is a more mature sentence than is usually given.
Native caution appeared in the Comprehension X, 5, "I don't know
any bad about him, nor any good either." In year XII, all linguistic
tests were failed?namely, vocabulary, abstract words, and similarities. The two similarities given were! cow, sparrow, snake?
"Can't talk"; and rose, potato, and tree, "all have flowers." The
last he justified by describing the rather obscure blossoms of
forest trees. In the colonial house, like one other subject, he described the family portraits as, "folks looking in the windows."
Observations on the test are:
1. Linguistic deficiency, due to home conditions.
2. Greater skill in the handling of objects than of pencil.
3. Exceeds Case 13 chiefly in "will-to-do."
Case 15 is almost as interesting a subject as Case 3. He is the
son of old A, and the uncle of Case 3 and 13. His age is 13 years 6
months, height 4 feet 10 inches, and weighs 70 pounds. The deficiency of 17 pounds, may be due to the fact, that he is the family cook.
He seems a sturdy little fellow, and reports no disease; but frequently
suffers from a "misery in the stomach"?not to be wondered at.
He is an obliging, friendly child, with a ready sense of humor and
original methods of thinking, but much inclined to underestimate
his own ability. He has good sense in practical situations, and takes
responsibility for the younger children.
The father's family were among the pioneers, and the man himself is said to have been a fine youth. He is able to read and write,
and can help the children a good deal when so inclined. He married
a daughter of another good pioneer family, but had illicit relations
with two other women at the same time. When past sixty years of
age, he left his legitimate family, providing for them liberally as
property goes in the mountains, and set up a new establishment
with a young prostitute from the mining camps. By her he had four
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 253
children, of whom this boy is the eldest. Three of them are of reasonably good mentality, but the youngest is an idiot, unable to talk
or observe decent habits. Back on the mountain, he runs about
completely naked, behaving like a little animal. The mother departed soon after the idiot's birth, but the older children are very
kind to him. The house in which they live is better than the average
of the neighborhood and the children are adequately clothed; but
this boy's cooking leaves much to be desired.
Teachers have considered this boy a bright student when he
gets to school, which is not much of the time. He gives his schooling
as five years, but the records show a scant sixteen months, and that
very irregular. His Binet mental age is 152 months, with four subjects superior and one other the same. His I. Q. is 94 with thirteen
higher. The tests failed were chiefly those dependent on information or school training, while those involving good sense or judgment
were passed. The tests given covered years X to XVI. The vocabulary score was only 30 words, the failures being due to lack of familiarity with the content. Failures were as follows: dissected sentences, induction test, president and king, arithmetic, clock, enclosed
boxes, and six digits reversed. The code was not given. The
drawing was better co-ordinated than most. Notable successes were:
before undertaking something important, "study about it"; justice,
"give a body justice in the Court"; reputation, "what's said about
you"; character, "what is." An ingenious explanation of the second
problem of fact was: "There was a fight. The lawyer come to
law the man that shot, and he played off sick, and sent for the doctor
and preacher, like he was about to die."
Summarizing:
1. Failures were due to lack of information and training.
2. Common sense and some ingenuity were shown.
Case 16. This boy is the only border-line case. He is 5 feet 2
inches tall, 13 years 10 months old, and weighs 80 pounds, over 20
pounds deficient. His early development was slow, as he did not
talk until almost two years, nor walk until considerably over one
year. At the age of six, he had spinal meningitis, which left his head
and neck drawn to one side, and the right shoulder badly hunched.
He is always silent and shy. At school he is mischievous and rather
sullen, but is kind to smaller children.
The house in which he lives is fairly good and not badly kept.
The mother is a kindly old woman, fond of her children and proud
of keeping the home neat. The father was quite old and as his older
children had left home, was often obliged to keep the three young
boys out of school to work. Since the time of the test, he has died
254 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
from the effects of a major operation for which he refused to leave
home. This will probably mean that the boy will receive no more
schooling; for, despite his physical defect he has done almost a man's
work on the farm.
Although living comparatively near the school, his attendance
has been only about twenty-four months during a period of six years.
He took the first grade in normal time, probably before his illness,
but repeated the second and spent three years in the third. All
teachers have rated him dull and troublesome. Arithmetic is his
only strong point, and reading his weakest. His Binet age of 124
months is next to the lowest, and his I. Q. is five below that of Case
10, and sixteen below any other. Two younger brothers, in third
grade, are remarkably good students.
His vocabulary score of 33 words showed some absurdities: as,
juggler, "to put cider in"; dungeon, "a fairy story"; skill, "don't
kill him." Colloquialisms were: impolite, "not speak him fair";
and "he follers pickin' the guitar." As the test was started with
vocabulary, this score carried us back to year X, while failure in
reading and designs placed the base at year IX. The reading took
two minutes, with six errors, but nine memories remained. The
second design was unrelated to the original. In year XII, the only
tests passed were the ball and field, and the abstract words, which
evidently suggested concrete situations to him, as, "which judge will
give best justice?" (heard in election campaign). The dissected
sentences were beyond his reading ability, the fables were given
meanings not wholly irrelevant, but incorrect, as, "Don't try to
sing," "Don't carry donkey." The pictures were merely described,
and only two similarities were correct. In year XIY nothing aroused
thought except the first two problems of fact. Nothing was given
in year XVI, except the differences, which produced only the responses "You're lazy" and "He's got a misery."
Conspicuous findings are:
1. Reading and language ability extremely deficient.
2. Impaired mentality probably due to meningitis.
Case 17 is a boy whose chronological age is 11 years 6 months.
His height is 4 feet 6 inches, and weight 65 pounds, a deficiency of 7
pounds. He has had no illness except whooping-cough, shows no
physical defects or peculiarities, and is very muscular for his age and
size. He is a silent child, who would remain unnoticed in a busy
school-room, but is patiently plodding along all the time. He seldom
asks for help, and almost never gives up a task. In contrast to his
sister, Case 5, he excels in number work, but is a poor reader.
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 255
His family history and home conditions have been noted in
connection with Case 5, so need not be repeated. Like his sister, he
is fond of school, and never willingly stays away, though his father
not infrequently keeps him out to work in the saw-mill. He makes
no vivid impression on teachers, but does good average work.
His mental age is 142 months, with eight of the group above
him, and his I. Q., 103, with seven higher. In the Ayers and Courtis
tests, he was accurate though slow, but his oral reading is veiy poor,
and silent reading little better. Giving the vocabulary first, and
finding his score to be 40 words, we started at year XII; but failure
in dissected sentences and digits reversed carried us back to year X,
in which no unusual responses were given. In year XII, the effects
of Sunday School were plainly apparent in "Leave God take your
revenge" (having learned the verse "Vengeance is mine! I will repay,
saith the Lord") and "Charity is the name of a chapter in the
Bible." As the examiner was his teacher in Sunday School he
probably considered these responses the most appropriate. Two of
the problems of fact were correctly given, but nothing else beyond
year XII.
Summary:
1. Has more ability than he usually displays.
2. Test helped school progress;
(?) By bringing his latent ability to the teacher's notice.
(?) By increasing his self-confidence and giving him a
standard to live up to.
Case 18 is a girl 14 years 2 months old, 4 feet 11 inches tall, and
85 pounds in weight, or 9 pounds deficient. Her complexion is
rather unhealthily pallid, though she is well built, strong, and quick
of movement. She walked at the age of twelve months, but did not
talk until eighteen months, reached physiological maturity just
before the age of 14, and is troubled with bad tonsils and decaying
teeth.
The father died before the age of thirty, but no cause was ascertained. "He just died," is all the information available. The
mother is an ineffective person, chronically tired and ailing. She is
now married to the brother of Case 16, by whom she has four normal
children. The home is the only downright filthy one visited. The
step-father works away from home much of the time; so this girl and
a younger full-brother of remarkable ability are kept at home for
weeks at a time to do the farm work. For two or more years the
family lived at the mines, where the children were not allowed to go
to school for fear they might "catch something from the dirty foreigners," their mother said. One could scarcely see how their condi256 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
tion could be made any worse, but the effect upon their education
was as bad as though the reason had been valid. This girl's entire
schooling covers less than fifteen months, but she was a superior
pupil in fourth grade.
Her Binet age was 161 months, or third in the group, with
Case 12 the same, and her I. Q. twelfth, with Case 13 the same. The
vocabulary score of forty-one words suggested year XII as a base,
so the test began at that point, which proved to be the correct base
age. The pictures and fables were especially well interpreted, the
latter scoring in year XVI. In year XIV, the rule for the induction
test dawned on her at the fifth cutting; but the paper cutting test in
year XVIII was a failure. Other successes in year XIV were the
problems of fact, and the clock problems. Failures were vocabulary, above twelve-year standard, arithmetic, and the differences
between president and king. All these involved more information
than she had encountered. No success was scored above year XIV,
except the superior interpretation of fables.
Conclusions based on the test are:
1. Memory language, imagination, and reasoning are
adequate.
2. Failures were due to lack of information.
3. Ability was good in the face of remarkably poor opportunity.
Some general deductions from the tests seem obvious. With
the exception of Case 1, all the children examined are strongly auditory minded. Ground for this assumption lies in several facts.
1. They reproduced the exact tone and manner of the teacher or
examiner in repeating anything taught, even trying to twist Dixie
vocal organs around Pittsburghese.
2. Only a few visualized the digits to be reversed, seeming
rather to repeat them forward in pairs and then reverse the pairs,
holding the tone memory throughout the process.
3. The vocabulary test conveyed no meaning until read aloud
by the examiner. Of course this is the proper method of procedure,
but for the sake of testing the hypothesis of auditoiy ideation, several children were asked to define the first half-dozen words at sight
and failed to do so, though the words were well within their reading
ability.
4. Much more frequently than is common in children at their
age a word was confused with one which resembled it in sound.
Thus lecture (quite outside their experience) became 'lection day to
most, and 'lectric light to a few whose relatives had been out of the
mountains. Hysterics had something to do with history; ochre
STUDY OF A MOUNTAIN COMMUNITY. 257
was a vegetable (okra); skill, a place to dry apples (kiln), or where
you get weighed (scale). Shrewd meant hollering along the road
(rude); treasury, is having a good time (pleasure); repose, to think
it is somebody else (suppose). Drabble is to care for a beast that is
sick (drench); swaddle, the way a fat pig walks (waddle); juggler,
a vein; quake, a bird we eat (quail) or a religion. Mellow is a mush
mellow (musk melon); coinage, being brave (courage); bewail,
never sick (be well); priceless, a list of prices. Southern is right
this minute (sudden); tolerate, I'm tolable well.
Almost without exception the subjects excelled in repetition of
digits, syllables and sentences as far as given. In fact, it is not improbable that most of them could have gone through all the auditory
memory tests up to superior adult.
The mental ages of the sixteen subjects belonging to the fourth
grade ranged from 123 months to 163 months, or a variation of 40
months. Their chronological ages varied from 98 months to 182
months, or a range of 84 months. In other words, the range of mental
age was less than half that of the chronological age. This seems
rather clearly related to three circumstances:
1. All the children have had about the same exposure to
formal schooling.
2. The distance from school and Community House strongly
affects the mental age of the child.
3. All seem to have made about equal advance since the
entrance of the Community Workers, but some had a
handicap before that time.
Of the subjects having mental ages of 161 months, one has an
I. Q. of 95, the other of 111, according to the rate of progress during
their different chronological ages. The lowest I. Q. was 75, made by
a meningitis victim; the highest, 135, made by an eight-year-old child
who has enjoyed exceptional advantages. These respective I. Q.'s
represent mental ages of 124 months and 132 months, a difference of
less than a year in present ability. In general the older children tend
to have a lower I. Q., because, for lack of schooling, the mental age
has not kept pace with the chronological. Case 8, for example, is a
much more reliable student than her sister, Case 9; and, so far as
actual accomplishment goes, is more intelligent. The younger child,
however, shows a better I. Q., her mental age being 142 to 147 chronological, as compared with her sister's 163 to 173, because both
have had about the same schooling.
It is probable that if group tests had been used, the results would
have been less creditable to the subjects, because:
1. Group tests in general require more reading ability.
258 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
2. Individual tests give the subject the advantage of the
examiner's entire attention.
3. Group tests give little scope for auditory memory, which
is the strongest point of these children.
4. Success in group tests involves a good deal of speed,
which enters into but few of the Binet tests.
The advantage of these subjects over their kinsmen taking the
army tests, seems to lie in:
1. The better adaptation of the Binet test to their ability.
2. The fact that they were on friendly terms with the examiner before taking the test.
Even considering these disadvantages, the group showed up
quite as well as similar groups elsewhere. Though the number of
cases is too small to afford ground for accurate generalizations, it is
safe to say that with proper teaching and attention to physical wellbeing, the children of the mountains will reach or surpass the level
of the "average adult," not only in the Binet tests, but in the work
of the world.
