Was He Bad
==========

(The Record of a Small Boy)
By Professor Robert Hill,
State Department of Education, University of State of New York,
Albany, N.Y.
It is a year now and more since the following record was made
by our three and a half year old boy. Vigorous, healthy and happy,
he found his childish world too tame and straightway entered upon
a brief, though absorbing career of exploration and conquest.
His outbreak came during a Friday afternoon, while his mother
was away and he was in the care of household help. His record
during those two or three fleeting hours was as follows:
Narcissus bulbs pulled from their bowl and scattered about the
floor.
Bottle of face cream emptied on the floor.
Talcum powder scattered about the house.
Pages torn from his brother's book.
Wall kicked and marred.
Kitchen floor daubed with paint.
Postage stamps taken from desk and torn.
Household accounts (box of slips) tampered with.
His mother rescued him from further depredations. He was
scolded and sent to his room until supper time. He was not dis-
turbed particularly and the next morning proceeded on his way with
the following interesting results:
Oriental rug cut with shears in three gashes. Part of fringe
cut off.
Door rug cut in two slashes and one piece cut out entirely.
Hole jabbed in leather chair seat.
More pages torn from his brother's book.
Several pages from his father's books torn out.
Typewriter ribbon pulled out.
One book badly cut with scissors.
Calling cards on receiving tray cut up.
Tobacco from tobacco jar scattered on table and floor.
Dental cream squeezed down wash-bowl.
Talcum powder distributed about floor and on bed-room fur-
niture.
(271)
272 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Pussy-willows taken from jar and hidden under dining-room
buffet.
By this time, his brother, three years older, was in hysterics of
wonder and his mother in consternation. The rapid passage from
event to event was almost too much to follow. In no case was he
visually detected in crime and discovery was accidental. He was
coralled at last in his room for the remainder of the day and to give
his parents some relief. He remained in solitary confinement with-
out, however, becoming resentful or apparently much concerned.
His hands were tied, also, to prevent even under arrest any further
depredations; also because he was somewhat proud of what he had
done and showed his mother how he could cut with hands tied in
front. At the usual hour he went to bed. He was apparently
normal again.
But the next morning it began again, this time before the family
was even awake. He arose quietly and alone explored the possi-
bilities of the house to his heart's content. These were the results:
One tapestry table-cover cut and slashed.
One Battenburg table-piece cut and ruined.
Family account box (with slips) dumped into waste-basket.
Ink bottle emptied on floor. (Fortunately not on rugs.)
Talcum powder scattered on the floor.
Leather portfolio slashed and straps cut off.
Cleaning powder scattered in kitchen and bath-room.
By this time the family was aroused and the boy's career cut
short. He was cheerful, uncommunicative and submitted readily
to confinement and isolation in his room with hands tied behind him,
where, except at meal time, he remained alone all day. He cried a
little, but for the most part he seriously contemplated the view from
the window. Apparently he was oblivious of damage done, of any
badness, and he had no regrets.
The next day he was released, but showed no inclination to pro-
ceed further. His line had run out. He had plumbed to the depths
of experience. The storm was over.
Aside from slapping and tying his hands, solitary confinement,
isolation and scolding, he received no further punishment. When
shown the results of his work later, he said he was sorry, but he did
not seem overwhelmed with remorse. On the contrary, he betrayed
little interest.
Naturally the burning question was: What is this? The boy
had never before shown any such tendencies. He had been char-
acterized mostly by winsomeness and mildness tempered by activity
and more or less individualism natural to a child of his age.
WAS [HE BAD? 273
Within a few days his case was preesnted to several specialists,
not for professional diagnosis and treatment necessarily, but for
information. We were curious, also, to know whether the treat-
ment administered was suitable or adequate.
The physician characterized the outbreak as brain-storm and
super-nervous activity due, largely, to too much confinement within
doors. He recommended more out-door exercise.
The psychologist ascribed the trouble to physical conditions.
"Give him a good physic," he said.
The sociologist found more significance in the story. Sifting
out details and considering surrounding conditions, his diagnosis was
somewhat as follows:
The child was on a tour of conquest and self-discovery. It was
an exhibit of the primitive desire to feel out the environment coupled
with a latent desire to win recognition and even approbation.
This analysis appeared to be more nearly correct. The boy was
not bad in the adult sense. Nor did he seem to be in poor health.
A year has passed, during which there have been no further
demonstrations of a similar nature. Occasionally the boy, who is
now in kindergarten, encounters or is reminded of his devastating
work of a year ago. He remembers, vaguely and in part at least,
but without much interest. In talking about it some time since, he
sought to prove that his older brother, not himself, was the culprit.
Doubtless this was an incidental, though important series of
events in the development of character whose significance may be
more evident in later years. Aside from the family tradition, these
incidents of a childish career are to be buried in personal history.
It is only when other events occur that one wonders if perchance
there may be a peep into the future.
Recently the boy was truly "naughty." He was therefore
roundly reprimanded by his father, who doubtless exhibited some
"temper." He accepted the verbal chastisement, perhaps accen-
tuated by certain other "gestures" with interest. He waited until
the storm was over, whereupon he blandly walked away, singing
right lustily, "Jesus loves me, this I know, for the Bible tells me so."
Doubtless he is right, for all in the family do.
