Albert
======

:Author:  Helen W. Brown, M.A.,
University of Pennsylvania.

Albert is a large-eyed, serious boy of twelve years of age, rather
undeveloped physically. His face is pale, with a slightly yellowish
tinge, his eyes unusually large and his general expression that of
weariness. He is round-shouldered, pigeon-breasted, with a protruding abdomen and entirely lacking in that flexibility which a
boy of his age should naturally possess. He is very "stiff." His
history, both medical and family, is not good. As a child, he had
measles, whooping cough (a very bad case), catarrhal fever and
pleurisy. At four years of age he caught on fire, and as a result of
the fright, although not severely burned, lay perfectly quiet for a
day and did not walk for three months afterward. His age for
first walking and talking were normal. At present his health is
reported as "generally good."

His home life has been far from ideal. His father while living
was a very heavy drinker and extremely abusive to Albert's mother.
His mother was very much over-worked and in a constant state of
worry during her pregnancies. There are seven children in the
family in addition to Albert, three of whom work in factories, one
brother being in Glenn Mills Reformatory and one in a special
class in public school. Albert himself lived for a time in a home
where the matron was taken to court because of her abuse of the
children. All these conditions it must be granted, constitute decided
handicaps in Albert's life.

At present Albert is in the Third B class in school, having
entered at the age of seven. This is really a retardation of about
three years in school work. Albert feels keenly this backwardness
and quite normally dislikes being in the class with children so much
younger and smaller than he. When examined at the Clinic, he was
pronounced of normal mentality. His performance on the mechanical tests was both quantitatively and qualitatively excellent. He
showed fine distribution of attention, good discrimination, a quick
rate of discharge and an immediate grasp of the problems. In the
Dearborn Formboard he showed good coordinarion of hand and
eyes, and in the design blocks, excellent imageability. Albert was
thoroughly interested in the tests and had a rapid discharge of
energy. During the examination it was noticed that Albert was
very shy, nervous and somewhat apprehensive. He possessed a
slight hesitancy in his speech which seemed like a silent stutter.

Albert was referred to a Clinic teacher for further observation
in order to discover the reason for his pedagogical retardation. The
first thing noted by the teacher was Albert's improper breathing,
which affected his reading to a marked degree. He was out of
breath most of the time. Dr Edwin B. Twitmyer examined Albert
in his speech clinic and noted a slight spasm of the diaphragm at
each breath. He pronounced him a potential stammerer and said
that any slight shock might cause this stammer to appear. Exercises
in correct breathing and out-door sports were recommended. Dr.
Twitmyer's breathing exercises were given to Albert by the Clinic
teacher once a week for three weeks. In addition, Albert was supposed to practice them at home once a day.
As he was reported very poor in arithmetic, the Clinic teacher
tested him in third grade work. It was discovered that he did not
know his tables and that he did not possess second grade efficiency
in arithmetic. He was drilled on the tables at each lesson.
Albert lived some distance away and became car sick each time
he came to the Clinic; therefore the Clinic teacher arranged with
the public school teacher to give him the breathing exercises and
drill on the tables every day in school. This was done during the
month of December and early January. Then Albert returned to
the Clinic teacher in order that she might see how much he had
improved. There was some improvement in breathing and consequently in reading, but apparently no work had been done on the
tables. The Clinic teacher again drilled Albert on his tables, but
as this in a question of every day drill, some more practical way
must be found to help Albert. He needs a thorough and careful
drill on the foundations of school work. He also needs efficiency
training. He should be taught by the "whole" method, as it was
discovered that the boy learned much more readily this way.
Albert is not up to par physically. He lacks vitality and vivacity
to a marked degree.7 He is the picture of inactivity. He should
have a thorough medical and neurological examination and then
plenty of fresh air and out-of-door exercise. It would be highly
advisable to place Albert in a home in the country or in the mountains, if such a thing is possible. He is not the intellectual type of
boy; lessons and school routine will probably never appeal to him,
but there appears no reason, except the physical one, why he should
not make progress in school far more normally than he does at
present.
