State Medicine and Its Relations to Insanity and Public Charity
=================================================================

248 Art. VIII.?
BY NATHAN ALLEN, M.D., Lowell, Massachusetts, Commissioner in Lunacy to tlie
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Before entering upon the discussion of any question, it is
always proper to define the terms used, and state as far as
possible the objects in view. The phrase "State Medicine"
implies legislation, or provisions of some kind made by the
State for the prevention of disease and the cure of the sick.
Insanity is the most serious and complicated of all diseases,
and, of sick persons, the insane, above all others, need treat-
ment and care. By "public charity" is meant help to the
poor and needy from some public source: or, in other words,
the act of relieving the wants and sufferings of those who
cannot help themselves by some public or associated action.
The relations of State medicine, then, to insanity and public
charity may be considered from two points of view; first, what
has the State done for the insane as a body, without distinction
of class or connection; and, secondly, what provisions has the
State made particularly for that portion of the insane who have
no means of their own or friends who can support them ?
In pursuing this subject we shall examine into the par-
ticular acts of legislation in its applications to both these two
classes.
"VVe propose to notice briefly what legislation has taken
place on this subject, and what is the present state of the insane
in the six New England States. There are certain general
points of resemblance or correspondence in these respects in
each of the States, and by analysing and comparing the facts
when brought together it will enable us to see better what are
the defects or excellences in each State. It is by such means
and comparisons that the evils or defects in legislation may be
better understood and the enquiry raised, what improvements
can be made and what are the duties of legislative bodies to
the public ? No surer test of the moral state and progress of a
people can be made than that of investigating what provisions
it has made to relieve the wants and sufferings of its needy
and dependent classes. The instances where individuals give
liberally of their substance for this purpose, either by direct.
contributions or by legacies, afford nobler examples of benevo-
* Eead before the Social Seience Association, Detroit, Massachusetts.
STATE MEDICINE AND ITS EELATIONS, ETC. 249:
lence and philanthropy; but where, by wise and humane legis-.
lation great numbers are relieved, in the best possible manner
too, it shows, in the aggregate, a higher state of humanity and
morality. The advanced steps which legislation here and there
are taking in hygienic and sanitary measures to promote the
health and welfare of people may be reckoned among the most
promising omens of the times.
We propose in this paper first to notice the most important
points in legislation in its relations to the insane in each of
the States separately, and then follow it by comparisons and
comments. We commence with Maine. The United States
census of 1860 made the number of insane persons in Maine
794, and the census of 1870, 792, that is with a decrease of two
persons in these ten years, which must be a mistake. The
best judges in the State estimate the whole number to be about
1,200?it may be a little more or a little less. The Insane
Hospital at Augusta had, in 1874,406 patients; the remaining-
insane are found either in the city and town almshouses
throughout the State, or in private families. As no reports
have been made of their number, condition, or character, no
definite information can be given. What proportion of these
are paupers, or how many of them are supported in private
families, we have no means of knowing. The overseers of the
poor in this State make no returns as they do in some other States.
The hospital at Augusta, built in 1840, is the only asylum
in the State, and accommodates about one-third of the insane
in the State. But steps have been taken by the Legislature to
build another; it is in the hands of a commission to select a
location. The average number in the present hospital for
several years has been about 400. It is strictly a State institu-
tion?built by the State?its trustees appointed by the Governor
and Council, and also a Board of Visitors, consisting of three
persons, whose duty it is to visit the hospital every week and
report upon the same. The State expends about $35,000
annually for the support of patients in this hospital, as follows:
The general price of board is fixed at $4 per week, though
more than that is paid in some particular cases. The State
supports wholly about fifty patients, and then pays $1 50 per
week for 290 more, having a settlement in some city or town
which pays the balance. About sixty patients are supported
from private resources. The hospital has been very much
crowded for years, so much so that the Legislature two years
ago ordered some forty or fifty of the lowest grades to be dis-
charged, but it was hard to get rid of them, having no suitable
place to which they could be removed. The Superintendent
estimates that nine-tenths of the persons belong to the incurable
NO. II.?NEW SERIES. T
250 STATE MEDTCINE AND ITS RELATIONS TO
class. The manner of committing persons to the hospital is as
follows: Complaint must be made first to municipal officers of
cities or towns, who constitute a board of examiners, calling
"before them such testimony, from friends and acquaintances, as
to satisfy them that the person is insane. In addition, they
must obtain the certificate of two respectable physicians certi-
fying the same. Cases connected with crime are committed by
the courts.
INSANE IN NEW HAMPSHIRE.
The United States census of 1860 returned the number of
insane at 503, and the census of 1870 at 548, making an
increase in these ten years of forty-five. There never has been
any exact enumeration of the insane in this State. The Super-
intendent of the hospital at Concord estimates the number at
700, while others would make it considerably larger. About
370 of these are in the asylum at Concord; 150 are in the
county almshouses; nearly 100 are in the town almshouses,
and the balance, whatever it may be, are supported in private
families. In 1872 a commission was appointed by the Legis-
lature " to enquire into the condition of insane paupers through-
out the State;" but so small was the appropriation made for
the purpose that only about one-half the State was canvassed.
No returns are made by the Overseers of the Poor, and nothing
is known of the number or condition of the insane supported in
private families.
The Asylum at Concord is the only institution in the State
intended for the insane. There are ten county almshouses,
several of them quite large, in which are gathered quite a
number of insane .'persons, in two or three from thirty to forty
each, and connected with some of these almshouses is a sepa-
rate building expressly for the insane. The asylum at Concord,
established in 1842, was built by the State, its trustees,
appointed by the Governor and Council, consisting of twelve
persons, and then a Board of Visitors of eight, with the
Governor at the head, making in all twenty. It is made the
duty of one or more from these Boards to visit the asylum
twice a month. The State appropriates annually $6,000 for
the support of patients in this hospital. While it is strictly
a State institution, it is managed very much as a private one,
as though there were no paupers confined or supported in it,
Most fortunately it has received large legacies, amounting in
all to $250,000, the income of which goes towards supporting
the insane poor. The price of board is fixed at $5 per week.
About fifty patients are supported by the State alone j nearly
INSANITY AND PUBLIC CHARITY. 251
200 by the State and towns in common, and 130 by friends, or
from their own means. The income from private funds is
applied from year to year to helping just such indigent patients
as the superintendent and trustees think need it most. In
this way many indigent insane are kept there as private
patients that could not be were it not for this. No distinction
in price or classification on the ground of support is made,
and the term " pauper" is unknown in the institution. This
feature in the management of the New Hampshire Asylum is
worthy of high commendation.
The county almshouses are placed under the care of county
commissioners, where about 150 insane persons are supported
by counties and towns at a moderate expense. In some of
these almshouses it is represented that the insane are not
properly cared for?have no hospital treatment when they
might be cured by being sent to the asylum. As to the condi-
tion of the insane in town almshouses, or in private families,
nothing definite is known.
The law, in the committal of persons to the Asylum, pro-
vides that it may be done by the judge of any court, by
Overseers of the Poor, by County Commissioners, by legal guar-
dians and friends. But no person can be committed without a
personal examination by two reputable physicians, whose charac-
ter and genuineness of the certificate must be certified to by the
Mayor of the city or chairman of the Board of Selectmen where
the person resides. An important law passed the Legislature in
1814 requiring visitation of some one or more of the trustees
at the hospital every other week to learn complaints and report
them to the whole Board in case of any difficulty. Stationery
is often furnished to inmates, who can send letters to any
member of this Board, and such letters to friends are transmitted
at once under seal. In case of deaths out of the ordinary
course a coroner's jury is called the same as outside of the
institution. The legislation of New Hampshire in behalf of
the insane has been conducted with the greatest economy.
INSANE IN VERMONT.
The census of 1860 returns the number 693, and of 1870 as
721, making an increase in ten years of 28. No attempts have
ever been made to ascertain the exact number of the insane in
Vermont. In the census of 1870 it is thought the whole
number of inmates of the asylum at Brattleboro were counted,
which should not have been, as about 200 of these at that time
belonged to other States. No returns of the overseers of the
poor are made, so that the number of the insane in almshouses
cannot be ascertained, neither can we learn anything as to the
T 2
252 STATE MEDICINE AND ITS RELATIONS TO
number or condition of the private insane in the State. There
must be a large number of this class scattered throughout the
State, in all probability a larger number than what the census
gives, judging by its returns in other States. Then, if the
census of 1870 included all the inmates of the asylum at
Brattleboro belonging to Vermont, we could not estimate the
whole number in the State much above 721 ; perhaps if we
should estimate it at 800 it would not be out of the way.
The asylum at Brattleboro, established in 1836, is the only
institution for the insane in the State. This was started by a
legacy of $10,000, to which the State added appropriations
from time to time. It was formerly supposed to be strictly a
State institution, but on a careful examination a few years
since it was found to be incorporated as a private concern, that
it was placed entirely in the hands of a trustee board, self-
perpetuating. Its charter provided for a board of visitors in
the judges of the Court of Chancery, but it seems practically
to have been a superfluous office. The Legislature in 1845 pro-
vided for a Commissioner of Lunacy, with certain powers of
visitation and report, with very small compensation for services.
As the appointment was only for two years at a time, and
chosen by the Legislature, it has often been changed, so that
little of value or importance could be accomplished by the
office. The number in this asylum for years has averaged
about 475, one-half of which are private patients, one-third
are town, and one-sixth are State. The price of board for
private patients varies, but for State it is fixed at $3 per week,
which is considerably below the cost. The State for several
years has appropriated $5,000 for this purpose. It is under-
stood that towns pay about the same as the State.
A bill has been before the Legislature for years for the
erection of a State Lunatic Hospital, and for making other
changes in the laws relating to the insane. As the State has
no asylum or hospital of its own to accommodate the insane,
it is presumed the matter will be pushed until it has one. The
asylum at Brattleboro, starting as a family, in which the
influences and relations of home-life have always been sys-
tematically cultivated, situated in a rural district, with ample
grounds for exercise and cultivation, has had a prosperous
career. Though it has been sustained in a great measure by
private resources, it has apparently answered the wants of the
State. The manner of committing insane persons to a hospital
in Vermont is peculiar. As this asylum is located in the
County of Windsor, the law provides that the Court of Chan-
cery appoints a medical examiner in this county, before whom
all persons supposed to be insane are brought and examined,
INSANITY AND PUBLIC CHAKITY. 253
and whose certificate alone entitles to admission into this
asylum. We cannot find that there is any different law of
committal applicable to other parts of the State. At the last
session of the Legislature there were six or seven Acts proposed
and discussed, intended for the relief of the insane, but they
were all voted down except one, providing for discharges of
patients of doubtful cases, referring them to the family phy-
sician and the Commissioner of Lunacy. In one respect
Vermont differs from other New England States; it has much
less of a foreign element in its population ; only a small repre-
sentation of Canadian French.
INSANE IN CONNECTICUT.
The United States census of 1860 reported the number of
the insane in Connecticut 281, and the census of 1870, 772.
The population had increased a little over 75,000 within this
period, adding one-sixth to its numbers, but the census of the
insane is reported almost three times larger for 1870 than for
1860. This was evidently a great mistake. Even the census of
1870 makes it altogether too small. In 1868 a committee was
appointed by the Legislature to canvass the State carefully as
to the number of the insane, with reference to building a State
hospital, and the actual number found by them was 1,066,
while the census two years afterwards returns the number 294
less. With an increase of population from 1868 to 1875 of
over 50,000, undoubtedly the number of the insane must have
increased from 1,066 in 1868 to the present time to over 1,200
certainly, and probably to over 1,300 in 1875. The State
Hospital at Middletown has some 400 patients, and the Eetreat
at Hartford has about 150, making only 550 under treatment
in hospitals. These two institutions constitute the only
establishments in the State for the insane. If we allow 100
more for the changes in these hospitals it will then leave one-
half of the insane in the State to be cared for outside.
These must be in almshouses or provided for in private families,
and no report can be given of them. The Eetreat for the
Insane at Hartford was started in 1824, and is strictly a private
institution, though answering, in some respects, the wants of
the State till eight or ten years since. Its last report bears the
imprint of its fiftieth annual report, and, though it retains now
only some 150 patients, it had almost double that number for
some years before the general State Hospital was built at
Middletown. This retreat has been considered one of the best-
managed institutions of the kind in the country. The State
has never had directly any control over this institution, though
254 STATE MEDICINE AND ITS RELATIONS TO
for many years it sent and supported patients in it. The price
of board or expenses in the Retreat depend on the accommoda-
tions and character of the patient. In 1866 and 1867 the
State built a large hospital at Middletown for the insane, and
it is managed strictly as a State institution. It has some 400
patients, a large number of whom are supported at public
expense. The price of board is fixed at $5 per week. The
State bears the entire expense of a small number, and pays
one-half the expense of over one hundred, the other half being-
paid by towns; and then the State pays half the expense of
over one hundred more, who are considered private patients,
and the other half is paid by friends. The number supported
entirely by their resources or by that of their friends is not
very large. In the last report of this hospital the manner
of support is thus given: Forty-one patients pay their own
expenses; seven were supported by the State; one hundred
and two equally between the State and friends; and one
hundred and three equally between the State and towns. This
speaks well for the liberality of the State in encouraging-
towns and the friends of the insane to send all such cases at
once to the hospital. Committals are made by friends, by
judges of the courts, and the order of the Governor. But
in all cases the court appoints some " regular and respectable
physician" in the place or region where the insane person
resides, who shall fully investigate the facts of the case, and
render a report to the judge of the court.
In the last report of the State Hospital the Superintendent
says that of the 395 patients remaining only 35 would properly
be considered curable. This statement presents rather a dis-
couraging view of the character of the patients here. An
interesting experiment of the cottage system is being tried con-
nected with this hospital. Two small cottages are occupied
by some thirty chronic insane, making up two families, and, in
a great measure, taking care of themselves. The Superin-
tendent remarks that the " very success with our imperfect
two little cottages makes us long for the day when we may
have more such structures adapted to the wants of such
patients."
RHODE ISLAND.
The census of 1860 returned 288 insane, and the census of
1870, 312?an increase of only 24 persons, with an increase of
almost 45,000 inhabitants in those ten years. If we should
add to the number of insane returned by the census in the
same proportion as in other States, it would make the whole
number in the State nearly 500 persons. The Butler Hospital
INSANITY AND PUBLIC CHARITY. 255
lias at the present time about 130 inmates, and the Asylum for
the Chronic Insane has 160, making 290 persons. There must
be in the Providence and town almshouses about 100 insane,
and probably as many more in the State are supported in
private families.
The Butler Hospital, started in 1849, is strictly a private
institution, and has received large donations from individuals.
It has permanent funds amounting to one hundred thousand
dollars. The lowest price of board is fixed at $7 per week, but
most of the patients pay a larger sum. It has always been
considered one of the best-managed lunatic hospitals in the
United States, and for more than twenty years was superintended
by Dr Isaac Ray, celebrated for his writings on insanity both
at home and abroad. This hospital, up to 1870, was the only
institution in the State provided for the insane. In 1868?9 it
became very crowded, and for many years complaints had been
made respecting the treatment of the insane in the town alms-
houses in the State. A movement was made to enlarge the
accommodations for this class, and it was decided to establish an
asylum for the chronic insane?that it should be located in a
rural district with a large portion of land attached. Some four
hundred acres of good land were purchased in Cranston, upon
which also it was decided to locate several other State institu-
tions. But this asylum for the insane is entirely distinct by
itself and has been in successful operation now five years. It
has 160 inmates, pronounced when coming there incurable,
though quite a number have entirely recovered. Without going
into details we think we may safely say it provides the best
arrangement for the chronic insane in the country. Sixty of
the patients are wholly supported by the State, some more
than that number by the towns, and the rest privately. About
three-fourths pay two dollars per week, some twenty pay three
dollars and a few pay four dollars. The buildings are one story,
light, roomy and airy, with plenty of land for cultivation. In
the opinion of the best judges the inmates here are most com-
fortably provided for?much more so than they were before
coming to this asylum. It accommodates not only the State
but towns and individuals, making annually a saving to the State
alone of over ?12,000.
The law for committing persons as insane to the hospital
is very similar in Rhode Island to that in other States. As
there has been only one institution, and the State itself quite
small, persons moving in such a matter become more easily known
to the public, so that there is much less danger of abuse.
256 STATE MEDICINE AND ITS RELATIONS TO
INSANE IN MASSACHUSETTS.
The census of 1860 returned the number of the insane
2,246, and that of 1870, 2,662. But the census report comes
very far short of the real number. The only thorough canvass
ever made in this State was in 1854, by a commission, which
found 2,632. It will be seen by this that the actual number
found in 1854 was only thirty less than the census return of
1870, notwithstanding the population had increased almost half
a million.
In 1874 the Board of State Charities, from a careful exam-
ination of the whole number of insane in all the institutions
and almshouses in the State, made the number 3,624. If to
this is added the number supported in private families, the
whole number of the insane in the State cannot vary much from
4,000. In October 1874, they were distributed as follows : In
the three State institutions, Worcester Hospital, 485 ; Taunton,
508 ; Northampton, 475; Tewksbury Asylum, 319; South
Boston, 206 ; Ipswich, 61; Somerville, 150 ; and some fifty in
smaller institutions. The overseers of the poor return about 500
in the city and town almshouses scattered through the State,
and then nearly 150 more partially supported outside. This
makes only about 3,000 in the institutions and almshouses. The
State supports some 500 in the hospitals at an expense of $3 50
per week, and over 300 at the asylum in Tewksbury for the
chronic insane at $:2 per week, making the whole expenditure
for the year $125,000. The cities and towns support at the
same rate in these hospitals some 650, paying annually about
,$125,000. Then these municipalities support some 500 in
almshouses, at a rate from $2 to $3 per week, amounting to
about $50,000 annually. Then there are two county hospitals,
one in Suffolk County, at South Boston (206), and one in Essex
County, at Ipswich (60), making an annual expense of $70,000.
We have then 2,000 insane persons supported by the State,
counties, cities, and towns, at an annual expense of nearly
$400,000.
The remaining insane are scattered in hospitals and families.
In the three State Hospitals there are over three hundred patients
supported by private means at an expense from $5 per week
and upward. The McLean Asylum, at Somerville, near Boston,
established in 1817, is strictly a private institution, has on an
average about 150 patients, supported at an expense of $15
per week and upward. There are four other small private
asylums or family institutions for nervous diseases and chronic
insane, where the expenses vary from $10 per week and
upward. There are a large number of insane persons sup-
INSANITY AND PUBLIC CHARITY. 257
ported by private means in families throughout the State, but
as to their exact number or real condition we have no means
of knowing. The only thorough enumeration of the insane
ever made in the State was in 1854, by a commission of which
Dr Edward Jarvis was at the head. In this return were found
716 insane persons at their homes, cared for by their friends;
and this enumeration took place more than 20 years ago,
since which the population has increased near half a million.
From careful enquiries made respecting the insanity of each
person it was reported at the time that just about one-half
this number were fit subjects, and should have been in hos-
pitals ; but of 320 towns insane persons were found in all but
19, which were small and situated mostly in the outskirts
of the State. This enumeration of the insane in Massa-
chusetts in 1854 is deserving of special notice, as it is the
only instance in the United States where a complete and
thorough canvass has ever been made as to the exact number
of the insane. It has been found that the census in this
respect is not at all reliable?that if other statistics are
returned correct, those of the insane are not, and other means
must be resorted to for this knowledge. One of the most
important steps taken in legislation in this State is the pro-
vision made for the support of the chronic insane by them-
selves. This experiment commenced in 1866 by erecting a large
building connected with the State Almshouse at Tewksbury,
in which three hundred chronic insane?all paupers?have been
supported at an expense of about $2 per week, saving thereby
over #25,000 annually to the State. Our object of establishing
this asylum was to relieve the hospitals of their crowded state,
but they are still very crowded. The State is building at pre-
sent another large lunatic hospital at Danvers at an expense of
over a million of dollars. In 1874 the Legislature provided
for the appointment of Commissioners of Lunacy, whose ser-
vices were to terminate after making a report, which was done
in January, 1875. In the matter of committing persons in
Massachusetts to hospitals the law provides that it can be
done by friends, by officers of cities and towns, and by the
judges of courts. But in all cases a certificate certifying to
the insanity of the person must first be obtained, signed by
two physicians, one of whom should be the family physician.
Complaints have been made for years that it was altogether too
easy to commit and confine persons for insanity, and that
greater checks and safeguards should be provided.
Having now presented an outline of the provisions made
by legislation for the insane in the New England States, it
affords an opportunity for making comparisons and comments,
258 STATE MEDICINE AND ITS RELATIONS TO
for in this way instructive lessons may be learned. As these
States are among the oldest in the Union and have generally
taken the lead in providing for the dependent and destitute
classes, it is presumed we can find some advantages to recom-
mend, and perhaps some evils to expose and condemn.
The first enquiry will he in reference to the increase.
Increase. Is insanity increasing faster than population? On
this question there have been differences of opinion among
what would be considered good judges. During the past year
I had a careful investigation made of the increase of popula-
tion and insanity by the census reports, and found that from
1850 to 1870 there had been a decided increase of insanity in
Massachusetts over that of population, amounting to 12 per
cent, in these twenty years. By the same investigations it ap-
peared that there had "been also an increase of the insane dis-
proportionate to that of population in the other New England
States. What may be the real causes of this increase, and
from what classes in the community it comes, are questions we
cannot easily determine. In Massachusetts there is some
evidence to show that this increased insanity comes mostly
from the foreign element, but it is not so in some of the
other States. One thing is evident, that lunatic hospitals do
not prevent the increase of insanity?that is, as far as we can
judge. It was thought in Great Britain when hospitals for the
insane were first established it would put some check upon the
increase of insanity; but, after thirty or forty years' experience,
that expectation has not been realised. A similar result has
been reached in this country.
It is generally conceded that the higher or more advanced
civilisation becomes the greater is the amount of insanity.
Now, this cannot be the fruit or result of true civilisation, but
comes from something wrong?some artificial habits, some
unnatural, unwholesome way of living, some false and corrupt
state of things in society. This undue increase of insanity
may arise, in part, from too great pressure upon the brain and
strain on the nervous system, by education, by excitement, by
strife and competition in business, &c., and with some by
what may very properly be styled "too fast living." When
it is borne in mind that these and other evils are not un-
frequently propagated by the laws of inheritance, in an
aggravated and intensified form, we see readily how our people
grow older from one generation to another, there follows
increased insanity. It would be an interesting experiment to
make, if we could get the statistics for a series of years on
population and insanity in several of the old and the new
States, and see how they would compare. Connected with
INSANITY AND PUBLIC CHARITY. 259'
this increase of insanity may there not be a new feature or
change in the type of the disease taking place which calls for
particular notice? The trustees of the Butler Hospital, not
medical men, but discriminating business men, some of whom,
have long been connected with the institution, make, in their
report for last year, this striking remark. In noticing a decline
in the proportion of recovered patients they say: " It would
seem as if the larger appliances and more diversified ministries'
which have been from year to year brought into requisition
have not kept pace with the growing difficulties of treatment,,
as if the malady was finding a deeper seat?arising apparently
in a larger proportion of cases from original defect of organi-
sation, and less frequently from mere accidental causes. If
this be so?if the statistics presented by the records of the
institution be sufficiently extended to afford a reliable indica-
tion?the patriot, as well as the philanthropist, is interested in
ascertaining to what causes at work in our community the
deterioration of brain is attributable."
There is much truth, we have no doubt, in the statement
here made by these trustees. Such is the type of our present
civilisation, that while it is attended with great advantages it
begets many evils. Some of these evils grow out of an undue
development of the brain and a morbid state of the nervous
system. It surely becomes the patriot and the philanthropist
to enquire if some of these evils cannot be avoided, or at least
abridged.
One of the most interesting and important features in State
medicine is its charitable work. In providing for the insane
the State, as a general thing, builds the hospital. Maine, New
Hampshire, and Connecticut have each one hospital for this
purpose, and Massachusetts has four. In Rhode Island the
Butler Hospital and in Vermont the Brattleboro Asylum, both
private institutions, answer very much the purpose of State
hospitals.
In each of the New England States there are indigent insane.,
having no means, no friends to support 'them, no claim on any
city or town by the laws of settlement. These are adopted and
supported by the State, generally in some lunatic hospital. But
the charity of the State does not stop here always. Maine,
New Hampshire, Vermont, Connecticut, and Rhode Island pay
from one-third to one-half the expense of that class of the
insane belonging to cities and towns, provided they are sent to
hospital for treatment. Nothing is paid by the State for those
in local almshouses, and the object of paying part of the expense
of city or town paupers is to induce their authorities to avail
themselves of all possible means for the cure and improvement
of this class.
260 STATE MEDICINE AND ITS RELATIONS TO
The State of Connecticut, finding some years since a large
number of insane persons, with small or limited means, and
friends unable to support them, and on this account could not
get the proper benefit of the hospital, and would not become
paupers, offered to pay one-half the expenses of such persons
while in the hospital. Accordingly, for several years more than
one hundred private patients of tins class have been found in
the State hospital at Middletown. This is, we believe, the only
instance where a State has proffered such aid, and it sets a
noble example. In the asylum at Concord, New Hampshire,
may be found a grand example of private beneficence. This
asylum has most fortunately some ,$'250,000 funds, received by
legacy and donation. A large proportion of the income goes to
support in the institution indigent persons who may also be
assisted by friends. Over one hundred private patients are
thus yearly aided by this charity. Insane persons are kept
here by this means who could not be otherwise. It relieves the
.State and encourages private benevolence. The friends will
continue to do for them and take far more interest, as long as
they are not paupers. So quietly is this private charity dis-
tributed that it is hardly known who are its recipients.
In Massachusetts the lines of support are very closely drawn;
the State supports its own; so do cities and towns their own,
.and those who are private must receive private support, whether
in a State hospital or private asylum. The State appropriates
money liberally for the insane, but does only what it is
obliged to do. It supports in the lunatic hospitals about 500
and 300 for the chronic insane, the whole at an annual expense
?of some $125,000. Cities and towns support in the hospitals
about 600, and there are some 300 private patients in these
institutions. Now, it has been an obvious fact that the propor-
tion of pauper insane has been relatively increasing for many
years in Massachusetts; that many starting as private cases
soon become paupers, and, of course, must be supported at
public expense. There can be no question but that the longer
an insane person can be kept as a private patient, the longer
friends will look after and do for such a person, the better
spirits and more hope the insane will have of recovery. Then,
if we extend help properly to the indigent private insane who
need and are outside of hospital, it might induce such to seek
the benefits of the hospital and prevent large numbers from
becoming paupers. In this way a great amount of good might
be accomplished.
INSANITY AND PUBLIC CHARITY. 2GI
CHRONIC INSANE.
Tlie question is now asked in all the older States, what are
we to do with the chronic insane, and how are they to be sup-
ported ? Unless there is some means besides death of eliminating"
and removing the incurable and the harmless insane from our
lunatic hospitals these institutions become filled up with a
class of patients, very few of which can ever be benefited by
curative treatment. This is becoming already a serious evil in
several of our older and larger institutions. These hospitals,
in their construction and management, were intended expressly
for the cure and treatment of the insane, and, accordingly,
have been provided with the best possible means?medical, phy-
sical, and moral. Such means and appliances require a large
outlay in their start, and then in keeping them up become very
expensive. After the insane have passed through the curative-
stages of treatment without relief, and settled down into an
incurable, harmless state, what is to become of them ? In their
case the same medical skill, the large number of attendance,
and costly accommodations are no longer needed. It is not a
hospital but a home they want, suitable exercise, plenty of sun-
light, pure air and water, proper nourishment, pleasant surround-
ings, etc. These can be furnished at much less expense than
large costly hospitals, with expensive medical supervision and
other attendance, under circumstances, too, where the advantages
of hygiene and sanitary laws may be employed more successfully-
Aside from comfortable house accommodation all that can be
done for this class is to supply properly their physical wants, and.
surround them with wholesome influences. As far as the men
are concerned, farm work is the best possible exercise for them,,
as well as plain, country style of living the best regimen. In
former years the almshouse has been the principal receptacle-
of the chronic insane discharged from the hospital. But Mas-
sachusetts and Rhode Island have now permanent asylums for
the chronic insane, which, in some respects, are the only insti-
tutions of the kind in the country. -We should except the
Willard Asylum, New York. The asylum in Massachusetts was
established near eight years ago, resulting from the crowded
state of the hospitals, and partly from the fact that the State
almshouses contained large numbers of this class, mixed up
promiscuously with other paupers. This asylum is located
at Tewksbury, on a large farm owned by the State, consist-
ing of a brick building 250 feet long, forty-five wide, and four
stories high, accommodating 300 insane persons. Though
located near the almshouse, the asylum, with its inmates and
yards, are entirely distinct. Within the eight years of its his-
262 STATE MEDICINE AND ITS RELATIONS TO
tory, more than a thousand chronic insane have been admitted
into this asylum, mostly coming from the State hospitals.
Nearly one hundred of these have recovered or improved, not
from medication, but from work on the farm. In the opinion
of good judges the condition of the inmates here has been
made as comfortable as it was before their admission, and the
experiment as a whole has been regarded as a decided success.
The expense has averaged for each inmate a little over one
hundred dollars a year, and the whole saving to the State
amounts to $25,000 each year, making over $200,000 since the
asylum was first established.
The asylum for the chronic insane in Rhode Island, being-
only about one-half as large, saves the State annually more than
$12,000. This is located upon the State farm, near the State
almshouse and workhouse, but is entirely separate in all its
arrangements. The buildings are only one story, well lighted
and well ventilated, with large yards and plenty of ground for
?cultivation. While a few of the inmates come from the Butler
Hospital, a large proportion come from the various almshouses
in the State, the expense being borne in common between the
.towns and the State.
The history of this asylum for the chronic insane in Rhode
Island deserves special notice. It has always been admitted
.that the Butler Hospital is one of the best-managed institutions
in the country, with very few changes in its superintendency
or Board of Trustees. Dr Isaac Ray, the most distinguished
writer on insanity in the United States, presided over this
hospital about twenty years, and in his annual report for 1866
presented the most elaborate argument that can be found
against the separation of the acute and chronic insane, main-
taining that for the interests of each that they should always
be kept in the same institution. Within one year from that
.date the friends of the insane were conferring together in
Rhode Island with reference to establishing an asylum for the
harmless and incurable of this class; and in 1869 such an
institution was established, with one hundred patients. Its
sixth report is just published, showing 170 patients, a larger
number than is now found in the Butler Hospital itself. Dr.
Sawyer, the successor of Dr Ray, acknowledges that this
asylum is an excellent institution, and is a decided relief to the
hospital. There is only one opinion among the friends of the
insane in the State, that it presents a great improvement over
the old order of things; and, from a careful personal inspection,
I can say that it is, of the kind, a model institution, and worthy
?of imitation in every other State.
INSANITY AND PUBLIC CHARITY. 263
COMMITTAL OF THE INSANE.
Tlie manner or provisions of committing persons to a
lunatic hospital are very important, as far as the law is con-
cerned. In the several New England States there are some
general resemblances, but in no two States is the process alike.
In the State of Maine city and town officers take the lead in
obtaining evidence, and the certificate of insanity must be
signed by "two reputable physicians." In New Hampshire
the judges of courts, overseers of poor, county commissioners,
guardians, etc., lead; the certificate must be signed by two
reputable physicians, whose characters and genuineness of cer-
tificates must be sworn to before municipal or town officers.
In Vermont the judge of one of the courts appoints a physician
in Windsor County, who shall be the examiner of all cases
committed to the Brattleboro Asylum. In Connecticut the
court appoints a reputable physician in the place or region
where the supposed insane person resides, who shall make
enquiries and personal examinations as to his insanity, and
make his report to the court. In Massachusetts the certificate
must be signed by two physicians, after personal examination,
and one of whom should be the family physician of the insane,
whereas, in many, if not a majority, of cases the individual
has no family physician. As the medical evidence is the most
important, this should be most carefully guarded. While in a
majority of cases the provisions in any one of these States may
be sufficient, still there may be danger at times that now and
then one might be unjustly and wrongfully committed as an
insane person. It may be said, if there should be a mistake
made, it would be soon detected in the hospital, and the
supposed insane person would be forthwith discharged, but this
is not so; it is not always an easy thing to correct such
mistakes. Besides, immense injury may be done before the
evil is corrected. Inasmuch as great responsibility must rest
upon the medical testimony, special pains should be taken to
secure the best and most reliable men. If men are appointed
for this purpose, and are known to be responsible to the public
for the results of their examinations, they will naturally feel
this responsibility and be more careful than if the parties are
picked up here and there. It is not mere skill or experience
in mental diseases that is wanted, but integrity and honesty of
character that has been tried and is unquestioned. There is a
chance, we think, for improved legislation in each of these
States which would throw greater safeguards around the com-
mittal of all persons who are charged with insanity.
264 STATE MEDICINE AND ITS RELATIONS TO
While legislation has laboured, in a variety of ways, to
promote the interests of the insane, there is one feature which
has been greatly neglected. We refer to a more careful super-
vision of institutions, to a more special study into the causes
of insanity, with reference to securing not only the best mode
of treatment, but to see if some means cannot be employed for
checking or preventing the disease. This can be accomplished
only by legislation in establishing a commission or appointing-
one or more persons adapted to the work and who shall make a
business of it for a series of years. This work cannot well be
carried on in small States, or at least cannot be so systema-
tically and thoroughly carried on as in large States where the
material is sufficient to occupy all the time of a commission.
Still, in Vermont a good work has been accomplished. In
1845, just thirty years ago, the Legislature established a per-
manent commission of insanity, "whose duty it was to visit
the asylum monthly or oftener, with the trustees or alone, to
examine into the condition of the institution, the management
of the patients and the general welfare of the asylum, and to
make a report thereon annually to the Legislature." This
officer is chosen once in two years by the Legislature and
receives small compensation.
Says Dr Draper, the present Superintendent of the asylum :
" The Commissioner thus occupies the position of guardian to
insane wards of the State, and visiting agent of the public. I
think the office has been useful, and is eminently a proper one.
If in addition to the duties required in relation to the insane
in this institution, it was also made obligatory upon him to
visit all the insane in the State in the town almshouses and
report upon their condition, the public interests would be still
better served." But as this officer was often changed, and was
paid only $300 a year, not much certainly could be accom-
plished. Several of the other New England States have at
various times appointed a Commission on Lunacy, but only
temporarily, for specific purposes, with no power but advisory,
and to make a report which terminated its agency. What is
wanted is a permanent living commission like the English or
Scotch, with all necessary powers and the assurance of con-
tinuance. Nobody can realise the value and importance of the
labours of such a commission but one who has witnessed its
beneficial effects in Great Britain, and, from personal knowledge
of our own institutions, can see what advantages might be
obtained here by means of a similar agency.
Dr Merrick Bemus, who was superintendent for fifteen
years of the State Lunatic Hospital of Worcester, and who lias
visited similar institutions in Scotland and England, made last
INSANITY AND PUBLIC CHARITY. 265
year the following statement in reply to the enquiry, " What
improvements have been made in the lunatic asylums in Great
Britain, and what relation does the Lunacy Commission hold
to the institutions ?" Says Dr Bemus:?
" The improvements are many. They have supplemented and
modified their system to such an extent that, while it bears some
resemblance to the past, the present is studded all over with new
features. The improvements for ventilation, cleanliness, classification,
for freedom, both outside and inside, are most noteworthy. Their
advances in the direction of labour among the patients, in the immunity
from physicial restraint and seclusion, in the granting of innocent
indulgences to trustworthy patients, are far beyond what is now
practised in any American hospital.
11 The Lunacy Commission has done much, and its continued opera-
tion is of incalculable benefit, not only to the insane, but also to the
officers of the institutions, they have improved the condition of the
insane in many ways, and have rendered a residence in a lunatic asylum
less irksome and hopeless to those who are obliged to' submit to the
restraint and treatment in a public institution. They have removed
the hard and forbidding cruel fixtures for restraint and seclusion.
They have Avell nigh emancipated the insane from the use of mechanical
restraint; have quite abolished every kind of punishment and task,
have raised and improved the quality of food and clothing. They have
opened the apartments of the furious and filthy to the sun and air,
and opened the doors, that all may enjoy, in some degree, the freedom
of the several establishments. More than this, they constantly act as
guardians for the insane, and they strongly support and strengthen
those Avho conduct faithfully the affairs of the asylums. They have a
systematic correspondence with every institution, and by reports of
officers of each they know, not so much the economies of each, but,
what is better, they have an understanding of the commitments to
such an extent that they can easily tell the justice and propriety of any-
questionable case. They are made to know of all cases of restraint and
seclusion, and they interest themselves in every case of hardship, and
thus lighten the burdens of the insane without in any way increasing
the cares of the officers.
" From their frequent inspection of the several institutions, and
from the mass of facts gathered by their correspondence, they publish
every year a valuable report of their labours, with plans, suggestions,
and histories of cases of hardship, abuse, and suffering."
When the great advantages, as here described, arising from
Lunacy Commissioners are considered, it would not seem possible
that the superintendent of any hospital would oppose the ap-
pointment of such a commission. The insane would not be the
only parties benefited, but the hands of the trustees and su-
perintendents would be held up; much of the prejudice existing
against such institutions and their managers would thus be done
NO. II.?NEW SERIES. U
266 STATE MEDICINE AND ITS RELATIONS, ETC.
away; less complaints would be heard from the insane and their
friends, and more confidence would be placed in those institu-
tions, so that acute cases of insanity would be more promptly
placed there for treatment. The great numbers now scattered
in almshouses and private families would be looked up and
better cared for, and the institutions themselves would be more
sure to reap the benefits of all improvements made at home or
abroad for the care and treatment of the insane. There is one
other advantage, or advanced step forward, to secure which
something certainly should be done. We refer to some sys-
tematic measures for the prevention of the disease. In all the
vast outlay and immense amount of labour expended in behalf
of the insane, scarce any efforts have ever been put forth for the
prevention of the malady. In the practice of medicine the
question is now constantly raised how to prevent as well as to
cure disease; and in consequence of the great improvement in
society in respect to a knowledge of hygiene and sanitary laws
many diseases are prevented?in fact, it is admitted that full
one-third of all the diseases and premature deaths can thus be
prevented. But the community must be made better acquainted
with the causes of insanity, and that these causes are subject in
a great measure to the control of human agency. Some years
since the superintendent of one of the large State hospitals
in Massachusetts said, in closing a paragraph in his report,
that " the more we see of mental disease, in its various forms,
the more we are convinced that the study of its prevention is
infinitely more important than even the study of its cure, and
that the discrimination of more correct views of the true way of
living and a more rigid observance of the laws of health and
nature would greatly diminish its frequency." Since that
remark was made in a public report more than a million of
dollars has been expended in the cure and treatment of the
disease by this same hospital, but not one dollar for the dis-
semination of knowledge for its prevention. How long will the
managers of our State institutions pursue such a course ? Will
not the public some time learn the truth of the proverb, that
" an ounce of prevention is here worth more than a pound of
cure " ?
