Will and Volition
==================

56 Art. IV.?
BY W. H. 0. SANKEY, M.D. LOND., F.K.C.P.
Lecturer on Mental Diseases, University College, London.
Judging from the somewhat recent publication of Dr Carpen-
ter's work on Mental Physiology, it would appear that there
exists a very unsettled state of opinion still upon the subject of
" Will and Volition," especially, perhaps, among the pure phy-
siologists. Yet there is, probably, no portion of psychology
of more interest; for our observations must be largely based
upon the voluntary actions of others in the objective study of
psychology. No part of mental philosophy either has a wider
practical bearing, since as connected with it must be included
the doctrines of free-will and necessity, of responsibility and
criminality, besides that of self-control, of impulsive insanity, &c.
That much difficulty surrounds the subject is admitted on
all sides. " How comes it, to what fatality is it owing," writes
Professor Bain, "that an enormous theoretical difficulty, a
metaphysical dead-lock, a puzzle and a paradox of the first
degree, an inextricable knot, should have been constituted in
understanding this subject ? "
Those among the English writers, and who now perhaps
constitute the larger proportion, who accept the doctrines of
the Positive philosophy agree very closely in their explanation
of the phenomena connected with will; but there are still, it
seems, many who dissent from them.
We find two views upon the question chiefly prevalent.
Dr Carpenter, in the work above mentioned, directs attention
to them, preparatory to entering upon the difficulties which he
himself experiences in the subject. " The mental relations of
mind and body," he says, " should always be considered to-
gether ; and it is to the neglect of this precaution that such
fallacies, discernible in the arguments brought forward, are due
in the oft-repeated controversies between the advocates of the
materialistic and the spiritualistic hypotheses."
The materialistic doctrines of Dr Carpenter are those which
are considered to be the received views of the Positive school of
philosophy, and an enunciation of them may be found in any
of the modern English writers of that school. Dr Carpenter
gives the following description of them:?" The most thorough-
going expression of this doctrine will be found in the ' Letters
on the Laws of Man's Nature and Development,' by Henry Gr.
Atkinson and Harriet Martineau. A few extracts will suffice
WILL AND VOLITION. 57
to show the character of this system of philosophy. ? Instinct,
passion, thought, &c., are effects of organised substances.'
' All causes are material causes.' ' In material conditions
I find the origin of all religions, all philosophies, all opinions,
all virtues, all spiritual conditions and influences,' ' in the same
manner that I find the origin of all diseases and of all insanities
in material conditions and causes.' 41 am what I am, a creature
of necessity; I claim neither merit nor demerit.' ' I feel that I
am as completely the result of my nature, and impelled to do
what I do, as the needle to point to the north, or the puppet
to move according as the string is pulled.' ' I cannot alter my
will, or be other than what I am, and cannot deserve either
reward or punishment.' "
" It seems to me," says Dr Carpenter, in commenting on the
above extracts, " that every system of philosophy which regards
the succession of mental phenomena as determined solely by
the ordinary laws of physical causation, and which rejects the
self-determining power of the will (or, which is the same thing,
regards the will as only another expression for the 'prepon-
derance of motives or as the general resultant of the action of
the physiological mechanism), virtually leads to the same con-
clusion."
In this latter paragraph Dr Carpenter offers no argument,
but enters his protest against the doctrines stated, this protest
" arising out of an involuntary repugnance felt."
Dr Carpenter, after mentioning some of the difficulties
which occur to him, which need not be here repeated, con-
cludes by saying that the materialistic philosopher places
himself in complete antagonism to the positive conviction felt
by every right-minded man, "that he really does possess a
self-determining power and then quotes Archbishop Manning,
with whom he says he entirely agrees on this point, viz.: " That
we have exactly the same evidence of the existence of this self-
determining power within ourselves that we have of the
existence of a material world outside ourselves. For, however
intimate may be the correlation between mind and brain " (and
Archbishop Manning seems disposed, adds Dr C., to go as far
as himself in recognising this intimacy) " there is still another
faculty, and,^ more than this, another agent, distinct from the
thinking brain." ..." That we are conscious of thought
and will is a fact of the internal experience of all men." And
Dr Manning concludes by quoting Dr Carpenter: " That the
common-sense decision of mankind in regard to the existence
of an external world is practically worth more than all the
arguments of the logicians who have discussed the basis of our
belief."
58 WILL AND VOLITION.
This objection should have its due weight. According to Rule
II. of Mr. Lewes' "Rules of Philosophising," "Any contradic-
tion of fundamental experience of science or intuition is to be
taken as evidence of some flaw either in the data or the calcu-
lation." The point raised may, however, be deferred for the
present. One may also note that the fact of two authorities
cited agreeing in the denunciation of the doctrines of the
Positivist school of philosophy is not without its significance,
for the dissentients probably do not argue from a common point
of view. Before examining the grounds of their " repugnance,"
it may be as well to glean the views of the more recent writers
of the school from their own writings. They are given by Mr.
Herbert Spencer concisely in his " Principles of Psychology,"
vol. i. p. 495, 2nd edition.
According to this school, " Will" is an abstract term, and
not "a distinct faculty or another agent distinct from the
thinking brain." A voluntary act does not differ, as regards the
mechanism by which it is performed, from those acts which are
performed automatically. And we know, in fact, that identical
movements are performed in somnambulism and in disease with-
out the least evidence of the presence of consciousness, and it
may be presumed that no volition can occur unconsciously.
Again, it is known that those automatic movements which are
eventually and distinctly of that character have become so by
insensible gradations from the most well-marked volitional
actions; and many automatic actions pass by equally insensible
degrees from instinctive, and these from the simplest reflex
movements, so that no distinction can be established between
any actions. It is evident, therefore, that the will, if it is a
distinct faculty, may be sometimes absent entirely, sometimes
partially, or may exert its influence, if it is an agent, sometimes
strongly, sometimes feebly, without affecting the result.
Spencer says: " Between the reception of certain impressions
and the performance of certain appropriate motions there is
some inner connection. If the inner connection is organised,
the action is of the reflex order, either simple or compound; and
none of the phenomena of consciousness exist. If the inner
connection is not organised, then the psychical changes which
come between the impressions and motions are conscious ones ;
the entire action must have all the essential elements of a
conscious action?must simultaneously exhibit memory, reason,
feeling, and will; for there can be no conscious adjustment of
an inner to an outer relation without all these being involved."
Positivists maintain that a motion may occur more directly
or less directly from its excitant; admitting, as they do, that
reflex movements resulting in direct response to the excitant,
WILL AND VOLITION.
59
and in which case the connection between the cause and effect
is organic, or, at all events, not assisted by the intervention of
any agent like "will," they hold that, in other resultant
actions, the organic connection may be not so direct, but pass,
as it were, through a chain, each link of which may be either
entirely unfelt, partially felt, or completely felt; that at each
link the explosion into a muscular movement may be checked
by a counter-excitant; that, consequently, instead of an action
taking place, the motor changes become " nascent" or are sup-
pressed. " When, after the reception of one or more complex
impressions, the appropriate motor changes become nascent,
but are prevented from passing into immediate action by the
antagonism of certain other nascent motor changes, appropriate
to some nearly allied impression, there is constituted a state of
consciousness which, when it finally issues in action, displays
what we term volition. Each set of nascent motor changes
arising in the course of this conflict is a weak revival of the
state of consciousness which accompany such motor changes
when actually performed?is a representation of such motor
changes as were before executed under like circumstances?is an
idea of such motor changes. We have, therefore, a conflict
between two sets of ideal motor changes, which severally tried to
become real, and one of which eventually does become real;
and this passing of an ideal motor change into a real one we
distinguish as ' will.''' *
"Will," according to this doctrine, is a state of mind, not an
agent; the consciousness of the conflict that passes finds its
recognition in the word " choice." As Mr. Spencer elsewhere
says, itvis quite true that man has a choice, for the consciousness
of the " conflict," as he calls it, between the motives or induce-
ments to do or to forbear are the outcome of former stored
impressions that are called up by association. He goes on to
explain that it is quite as true that there is a choice of motive,
and the man chooses because at the time of the volition the
mental processes, the conflict, &c., constitute the man's mental
self.
This statement, and which in justice perhaps should be read
in extenso by any one not fully cognisant of the views, is some-
what different in character from that extracted from Miss
Martineau and Mr. Atkinson, yet it does not absolutely contra-
dict them. Their view is equivalent to saying that, given, a
certain individual of a given character (having, that is, certain
inclinations, experiences, principles, &c.), and place him in a
given position, and a certain or necessary conduct would result.
The argument of Positive philosophers is that such is truly the
* Vol. i. p. 496.
60 WILL AND VOLITION.
case, and that to question it would be to question the order of
nature; they admit at the same time that the experiment
would be almost an impossible one, on account of the diversities
in the characters of different individuals. There is no doubt
that an approximate calculation, however, can be made and is
daily made of what the result would be on the juxtaposition of
two individuals, or from the position of different individuals
in given circumstances; such an estimate is hourly made by
nearly every one of his associates in every kind of society ; such
calculations enter into every dealing- or intercourse between
men.
But one of the chief objections which the opposite class of
thinkers bring against the doctrine is, that it implies that man
placed in a certain position must of necessity act in a certain
manner ; that, therefore, he is not a free agent, and not being
a free agent, is, of course, not a responsible one ; and from the
quotations which Dr Carpenter brings from Miss Martineau
and Mr. Atkinson, it would seem that they, and those who think
with them in this controversy, really hold this view.
The word " necessity " has been objected to, and Professor
Bain writes: " I very much doubt whether the word ought to
be retained in any of the sciences, physical or moral; nothing-
is ever gained by it. I consider the word ; necessity' as nothing
short of an incumbrance in the sciences of the present day." *
There is a certain ambiguity, at least, in its meaning: at one
time it expresses " negation of freedom," and at another time
it implies " a want or need." In most discussions connected
with the subject of will, it is used to signify the absoluteness
of the dependence of a given effect upon a certain cause.
That, for example, on the conjunction of two agents, a certain
effect will " necessarily " follow; that two added to two gives a
quotient of four; that sugar placed in water will be dissolved,
&c. In this sense it is that a result is said to be necessary in
science generally. There is no difficulty or doubt, however,
concerning the sense in which the word is used in this contro-
versy, for the very essence of the doctrine of necessity (a
doctrine which has been warmly discussed in all ages) depends
upon its signification of absolute connection between cause
.and effect.
Necessity and free-will, of course, are parts of the same
subject. Here is a passage from Spinoza, as quoted by Dr.
Maudsley: " Men deceive themselves in this point, that they
believe themselves free. For in what does such an idea con-
sist ? In this only, that they are conscious of their actions,
but are ignorant of the causes which determine them." . .
* Emotion and the Will, p. 549.
WILL AND VOLITION. 61
u Those who fondly think they act with free-will dream with
their eyes open."*
" If the will is free," wrote Cicero, " then Fate does not
rule everything; if Fate does not rule everything, then the
order of all causes is not certain, and the order of things is no
lono-er certain in the foreknowledge of God."
^Perhaps the greatest objection to the opposite doctrine,
the doctrine of necessity, has come from the theologians, on
account of its supposed abrogation of responsibility; but the
doctrine of entire freedom of will would appear to be equally
if not more dangerous to morality or Christianity. If a man
could at any moment change the evil tenor of his life at will,
he might argue that it would be wise to indulge in the plea-
sures of an evil course, often so much pleasanter to youth than
a life of self-denial, since when he was old he could readily
turn from his evil courses.
Afrain, if men could act entirely by caprice, or were actuated
onlv by any transient impression, how would government be
possible ? How could the discipline of an army be ensured ? So
that if the doctrine of the Necessarian is objected to on account
of its favouring" fatalistic notions, it cannot be said that free-
will is altogether free from difficulties. Most men would
rather be under the dominance of fixed and immutable rules,
than trust to unfixed and unstable laws.
The points mentioned by Dr Carpentei as forming the
ground for dissent to the doctrine of will, as advanced by the
Positive school, and which were deferred, were, that this expla-
nation of the phenomena of will implied absence of respon-
sibility, and that the doctrine simply examined or observed by
the same faculties which convince us of the reality of objects
around us appeared to be repugnant to common sense and to
every one's natural convictions and beliefs. It may be con-
ceded that much of the doctrine, as he quotes it, and considers
it expounded by the Positive school, runs counter to most
people's belief and common sense. We are all, every one must
confess, conscious of possessing a power of choice; this is as
evident to us as that we can see or feel. Professor Bain gives
the example in illustration of a common proceeding in shop-
ping. When a person purchases one article out of several
submitted to his view, the recommendations of a particular
article are found to be greater than those of the rest, and the
purchase is concluded by the selection of it. It may happen
that for a moment the opposing attractions of some two articles
are exactly balanced, and decision may be for a time suspended,
but eventually the choice is made. Every one is conscious that
such choice was made voluntarily and by himself, or, as it is called,
* Physiology and Pathology of Mind, p. 146.
62 WILL AND VOLITION.
of his own free will. But the example is open to explanation by
both views, according- to each person's convictions. The advocates
of free-will quote it as a proof of the free-will of the purchaser
in his selection. According to this hypothesis the free-will, as
an agent, interposed and decided the transaction. The other hypo-
thesis, to which the name of the "Necessarian" is applied, would
explain the transaction in the following way. While the pur-
chaser was examining the goods, their advantages or disadvan-
tages were severally presented to his observation or senses; at
one time, perhaps, preponderating in favour of A, at another time
in favour of B, keeping the balance oscillating for awhile, until
the advantages of one completely outweighed those of the other,
and conviction resulted, and immediately on this, of necessity,
an action completed by the purchase. To this it will be objected,
where is the proof of a necessity ? The purchaser might have
been convinced that A was better or cheaper than B, yet out of
perversity have bought B. Assuredly. But then in such cases
there would have been placed in the scale with B the desire
to do an eccentric or perverse act; a motive of some sort,
according to the explanation of the Positivists, who do not deny
the influence of perverse incentive to action.
The difficulty in understanding the question often made by
common minds is owing to the fact that they leave out the
last incentive or motive. It is like that common trick played
by young people, of dividing the wishing-bone of a chicken,
when the promise is held out that he or she to whom falls the
greater half shall have whatever is their last wish. One wishes,
perhaps, a hawk; another a hand-saw; and assuredly that one
who obtains the greater piece of bone has the last wish of his
mind, for to gain his first object he wished for his last. So in a
volitional act it is the last choice, and last choice only, which
excites the act of volition, though that last act is the resultant
of many previous motives, and any one act extends over only one
increment of time.
If the above be a satisfactory explanation of the phenomena,
there yet remains the feeling of repugnance to which Dr.
Carpenter refers, and in which he says Archbishop Manning
concurs, which must be considered. They say that this enuncia-
tion of the law is repugnant to the common-sense convictions
of men in general. In many arguments such a vague feeling
might be considered inadmissible as evidence, but in the present
question it may be allowed to have weight, since it is to the con-
victions produced through the ordinary channels by which the
question at issue must be ultimately decided. It is to the
evidence of sense to which they appeal. " We have exactly the
same evidence of the existence of a self-determining power
WILL AND VOLITION.
63
within ourselves," they say, " that we have of the existence of a
material world outside us.''
It is certainly true that the sense of a determining power is
felt, and it is equally true that it is felt to be intimately con-
nected with self (or the Ego), while it seems equally clear that
the phenomena of volition and voluntary act are truly and
satisfactorily explained by the Positive philosophers.
Since the explanations are diametrically opposite, it is
obvious there must be an error somewhere, and it appears to my
mind that it is in the logic: the propositions, as enunciated by
the opposite parties, are not identical. _
The question submitted is the following: What occurs m
a voluntary act? Both parties will agree that the result or act
is due to the reaction between the individual and an excitant.
In other words, that the result would not occur without some
motive whether this be an internal or external excitant, whether
it be an object of danger to be avoided, or an internal desire or
wish to act. At all events, there must always be some reason or
incentive to perform a volition. _
This beino- admitted on both parts, the problem is reduced
to an enquiry into the nature of the reaction between the ex-
ternal excitant and the individual, which, for the sake of brevity,
we will call the " Ego." One view (A) is that, given a particular
Ego acted upon by a particular excitant; a certain and pre-
dicate result will follow?or, some would put it, would
necessarily follow. The other view (B) is, that the result would
not be certain or necessary or predicable, but, on the contrary,
variable?that when the Ego was acted upon by an excitant,
the result would be determined by an intervening power, called
Will, and that experience and common sense prove it.
The error, in my opinion, lies in this, that the Ego, as
understood by the two parties, is not the same is not a fixed
term. The premises of the propositions are thus not identical.
The Ego as used in the first proposition A is a concrete
term; it is limited in its use to a single increment of time;
while the Ego in the second proposition B is a general or
abstract term, and is not limited to time. On the contrary, the
signification of Ego, as used by Dr Carpenter in his arguments,
is a general notion, abstracted from the continuous existence of
the idea of self from childhood to manhood. Personal identity
is a similar general idea. We believe that we are the same
individual, through the whole stages of life, though the body
lias grown, and though we believe we have changed its material
over and over again. We have the conviction, from the
evidence of sense, that the Ego is the same. When we speak
of the Ego in this signification, we must view it as modified by
64 WILL AND VOLITION.
a life's experience, as the receptacle and storehouse of an infinity
of influences, some even of hereditary origin, but we make use
of the term perfectly legitimately, as expressing a general
idea. When we put the same proposition with this under-
standing, it is obvious that we are not arguing on the same
terms as when the term means simply the person at one point
of time only.
In this or second case B the reaction, too, is not only
between a general or abstract idea of the Ego, but the action is
considered as extending through an indefinite time, and there-
fore reacting upon a varying state of the environments, or upon
a more or less general view of the circumstance in which the
Ego was placed. The conclusion is therefore evolved only in an
abstract or general form.
By a very easy transition, such a review of a man's voluntary
powers leads to the abstract notions of power and the other
attributes claimed for the " will." In reviewing the phenomena
in this general way, since the general idea must be formed upon
the particular or concrete act of volition, it will be readily per-
ceived that in the reaction of the Ego and its environments the
former is active and the latter usually passive, and the general idea
of the Ego becomes connected with the attribute of activity.
Hence it is readily conceived to be not only an agent, but the
determining agent,"* in all volitional acts, and, as it would appear,
as readily and as a natural consequence. The next step appears
to be to exalt the idea thus abstracted into an entity, and we
meet with such expressions as " Coughing can be excited by the
mandate of the will"; another, " The strongest exertion of the
will is powerless to prevent"; " The power of the will over the
muscles ;" " In these cases the will does not struggle against
a foreign impulse ;" &c.
The hypothesis of a separate determining agent is at least
unnecessary, since the facts are as readily accounted for Avithout
it, and Newton lays down the law that we should admit no
more causes of natural things than such as are both true and
sufficient to explain the appearances.
It would appear,in fine, that the differences and the difficulties
of the metaphysical hypothesis concerning the will are due to
the fact that their result is drawn from an abstract and general
view of the phenomena, whereas the hypothesis of the Positive
school is based upon observation of the phenomena in the
concrete.
It has been supposed that the metaphysical (or, as Dr Car-
* " It is the abstraction from tho particular volitions which metaphysicians
personify as "Will, and regard as their determining agent."?Dr Maudsley,
Body and Mind, p. 22.
WILL AND VOLITION. 65.
penter writes, the spiritualistic) explanation alone would account
for responsibility and choice of action.
But is there anything in the Positivist's explanation which
negatives choice, or freedom to choose, or responsibility ? For
these are the points which form the ground for the repugnance,
and are the attributes which are said to be as evident to the
experiences as the existence of an external world..
It is clear that it is quite as legitimate to* form an. abstract
and general idea of self as of any other concrete notion. A
concrete idea of self is necessarily limited by a single increment
of time, for directly we spread our existence over any sensible
duration in time the Ego is modified. In reviewing any single
act of volition thus limited we find in it, by the very means
appealed to by the spiritualistic school, viz. by our internal
sensation, an element of choice, for we cannot allow that act of
the will is contrary to our choice; and the Positivist school
admit the same, only explaining the word "choice" to be the
balance of inclinations in one or other way ;? if the spiritualistic
would make choice independent of such balance, and entirely
unconnected with will, except as a constant concomitant, it
follows that both agree that the concrete volition is always
accompanied by choice; and hence the general idea which is
the outcome of the concrete must also contain the attribute of
choice.
The abstract or general idea of choice, or, what is its
equivalent, the idea of a general power of selection, gives the
general abstract idea of " Free Will." But such general concepts
cannot yield an absolute, but only a contingent result; and this
is all that experience warrants in this case. And no man's
common sense or conviction can make him believe that he has
absolute freedom or free-will. It is not true that our convictions
prompt us to believe that we could by our will pervert any
natural law; all that they convince us is, that we have a certain
range, a comparative freedom to act, according to our organism
and our surroundings.
If the Positivist's theory, as admitted, gives but a compara-
tive or modified freedom, in what does this differ from the oppo-
site, which is, We are free, therefore responsible : this is freedom
with drawbacks, and therefore not an absolute freedom ? If
there is no absolute freedom, how can there be an absolute re-
sponsibility ; so that one hypothesis is not better in this respect
than its fellow. The truth is, the idea of responsibility is a
legitimate concept from experience, and in no way militates
against the Positive view of psychology. That certain actions
are accompanied by pain is a concrete fact, from which the
general concept of responsibility naturally follows.
NO. I.?NEW SEKIES. F
66 WILL AND VOLITION.
The main difficulty, however, in the understanding of the
theory of Will is the tendency still extant in the minds of many
to metaphysical doctrines. These doctrines had a deep hold of
the general reader; they were intimately incorporated into all
kinds of literature for a long period, and the effects are still
discoverable in the debris which occasionally turn up. Those of
this school, it is true, usurped the name of " Spiritualist," yet
no materialists were more wedded to matter than many of them.
No error is more common still than the embodying of an abstract
idea in a real and substantial person. " Having once detached
an aspect, and considered it apart, the mind is prone to assign
an objective reality to this separated aspect The danger
is slight, with abstractions of the first degree. Probably no
one ever personified whiteness?as virtue and nature have been
personified?though we remember that boundary had its god
Terminus?marriage its god Hymen, &c."*
The idea " will" has been thus personified, and has been in
that form allowed to tyrannise over the intelligence. Will has
been compared to the engine-driver, and the locomotive to his
body. The engine-driver Will is able to move or stop the
engine as he likes. The simile may be good, to a certain
extent, but it cannot be admitted that the analogy is complete
in all its details, nor can it give a separate existence to the Will
apart from the engine. A simile is a legitimate method for
explaining a process, but it proves nothing, and this simile or
metaphor will give no more warrant for the idea that the Will
is separate from the body and bodily functions, than that it can
step down from its engine to perform other functions ; and if
we give this independent power to Will, we must assign the same
to Digestion, or Growth, Life, &c.; or if it is intended to signify
that this power is what is called the " Soul," and which probably
is the view of many, this would be nothing more than changing
the title, and the same arguments would apply that have been
used to the faculty, under the title of the " Will."
* Lewes, Problems of Life and Mind, p. 278.
