Arachnoid Cysts
================

167 Art. II.?.
BY J. CRICHTON BROWNE, M.D., P.R.S.E.
Medical Director, West Riding Asylum.
Of the pathological changes that present themselves to obser-
vation in the post-mortem theatre of an asylum, there are few
more striking or distinctive than those membranous bags or
films that have been designated arachnoid cysts. Lining the
dura mater, and covering the surface of the hemispheres, which
they sometimes compress to no inconsiderable degree, they are
calculated, by their situation, by their glistening surface,
their variegated tints, their essentially morbid appearance,
to impress and dwell in the memory. Once seen they are
not easily forgotten, and once pictured in the mind's eye
by the aid of an accurate description, there can be but little
danger that when thereafter encountered they might be mis-
taken for anything else. Descriptions of such cysts abound
in the records of most asylums, and it may be well to open
-what I have to say regarding them by quoting a description
from the archives of the West Riding Asylum, selected not
because it is unusually precise or excellent, but because it is
the first that comes to hand, and refers to the last case here
in which arachnoid cysts were discovered.
H. H. died in the West Riding Asylum on the 11th of
.June last, having completed the dreary curriculum of general
paralysis, unvaried in his case by any exceptional incidents.
The post-mortem examination of his body took place thirty-five
hours after his death, and revealed the presence of arachnoid
cysts on his brain. The instant that the skull was opened the
presence of these cysts was suspected, for the dura mater was
not so white as it ordinarily is, but had a diffused bluish tinge,
and fluctuated perceptibly when touched. The reflection of
the dura mater brought the cysts into view, lying upon both
hemispheres, and covering what was exposed of them entirely,
so that no convolution was visible. Between the dura mater
and the cysts a certain degree of adhesion existed, which could,
however, be readily broken down by the finger tip, except at a
few scattered points over the left hemisphere, where threads of
greater tenacity bound them together, requiring the point of a
knife for their severance. The inner surface of the dura mater,
wherever in contact with the cysts, had a rusty reddish brown
colour, due to an exceedingly fine layer of deposit capable of
168 ARACHNOID CYSTS.
being scraped off. The cysts themselves were quite distinct from
each other, and that on the left side was much the larger of the
two. It formed a large membranous bag with fluid contents,
and it not only covered the upper aspect of the hemisphere, but
was wrapped round its edges and ends, and continued as a
toughly glutinous layer over the orbital lobule to the middle
sulcus, and over the whole contour of the tempero-sphenoidal
lobe. In colour it varied from a dull buff over the parietal
eminence to a pale pink at its outer margins, dabbled with
sanguine blotches, and with irregularly interspersed greenish
and brownish tints. In its walls, which were smooth and moist,
ramified minute vessels, and in its interior were several ounces
of clear fluid of a greenish red colour. This fluid occupied the
cavity of the cyst, which was co-extensive with the parietal and
posterior portions of the frontal lobe. Beyond these limits
the two layers of the cyst became adherent, though for some
distance they could be torn asunder. Ultimately, however,
towards the base of the brain, they became intimately and
inseparably connected, and formed one delicate membrane of
the consistence of the most toughly organised clots found
in the cardiac cavities. The cyst covering the right hemisphere
in all respects resembled that on the left side, except that its
walls were everywhere thinner, and that it contained a less
amount of fluid. When the two cysts were removed from the
hemispheres, from which they could be readily peeled off, being
only adherent by a few reddish threads (blood vessels) binding
them to the arachnoid and pia mater beneath, the brain was
seen to be generally flattened and compressed. The convolu-
tions looked as if they had been smoothed out, and the sulci
were scarcely discernible. This was especially the case on the
left side, where the compression of the brain was most marked,
the frontal lobe having an attenuated and pointed appearance.
Beneath the cysts, the visceral layer of the arachnoid, opaque
and milky in some places, was distinctly seen, and beneath it
was the pia mater, intimately adherent to the cineritious matter
of the gyri. A few of the gyri on the left side?the ascend-
ing parietal, postero-parietal lobule, and angular gyrus?pre-
sented an unusual appearance, the outer surface of their cortical
matter being stained of a deep reddish yellow or mahogany
colour. This staining, unlike the adhesions of the pia mater,
was not confined to the summits of the gyri, but dipped down
along their sides, even to the bottom of the sulci. When
removed from the brain and emptied of their fluid contents,
the two cysts weighed exactly 39 grammes.
In this case the arachnoid cysts were of great size and
extent, and belonged, indeed, to the most marked type of these
AKACHNOID CYSTS. 169
morbid formations which are seen in other cases of very
varied dimensions, but all partaking of the same characters.
Even in those cases where the reparative process has advanced
furthest in the removal of the cysts, they are found as thin,
transparent, cloudy membranes, investing the frontal or parietal
lobes, separable towards the middle into two layers, perhaps
closely applied, or even adherent to each other, but continued
as one attenuated membrane towards the periphery.
Arachnoid cysts are, as I have said, perhaps the most striking,
and they are certainly not the least frequent, of the intra-cranial
pathological appearances found on inspection of the bodies of
the insane. I have carefully gone over the reports of 1,240
post-mortem examinations performed under my own supervision
in the West Eiding Asylum during the last nine years, and I
find that in exactly 59 of these cases were arachnoid cysts
discovered. The induction is sufficiently large to warrant the
conclusion that such cysts exist in nearly 5 per cent, of all
lunatics dying in asylums. In the 59 cases I have of course
included cysts in every stage of development, and all sub-
arachnoidal haemorrhages, except such as were connected with
clots in the cerebral substance, and were really dependent upon
the breaking out of the clot on the surface of the brain or on
the escape of blood from the ventricles. Wherever extravasa-
tion of blood had taken place into the arachnoid cavity, whether
that extravasation had become organised or not, I have con-
sidered the case one of arachnoid cyst, and have embraced it
in my statistics. The cases, however, in which the extravasa-
tion was of recent origin, and remained as a film of fluid blood
or a simple clot, were only 11 in number, leaving 48 cases in
which a membranous formation and persistent sac had taken the
place of the original coagulum. The 11 cases, too, in which
the cysts were in their incipient stage all presented features
making the true character of the sanguineous effusion into the
arachnoid quite unmistakable.
Of the 59 patients in the West Eiding Asylum in whom
arachnoid cysts were shown to exist on post-mortem examina-
tion, 43 were males and 16 females, so that the liability of the
male sex to this particular pathological change seems to be
nearly three times as great as that of the female sex. The
explanation of this singular disparity is to be sought in the
much higher liability of males to suffer from those serious
organic diseases of the cerebrum upon which as a rule arach-
noid cysts supervene. The following table shows at a glance
the diseases and degenerations which afflicted and caused the
death of those 59 patients in whom arachnoid cysts were
recorded:?
NO. II.?NEW SERIES. 0
170 ARACHNOID CYSTS.
Disease
Hale
Female
Total
General paralysis of the insane
Chronic disorganisation of the brain
Senile atrophy of the brain
Epilepsy, with domentia .
Chorea, with mania .
Meningitis, with mania .
Bright's disease, with mania
Phthisis, with chronic mania
26
11
3
1
1
1
29
16
4
3
2
2
2
1
Total
43
16
59
We thus see that in nearly one-half of the whole number
of cases in which arachnoid cysts were found general paralysis
was the disease causing death, and that in every case, there is
reason to suppose, there was antecedent degeneration of the
brain or its blood-vessels. The ages at the time of death of
the patients in whom the morbid change under consideration
existed correspond of course with those periods of life in
which organic diseases of the brain and its membranes have
their maximum frequency. As is shown in the accompanying-
table 28, or nearly one-half of the whole number of arachnoid
cysts, were found in patients dying between the ages of 35
and 45. A distinction is thus pointed out between arachnoideal
haemorrhages and those taking place in the substance of the
cerebrum, which have their maximum frequency at a much
later period of life.
Age
Male
Female
Total
Between 20 and 30 .
30 ? 35 .
35 ? 40 .
40 ? 45 .
45 ? 50 .
50 ? 55 .
55 ? 60 .
60 ? 70 .
70 ? 80 .
17
6
3
6
4
2
2
2
2
20
8
6
10
6
3
2
Total .
43
16
59
As to the localisation of the cysts, I find that in 14 of the
59 cases the cyst covered the left hemisphere, in 13 the
right hemisphere, while in 32 cases there were cysts over
ARACHNOID CYSTS. 171
both hemispheres- Although it might seem from these figures
that the two hemispheres are liable to be affected by arach-
noid cysts in about equal proportion, there is other evidence
indicating that the left side of the encephalon is the more
chosen habitat of that particular morbid change. In 8 of the
32 cases in which cysts were spread over both hemispheres it is
noted that that on the left side was much the larger and fuller
of the two, whereas in only 1 case of the 32 is there a
record that the right cyst exceeded the left one in size. Then
in the 14 cases in which the cyst was limited to the left side the
descriptions given unmistakably show that the pathological
condition was more pronounced than in the 13 cases in which
the right side was affected. It was in those 14 cases that the
most decided instances of wasting of the hemisphere com-
pressed by the cyst occurred. Thus in J. M. the left hemi-
sphere, which had been enveloped in a cyst, weighed 470
grammes, while the right, which had not been so enveloped,
weighed 595 grammes. In Gr. L. the left hemisphere, which had
been cyst-covered, weighed 528 grammes, and the right, which
had been free, weighed 570. On the other hand, in the cases in
which cysts were found on the right side alone the difference
in the weight of the two halves of the cerebrum was com-
paratively trifling.
Respecting the mode of origin of those cysts found in the
arachnoid cavities, I have already taken for granted the truth
of the proposition that they result from extravasations of
blood. The writings of Mr. Prescott Hewett, Dr Ogle, Dr.
Wilks, Dr Henry Sutherland, and of other able observers,
may be almost said to place that truth beyond cavil. The old
theory that these cysts originated in the organisation of lymph
poured out during an anachritis has now few supporters. The
cysts have been seen in every stage * of their formation?from
fluid blood up to tenacious membrane, and light has been
thrown on their nature and structure by experiment and the
study of various allied conditions. Thus Sperling (' Centrall.'
1871, 448) has made injections between the dura mater and
the arachnoid over the convexity of the brain in rabbits with
the following results :?Eight days after the injection of fresh
blood it began to be organised into a connective-tissue mem-
brane, which was complete after two or three weeks. After the
latter period new blood-vessels were found in the new mem-
brane, which agreed in all characters with the membrane of
pachymeningitis. The organisation of the blood occurred over
the convexity of the brain on the inner surface of the dura
mater without any adhesions to the arachnoid. The formation
of the new membrane was due to the organisation of the fibrin
0 2
172 ARACHNOID CYSTS.
contained in the blood. That this was so was shown by the
fact that no new formation was found after the injection of
defibrinated blood, which was completely re-absorbed. Injections
of iodine and other irritating fluids was not followed by any
new formation. In some cases the dura mater was found
thickened, in others there was pus. Then in the ceph al-
ii asmatoma of infants we may discern an analogous origin and
a series of analogous changes to those which take place in the
intra-cranial hsematomata of adults.
It is no uncommon occurrence to find in the infant whose
head has been subjected to severe and long-continued pressure
during parturition, by the os uteri or against the walls of the
pelvis, large extravasations of blood both without and within
the cranium. The pressure to which the infant's head has
been subjected has bruised its tissues, and the difficulties con-
nected with the establishment of a new current of circulation and
a new respiratory process have interfered with the free return
of the blood from the cephalic vessels, as the tumid and livid
features seen at such a time abundantly testify, and so a
capillary hemorrhage or oozing takes place. If the extrava-
sation be within the cranium and be of considerable amount,
death, preceded by coldness of the surface, laboured breathing,
slowing of the pulse, and muscular twitchings or convulsions,
takes place. If it be within the cranium, but of less amount,
a false membrane is formed, the cerebrum is compressed and
restricted in growth, and incurable idiocy results. And if it
be within the cranium, and of still less amount, it may be
altogether absorbed and produce no unpleasant consequences.
If, on the other hand, the extravasation be without the cranium,
little or no danger attends it, and facilities are offered for
watching its formation and the changes which it undergoes.
Under such circumstances it first becomes perceptible within
a few hours of birth, on one or both of the parietal bones, as
an elastic fluctuating tumour, which goes on slowly enlarging
for several days, until it sometimes attains the size of an
orange. When it has reached its full dimensions the cephal-
hematoma?for so the tumour is designated?remains stationary
for some time, and then retrogrades in a definite manner. A
ring of hard consistence forms at the circumference of its
base, the clot separates into serum and crassamentum, the
latter is gradually deprived of its colouring matter, a steady
diminution in size goes on, until complete absorption has taken
place. For long, however, after the cephalhematoma has dis-
appeared, a slight elevation may be found at the site which it
occupied.
In the othsematomata of the insane a connecting link
ARACHNOID CYSTS. 173
may be found between the cephalhcematomata of infants and
the arachnoid cysts of chronic lunatics. These othsema-
tomata have been shown to depend on an accumulation of
blood between the skin of the pinna and the cartilage, gradually
increasing until a high state of tension of the covering is
reached, and then retrograding by the formation of a coagu-
lum, the adhesion of a membrane to the walls of the sac, and
the steady absorption of its liquid contents, until only a few
fibrous shreds and some cholesterine are left at its core.
The different stages of growth and retrocession in the blood
tumours of the ear agree closely with those which take place in
the blood tumours beneath the dura mater, except that in the
case of the ear tumours there are certain special subsequent
changes attributable to degeneration and shrivelling of the
cartilage, the nutrition of which had been seriously interfered
with by the extravasation. In all blood tumours, in fact, the
process of growth and decay is tolerably uniform. The sangui-
neous effusion is gathered into a clot or disseminated into a
layer. It forms a coagulum, enclosing the fluid portions of the
blood, that coagulum is absorbed or becomes condensed and
organised, with vessels ramifying in it, and then it remains
stationary or dwindles away, according to its surroundings.
The mode of origin of arachnoid cysts in the manner indi-
cated is now almost universally admitted, and the point to be
determined is not whether these cysts are hgemorrhagic in their
source, but whence the hemorrhage has taken place. By some
it is maintained that it proceeds from the ruptured vessels of a
false membrane or efflorescence lining the dura mater, and
resulting from a pachymengitis, and by others that it has its
source in the vessels of the dura mater itself. But neither of
these views seems to me to be satisfactory. The few and slender
vessels which penetrate the dura mater from its outside, where
its great vascular supply is situated, are incapable of pouring
out so large a quantity of blood as frequently goes to the forma-
tion of a cyst; and this will be especially evident when it is
borne in mind that these vessels?the vctsa propria of the mem-
brane?have a singular proclivity to become plugged by coagula,
and so sometimes induce gangrenous changes in areas of paren-
chyma thus cut off from nourishment. Then, as to the alleged
false membrane of the dura mater and its bleeding capillaries,
it is to be remarked, that in many cases where the cysts are
largest no such membrane nor any reminiscence of it, nor any
extraordinary thickening of the dura mater has been discover-
able ; and that in other cases, where a gauzy shreddy lining of
the dura mater, distinct from the cyst, has been discerned, its
vessels also have seemed inadequate to the production of such
174 ARACHNOID CYSTS.
a haemorrhage as that which goes to the making of an arachnoid
cyst. The capacity of the newly developed capillary network
in the way of extravasating blood may, perhaps, be gauged by
the bloody points and blotches which are often seen in its sub-
stance, and which do not exceed a sixpence in circumference or
thickness. The gap between these blotches and an arachnoid
cyst is certainly very wide. Even allowing that the capillaries
in such a membrane are very capacious, and are distributed in
young and lax connective tissue, and that they are, as has been
said, a diverticulum or safety-valve for the increased tension of
the actively congested dura mater, it is still impossible to
admit the conclusion sought to be drawn from these facts, that
they may, by interstitial htemorrhage, create those masses and
extensive layers of clot that are transformed into arachnoid
cysts. If arachnoid cysts were really derived from such efflor-
escences, we should expect to find them formed most frequently
at the time when the circulation in the new membrane was
most active, when the pacliymengitis was at its height. But
the fact is, that we never do find such cysts in cases of general
paralysis or other brain disease in its early stages, when in-
flammatory changes might be supposed to be most energetic.
I have never encountered such a cyst or its preparatory clot
in any general paralytic carried off by intercurrent disease
earlier than the second stage of the malady. Arachnoid
cysts are consequential and not essential changes in all the
diseases in which they occur. As a rule, too, they do not begin
to form until the disease has well-nigh run its course. And
here we have a clue to their point of origin. If these cysts
never appear until the disease is far advanced?until much wast-
ing of the brain has taken place?it is fair to infer that they
are drawn from some of the vessels which become over-distended
when wasting is established. And the vessels which suffer most
in this way are the great veins which run over the frontal
and parietal lobes, conveying the blood to the longitudinal sinus.
These become terribly dilated and engorged, and at the same
time, being to a great extent surrounded by serous fluid, they
have lost some of that support which they normally derive from
the subjacent brain-substance. Then they are also in a state of
permanent atony brought on by the protracted and often-
repeated irritation and hyperemia of the cineritious substances
of the brain in general paralysis and kindred complaints; and
this state, through passive congestion and plilebectazy, distension
and elongation, may lead not merely to effusion of serum and
oedema of the pia mater, but also, on the occurrence of any
determining cause, to actual haemorrhage. This will be parti-
cularly likely to happen when the delicate walls of the veins are
ARACHNOID CYSTS. 175
degenerated as well as stretched and dilated, as it is not impro-
bable they are in many organic cerebral diseases. All this
being so, it appears that the veins of the pia mater are, under
certain circumstances, very liable to rupture; and the calibre of
these veins is such that they could furnish forth the smallest
and the largest of the superficial clots that are found on the
surface of the brain. It is certainly an instructive fact in rela-
tion to their origin, that the largest of these superficial clots
invariably have their centre and thickest part precisely at those
sites where wasting is always most decided and where the veins
are most distended, that is to say, in the upper frontal and
parietal regions.
It is scarcely to be expected that'in such haemorrhages as
those into the arachnoid cavity the precise point of leakage
should be detectable. If the hsemorrhage is of any age at the
date of the examination the damage may have been repaired;
if it is quite recent there are generally revealed by its
removal a large number of oozing points in the vessels, from any-
one of which it might have originated. In one case, however,
which came under notice in the West Riding Asylum some
years ago, conclusive evidence was obtained that an extravasa-
tion into the arachnoid cavity may come from the great veins.
True in that case the pathological conditions displayed were
somewhat unique; but the significant fact remains that the
blood poured out had flowed, not indeed from the veins of the
pia mater, but from their confluence in the sinuses of the dura
mater. The patient was a woman 53 years of age, who had
laboured for above four years under chronic mania, and who
was steadily losing health. While passing through an exacer-
bation of excitement in December 1871 she suddenly, in the
midst of a transport of shouting, became silent, pale, and faint.
Taken to bed, she grew drowsy and stupid, and in twelve hours
was in a state of deep coma, which continued for four days, and
then ended in death. At the inspection of her body a large
dark pulpy clot, about an eighth of an inch in thickness, was
found lying upon the surface of the brain on the left side. It
covered the tempero-spheroidal lobe, and extended backwards
on to the occipital lobe, and upwards on to the parietal lobe.
On removing the mass of the clot several small stringy clots of
considerable tenacity were found proceeding from it into several
small distinct holes or deficiencies in the left lateral sinus.
Out of these holes the tenacious clots could be dragged, leaving
patent communication with the cavity of the sinus. There
were three such holes distinctly visible, and a few smaller and
less distinct ones. The dura mater, where forming the left
lateral sinus and in its vicinity was thin, and had a singular
176 ARACHNOID CYSTS.
reticulated appearance. It looked as if it were almost cribriform,
as if it had been macerated and the bundles of fibres composing*
it had been dissected out and separated from each other. Along
the superior longitudinal sinus there were several reticulated
attenuated-looking patches resembling those seen over and
about the lateral sinus.
Cases have been reported in which, from traumatic causes,
the veins of the pia mater have been altogether torn away
from the superior longitudinal sinus, and no difficulty need, I
think, be experienced in conceiving liow minor injuries of these
veins, or their rupture from extreme distension, may permit
the formation of large superficial clots and arachnoid cysts.
Dr Wilks, than whom no higher authority could be quoted
upon such a subject, has expressed his belief that the effusions
of blood which give rise to arachnoid cysts may proceed from a
laceration of a vessel of the pia mater.
It has been generally alleged that the effusions of blood
which give rise to arachnoid cysts result from blows or injuries,
and no doubt much may be said in favour of that theory.
These cysts are mostly found in patients who have suffered from
diseases characterised by diminished precision of muscular
movement and loss of the power of equilibrium, and characterised
also by restlessness and reckless excitement, so that it might
well be that in such cases falls and concussions of the brain have
been sustained. My own observations, however, have led me to
believe that in reality blows and injuries play a comparatively
insignificant part in the causation of arachnoid cysts, and that
other conditions are more generally responsible for their produc-
tion. Allowing at once the impossibility of proving that blows
have not been instrumental in their production, particularly
when the recollections of the patient himself are not available
as evidence, I may still instance cases which have fallen within
my own knowledge, which had been carefully watched from
first to last, in which no accident of any kind had been known
to have taken place, and in which these cysts were discovered
post mortem. I have found these cysts in their incipient stage
existing, indeed, as a dark soft clot of blood, obviously formed
only very shortly before death, in patients who had been bed-
ridden and incapable of spontaneous movement for weeks prior
to their decease, during which they had been watched uninter-
ruptedly, and who presented no vestige of a bruise or injury
upon the scalp or any other part of their bodies. One very
instructive case bearing upon the point at issue occurred in my
practice some years ago. A patient well advanced in general
paralysis, but without any muscular symptoms except thickness
of speech and tremor of the face, was seized by epileptiform
ARACHNOID CYSTS. 177
convulsions in my presence. He was seated at the time when
the convulsions came on, and did not fall, but was at once
supported and conveyed to bed, where he continued to suffer
from general chronic spasms for twenty-four hours, his head,
face, and neck being livid, congested, and bathed in perspira-
tion throughout the seizure. After the convulsions ceased he
remained in a drowsy, semi-comatose state for nearly a week,
and then it was ascertained that he had, to a great extent, lost
power in his right arm and leg. This condition of partial
hemiplegia was subsequently in some degree mitigated, but
it never entirely disappeared until his death, which happened
two months after the first and only epileptiform attack from
which he had suffered. At the sectio cadaveris a pulpy mem-
branous clot, decolorised at its centre and containing there a
cavity with fluid contents, was found stretched over, the upper
surface of the left hemisphere, upon which it exercised con-
siderable pressure. I think it is reasonable to infer that that clot
or arachnoid cyst was formed during the epileptiform seizure, and
was due not to any external violence, but to the over-distended
state of the intracranial vessels during the long-sustained con-
vulsive condition.
Bearing in mind that towards the close of general paralysis,
and other organic diseases of the brain accompanied by wasting,
the vessels are dilated, are deprived of their proper support, and
are also badly nourished and degenerated, it is not difficult to
understand that many other circumstances besides the jar of a
concussion may lead to their rupture and the effusion of their
contents. No doubt a sudden and violent vibration may and
does sometimes bring about that catastrophe, but what I desire
to insist upon is that there are many other agencies which are
at least equally potent in inducing it. Any circumstance
or condition that occasions cerebral hyperemia may be re-
sponsible for its occurrence. And such circumstances and con-
ditions are certainly not wanting in patients of the class liable
to arachnoid cysts. They labour under a great tendency to faecal
accumulations in the intestines, and these, by compressing the
abdominal aorta, are particularly apt to cause cerebral conges-
tion. They are rash and careless in their conduct, and often
expose the skin to cold, and so set up collateral fluxionary
congestion of the encephalon. They are often sedentary in
their habits and voracious in their appetites, and so grow fat
and plethoric for a time after the cerebral disease has spent its
earliest force, and are thus again exposed to risks of hyper-
emia of the brain. They are subject to transient attacks of
mental excitement, during which there is active liypersemia of
the cortical substances of the brain, and in which they shout
178 ARACHNOID CYSTS.
and strain, and so hinder the return of blood to the thorax,
and aggravate the cerebral congestion. And they are subject
also to epileptiform attacks, often of great severity, in which
there are trachelismus, fixture of the respiratory muscles, and an
intense degree of engorgement of all the blood-carrying conduits
of the head. In one and all of these conditions there is surely
enough to account for arachnoid cysts in many cases without
resorting to the crude hypothesis of mechanical disturbance.
Were these cysts in many instances due to blows or falls we
should certainly expect to find associated with them occa-
sionally some of the other and more ordinary consequences of
injury of the head of such severity as to cause the rupture of a
vessel. Now, it is a remarkable fact that I have never in such
cases seen a trace of hemorrhage outside the dura mater,
although, as is well known, the meningeal vessels are most of
all apt to give way when violence is applied to the head. It is
remarkable, also, that I have never been able to detect any
damage to the skull, any rupture or softening of the cerebral
substance, or any remains of those changes which are most
familiar as the results of injuries of the head. On the other
hand, again, it is curious that in cases in which undoubted
injuries have occurred to the head arachnoid cysts are very
rarely encountered, save in general paralytics and other patients,
with organically diseased brains. From all which it must, I
think, be deduced that an error has been committed in attri-
buting all arachnoid cysts to traumatic causes, and that we
shall be justified in holding that many of them are ascribable to
the spontaneous laceration of a vessel, owing to morbid changes
and conditions. Such spontaneous laceration we see taking
placing in hooping-cough, and also in those very diseases upon
which arachnoid cysts supervene in the otheematomata (to
which we have already adverted) of the external ear, which were
also at one time held to be invariably the offspring of injury, but
which are now known to grow up without the intervention of
any outward force. It seems to me that the old formula that
injuries of the head affect the surface of the brain and diseases
its interior is no longer tenable, and that for practical and
medico-legal purposes we are bound to depart from the notions
which have long been promulgated about arachnoid cysts, and
to maintain that they may and frequently do originate in what
is called a spontaneous manner.
To the interesting enquiry that arises whether there are any
distinctive symptoms making it clear during life that an arach-
noid cyst has been formed, and making it safe to predict that
one will be found after death, only an uncertain answer can be
returned. A priori, one should have thought that such a for-
ARACHNOID CYSTS. 179
midable-looking lesion in so infinitely important a position
would have been attended by unmistakable outward signs, and
indeed, when looking at a large cyst one cannot help wondering
that life was for any length of time compatible with its presence
within the cranium. The fact is that such an extravasation occur-
ring in a previously healthy man would inevitably cause speedy
death, and that it is only tolerated in those diseased persons
in whom it is found because they have been prepared, as it were,
to receive it and to sustain its effects. The grey matter of the
cerebrum is exceedingly liable to alteration under various con-
ditions, and in certain states of alteration is able to adapt itself
to circumstances that in its normal state would prove fatal. In
the undeveloped brain large clots are borne with impunity,
and MM. Eilliet and Barthey have pointed out that in infants
copious and widely diffused extravasation of blood may exist
on the surface of the hemispheres without any paralysis being-
present. Well, in the involuted brains of chronic lunatics a>
similar insensibility exists. The degenerated, or partially dis-
integrated, cerebral matter is far less susceptible to the influence
of compression and irritation than it was in those days when it
rejoiced in the plenitude of its power. An amount of com-
pression that would at once arrest the functions of a vigorous,
brain and interrupt consciousness may exert but little effect on
the sluggish movements of one that is already dilapidated and
may scarcely augment the helplessness of dementia. The de-
generated brain is already, owing to changes in its vessels and
the surrounding textures, in a state of anaemia, and cannot
therefore have its blood squeezed out of it by compression to
the same extent as takes place in a healthy brain in the fulness
of its vascular supply when similarly treated. Therefore it
comes about that in general paralysis and organic dementia the
indications afforded of a superficial haemorrhage on the brain
are sometimes very insignificant, especially if the haemorrhage
has taken place slowly. These indications consist in some
slightly increased impairment of muscular power on one or both
sides of the body, and in some further deepening of the already
profound fatuity, and cannot of course warrant more than a
suspicion that a superficial haemorrhage has taken place. In
some cases, however, there are other symptoms which may
convert a suspicion into tolerable certainty, and which
may even enable us to fix upon the precise time when the
haemorrhage occurred and the foundations of the cyst were
laid. In a case already quoted, it was tolerably clear that the
haemorrhage took place during an epileptiform seizure, and
in several other cases, of which I possess notes, the symptoms
suggest forcibly that the clot was formed under similar circum-
180 ARACHNOID CYSTS.
stances. One case may be mentioned which proves incon-
testable" that extravasations of blood do occur on the surface of
the brain during the convulsive seizures of organic cerebral
disease. M. L., female, aged 38, was sinking quietly through
the final stage of general paralysis of four years' duration,
when, on April 25th, 1873, she was seized by convulsions, which
recurred frequently on that and the following day. The con-
vulsive movements were sometimes on one side of the body,
sometimes on the other, and occasionally bi-lateral. They
affected, however, chiefly the left side of the body, the head
being turned as if looking over the left shoulder. On the
second day it was noted that, during the intervals between the
convulsions, she lay with her head slightly turned to the left
and that she was incessantly going through a chewing move-
ment ; she endeavoured to bite everything that was brought
near her, and when nothing else was available she gnawed her
own hair and the bedclothes ; she was only partially conscious.
She continued in much the same state up till the 6th of May,
when she died. At the post-mortem examination, six small dis-
tinct dark clots were found under the arachnoid, in the meshes of
the pia mater, lying upon the three tiers of frontal gyri of the
right side. These were quite recent and quite superficial. All
the vessels of the pia mater were engorged with dark blood. In
another case the formation of the clot at a much longer period
before death was indicated with tolerable clearness. S. A. S., a
female, aged 46, who was suffering from severe chorea-mania,
went to bed in her usual condition at 7.30 p.m. on the evening
of October 24th, 1873. An hour later she was found by the
night-nurse apparently dead: her features were pallid, and there
were no respiratory movements beyond a few convulsive twitch-
ings in the throat. Artificial respiration had to be kept up for
some time before she revived. For many hours she remained
in a stupid bewildered semi-comatose condition, and when this
passed off she was still decidedly more fatuous and feeble than
she had previously been, drooping perceptibly to the left side.
She grew worse and died from typhlitis in the February follow-
ing, when a thin reddish yellow membrane of considerable
tenacity was found spread over the right hemisphere, having
its centre in the parietal lobe.
The commencement of the clot in an attack of excitement
was illustrated in the case of T. E., aged 36, an inmate of the
West Riding Asylum. This man, who was a general paralytic,
had improved slightly under Calabar bean, when, on October
11th, 1875, he had an unaccountable outburst of excite-
ment, in which he shouted, stamped, swore, and behaved with
great violence. His fury, however, gradually became more
ARACHNOID CYSTS. 181
impotent, and lie passed into stupor. On the following day
liis eyeballs were prominent, his pupils were unequal and
irregular in their margins, his face was flushed, his gait was
very unsteady, and he was torpid and could not speak. Sub-
sequently he failed rapidly, and died on April 22, 1875. Over
the left hemisphere of his brain was found a thin membrane,
separable into two layers and pretty firmly adherent to the
dura mater.
As to the treatment of arachnoid cysts not much can be
said, as they scarcely admit of treatment apart from the diseases
of which they are complications. The great matter is to guard
against their formation. If we knew that blood was actually being
poured out into the arachnoid, we might, perhaps, limit the
amount of the extravasation by ergotine and active purgatives.
When, however, the extravasation has once taken place not
much can be done beyond improving the general health, so as
to favour absorption. Iodide of potassium has been tried, but
with doubtful benefit.
\
\
