Condition of Lunacy in England
================================

182
Art. III.?

TnE Twenty-ninth Annual Report of the Commissioners in
Lunacy has just been issued, containing valuable particulars and
statistics, relating to the care and treatment at present existing
in England of persons of unsound mind.

By perusal of its pages, we find that on the 1st January
of the present year there were on the official books of the
Commissioners 63,793 registered lunatics, showing an increase
of 1,766 on that of the preceding year. Of this number 7,390
are registered as private lunatics, and 56,403 as pauper lunatics.
Among the former class are included patients, not only residing
in licensed houses, but also those maintained at the national
cost at the Eoyal India Asylum, at the Yarmouth Naval
Hospital, at Netley Abbey, Grove Hall, Bow, and at the Criminal
Asylum, Broadmoor. Among the pauper lunatics are placed
only those who are maintained wholly or in part by or charge-
able to parishes, unions, counties, or boroughs.

The increase during the year of private patients is 98, and
of paupers 1,668. The increase of the latter has taken place in
the county and borough asylums by 1,157, in licensed houses
by 168, in Broadmoor Criminal Asylum by 20, in workhouses
by 358. But there is a decrease in the out-door paupers by
17, and also of 52 maintained in registered hospitals. The in-
crease of private patients is 1 in county and borough hospitals,
81 in registered houses, 50 in licensed houses, 5 as "single
patients " under private care, but it has decreased in number
by 7 in the Naval, Military and Indian asylums, and by 32 in
the Criminal Asylum of Broadmoor. The total population
between the years 1859 and 1875 has increased 21*63 per cent.,
but the private patients under care have increased as compared
with 1859, 48*39 per cent., and the increase of the paupers in
the same time under care is 77*47 per cent. At the present
time there are 172 males and 269 females under care as single
patients in private unlicensed houses.

Twelve interesting tables are given relating to the dis-
tribution of the insane during the last fifteen years, both pauper
and private; and it is a matter of congratulation to find by
reference to Tables V., VI., and VII., that the recoveries have
been 4 per cent, higher than they were last year, and 2 per
cent, above the average of the last sixteen years, whilst the
rate of mortality has remained stationary. We regret to
find out of 32,529 inmates of County and Borough Asylums
only 2,431, or a proportion of 7*47 per cent., are deemed
curable, but this to a great extent appears to us to be due to
the fact tliat these asylums are gradually becoming occupied
by a large proportion of chronic and incurable patients, who
might well be sustained in well-organised workhouse wards.
The attention of the Commissioners has for some years been
directed to the large number of epileptic patients who are
found dead in bed, and to the frequent occurrence of suicide
during the night, especially in public asylums. Attention was
directed to this subject in the 26th and 28th Reports of the
Commissioners in Lunacy, but notwithstanding the opinions
therein expressed of the inefficiency of the night nursing in
public asylums, proper precautions have not been hitherto
taken.

The Commissioners think that special attendants should be
.appointed for the exclusive care of these cases during the night,
and that arrangements should be made either by alterations in
existing wards, or by the construction of others affording ready
facility for immediate supervision.

Epileptic cases are generally under the strictest supervision
during the day, but during the night are apt to be neglected.
The Commissioners write as follows : " It is not only on account
of the number of epileptics found dead in their beds, and
of suicides which take place during the night?casualties
which, under proper arrangements, might often have been pre-
vented?that we continue to press our views, for we are strongly
of opinion that the sick and dying also demand continuous
nursing during the night. At the same time the epileptics
should have assistance always at hand during their terrible
seizures ; and all suicidal patients should receive that strict
personal supervision which alone can secure their safety. In
large asylums nothing less than the provision of special wards
for these classes will meet the requirements of the case.
Whether in small asylums suitable arrangements can be made
for the suicidal cases in combination with the sick depends
upon the construction of the buildings and the disposition of
the superintendents, most of whom, we believe, are favourable
to our views."

We are glad to find that these recommendations have been
carried out with excellent results in several asylums. The
various suicides and casualties which have taken place during
the year in the County Hospitals and Licensed Houses are
given in extenso in the Report, and also the various alterations
in the structural and other arrangements of these institutions.
The condition of establishments, both public and private, for
the reception of the insane, appears to ns to be highly satisfac-
tory on the whole, with the exception of the accommodation
provided for the reception of the insane in workhouses; and we
beg here to express our disappointment and regret at the
reluctance displayed by Boards of Guardians and medical officers
connected with these institutions in carrying out the recom-
mendations of the Visiting Commissioners ; and our remarks
would here especially allude to the Union "Workhouse of
Lang-port, the Brownlow Hill Workhouse, in the parish of Liver-
pool, and the Nottingham Union Workhouse. We would also
suggest that the relieving officers and others who are connected
with the care of pauper lunatics should make themselves cog-
nisant with what is required of them in the Act relating to the
legal bearing of the several sections of the Lunacy Act. The
Report before us contains actions which have been brought
against officials for breaches of the Lunacy Acts, and we
consider that at the present day it is a public disgrace that
the cases here reported should have taken place. It is sufficient
for our purpose to report briefly the facts relative to one of the
cases here cited.

At the commencement of 1873, G-eorge Wilson, a retired
servant in the Post Office, residing in the parish of Saint Mary,
Islington, showed symptoms of mental aberration. Mr. Merri-
field, the relieving officer of the parish, was informed that
there was a lunatic in his parish not under proper control.
Merrifield visited the house of the alleged lunatic three times,
but he never saw Wilson, or attempted any steps for his proper
supervision, notwithstanding he was informed that he was a
dangerous lunatic. In fact, he neglected his duty in failing to
comply with the 16 & 17 Vict. c. 97, s. 68, in giving notice of
the fact to a Justice, in order that the prescribed steps for the
proper detention in an asylum might be taken.

The lunatic, thus at large, attacked one of his sons with a
hatchet and killed him, but was, when arraigned on trial for
murder, unable to plead, and acquitted on the ground of
insanity. The Relieving Officer was prosecuted by the Com-
missioners for failing to comply with the Act; he was convicted
and fined the full penalty of ?10.

The case to us amounts to positive manslaughter, and we
trust Merrifield no longer retains the post of Relieving Officer,
one for which he has proved himself to be unfitted.
Another case in which the Commissioners justly decided to
prosecute we give particulars of:

Mrs. Groulden, landlady of a public-house, maintained in her
house amongst others Sarah Pownall, the daughter of her first
husband. It appears that this person had for some time been
considered eccentric, "but at the same time had been accustomed
to perform the menial offices of household work. In April 1873,
some of the neighbours failed to observe her going about as
usual, and on enquiry it was found that she could not be induced
to leave a small room in Mrs. Goulden's house, which was appro-
priated to her exclusive use. The Commissioners report that
" no active steps were taken to discover her real condition till
the 24th of May last, when the room in which she lived was
visited by the police. She was then found lying on a bed much
too small for her, and made up of a carpet, an old sheet, and an
old and dirty mattress. She lay with her knees nearly touching
her chin, her legs were covered with excrement caked on to the
skin; her hands and face were very dirty, her hair matted,
whilst beneath the bed the floor was swimming with urine;
the stench in the room'being unbearable." Such then is the
description given of a person, non compos mentis, whose friends
have undertaken the care. By direction of the police the
woman Pownall was washed and removed to another room, and
on the following day, having been examined by a medical man,
was forthwith conveyed to a County Asylum. Her mental state
was that of great depression, but her bodily condition, on
admission, was frightful. " She was filthily dirty, very thin,
and weak, her legs were contracted, so that they could not be
straightened beyond an angle of thirty degrees to the thigh,
there were sloughing sores over the thighs and knees and under
the arms." Such being the facts, the Commissioners most
properly determined to proceed against Mrs. Groulden, under
the 16 and 17 Vict, chapter 96, sec. 9, for the wilful neglect of
Sarah Pownall. Summonses were issued, and the hearing fixed
for the 6th of July.

The patient, however, died on the 25th of June in the
Asylum, from exhaustion, and at the inquest, held upon the 6tli
of July, the Coroner's jury returned a verdict that the death
had been accelerated by the culpable neglect of Mrs. Groulden,
who was accordingly committed for manslaughter. The enquiry
before the magistrates was held on the ] 3th of July, and Mrs.
Groulden was acquitted of manslaughter, and convicted only of
misdemeanour under the above-mentioned provisions of the
Lunacy Act. On the 11th of August, Mrs. Goulden was found
guilty at the Assizes at Chester of manslaughter, but in con-
sequence of her age and infirmity was recommended to mercy,
and sentenced to six months' imprisonment with hard labour.
This of itself should convince those who at the present day are
wont to ignore the responsibility incurred by those who
undertake the charge of persons of unsound mind, that
the charge is a grave one, and if abused, will be met with.
its just reward. And it is perfectly monstrous, notwithstanding
the popular cry, to suppose that persons of unsound mind in
private houses, whether pauper or private, can receive the
care, surveillance, and treatment provided for them in Asylums
and Licensed Houses.

An important addition to the particulars required by 8 & 9
Vict. c. 100, to he inserted in the case-hook kept at licensed
houses, has been recently made by the Commissioners. Upon
the admission of a patient the presence or absence of bruises
must be mentioned by the medical superintendent in the case-
book. This we consider most advisable. We have recently had
a case under our especial notice in which, notwithstanding
symptoms of dangerous and acute mania had for some time
been evinced, the friends and relatives refused to take any
active steps for placing the patient under legal restraint
until they were compelled to do so in consequence of very
alarming symptoms. The patient was in such a violent state
that it was impossible for her to travel by rail, and she had to
be placed in a carriage and driven to the asylum. Upon her
admission, on an examination it was found she was covered
with bruises on her arms and legs, the result of being forcibly held
down in her violent struggles ; entries of these bruises were
made in accordance with the instructions of the Commissioners
in Lunacy to which we have referred. In some cases the
relatives might unjustly attribute bruises to the attendants at
the asylum, but this cannot be done now, as will be seen by
the excellency of this proviso.

The following are the Revised Orders respecting the Case
Book:

Case Book Order. Eevised, 1874. '
8 and 9 Vict. c. 100, s. 60.
The Commissioners in Lunacy, by virtue of the power vested in
them by the Act of Parliament passed in the Session holden in the
8th and 9th years of the reign of Her present Majesty, intituled " An
Act for the Regulation of the Care and Treatment of Lunatics," do
hereby order and Direct?

That the Medical " Case Book," by the said Act directed to be
kept in every Licensed House and Hospital, shall be kept in the form
hereinafter mentioned, viz.:

First. A statement to be entered of the name, age, sex, and
previous occupation of the patient, and whether married, single,
or widowed.

Secondly. An accurate description to be given of the external
appearance of the patient upon admission : of the habit of body,
and temperament; appearance of eyes, expression of countenance,
and any peculiarity in form of head; physical state of the vascular
and respiratory organs, and of the abdominal viscera, and their
respective functions; state of the pulse, tongue, skin, &c.; and
the presence or absence, on admission, of bruises or other injuries
to be noted.

Thirdly. A description to be given of the phenomena of mental
disorder: the manner and period of the attack, with a minute
account of the symptoms, and the changes produced in the
patient's temper or disposition; specifying whether the malady
displays itself by any, and what, illusions or irrational conduct,
or morbid or dangerous habits or propensities; whether it has
occasioned any failure of memory or understanding, or is con-
nected with epilepsy, or ordinary paralysis, or symptoms of general
paralysis, such as tremulous movements of the tongue, defect of
articulation, or weakness or unsteadiness of gait.

Fourthly. Every particular to be entered which can be obtained
respecting the previous history of the patient: what are believed
to have been the predisposing and exciting causes of the attack;
what the previous habits, active or sedentary, temperate or other-
wise ; whether the patient has experienced any former attacks,
and if so, at what periods; whether any relatives have been
subject to insanity; and whether the present attack has been
preceded by any premonitory symptoms, such as restlessness,
unusual elevation or depression of spirits, or any remarkable
deviation from ordinary habits and conduct; and whether the
patient has undergone any, and what previous treatment, or has
been subjected to personal restraint.

Fifthly. During the first month after admission, entries to be
made at least once in every week, and oftener where the nature of
the case requires it. Afterwards, in recent or curable cases,
entries to be made at least once in every month ; and in chronic
cases, subject to little variation, once in every three months.
In all cases an accurate record to be kept of the medicines
administered, and other remedies employed, with the results, and
also of all injuries and accidents.

That the several particulars, hereinbefore required to be recorded,
be set forth in a manner so clear and distinct as to admit of being
easily referred to, and extracted, whenever the Commissioners shall so
require:

And that the present order be in substitution for those of the 9th
January 1846, and of the 20th March 1863, and that a copy hereof be
inserted at the commencement of the Case Book.
Dated this 16th day of March 1874.
Office of Commissioners in Lunacy:
19 Whitehall Place.
It is generally the custom now for the Commissioners in
Lunacy to send to each patient discharged as " Recovered " the
following statement:

Office of Commissioners in Lunacy:
19 Whitehall Place, S.W.
187 .
I am to inform you that Notice has been received at this Office,
that on the day of you were discharged
from care and treatment as a person of unsound mind.
The Commissioners desire that you should understand that you are
now a perfectly free agent, and that no interference with your liberty of
action will be justifiable under colour of the Lunacy Laws, except
?under fresh order and certificates.

As a proof that you have received this note, I am to ask you to tear
off the acknowledgment on the fourth page, to sign it, and post it to
this office.
I am
Your obedient servant,
Secretary.

We cannot altogether endorse this resolution of the Board.
There are many patients who, when placed in an asylum?fortu-
nately for their well-being?are under the impression that they
come there voluntarily, their friends wishing them to think
so in order to avoid exciting them unnecessarily. It appears
to us, that when patients have been discharged recovered,
it is unwise in most instances to make them aware of
all the particulars of their detention, for by so doing it may
be the means of causing much mental distress, and perhaps
inducing a relapse. We will take, for sake of illustration, the
following case:?A gentleman, whose bodily health is in a bad
state, suffers from well-marked symptoms of melancholia, with
delusions. He is desirous of placing himself under active
supervision in an asylum; certificates and order for admission
are duly filled up and signed, and he is received into the
asylum as a patient in a fit state to associate with the family
of the physician, at the same time imagining he has come
voluntarily. Having resided for three months at the asylum,
and receiving active treatment both for body and mind, he
leaves the asylum " recovered." Within a few days of his dis-
charge he finds that he was legally certificated as a lunatic;
much domestic grief and unhappiness are the result, and a
relapse in all probability ensues.

The Commissioners briefly and feelingly allude to the death
of Mr. Bryan Waller Proctor, one of the honorary members of
the Commission.

The Eeport carefully describes the condition of the various
County Asylums and Hospitals for the poor, and it is highly
* Recovered, or as the case may be.

gratifying to find that the reports are generally of a favourable
description, and everything appears to be done for the comfort
and care of the patients.

The criminal asylum at Broadmoor contains about 429
men and 116 women. The Commissioners say, "We learnt
with satisfaction that no person certified to be insane whilst
undergoing sentence of penal servitude has been sent to this
asylum from Millbank since November. If no more patients of
the convict class are sent here, those now in the asylum con-
victed in England, and sentenced to penal servitude for various
terms, will within ten years have served their time, and can
then be transferred to other asylums; but 19 convicted abroad,
12 convicted in Scotland, and 21 sentenced in this country to
penal servitude for life, will ten years hence still be here, if
alive and insane."

Another asylum is contemplated for the lunatic convicts
now accumulating in prison, and for other convicts who may
become insane. The asylum appears to be in a satisfactory
condition.

The Report is most instructive, especially to those connected
with the treatment and care of the insane, and our thanks are
due to the Commissioners for their endeavours to further the
kind and skilful management of the insane. Insanity is not
what it was some years ago; we have now a recognised Board
to inspect asylums, and everything is done to cure the patients
by skilful treatment combined with kindness.
