In Memoriam
============

Forbes Benignus Winslow,
M.D., D.C.L. Hon. Oxon.
"VYe cannotf allow this first number of the New Series
of the " Psychological Journal" to issue from the press
without paying a sincere tribute of respect and affection
to one who was associated with the journal, as editor
and proprietor, from its earliest days.
Dr. Forbes Winslow, following in the steps of Pinel
and the Tukes of York, was, with the late Dr. Conolly,
one of the first to systematise a gentle, persuasive, and
loving treatment of the insane, who had hitherto been
regarded in the light of wild beasts, to be curbed and
restrained by bolts, bars, and keepers' whips, rather
than as human beings, fallen, indeed, from their high
state, but amenable to tenderness and judicious kindness.
He it was who created the science of Psychology,
and gave to it a local habitation and a name, at least
so far as this country is concerned. He was the first
physician who urged the plea of insanity in criminal
cases: a plea which has outlived the assaults of popular
clamour and ignorance, and is now accepted as valid in
the courts of law.
He likewise has contributed largely to the literature
of his country, his magnum opus, " The Obscure Diseases
of the Brain and Mind," being one of the scientific
classics of the English language.
These achievements, combined with his successful
ministry to " the mind diseased," and his unvarying
kindness, generosity, and deep religious feeling, have
earned for him a world-wide reputation, a reputation
vi " m MEMORIAM.
which, we can confidently predict, will shine with purer
and clearer lustre as time allows of full justice being done
to the great work he has accomplished.
Dr. Forbes Winslow is now happily beyond the
reach of all human criticism; the work of his anxious
life consummated, he sleeps well. Nevertheless, it may
be pleasing to our readers, as well as gratifying to our-
selves, if we briefly recall some incidents of his remark-
able career. Dr. Forbes Winslow, the ninth son of
Capt. Thomas Winslow, of Her Majesty's 47th Regiment
of Foot, and of Mrs. Mary Winslow, whose memoirs have
obtained for her considerable celebrity in the religious
world, was born in London, 1810. He was a lineal
descendant of the famous Edward Winslow, first
Governor of New Plymouth, one of the leaders of the
Pilgrim Fathers, who left England in the "Mayflower"
in 1620. During the War of Independence, the Wins-
lows were ardent Royalists, and at the termination of
the war all the extensive family estates at Boston were
confiscated, and Dr. Winslow's family came to England.
He was educated in Scotland, and commenced his pro-
fessional education in New York, continuing the study
of medicine, for which he early evinced a very strong
predilection, at the University of London, where he was
a pupil of Drs. Turner, Elliotson, and Quain, and also
at Middlesex Hospital, where he had the advantage of
being a pupil of Sir Charles Bell, whose brilliant re-
searches into the mysteries of the nervous system were
then causing a complete revolution in physiological
science.
At the commencement of his career, owing to the
straitened family circumstances, Dr. Forbes Winslow
was met by obstacles which would have daunted a less
ardent and ambitious mind; but with him difficulties
were only made to be overcome, and his eager thirst for
knowledge, his determination to make his mark in the
world, and the consciousness of power within, carried
him triumphantly through all his early struggles.
He would work all day at the hospital, and then, as
reporter for the Times, go in the evening to the Gallery
" IN MEMOBIAM.' ^ii
in the House of Commons, so paying for the expenses
of his own education.
This practice he carried on later in life. Of these
early days an intimate friend has thus written:?" Even
after he had retired from general practice, had taken his
degree in medicine, and removed to a private house in
Guilford Street, Russell Square, he continued for some
time to report for the Times. It was no uncommon thing
for him to leave the Times' office at seven or eight in the
morning, take a hasty breakfast, and be ready to receive
patients by ten o'clock. He managed to steal two or
three hours of sleep in the course of the day, but was
always ready, and apparently fresh, to take his turn in
the Gallery when he was required. The labours,
physical and mental, which he then underwent would
have undermined a constitution less sturdy and healthy
than his. But he was made of the right stuff for work,
and possessed a cheerfulness of spirit, a hopefulness and
self-reliance, which carried him through."
Even while he was a student he began to show signs
of his possession of the literary faculty; in 1831 he read
a paper on the "Application of the Principles of
Phrenology to the treatment and cure of Insanity," which
he afterwards published as a pamphlet; then a manual
of Osteology, a manual of Practical Midwifery, and the
Student's Pocket Guide to the College of Surgeons.
These manuals were written in his early days, with
the view of defraying the expenses of his own education,
his pen being then the only means he had; he obtained
?50 for his first manual, and with this sum he paid his
fees for lectures at the hospitals. He never alluded in his
later days to the literary efforts of his earlier career, and
the existence of these manuals were not even known to
the members of his own family, who were professionally
associated with him; in fact, Dr. Forbes Winslow was a
self-made man, and made his way and name in the world
by indomitable perseverance and talent. We remember
his telling us that frequently, after having been engaged
in the House reporting, and notwithstanding that he had
been at his professional work at the hospital during the
viii " IN MEMORIAM."
day, he would, as soon as the House rose, steal off with a
candle to the dissecting-room, and though worn out with
the labours of the day, resume his anatomical studies.
In 1835 he became a member of the Royal College of
Surgeons, and shortly afterwards graduated as Doctor of
Medicine at the University of Aberdeen, and was
elected as Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians,
Edinburgh, and subsequently as Member of the Royal
College of Physicians, London, 1859.
In 1839 he produced his first considerable work
" Physic and Physicians," which subsequently passed
through three editions ; an amusing book, brimful
of anecdotes and curious information as to the early
struggles, eccentricities, and careers of eminent medical
men. In 1840 he brought out " The Anatomy of
Suicide," the first book ever written in England on the
subject. In this work his object was to plead for the
abolition of the verdict of Felo-de-se in cases of suicide.
In every case of suicide he maintained that there was a
perversion in a greater or smaller degree of the intellectual
and moral faculties, the act of self-destruction itself being
often the very first symptom of this perversion. "To
punish suicide as a crime is to commit a solecism in
legislation. The unfortunate individual by the very
act of suicide places himself beyond the vengeance of
the law ; he has anticipated its operation ; he has
rendered himself amenable to the highest tribunal?
viz. that of his Creator; no penal enactments, however
stringent, can affect him. It is unjust, inhuman, un-
natural, and un-Christian, that the law should punish
the innocent family of the man who, in a moment of
frenzy, terminates his own miserable existence." These
views, which were somewhat novel at the time they
were written, are now accepted by all right-thinking
men, and the useless and cruel verdict of Felo-de-se is
very seldom recorded.
About this period he published a book on " The
Preservation of the Health of Body and Mind," which
received the very highest encomiums from the press,
and was hailed as indicating the approach of a new era
" IN MEMORIAM." 1X
in the history of medicine. In 1843 he produced a
small work which went through three editions, and
eventually caused a revolution in the procedure of our
courts of law ; we refer to his " Plea of Insanity in
Criminal Cases," of which we shall have more to say
further on.
His success in life was now assured. To carry his
theories into practice, in 1847 he founded two private
asylums for the care and treatment of the insane, at
Sussex and Brandenburgh Houses, Hammersmith.. Here,
perhaps, he went further than all his compeers, in the
completeness with which he carried out his benevolent
views. Kindness and gentleness were the two universal
factors in his treatment. The surveillance to which his
patients were submitted, while unremitting in the care
of dangerous cases, was most unobtrusive; concerts,
dinner parties, balls, games of all kinds and varieties,
were called in to play their part in his scheme. The
life of the asylums was essentially a home life, the good
doctor and his family living in the midst of his patients,
who became for the time being members of his family
circle. Those who manifested signs of improvement
were allowed to go out of the gates on parole, and this
parole was most honourably observed. This treatment,
combined with skilful therapeutic remedies, produced
in many cases very marked results, and during the
latter part of his life Dr. Winslow was continually
receiving most pleasing tributes of affection from grate-
ful patients, to whom he had restored the light of reason.
In 1848 he founded the " Quarterly Journal of Psycho-
logical Medicine," which enjoyed a high reputation and
large circulation. It was remarkable not only for its
profound scientific thought, but also for its wide range
of subjects. This journal continued in existence for
sixteen years, and bears in its pages ample proof of
the literary capacity and singular ability of its editor.
His next productions were a " Synopsis of the Law
of Lunacy, the Lunacy Act, with Notes," " Softening"
of the Brain from Anxiety," &c.
In 1851 he was elected President of the Medical
x " IN MEMORIAM."
Society of London, and on the establishment of the
Juridical Society, he was elected Vice-President, and
read before its members an elaborate paper on " The
Legal Doctrine of Responsibility in cases of Insanity
connected with alleged Criminal Acts," and at the late
Lord Derby's installation as Chancellor of the University
of Oxford he had the very high honour of having con-
ferred upon him the honorary degree of D.C.L. He
was selected by the Medical Society as the Lettsomian
Professor of Medicine for 1851-52, when he delivered
three lectures, subsequently published, 1, on the Psy-
chological Vocation of the Physician; 2, on the Medical
Treatment of Insanity; 3, on Medico-Legal Evidence
in cases of Insanity.
The year 1860 saw the issue of his great work,
called by one of the Quarterlies " the master effort of
a great philosopher," his fascinating book " On the
Obscure Diseases of the Brain and Mind," intended as
a preliminary volume to a larger and more comprehen-
sive work, " On the Softening of the Brain," unhappily
not completed at his death. This production passed
rapidly through four editions, and is to this day the
text-book on the subject of which it treats. From the
pureness of its style, the clearness as well as depth of its
thoughts, and the ability with which the reader is
carried with unabated interest from beginning to end
of the volume, this work may fairly be considered as
one of the classics of the English language. We have
space but for one beautiful and suggestive passage :?
" The physician should entertain right notions of
his duty and position, and encourage elevated, lofty
thoughts and grand conceptions of his honourable voca-
tion. He should impress repeatedly, earnestly, and
solemnly upon his own, as well as upon the minds of all
engaged in the same holy work, the fact that they are
conjointly occupied in the study and treatment of a
class of diseases affecting the very source, spring, and
fountain of that principle which in its healthy operation
alone can bring man into remote proximity to Deity;
that the physician has to deal with the spiritual part of
"IN MEMORIAM." X1
liis complex nature, with tliat which elevates him in
the scale of created excellence, and places him high on
the pedestal among the great, the good, and the wise.
But his functions expand in interest, gravity, gran-
deur, and importance as he reflects that it is Human
Mind prostrated, perverted, and often crushed by
disease with which he has to deal; that he has placed
under his care a class of the afflicted human family,
reduced by the inscrutable decrees of Providence to
the most humiliating and helpless position to which a
rational being can fall; that it is his duty to witness
the melancholy wreck of great and noble minds, and to
sigh over the decay of exalted genius.
" Like the historian and antiquarian wandering
with a sad heart over ground made classical and
memorable in the story of great men, and in the annals
of heroic deeds, surveying with painful interest the
ruins of ancient temples, viewing with vivid emotion
the almost extinguished remains of proud imperial
cities, consecrated by the genius of men renowned in
the world's history as statesmen, scholars, artists, philo-
sophers, and poets, so it is the duty of the mental
physician to wander through the ruins of still greater
temples than any raised in ancient days to the honour
of imaginary Deities. It is his distressing province to
witness great and good intellects, proud and elevated
understandings, levelled to the earth, and there crumb-
ling like dust in the balance, under the influence of
disease.
" Survey that old man crouched in the corner of
the room, with his face buried in his hands. He is
indifferent to all that is passing around him; he heeds
not the voice of man nor woman; he delights not in
the carolling of birds nor in the sweet music of the
rippling brooks. The gentle wind of heaven, playing
its sweetest melody as it rushes through the greenwood,
awakens in his mind no consciousness of nature's charms.
Speak to him in terms of endearment and affection ;
bring before him the glowing and impassioned images
of the past. He elevates himself, gazes listlessly and
xii " IN MEMORIAM."
mechanically at you, ' makes no sign,' and, dropping
his poor head, buries it in his bosom, and sinks into
his former state of moody, melancholy abstraction.
This man's oratory charmed the senate ; the magic of
his eloquence held thousands in a state of breathless
admiration ; his influence was commanding, his saga-
city eminently acute, and his judgment profound.
"View him as he is fallen from his hiffh and honourable
?estate.
" Listen to the sweet and gentle voice of yonder
woman, upon whose head scarcely eighteen summer
suns have shed their genial warmth and influence.
How merrily she dances over the greensward! How
touchingly she warbles, like Ophelia, in her delirium,
snatches of song! What a pitiful spectacle of a sweet
mind lying in beautiful fragments before us ! Look!
she has decked herself with a spring garland. Now
she holds herself perfectly erect, and walks with queenly
majesty. Approach and accost her ; she exclaims,
' Yes, he will come ; he promised to be here; where
are the guests? where is the ring? where is my wedding-
dress?my orange blossoms?' Suddenly her mind is
overshadowed, and her face assumes an expression of
deep, choking, and bitter anguish?she alternately sobs
and laughs, is gay and sad, cheerful and melancholy?
Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
She turns to favour and to prettiness.
" Speak again to her, and another change takes place
in the spirit of her dream. Like her sad prototype, the
sweetest creation of Shakspeare's immortal genius, she
plaintively sings?
He is dead and gone, lady,
He is dead and gone;
At his head a green grass turf,
At his heels a stone !
" Her history is soon told. Deep and absorbing
passion, elevated hopes, bright, sunny, and fanciful
dreams of the future?Death with all its factitious
" IX MEMORIAM. ' Xlll
trappings, sad and solemn mockery of woe?seared
affections, a broken heart, and a disordered brain ! "
In 1856 Dr. Winslow was elected President of the
Psychological Association.
In 1865 Dr. Winslow had a serious illness which
brought him to the verge of the grave, and confined
him for a year to his bed, and during convalescence he
wrote, more for amusement than anything else, a
pleasant, chatty book, on " Light and its Influence;" he
likewise issued a pamphlet on " Uncontrollable Drunken-
ness, Considered as a Form of Mental Disorder,"' which
created great interest, and opened a new sphere of
usefulness ; and in 1872 he was examined as a special
witness before a Select Committee of the House of
Commons, appointed to enquire into the general
management of drunkards. Besides these literary
labours he was a constant contributor to the medical
and daily papers, working readily with his pen, in the
midst of the greatest noise and distraction, having a
singular power of immediate concentration of thought.
We should fail to do justice to his memory did we
not dwell especially upon that which we may call the
grand achievement of his life?the establishment of the
plea of insanity in criminal cases.
At the trial of McNaughten for the murder of
Mr. Drummond, Dr. Winslow, who was in Court, and
who had not been summoned on either side, was asked
by the judge to enter the witness-box; and after he
had given his evidence in favour of the insanity of the
luckless murderer, Lord Chief Justice Tindal inter-
posed and stopped the case, as his evidence, combined
with that of a previous witness, Mr. Aston Key, proved
beyond all doubt the insanity of the murderer. From that
time Dr. Winslow has been constantly summoned as a
medical jurist in cases of doubtful insanity, and has
been instrumental in saving many a poor irrational
lunatic from the last terrors of the law. The opposi-
tion which he had to encounter before he could get this
plea of insanity established is well nigh incredible, save
to those who know how conservative our lawyers are,
xiv " IN MEMORIAM.
and how jealous they manifest themselves of any intru-
sion on their prerogatives, and also how unthinking and
unreasonable, for the most part, public opinion is when
its feelings are strongly excited. On this matter we
will let the doctor speak for himself:?
" A man commits a murder. He is tried for the
crime. The plea of insanity is raised in his defence, upon
what is conceived to be sound evidence, of the exist-
ence of mental derangement at the time of the murder.
The attempt thus made to protect the criminal imme-
diately rouses public indignation. Such an excuse
is not in many instances listened to, and the unfortunate
medical witnesses who have been called upon to exer-
cise an important, and often thankless duty, in support
of the plea, are exposed, for giving an honest expression
of opinion, to the most unmeasured ridicule and vitupe-
ration. In defending the memory of the suicide from
the disgrace that would accompany a verdict of Felo-de-
se, the evidence of the medical man proving insanity is
regarded with great respect, and treated with profound
deference ; but in his effort to save a lunatic from the
agonies of a painful death upon the scaffold, on evi-
dence much stronger than was adduced before the
previously mentioned Court, the expert is exposed to
unmitigated abuse. Instead of being considered as an
angel of mercy engaged in the exercise of a holy and
righteous mission, he is viewed with suspicion, and
often treated with contumely, as if he were attempting
to sacrifice instead of to save human life. Again, the
attempt to prove sanity and mental capacity at a Com-
mission of Lunacy, with the object of preserving
intact the liberty of the subject, and establishing his
right to an unfettered management of his property, is
applauded to the very echo; but any endeavour to
excuse, on the plea of insanity, the crime of some un-
happy wretch alleged to be an irresponsible lunatic, in
order to rescue him from penal servitude, or from the
hands of the executioner, is denounced, in unqualified
language, as a most monstrous, unjustifiable, and
iniquitous interference with the course of justice. The
"in memoriam." XV
excuse of insanity will not, in many cases, under these
circumstances, be tolerated by a portion of the press.
The public mind is violently shocked at the commission
of a horrible and brutal murder. The act is viewed
as one of great and barbarous atrocity, apart altogether
from its concomitant extenuating medico-psychological
considerations. The cry is raised for ' vengeance! '
The shout is, ' an eye for an eye! ' 1 a tooth for a
tooth !' ' blood for blood!' forgetting in the paroxysm
of indignant emotion and frenzy of excited feeling
engendered by the contemplation of a dreadful violation
of the majesty of the law, that justice must be tempered
with that Divine mercy which sanctifies and enshrines
The throned monarch better than his crown.
And is the attribute of God Himself."
These words were written ex anim.o pleno, and are
evidently dictated by sad experience. However, Dr.
Forbes Winslow had the satisfaction before his death of
seeing his views generally accepted, and the plea for
which he had so valiantly striven now passes unchal-
lenged in our courts of law. Other physicians have
since written on the same subject, but palmam qui
meruit ferat; and we repeat, it is to Dr. Forbes
Winslow that the honour of first establishing the plea
in England is due. We may mention the following
memorable cases, in which Dr. Winslow was engaged as
a medical expert:?In the trial of Atkinson, who mur-
dered his sweetheart; in the case of Mrs. Brough, the
wet-nurse of the Prince of Wales, who murdered her
six children ; of Weston, who shot Mr. Waugh, the
Solicitor of Bedford Row ; of Mrs. Yyse, who mur-
dered her children. He made an ineffectual attempt to
save Buranelli, the Italian, who was undoubtedly mad.
The two cases of young Windham and George Victor
Townley, in which he asserted the existence of insanity,
in opposition to excited popular feeling, and almost the
entire public press, proved by their final issue the cor-
rectness of his judgment ; Windham, by his painful end,
proving to us his utter inability to take charge of himself
xvi "IN MEMORIAM."
or his property, and Townley terminating his existence
by suicide in his prison.
Besides these more notable cases he was often called
into consultation by the prison authorities as to the
insanity, feigned or otherwise, of the prisoners under
their charge. He was also largely consulted in cases
of legal dispute involving questions of mental capacity;
and many points of extreme delicacy involving large and
important interests were submitted to his unerring tact
and judgment.
So much for his professional and public life ; of his
generosity and kindness to needy members of the pro-
fession and to those around him, of his geniality and
brightness, and the deep religious principles which
enabled him to administer to the souls as well as the
minds and bodies of his patients, it is not our desire
to speak?these are written, we trust, in the records of
another Book. He never recovered the great shock
which he received some nine years before his death, and '
although he rallied in a certain measure, he gradually
became more and more incapable of very active exertion,
keeping possession, however, of his clear faculties and
cheerfulness even to the very last. In March 1874, at
light on, he succumbed to Bright's Disease, having
earned for himself an imperishable memorial in the love
and gratitude of his countrymen, having acted up to
the spirit of those memorable words with which he
concludes his great work :?" The spirit of love, tender
sympathy, Christian benevolence, unwearying kindness,
and warm affection, should influence every thought, look,
and action of those engaged in the responsible treatment
of the insane. It is the special province of the psycho-
logical physician to
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache Avith air, and agony with words.
What a holy, honourable, and sacred occupation is that
m which he has the privilege of being engaged! An-
gelic spirits might well envy him the ennobling and
exalted pleasures incidental to his mission of benevolence
and love."
