The Delusions of the Insane: Their Real Nature as a Means of Diagnosis
=======================================================================

Akt. VII.?
:Author: Jambs George Davey, M.D., BRISTOL.

The object of the following- remarks is to call attention to a
circumstance of not infrequent occurrence, and of a nature
calculated to interfere with that harmony of feeling and reci-
procity of action so desirable as between the asylum pro-
prietor or superintendent and the official inspectors, the
visiting magistrates more especially.

My experience as a proprietor of a private asylum has
extended over a period of twenty-three years about, and from
time to time a question has been raised as to the insanity of a
patient under my care. This question I have ever found has
been hedged around with certain views so purely artificial, and
so far away from the laws of mental science, that it has been
quite impossible for me to accept the conclusions arrived at by
the visitors; or, in other words, to agree with the advice given?
involving, it may be, the removal or discharge of the patient.
Such cases are more than likely to occur where the visiting
justices include a gentleman who has been, or is, of the legal
profession. The visiting magistrates with whom I have been
officially concerned did through long years include a retired
barrister; one who dearly loved his old calling, and looked to
the law of lunacy, as reflected in the too famous Questions
and Answers of the Peers and Judges, bearing date 1842, as
all-important and truthful. Now the gentleman referred to
did some good service in his time, and promoted by his zeal
and praiseworthy efforts?made some twenty odd years since
?the good cause of the insane in many particulars; therefore
I can desire only to speak of him with due respect. In these
remarks it will be seen that no allusion is made to the Com-
missioners in Lunacy, nor to the many among the visiting
magistrates, from whom I have to acknowledge the reception
of much courtesy and consideration; but to one only of the
latter, whose duty it is to inspect asylums beyond the more
immediate jurisdiction of the first-named.

As I have said, a question has been raised, from time to
time, covering my residence at Northwoods, as to the insanity
of a patient under my care; and in each instance of the
kind some unpleasantness has arisen. If, as is too likely to
happen, a difference of opinion has begotten discourteous, if
not angry words?if each visit made or examination gone into
Las provoked feelings the reverse of friendly?-if whatever
confidence on 'either side towards the other existed has dimin-
ished, even in a small degree?it is, of course, most desirable
to recognise, with no loss of time, the cause or starting-point
of such " difference of opinion,'' with the view to its removal.
The annexed case of A. B. (so to designate it) is a good
example of the " question " referred to, because it takes in, on
the one side, the legal fiction comprised in this same " Law of
Lunacy," whilst, on the other, it ignores those teachings of
medical science with which psychologists are familiar.
I may premise?the question of the insanity of A. B. was
decided in the negative, because only she manifested no positive
or satisfactory sign of " delusions.''

A. B. was admitted at Northwoods in the usual formal
manner?that is to say, the " order " and '? statement," as well
as the " medical certificates,'' were all as the law requires.
The facts of the case were duly set forth in the proper place;
the indications of impaired mind were registered, i.e. the
several signs of insanity, as they were revealed to me, were
recorded after the most approved manner. In my report
of A. B. on her admission are seen these words: "She
appears on first looking at her to be free from mental dis-
order; but there are various small yet conclusive ways in
which she reveals the presence of much cerebral mischief."
It is added, in due course, " She lefuses her food, and much
difficulty is experienced in feeding her. There is great ema-
ciation. Through the night A. B. is restless and sleepless.
She will persist in retaining her urine so long and so per-
sistently that the catheter is of necessity brought into request.
Her state is one of childishness; she requires much looking
after, and urging to the simplest acts of attention to her own
immediate wants. Without the slightest force of character,
with an apathy which nothing can overcome, and which infuses
itself into each act of her existence, she will, as the general
rule, neither eat nor drink, neither get up nor go to bed,
neither go out nor return when out, neither dress nor undress,
and so on in everything. Her capricious wants and morbid
fancies so press on her and influence her for evil that much
and constant care and management are required."

Such a form of words was held to be unsatisfactory and
inconclusive. The visitors, urged thereto by the retired lawyer
before referred to, would regard A. B. as one sane and fit to be
discharged. After several long and tedious visits, and after
much not very agreeable correspondence, the visitors incurred
the responsibility of discharging my patient; and so it turned
out that a much afflicted lunatic was removed from the necessary
care and control to the family circle, wherein those nearest and
dearest to each other?including the patient?were rendered,
for a time, really miserable. A. B., said the visitors, is nowhere
stated to have had delusions; such are not proved to have been
present during her stay at North woods, or not until a certain
time subsequent to the commencement of our especial enquiries
into the state of mind of A. B. We therefore take leave to
doubt their presence altogether.

This statement was not, indeed, what may have been looked
for; but with matters of a personal character this paper has
nothing to do.

My case book records this fact, viz. A. B. is discharged by
order of the visitors, it being their opinion that she was and is
not of unsound mind, but simply nervous; but very opposite are
the expressed opinions of the family medical attendant, the
mother, and of myself.

The present is an opportunity too good to be lost, inasmuch
as it illustrates very clearly the antagonism of law and medicine
?of lawyers and doctors. The whole case may be used, and
rightly used, as a sign or index of the present bad times, and as
evidence in favour of other and more truthful views in regard
to asylums and the insane.

The retired lawyer had, doubtless, his excuses; he was
trained in the law's defects and very shortcomings, and what
could have been expected of him else than that we have seen.
He confined his attentiou to the state of the " consciousness " of
A. B. He looked no further or deeper down than the state of
the knowing faculties. He asked himself thus : Is the lady
before me " able to distinguish right from wrong " ? and so on.
Convinced of the soundness of Leonard Shelford's teachings
" Concerning Lunatics," Mr. declared that a " sound mind
is one wholly free from delusion; an unsound mind, on the
contrary, is marked by delusion." In other words, " the true
criterion, the true test, of the absence or presence of insanity "
..." may be comprised in a single term, namely, delusion."
In ignorance of the mind in a state of health, he was unable
to appreciate the many and diverse springs of human thought
and action. The strong affections of our being, their force in
moulding the character, their ever-widening influence over the
speech and actions of man, now moving him to virtue and now
to vice, and putting him, ever and anon, away from or outside
the fair promptings of his mere knowledge of things, these were
as nothing in this lawyer's comprehension. It could not take in
the first cause of that master passion concerning which Pope
sang so charmingly and so well; and whereby one man is seen
to realise the merits of an Oberlin, a Melanchthon, a Basil
Montague, or a Howard, and another the demerits of a Pope
Alexander, a Palmer, the Eighth Henry of England, or a Eajah
of Bitpoor.

Furthermore, it did not, as the result in good part of a
defective training, take in the prime fact, to be proven each
succeeding hour by a really thoughtful man, that the ever-
active sympathies or emotions of our being, rather than the
crude measure of our intellects, it is which go to form our likes
and dislikes, our preferences for this or that. Doubtless the
like or the wish is ever the father to the thought. The vain
wish?the vanity?which is said to have prompted the Prince
Henry to " hunger" for his father's " empty chair" ere even
his " hour was ripe," and in spite of the knowledge of those
kingly cares of " Henry IV.," which " had fed upon his body "
and " eat the bearer up," affords a strong example of the fact.
An equally apt illustration of the workings of the emotional
mind is seen portrayed in the lad Walter, ? Uncle Sol's kind
friend," the " master passion," i.e. the affections, in whom are
thus eloquently referred to:

" As Walter sped along, intent only on the distress and anxiety of
his kind relative, everything seemed altered. _ There were the usual
entanglement and noise of carts, drays, omnibuses, wagons, and foot
passengers; but the misfortune that had fallen on the wooden mid-
shipman made all things strange and new. Houses and shops were
different from what they used to be, and bore Mr. Brogley s warrant
on their fronts in large characters. The broker seemed to have got
hold of the very churches, for their spixes soaied into the sky with an
unwonted air. Even the sky itself was changed, and had an execution
in it plainly."

It is evident that Shakspeare and Dickens read the human
mind aright; with such a knowledge of its healthy charac-
teristics as these great men have displayed, it is very unlikely
they would have fallen into the error in regard to the exist-
ence or not of delusions among the insane now complained
of. If it is important in every case of doubtful insanity to
accept as the groundwork of our enquiry the knowledge thus
indicated, in regard to the mental operations, as they occur to
the sane, then indeed may lawyers extend their studies to the
poets and novelists?accepting, as we may, the two here named
as the highest type of their respective excellences.

Having regard to the facts of the case here considered, what
hope remained that the retired barrister would do else than repu-
diate the " emotional theory of insanity " ? That we accept it
as the basis of our reasonings, and as the starting-point of our
many means of control of our patients, is not infrequently
urged as a proof of its importance. Vain indeed are our
endeavours to persuade some that neither " consciousness " nor
the ability to distinguish right from wrong constitutes any-
thing like a reliable test of either the sanity or the responsibility
of an individual; in other words, that the state of the knowing
and reflective faculties is an indifferent criterion of a sound
mind and of man's power to duly control himself. It is to be
feared that that time is yet looming in the distant future when
the many outside our speciality, yet near to and touching us in
virtue of their office-bearing, will see that the great majority
of those really insane are so because only their moral natures, i.e.
their affections, have taken on either an exalted or abnormal
action ; and that this state of tilings it is which, as the rule,
constitutes the very pith and substance of mental disorder in
each one of its many varieties.

However it well becomes us to hasten, as best we can, the .
advent of truth; and to demonstrate the grounds on which
psychologists affirm?

1st. That the history of mental disease is the history, for
the most part, of a perverted moral sense, the cause of which is
to be found in either grief, disappointment, fright, losses in
business, domestic trouble, anxiety, and so on.

2nd. That insanity has first manifested itself in the patient
by some unusual or capricious state of the feelings or emotions,
some excessive indulgence of the passions or propensities, con-
stituting rather an exaggeration than an alteration of the
natural character, the knowing faculties remaining unaffected.
3rd. That the first person who becomes aware or conscious
of the impending affliction is the sufferer himself; and that,
knowing it, he strove, but in vain, to hold onto his self-control,
so fast receding from his grasp.

4th. That if delusions, so called, make their appearance in
the course of the malady (a matter by no means certain) these
are found harmonising with some dominant and deranged
feeling or emotion or propensity, constituting the mere effect
of a pre-existing cause.

5th. That if in the absence of the necessary care and con-
trol, any criminal act is attempted, the same ought to be looked
upon as an indication, not of an impaired understanding, not of
an inability to distinguish right from wrong, but of a temporary
and abnormal excess of emotion or passion, whereby all con-
trolling power is lost, and the patient is reduced to a mere
automatic or machine-like existence.

6th. That if recovery succeeds to all this, then will it be
observed that its approach is marked through the feelings or
affections; that their unusual or capricious state becomes
" small by degrees and beautifully less," until the natural
character is yet again reached.

There can be no kind of difficulty in coming to these several
conclusions, if it be borne in mind that the many primitive
faculties of the mind having their seat or location in just as
many portions of the grey matter of the convolutions, it must
follow that each one of such primitive or indecomposable
faculties?whether or not they relate to the emotional or intel-
lectual man?must depend for its healthy manifestation, or
otherwise, on the especial tone or quality of a distinct portion
of brain matter; and, in this case, it follows that the in-
dividuality or peculiar nature of any given case of cerebro-
mental disorder will be dependent on what distinct portions of
the brain or on what " organs" are attacked, their number
and size. For example, those parts or portions of grey con-
voluted matter underlying* the several primitive faculties,
known as self-esteem^ or pride, venevcition} and clestvuctiveness,
may each of them take on an exalted or depraved action, may
become diseased, and ultimately reach so great and painful an
intensity that the speech and actions of the patient may over-
come all bounds, and realise the common features of acute
mania. Now the first sign or symptom of disease so located is
expressed by an unusual and extraordinary display of either
pride, religious enthusiasm, or anger. If the abnormal action
continue unabated, it may or may not happen that a delusion
will become superadded to the first indications of mental de-
rangement, constituting, as it were, an apology for the osten-
tatious deportment, or fanaticism, or extieme anger, or cruelty
of disposition. In each of the instances imagined the
delusion is seen to be in harmony with the preceding and
morbid affection of a part or " organ of the brain, and not
only so, but to express the especial puipose or function of such
" organ." It is on these grounds we come to appreciate, as we
should, the thousand and one delusions of madmen, their
vain imaginings and assumed personifications, and to reg'ard
them as so much morbid colouring, devised or accepted volun-
tarily, for the most part, for or on behalf of their deranged
moral feelings, or?which is much the same thing?as a real
and tangible ideal of their several innate, involuntary, and
morbid impressions. If, as has been shown, the sane man?him
in the exercise of the mens scina in corpore sctno?is not proof
against the strong influence of his emotions over the intel-
lectual powers, it must not be expected that the insane man?
him with the unsound mind?is proof against the same emo-
tions, or has not his intellect more and more deeply tinged by
his passing loves and joys, his surging hopes and wild ambitions.
94 THE delusions op the insane.

However, both theory and practice go to show that a " delu-
sion " regarded as a symptom or indication of insanity is most
uncertain; that when found to exist, it is, not infrequently,
temporary only; and that whilst it may complicate an early and
mild cerebral affection, it may not be present in brain disease
of long standing and of much severity.

It is now thirty years since I penned these words, viz.: " A
delusion, so called, holds much the same relation to the insane
mind as a simple prejudice does to the mind of bim said to be
in the enjoyment of one sane and healthy. The delusion, like
the prejudice, does not, or need not, imply a bona fide belief;
they are alike thus far, they indicate the presence of some
innate and dominant affection or passion wherewith the psy-
chical nature of both, the sane and insane, is imbued." ....
" In fact, this delusion test is altogether a fallacy; a large
number of insane persons are without delusion of any kind,
have been insane five, ten, or fifteen years, but during the
whole period of their disorder have not manifested anything
like a delusion. This mere symptom of cerebro-mental disease
is not always present, and when it does show itself, it very
much more commonly than otherwise expresses only the nature
of the predominant feelings in the patient; and with these it
is always in harmony, as cause and effect are ever seen to be."
..." An insane female, once under my care, was remarkable
for the very high opinion she had of herself; her self-esteem it
was which gave the character to her deep and long-standing-
affliction. This patient called herself a Queen ; she would not
infrequently occupy herself in marking her apparel ' V. R.
Buckingham Palace.' After devoting much care to this self-
imposed task, she would be very angry, and express considerable
annoyance at what she called her stupidity. This old lady
seemed so to indulge her delusion as to exhaust it. With her
pride was a prejudice, and thus she deluded herself. That she
ever believed herself a queen I never could persuade myself.
In fact, I have taken, at various times of my life, considerable
pains to get at the real state of the minds of patients said to
have delusions of different kinds, and I am induced to conclude
that, in by far the majority of cases, they do not themselves
believe in the delusions attributed to them."

It would be more than ungracious were I to omit the fact
that reformers?aye, and good ones?are to be found in the ranks
of the lawyers. The minds of a few such are of a widely different
calibre to that of the retired barrister so often referred to.
A reference to the famous trial of McNaughten, for the
murder of Mr. Drummond, shows that the present Lord Chief
Justice Cockburn, who in 1843 conducted the defence of
the delusions of the insane. 95

McNaugliten, acting under the authority and guidance of our
profession of, for instance, the late Dr F. Winslow, Spurzheim,
Combe and Ray?dissented entirely from the views made public
by the peers and judges, in the several Questions and Answers
already alluded to, and echoed to even this present time.
In the defence of the prisoner, these words occur: " It is
now I believe, a matter placed beyond doubt that madness is a
disease of the body, proceeding from the cerebral organisation;
?rirl tint the knowledge of the disease can only be precisely and
accuratelv ascertained by those who have made the study of this
disease, and of its pathology, the object of long reflection, of
diligent investigation, and of attention and experience
" How can we " it is asked, " who are brought into contact only
with thp sane?how can we be competent to judge of the nice and
shadowy distinctions which mark the boundary Une between
mental soundness and mental disease. . . . . ank God,
continued the Lord Chief Justice, " science and humanity have
reached the dreary abodes of those miserable beings-the insane ;
and whilst the one has poured the ba m of consolation into the
bitter cub the other has held the light of science over our
hitherto imperfect knowledge, lias ascertained the true existence
of the diseise, and has marked its boundary in order to the
restoration of the sufferer." . ? ? ? "Propositions and maxims
arose during the times of ignorance-and thus alone can I
explain the crude maxims, inapplicable to all the forms of the
disease, which are everywhere laid down. He added t The
insane, though phrenzied at the time on one point, may show
the highest degree of subtlety on that point, and be in the full
possession of the ratiocinative powers upon every other point.
The madman may, in carrying out his fell purpose, not only
show himself perfectly aware of the nature of right and wrong,
and in every way competent to manage his own affairs, and dis-
cbarge all the relations of life, but will in so doing exhibit all
the skill forethought, subtlety, and cunning of an individual in
the -possession of his ordinary faculties."

The entire aim of this successful defence of McNaugliten
was to prove that, the human mind being compounded of many
primitive faculties or powers, any one of them is liable to
derangement?the remainder preserving more or less their
normal state of being; and if so, it must happen to us to witness
examples of, say, a becoming self-respect degenerate into a
deplorable and absorbing egotism and pride; the mild and
fascinating demeanour of the sincere Christian exchanged for the
rancour and intolerance of fanaticism; a necessary caution or
prudence pass into a painful and uncontrollable timidity and
suspicion; and so on to the end.

The late Lord Erskine lias given to the world very similar
testimony against the theories embraced by the Law, and in
favour of Nature as we have come to read it. When discussing
the legal aspect of insanity, so to speak, we find these words,
viz.: " If a total deprivation of memory is intended to be taken
in a literal sense of the word?if it is meant that to protect a
man from punishment he must be in such a state of prostrated
intellect as not to know his name, nor his condition, nor his
relation towards others?that, if a husband, he should not
know he was married, or, if a father, could not remember that
he had children, nor know the road to his house, nor his pro-
perty in it?then no such madness ever existed in the world."
. . . . "It is idiotcy alone which places a man in this helpless
condition, where, from an original mal-organisation, there is
the human frame alone, without the human capacity." ....
" Among the insane there are those who have not only had the
most perfect knowledge and recollection of all the relations they
stood in towards others, and of the acts and circumstances of
their lives, but have been, in general, remarkable for their
general intelligence, their subtlety, and acuteness." ....
" Reason is not driven from her seat, but distraction sits down
upon it along with her, and holds her trembling upon it, and
frightens her from her propriety."

How certainly do the words of the great lawyer named
remind us of the piteous exclamation of Coleridge, " There is
no hope for me ; my case is a species of madness, only that it is
a derangement and utter impotence of the volition, and not of
the intellectual faculties! "

Moore and G-eorge Eliot have, it would seem, realised
the same too painful position of Coleridge in the persons of
Zuleika and Hetty Sorel. In the poet's charming descrip-
tion of his much-loved heroine we find these few yet eloquent
words, viz. :

" The mind was still all there, but turned astray :
A wand'ring bark, upon whose pathway shone
All stars of heaven save the guiding one."
Those acquainted with George Eliot's " Adam Bede" will,
without doubt, recognise in the highly wrought confession made
to Dinah, and put by the author, or rather authoress, into the
mouth of the unfortunate Hetty, a kindred " mind turned all
astray," and " wandering with no guiding star" towards its
inevitable and sad doom.

One word more?if the preceding remarks will help the
removal of one source of misapprehension on the part of those
to whom we, or many of us, owe an allegiance; if what has
been said will promote the acceptance of a more correct estimate
of the nature of the " delusions" of the insane under our imme-
diate care, and render more easy and clearer the diagnosis of
madness?then surely may we anticipate a more desirable and
pleasant relationship, and a better understanding, as between
the " Visitors " and ourselves. Moreover, when this much has
been attained, it will follow that the removal or discharge of
patients from our care will find a better excuse and a fairer
explanation than is now occasionally found in the mere absence
of " delusions," so called, in him or her insane.

NO. I.?NEW SERIES. H
