Psychological Retrospect
=========================

During tlie last few months nothing of special interest has occurred!
relating to insanity or to psychological literature. "We have to report
the death of B. W. Proctor, Esq., who for some years held the
appointment of one of the legal Commissioners in Lunacy, and lately
was one of the non-visiting members of the Board. The death of
this gentleman necessarily causes a vacancy in the Board, but as yet
we have not heard of his successor. Dipsomania has lately been
brought prominently before the profession, to which reference is made
in the article on the subject.

We have to record murders and suicides committed by lunatics-
at large, whose friends would not interfere and place them under
legal restraint.

We give particulars of one in which gross neglect was shown.
Charge of Murder.?Louisa Elizabeth Ashley, 46, a melancholy-looking
creature, was placed at the bar to plead to an indictment charging her with
the wilful murder of her child, Rose Margaretta Ashley.?In this case, it
will be recollected, the prisoner made an attempt to drown the same child
on the 8th of December, and there was no doubt that she was in a state of
insanity, and that she had been in this condition a great many years. Two
days afterwards the prisoner appeared to have attacked the child, which was
a year and eight months old, with a chopper, and inflicted injuries which
caused its death. Almost immediately afterwards the prisoner appeared to
have lost all recollection of what took place.?Mr. Besley, who appeared for
the prisoner, suggested that she was not in such a state of mind as to be
able to plead to the indictment.?Mr. Johnson and Mr. Nicholls, two surgeons
who had known the prisoner for many years, were then examined, and they
proved that the prisoner had attempted to drown herself in 1865, and in
1866 she tried to poison herself. She had also tried to kill another child,
and a certificate had been given for her removal to a lunatic asylum, and it
was only by accident that she had not been removed, and thus the terrible
occurrence would have been prevented.?Mr. Gibson, the surgeon of New-
gate, said he had repeatedly examined the prisoner, and although she was
now apparently rational, and able to answer the questions put to her, he
believed that she was utterly ignorant of everything that had occurred
relating to the crime, and was, in fact, insane.?The jury, upon this evidence,
found that the prisoner was insane, and unable on that ground to plead to
the indictment, and she was ordered to be detained during Her Majesty's
pleasure.

11 PKOBATE CASE.

This case is one of a class that we regret to say is now becoming
very prevalent in consequence of the friends and the relatives refusing
to be guided by the opinions of the medical men consulted. We here
see a person who must have been of unsound mind, more or less, for
ten years; and, notwithstanding two deliberate attempts were made at
self-destruction in 1865 and 1866, and one attempt at murder in Decem-
ber 1874, the persons in immediate attendance on her regarded her as
a person of sound mind, and fit to be at large. A medical certificate
is obtained, but even then the friends do not send the case to an
asylum. This certificate was signed immediately after an attempt
had been made to drown her child, the evidence stating it was by
" accident" that she had not been removed. The result of this
" accident" was the horrible mutilation of her child with a chopper.
It seems to us a case in which severe condemnation should have been
pronounced by the Judge on the relatives of the lunatic for not taking
active steps to remove the patient to an asylum.
We regret there is no provision in our lunacy law which
empowers the medical man to be guided in his own discretion with a
?dangerous lunatic.

In France there is a special provision by which the medical man
is empowered, when consulted in the case of a dangerous lunatic, to
order the immediate conveyance to a maison de sante, and there the
patient is received upon his certificate alone. The inspector-general of
asylums is informed of the case, and two sub-inspectors are sent down
to the asylum to report thereon. By this rapid procedure such an
?occurrence as we have been discussing would be avoided.

There have been several probate cases in which the insanity of the
testator has been brought forward in order to upset the will, amongst
which we may mention the following :?

Willis and Willis v. Beard and Others.?This was a probate suit,
in which the plaintiffs propounded the will of the late John Willis, who
died by his own hand on the 8th of May 1874. The will is dated the 2nd
of February previous, and is opposed by the defendants, who are the nephews
and nieces of the testator, chiefly on the ground that at the time the will
was executed the testator was not of sound mind.?Mr. M'Intyre, Q.C., and
Dr Tristram were counsel for the plaintiffs; and Dr Spinks, Q.C., and Mr.
Bayford appeared for the defendants.?It appeared that the testator was a
blacksmith, and carried on business at Pudhill Wharf, Shinfield, near Read-
ing. For several years before his death he had retired from business, and in
1872, his mind having given way, he was confined in a lunatic asylum. His
wife died in 1873, and he then went to live with his two brothers, the
plaintiffs, in whose favour, on the date stated, he made the will now pro-
pounded. From the evidence in the case in support of the will, it appeared
that the testator, after he gave up business, had been confined in lunatic
asylums for considerable periods. The solicitor, however, who prepared the
will, stated that, from the conversation he had with the testator on that
occasion, he was perfectly sane, and understood what he was about. In the
month of May, after the will was executed, the testator went out to the
garden with a pistol, on the pretence of shooting birds, and shot himself.
Medical gentlemen were called, who stated that they examined the testator
in 1872, and they found that at that time he was perfectly competent to
transact business and to make a will. Evidence was also given that he was so
up to tlie making of the will.?In opposition to the will a number of wit-
nesses were called, who stated that from 1862, when the testator was first
sent to a lunatic asylum, he never was competent to make a will. Several
of them stated that the testator was always in the habit of speaking about
wars and murders; that he was suspicious; that he spoke of his beino-
Eoisoned; and that in every respect he showed symptoms of insanity.?After
earing the whole of the evidence, and without hearing the arguments of
counsel in the case, the learned Judge was of opinion that the testator was
not of sound mind at the time he executed the will propounded. He accord-
ingly pronounced against the will, and condemned the plaintiffs in costs.
Sandys v. Atchison.?This was a probate suit, in which the plaintiff
propounded the will of the late Mr. Thomas Atchison, who was a surgeon in
the service of the East India Company, and who died in May of last year.
The will is dated in April 1870, and is opposed on the ground of irregularity
of execution and incapacity. Dr Spinks, Q.C., and Dr Pritchard were
counsel for the plaintiff; and Mr. Bayford was for the defendant. Dr Spinks
stated that he believed the plea of incapacity would not be in dispute, as
there was medical testimony which would clearly show that the testator
was of perfect capacity at the time he executed the wilj. The testator was
a surgeon-major in the service of the East India Company, but he returned
from India in 1865, and after he did so chiefly resided at the East India
Club, in St. James's Square, and he believed the only question would be as
to the execution of the will, the attesting witnesses not being certain whether
they were both present at the time the testator signed it. The will was
signed in the library of the club, of which all the parties were members.
As to the testator's capacity, Dr Quain was called, who stated that he was
formerly a professor at University College, where the testator was educated.
He was intimate with him, and after his return from India, in 1865, he saw
him often. In 1870 he was of perfect capacity, and was so up to within a
month of his death. As to the execution of the will, both the attesting
witnesses were called, who stated that they both signed the will, which
was a holograph of the testator. Neither of them saw the other sign, and
only one of them recollected seeing the testator sign, but they knew it to be
his handwriting. It was signed in the library of the club, when several
gentlemen were present, and while the one did not see the other sign, they
both might have been in the room at the time.?After hearing the evidence,
Sir James Ilannen said he was satisfied as to the testator's capacity, but as
to the execution of the will there was some difficulty. Looking, however,
at the circumstances under which the will was executed, in the public
library of a club, the facts of the case might have passed from the witnesses'
minds after the matter was over. He therefore found that the testator was
of full capacity, and that the will was duly executed. He therefore pro-
nounced for it, but by consent ordered the costs out of the estate.
The following case is novel in its nature, and requires a few
comments:?

WOKMLEiGnTON v. Asn?An action in the Queen's Bench, in which
judgment was allowed by default, " Wormleighton v. Ash," was heard
before Mr. Under-Sheriff Burchell and a jury, to assess the amount to be
awarded in an action of breach of promise of marriage. The damages
were laid at 1,000? The case, from its peculiar character, occupied the day.
Mr. Talford Salter, Q.C., and Mr. L. M. Apsland appeared for the plaintiff;
Mr. Lumley Smith for the defendant.

The plaintiff, liosanna Wormleighton, lives with her aunt, who keeps a
boarding-house, at 27 Ovington Square, Brompton, frequented by Horn an
Catholics. On the 9th September last the defendant took apartments at
the house, where be remained three weeks. They became acquainted, and,
according to her evidence, she found him clever and intelligent, and he com-
plained of the extravagant mode of ladies' dressing at the present day. He
went to Paris, and corresponded with her. A fortnight after the correspon-
dence commenced, he returned to Ovington Square, and she received him as
her lover, he having made her an offer of marriage, which she had accepted,
lie bought her an engaged ring, and after he saw his sister on the subject of
the intended marriage he became low-spirited. He had brought her a cross
and earrings from Paris. She had made arrangements for her marriage, and
expended 40/. or 50/. He said his sister wished him to see Dr Johnson and
Dr Blandford, who had attended him, before he married. On the 28th
December he could scarcely speak to her, and told her he was not allowed
to marry. On the 4th January he left the house, but was immediately
afterwards served with a writ in the present action. The plaintiff said she
was 35, and the defendant 44. He had about 290/. a year. She admitted,
when he said he was dull, she has said, " You had better marry."
Several letters were read. In one of her letters she sent him some
il unsophisticated love for his heart, of which she wished him to drink freely,"
and he afterwards proposed marriage to his dear Rose, the queen of maidens,
as the rose was the queen of flowers. She now knew that he had been con-
fined for being out of his mind. She had seen Miss Ash, the sister, and it
was said that it would be highly improper for the marriage to take place.
The case on the part of the defendant, William Ash, was that he could
not fulfil bis engagement, which the plaintiff had hastened, on account of
his mental and bodily condition. The defendant was called, and was
examined. He described his illness. The plaintiff, he imagined, wanted to
marry him, and he did not think her "loss was much." It was alleged that
she had made love to him.

Dr E. Johnson, Dr Blandford, and other medical gentlemen, were called.
They had advised that the defendant was not in a fit state to marry, and in
consequence the marriage had not taken place.

Mr. Under-Sheriff Burchell told the jury that the case was of importance
to the public, who were interested to know how they would deal with a case
of such peculiar and remarkable features. He went through the case, and
left it to the jury to estimate the loss sustained by the young lady, who was
willing to marry the defendant. _

The jury retired, and on their return gave a verdict for GOO/.
Mr. Lumley Smith asked the Court to stay the costs, to enable an appli-
cation to be made to the Court above, on account of the excessive damages.
Mr. Apsland objected, on the ground that the question of the amount
was one solely for the jury to decide.

The learned Under-Sheriff said he should stay the writ for an application
to be made.

A verdict was entered for GOO/., and execution stayed.
In reference to the above case the Lancet says, " We consider the
damages given to have been most excessive, and do not think the jury
could have had an intelligent appreciation of the merits and circum-
stances of the case."

We most heartily agree with the view of the case as taken by
the Lancet, and must express ourselves greatly surprised at the
verdict. We read of a person who had actually been confined as a
lunatic proposing marriage to a lady, who accepts him as her future
husband. The defendant is cautioned by Dr E. Johnson and Dr.
Blandford against getting married, and strongly advised not to; the
result being the above-mentioned action; and the jury, in the face of
the high medical evidence, gave a verdict to the plaintiff, with extraor-
dinary high damages. We are not acquainted with a case in which
justice was so ignored as in the above-mentioned one, and we trust
that when the case is taken into a higher Court the facts will be
reconsidered.

An Extraordinary Will.?The will, dated March 26,1874, of the Rev.
William Hill, late of Lansdown Villas, Springfield Road, Cotham, Bristol,
Baptist minister, who died on November 11 last, has been proved at the
district registry, Bristol, by Emerson Gerrish and Thomas Bowbeer, the
executors, under 3,000/. After the death of his wife he gives to the Society
for the Relief of Aged and Infirm Baptist Ministers, instituted in Bath,
181G, and to the Baptist Foreign Missionary Society, each 100/. The
testator directs " the payment of all my just debts, funeral, and testamen-
tary expenses, as soon as conveniently may be after my departure to heaven;
but, as this is to be my final public document, I shall here record my
detestation of all State establishments of religion, believing them to be anti-
Scriptural and soul-ruining. I have for years prayed the King of Sion to
overthrow the politico-ecclesiastical Establishment of the British empire,
and I leave the world with a full conviction that such prayer must ere long
be answered. I thirst to see the Church brought down, the Church by man
set up, for millions are led by it on to drink a bitter cup. I desire all
posterity to know that William Hill was a conscientious Trinitarian Baptist
minister, and that he believed infant sprinkling to be from his Satanic
Majesty, the keystone of Popery, therefore the parent of unnumbered terrible
evils; this delusion must also pass away at the divinely appointed time,
and the immersion of believers, as plainly taught by the Great Teacher, the
Iloly Ghost, and the Apostles, shall one day universally triumph. Man
says, some water in the face, and that before the child has grace, is what is
meant in Jesus' Word by being buried in the Lord. .The deadly-drinking
customs of professors and non-professors are likewise doomed. Heaven
dash all error, sin, and the devil from the earth, and cause truth, holiness,
and Christ everywhere to prevail.?Amen."

We do not often meet with a more curious will than the above,
and we think we are entitled to publish it as a psychological curiosity.
An extraordinary sect has lately sprung up in England, called the
" Shakers." The condition and customs of this community resemble
the "dancing mania" which occurred in Germany in 1374. The
mania gradually spread until the sect mustered over five hundred,
and many beggars joined as a means of obtaining a livelihood.
Hecker, in his " Epidemic of the Middle Ages," thus describes this
class of people:?

<l They formed circles, hand in hand, and, appearing to have lost all con-
trol over their senses, continued dancing, regardless of the bystanders, for
hours together in wild delirium, until at length they fell to the ground in a
state of exhaustion. They then complained of extreme oppression, and
groaned as if in the agonies of death, until they were swathed in clotli3
bound tightly round their waists, upon which they again recovered, and
remained free from complaint until tlae next attack. This practice of
swathing was resorted to on account of the tympany which followed these
spasmodic ravings, but the bystanders frequently relieved patients in a less
artificial manner, by thumping and trampling upon the parts affected.
"While dancing they neither saw nor heard, being insensible to external im-
pressions through the senses, but were haunted by visions, their fancies
conjuring up spirits whose names they shrieked out; and some of them
afterwards asserted that they felt as if they had been immersed in a stream
of blood, which obliged thenx to leap so high. Others during the
paroxysm, saw the heavens opened and the Saviour enthroned with the
Virgin Mary, according as the religious notions of the age were strangely
and variously reflected in their imaginations."

Removal of ojte or the Shakers to an Asylum.?Miss Julia Wood,
in whose name New Forest Lodge was taken for the Shaker community, was
removed on Saturday to Laverstock, a private asylum near Salisbury. Mr.
W. Muskerry Tilson, who has been described as a nephew of Miss Wood,
but who, it appears, is the legal adviser of her family, arrived in Lymington
on Friday. Mr. Muskerry Tilson, Dr Maskew, of Lyndhurst, and Dr.
Adams, of Lymington, a nurse from the Laverstock Asylum, and two police-
men, repaired to the barn at Batchley next day. They found that Miss
"Wood was not there. They then proceeded to the field in which the
Shakers had erected their tent. The correspondent of the Manchester
Guardian gives the following account of what followed :?" Dr Maskew
entered the field singly, and made his way to the tent. At the entrance he
was met by Brothers Isaac and Harry, who demanded his business, when he
replied that he was a friend of Mr. Cowper-Temple, and had come to have
a chat with him. He was then admitted into the tent. Most of the Shakers
were sitting reund the stove, some reading books, while one young person,
evidently the hairdresser of the community, with a round stick and a brush,
was engaged in curling the hair of her sisters. In all about 70 persons
were present in a tent measuring about 20ft. by 10ft. Dr Masker proceeded
to inform Mrs. Girling, to whom he was conducted, that he came to pay her
a visit, as he was much interested with the notices of the press respecting
them, and that his wife had plenty of money and would be glad to assist
them. Would they rent a place if she bought it for them ? Continuing
in this way, he skilfully introduced the name of Miss Wood. 1 By-tlie-bye,'
said he, ' how is Miss Wood ? I do not see her' (looking round) ; ' where is
she ? ' Mrs. Girling replied that Miss Wood was there on the previous day,
but that as she was in the habit of visiting their brethren round the neigh-
bourhood, she could not say where she was at that moment. Dr Maskew
proceeded to arrange a date for Miss Wood to see him, saying he came from
some very old friends of hers, from whom she would be glad to hear, and
that if Miss Wood would write and appoint an interview he would come,
and see her. At this moment there walked in a police-sergeant and Mr.
Tilson, who was known to the Shakers, when the plot was thus ' blown.'
Dr Maskew protested that he was quite alone, and that it was an accidental
meeting. Baffled at the tent, the procession returned to Batchley Barn,
calling on the way at Woodcock Farm, the residence of an outside Shaker.
This time they were admitted to the barn, but, not finding Miss Wood, they
returned to Woodcock Farm, where Dr Maskew was received by the farmer
armed with a pitchfork, and the farmer's wife with a poker, both barring
his entrance. Propelled from behind by the police-sergeant and others, in
spite of these obstacles, Dr Maskew and Mr. Tilson were thrust into the
house. Permission was given them to search the place, but this was done
without success. Going next to the Bells Inn for refreshment, the rural
postman was met, who put them on the right track. Piloted by a renegade
Shaker, the party proceeded to Batcliley, to the cottage of an outside member
of the community, named Knight, by profession a hawker, chimney-sweep,
and yeoman, and Miss Wood was here discovered. No sooner did" she see
her pursuers than she tried to retreat to an upstairs room, but it was too
late. Dr Maskew and the nephew first entered the cottage, and remained
there a quarter of an hour. Dr Adams then took the place of Dr Maskew,
while he retreated to the carriage to write his report. After five minutes
Dr Adams came out, and I entered the cottage by invitation of Mrs. Knight?
Mr. Haase, a Shaker of gentlemanly address, the cottager Knight, and se?ven
women were present, Miss Wood being seated in the smoky chimney-corner,
clad in her accustomed bloomer costume. Beyond the excitement consequent
on such an event, Miss Wood seemed perfectly sane to an inexperienced
eye. After the necessary warrant had been signed by the medical men, her
removal was at once attempted. Mr. Haase placed himself before her and
repeatedly urged them to show their authority for removing Miss Wood.
Dr Maskew refused to do so, saying 1 he was the authority.' The police-
sergeant was called, who took Haase by the arms and threw hiai back. Mrs.
Knight next placed herself before Miss Wood, but in vain. Half-supported
by Dr Maskew and her nephew, her grey hair streaming in the wind, she
was placed in the carriage, calling upon the representatives of the press to
bear witness that she was taken away against her will. The carriage was
then driven to Lyndhurst, en route for Laverstock, a private asylum near
Salisbury." Mr. C. S. Perceval, Secretary of the Commissioners of Lunacy,
wrote yesterday to the editor of the jEcho :?" Sir,?I am directed by the
Commissioners in Lunacy to inform you that the statement contained in
paragraphs appearing this morning in the Daily Neivs and Standard, that
Miss Wood, of the Shaker Community in the New Forest, has been con-
veyed to a lunatic asylum under their order, is untrue. The Commissioners
have had nothing to do with the matter, directly or indirectly." Mr. Mus-
kerry Tilson .also wrote to the Echo yesterday:?" Sir,?In your issue of to-
day I perceive my name mentioned in connection with the removal of Miss
Wood as being her ' nephew.' This is not the case ; but the error doubt-
less originated in the fact that, on a previous visit to the Shaker encamp-
ment, I was accompanied by one of Miss Wood's nephews. My appearance
on the scene last Saturday was solely in the character of legal adviser to the
lady's family."

A great deal of public indignation has been caused in consequence
of the removal of Miss Wood, under certificates, to an asylum, and the
circumstance has given rise to a number of letters in the various
newspapers on the lunacy law; the majority of these letters contain
erroneous misrepresentations of our Act, and so the public generally
might be misled. The opinion now current and expressed in our
public journals is, that for a person to be placed in an asylum he must
be " dangerous to himself or others." This is a strange interpretation
of our statute; and as the question relative to Miss Wood being in a
dangerous state was mooted in the House of Commons, it is our
intention to make a few remarks on the matter.

In a case of alleged lunacy people are very fond of expressing
their views on the matter, and misquoting our Act. By reference to
16 and 17 Yict. Schedule B, we read, the medical man must state in
his certificate " that the said A. B. is a person of unsound mind, and
a proper person to be taken charge of and detained under care and
treatment."

No mention is here made relative to the " dangerous condition
Many persons of weak intellect are at the present time detained in our
asylums who cannot be pronounced to be dangerous to themselves or
others. These harmless lunatics are quite unable, from mental inca-
pacity, to manage themselves or their affairs, and are justly and legally
confined. Admitting the popular notion that the person must be
" dangerous," we at once liberate all our idiots and demented patients.
The new-fangled idea is so ridiculous, that further comment is
unnecessary.

The Arrest of Miss Wood.?Mr. Dillwyn asked the Secretary of
State for the Home Department whether his attention had been called to
the case of the recent arrest in the New Forest of Miss Wood, a person
alleged to be a lunatic; and, if so, whether such arrest was made on the
ground that she was dangerous to herself or others, and whether such arrest
was legal and justifiable.?Mr. Cross: My attention was called to this arrest.
I immediately put myself in communication with the Lunacy Commissioners.
I ascertained that the certificate which had been given did not warrant a
detention in a lunatic asylum. I further communicated with the Lunacy
Commissioners, and directed that an enquiry should be made, in order that
Miss Wood should be released if they found no necessity for her detention.
I am happy to say that this afternoon I have received a note saying that she
has been discharged.

A few days afterwards Miss Wood was re-admitted into the asylum
on fresh certificates.

" The sending of this unfortunate lady to a lunatic asylum, while her
equally insane companions are allowed to roam at large, seems, not un-
naturally, to have excited in the minds of the populace an indistinct notion
of injustice and oppression. Miss Wood is not possessed of any property,
and therefore the placing her under restraint cannot be attributed to any
mercenary motive on the part of her friends. As to her unsoundness of
mind there can be no mistake, her delusions being of such a character as to
leave no doubt as to their insane origin. She believes that she has passed
through death, and that God has said she will never die. She sees spirits,
and frequently hears the voice of the Almighty addressing her; has several
times seen the Saviour in human form, and believes that on one occasion
the Holy Ghost descended upon her bed in the shape of three white doves.
" As long, however, as her insanity showed itself only in delusions like
these, and as long as her conduct was harmless to herself and others, her
friends did not think it necessary to interfere, but when they found her
thinly clad, sleeping in bitterly cold weather in a tent partially open to the
sky, they naturally thought that her life was imperilled, and most properly
took the only steps which were open to them. They accordingly had her
insanity certified, and placed her in the Laverstock Asylum. Some in-
formality in the certificate necessitated her release. We believe that this
has been rectified, andithat this unhappy lady is now where alone she could
have any chance of regaining her health."?Lancet.

11 In the course of comments on the case of Miss Wood, we observe com-
plaints that the existing Lunacy Law is in an unsatisfactory condition. An
arrest under the present order and certificates ought, it is said, to have only a
provisional effect, and no lunatic ought to be permanently imprisoned without
a certificate from a medical officer of the Government. But this is exactly
what now takes place: every patient is visited by a medical officer of the
Government, to wit, a commissioner in lunacy; he can demand a private
interview, and will be discharged if found sane. No one is 'permanently
imprisoned' without such inspection; but if, as some suggest, every patient is
to be inspected by a commissioner immediately after admission, commissioners
will have to be appointed by the hundred, for the admissions amount to many
thousands; and we question whether the tax-payer would approve of the
arrangement."?British Medical Journal.

DANGEROUS LUNATIC AT LARGE.

Alarming Incident in a Church.?The Catholic Apostolic Church
in Albury was the scene of a very unpleasant and alarming occurrence on
Sunday last. During the Communion service a young man rushed into the
pulpit, demanding to be heard upon some personal grievance of which it
seems he imagines himself to be the victim; and upon being requested to
withdraw he drew a sword from under his coat, and flourished it in the air
in an excited manner, threatening anyone who should dare to approach him.
Upon further remonstrance he produced a loaded pistol from his pocket,
which he declared he would fire at the officiating minister if anyone inter-
fered with him. After he had remained for some time in this threatening
attitude, some persons succeeded in arresting his attention for a moment, and
a gentleman who had for some time parried his sword cuts with his umbrella,
rushed up the steps of the pulpit and secured him, not, however, until he had
received a severe cut on the back of the hand. The young man, who proved
to be the Rev. John Symes, of the Irish Episcopal Church, and was staying
with his friends, members of the above congregation, was removed to the
vestry, and thence to the residence of Mr. Reginald Bray, the county
magistrate, at Shere, where he was examined by two medical men, Dr.
Capron and Mr. Fisher, and on their certificates, and a warrant signed by the
Duke of Northumberland and Mr. Bray, he was removed, under the care of
Superintendent Parkes,to Guildford, as a dangerous lunatic, pending arrange-
ments for his removal to Brookwood Asylum. He wore an orange sash
under his great-coat, and on examination the sword was found to have been
recently pointed and sharpened, and the pistol capped and loaded with ball.
We give this case as an illustration of what may happen from
allowing dangerous lunatics to be at large.

" Lunacy in Yorkshire.?At the Sheffield Quarter Sessions, Lord
Wharncliffe laid before the Court the Report of the Visiting Committee of
the Wadsley Asylum. It contained some startling statements respecting
the increase of lunacy in the West Riding of Yorkshire. The asylum was
erected two or three years ago at Wadsley, near Sheffield, to relieve the
already overcrowded asylum at Wakefield. It was capable of providing
accommodation for nearly 1,000 patients, and it was believed that this
would be sufficient for some years to come. The Committee, however, now
reported that lunacy was increasing at the rate ,of 150 a year, and that the
whole of the available space in the asylum would be occupied in sixteen
months. This being so, they recommended that a detached block of buildings
should be erected on the asylum estate to accommodate 250 more men, and
that a similar block should also be erected to accommodate a like number
of women. The report was adopted."?Lancet.
