Hereditary Disease
===================

THE JOURNAL
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND ft
MENTAL PATHOLOGY. J
Art. I.?.
:Author:  J. M. WINN, M.D., M.R.C.P., &c.

Formerly Resident Physician of Sussex House Lunatic Asylum.
The inheritance of disease is one of the most mysterious and
deplorable conditions of humanity. Any suggestions that may
tend to throw light on the laws which regulate the development
of hereditary diseases, with a view to their prevention or alle-
viation, cannot fail to interest not only the physician or philo-
sopher, but all mankind; for how few of us can boast of an
ancestry entirely free from some form of hereditary taint. How
often does it become the painful lot of the physician to see some
member of a family, who had given every promise of health
and a brilliant career, struck down by an attack of insanity, which
his friends would fain attribute wholly to some accidental cause,
mental or physical, but which the experienced medical man
discovers, on close enquiry, to be the development of constitu-
tional disease, transmitted from some member of the family
more or less remote. If he does not find evidence of decided
insanity (for friends and relations will often take infinite pains
to conceal this fact), he will probably discover that some have
manifested the existence of hereditary disease in the form of
phthisis, scrofula, epilepsy, &c. Having made the connection
between these diseases and insanity the object of close observa-
tion and study during many years, the conviction of their
having a common origin became so strong to my mind that, in
186^, I published a treatise on the subject.* Since that time
extended observations have confirmed my belief in the truth of
the theory which I then advanced?that all hereditary diseases
were mutually convertible?and convinced me that it was
founded on sound principles, and supported by undeniable facts.
It may be as well to premise the remarks I am about to
make, with a recapitulation of the principal arguments which I
brought forward in that essay:?

1. I showed, by a series of examples, that hereditary disease
frequently appears in different forms in members of the same
family, and often even in one and the same individual?the
disease passing from one form to another. From these facts I
inferred a correlation of morbific forces.

2. The examples which I brought forward to prove a corre-
lation of force had reference to mania, epilepsy, phthisis, scrofula,
and cutaneous affections. I suggested that gout and cancer might
also probably belong to the same group, but could not at that
time speak confidently on the point. I have now no hesitation
in including these diseases, as well as hereditary rheumatism,
in the same generalisation.

3. I stated that the dissimilarity of the symptoms between
some of the hereditary diseases?such, for example, as phthisis
and insanity?does not prove that they are owing to different
causes. Similar phenomena are traceable in the purely mate-
rial world. Grove observes, " The attraction and repulsion of
amber is very unlike the decomposition of water, and yet they
are the same force." I also instanced zymotic diseases as ex-
amples, presenting marked special differences, and yet subject
to the same general law. The frequent occurrence of carbuncle
in gouty subjects may be cited as another example of a rela-
tion between diseases that exhibit dissimilar symptoms. This
is a fact to which I was, I believe, the first to draw the at-
tention of the profession. What can prima facie be more
unlike than carbuncle and an ordinary attack of the gout?
One an affection of the skin and cellular membrane, terminating
in the death of the cellular tissue; the other, an acute inflam-
mation of a joint, ending for the most part in resolution. The
worst case of carbuncles I ever met with was that of an indi-
vidual who had suffered from repeated attacks of the gout.
The usual symptoms of gout had, however, been for some time
in abeyance before the commencement of his fatal illness; and
the carbuncular disease, of which he died, was evidently the
vicarious action of the same subtle morbific force as that which
had previously caused his sufferings from gout.

4. From various facts which I adduced, I drew the inference
that if there be but one cause for the existence of a large class
of hereditary diseases, there must necessarily be one general
plan of treatment more or less applicable to the whole.
In applying the theory of a correlation of force to disease,
it is necessary, in the first place, to assume what scarcely admits
of a doubt, that a force of some kind is incessantly at work in
disease as well as in health. Force is in operation everywhere,
in the organic as well as in the inorganic world. Carlyle has
quaintly expressed its universality by saying, " there is force in
a rotting apple." I have provisionally termed the disease-
producing force which obtains in hereditary disease, morbific.
Exception has been taken to the existence of such a force: one
writer considers it an improbable assumption, but surely a mere
deficiency of vital force is insufficient to explain why we have
tetanic symptoms from a vegetable poison (strychnine), tetanic
symptoms from an animal poison, and tetanic symptoms fol-
lowing an injury. In these cases, as well as in epilepsy and
acute maniacal excitement, the existence of a morbific force can
scarcely be considered an improbable assumption.

The phenomena of recurrent insanity afford convincing
proofs of the existence of a force which may remain latent in
the nervous system for many months between the intervals of
its manifestation. I published a case which exemplifies this
fact. The patient, a highly educated gentleman, about forty
years of age, and of unexceptionable moral character, was sub-
ject to attacks of recurrent acute mania of the most violent
character. During the intervals his mental and bodily condition
were those of a person entirely free from disease, and formed a
striking contrast to his maniacal state. The paroxysms were
marked by outbursts of uncontrolled passion, violent gestures,
and the use of obscene and blasphemous language. After the lapse
of a few weeks this terrible commotion would subside, leaving
the patient calm and rational. It was like the clearing of the
atmosphere by a thunder-storm, and supports the theory that
there were latent morbific forces in the system, which became
developed by some exciting cause, leading to a" disturbance of
the nervous centres, somewhat analogous to electrical phenomena.
The same argument applies with equal force to epilepsy. The
two diseases are so often associated in the same individual, that
it is impossible not to infer a similarity of origin. An attack
of epileptic convulsions bears a strong analogy to one of acute
recurrent mania. After an interval of apparently perfect health,
the patient is seized with a paroxysm of what may be termed
intense nervous excitement. In one the paroxysm lasts for
weeks, in the other generally for a few minutes only. In both
we witness the accumulation of a force, which expends itself in
the one instance in maniacal violence, and in the other in
convulsive movements.

In the course of my practice I have constantly found
insanity supervene on the subsidence of disease of the lungs,
and, in the same manner, phthisis has followed the recovery
from various forms of mental disease. The way in which I
have seen skin disease alternate with attacks of insanity is still
more striking. These and similar facts strongly suggested to
me a correlation of force in hereditary disease. Before this
can be established, it is necessary to prove this mutual con-
vertibility. It is not sufficient to give instances of one disease
passing into another, we must demonstrate a see-saw sort of
action. In my essay to which I referred, I gave several exam-
ples of the remarkable manner in which the various phases of
hereditary disease passed backwards and forwards, either in the
same individual, or in various members of different genera-
tions of the same family. Subsequently to the publication of
these cases, I forwarded, on May 21, 1870, a letter to the
Medical Times and Gazette, containing cases illustrative of
my theory, which I will briefly repeat:

Mrs. , aged forty, had been troubled with psoriasis for
many years. The rash disappeared, and she became acutely
insane. On the subsidence of the maniacal attack the psoriasis
reappeared.

Three children in one family were afflicted with hereditary
disease; one was the victim of epilepsy, another of phthisis, and
a third of insanity. Their aunt and two cousins died of phthisis.
Mr. , aged 24, was sent to a warm climate on account
of decided symptoms of phthisis. Whilst abroad the disease
was arrested, but was followed by an attack of acute mania.
Miss , aged 19. This was a case of religious mania,
succeeded by phthisis.

Miss , aged 25. Scrofula, followed by suicidal mania.
Miss , aged 27. Chronic monomania of suspicion. Her
uncle died of phthisis.

Count became insane late in life and died in an asylum.
His daughter suffered severely from scrofula, and subsequently
died of phthisis.

Mr. , aged 25. Profound melancholia. This gentleman
was one of a very morbific family. One of his sisters died of
phthisis. Two brothers died of phthisis. Two sisters died
insane, and another was exceedingly eccentric. The mother
died of pulmonary consumption.

Mrs. , aged 33. A decided epileptic. Her father and
mother are dipsomaniacs.

Miss , aged 14. Epileptic. Her uncle died of phthisis.
Mr. , aged 18. Psoriasis of head and face. Father
died of phthisis.

Miss , aged 12. Severe eczema of the scalp and neck.
Mother died of cancer.

Master , aged 7. Dr eczema of the face &c., of two
years' duration. His mother has been subject to melancholia
for upwards of four years, and his grandfather was a martyr to
gout.
Miss , aged 18. Melancholia, of many weeks' duration.
Several of her family have suffered from scrofula.
Miss , aged 20. Beligious melancholia. Father is a
very gouty subject.

JNXiss ?, aged 24. In this case maniacal excitement and
rheumatic fever occurred alternately.
Mr. , aged 40. Incoherent mania of more than ten
years' duration. His sister died of cancer of the oesophagus.
Cases like these can be multiplied to almost any extent,
and all medical men connected with asylums have met with
them, the most frequent being the relation of insanity to
phthisis. The cases I have enumerated are sufficient to prove
the truth of the doctrine that there is a correlation of force in
disease. With respect to the nature of this mysterious force, it
can no more be explained than that of any other force?we can
only know it by its effects. All that medical science can do
is to determine the laws by which it is governed. The present
state of our knowledge will not admit of its being considered
identical with physical force. As it is destructive of life, and
therefore opposed to vital force, I have called it morbific. It
is conceivable that infinitesimally minute particles of matter
endowed with morbific energy, transmitted to the ovum at the
time of conception, might lie dormant in the system until
developed by some exciting cause. We can thus form some
notion how disease may be conveyed from grandparents to
grandchildren, without any manifestation of its existence in the
intermediate generation.

That a terrible force may be dormant in the system for
an indefinite time, is shown in the effects produced by the bite
of a rabid dog.

Since the appearance of my treatise the tendency of thought
amongst medical men has been in the direction of my theory.
Nine months after its publication in October 1869, Mr. Jonathan
Hutchinson read a paper at a meeting of the Hunterian Society
on " Some of the principal diatheses, and their mutual relation,"
in which he argued that gout, syphilis, scrofula, cancer, bron-
chocele, dartrous affections, &c., have common properties. This
group (although syphilis is mentioned, which I do not include
in my category, and insanity is omitted) bears a very close
resemblance to mine. Mr. Hutchinson classifies these diseases
under the head of diathesis, which he considers different from
dyscrasia or temperament; but all these words are vague, and
do not convey to the mind the same clear idea that is expressed
in the term, correlation of force.

In Drs. C. J. B. and C. T. Williams's work on pulmonary
consumption, published in 1871, I find it stated that gouty and
asthmatical patients often produce phthisical offspring.
In the number of the Medico-Chirurgical Review for July
1875, the writer of an article on Heredity says : " The practice
of endeavouring to establish a law of heredity, by pointing out
the liability of certain families or communities to certain classes,
though not to the same class of diseases, is prevalent in the
present day, and we have elaborate treatises and tables to prove
that scrofula, phthisis, gout, rheumatism, convulsive affections,
and insanity frequently affect members of the same family or
their collateral connections, with the implied or appended
inference that they are congeneric affections, and though
separated so widely by the tissues involved, and the nature and
event of the maladies themselves, they may be traced to a
common factor in hereditary tendency." I am not aware
that " the practice of endeavouring to establish a law" that
" scrofula, phthisis, gout, rheumatism, convulsive affections,
and insanity " are " congeneric affections " was prevalent before
the appearance of my essay; and, although the writer has not
mentioned my name, I can scarcely help concluding that it is
my theory to which he refers. He denounces the theory as
improbable; nevertheless he cannot deny the truth of the
induction, or ignore the facts on which it is based.
With respect to the origin of hereditary disease, which seems
to be involved in impenetrable obscurity, the oldest historical
works give us scarcely any information. The earliest records
refer to insanity and epilepsy. All we can say is, that they
must have had a beginning. The variety of races, however,
shows how peculiarities in the physical conformation of the
parents, induced by peculiar habits, have been transmitted to
their offspring; and in the same manner we may infer that
disease engendered by vicious courses in our progenitors may be
entailed on their descendants.

I will now proceed to re-consider some points in connection
with the treatment of hereditary disease, to which I referred in
my treatise, and which involve the two deeply important ques-
tions of hygiene and marriage.

Where there is reason to suspect a tendency to hereditary
disease, hygienic treatment cannot begin too soon. It should
commence with the earliest period of infancy, for it often
happens that the symptoms of constitutional disease are
exhibited soon after birth, and often they are manifested before
the period of dentition, in the form of convulsions, or some
other affection of tlie nervous system. The brain and nerves
of infants being proportionally larger than those of adults, will,
to a certain extent, account for their proclivity to nervous
disease. If my conjecture be correct, that it is in the nervous
system that the morbific force is located, it is to be expected
that infants, from this preponderance of nervous tissue, should
be especially liable to convulsive disease.

The first consideration that demands our attention is the
nourishment of the infant. It is of the greatest moment that
it should have the food which nature has provided for it in the
mother's breast.* Even if the mother is supposed to belong to
a family in which some form of hereditary disease has been
manifested, I do not think it an objection to nursing, provided
she be strong and has plenty of milk; for there is no ground
for believing that the class of hereditary diseases to which I
have referred can be communicated, like syphilis, through the
secretions of the mother. If the mother should not have the
power of suckling her child, a healthy nurse should be provided.
The three other great requisites for an infant's health are
air, warmth, and bathing. It must be warmly clad, and
taken out into the open air whenever the weather permits.
Education should begin with the first dawn of intelligence.
The child must be managed with firmness, combined with
tenderness. Nothing is more prejudicial to its future health,
both bodily and mental, than the capricious behaviour of those
parents or guardians who are over-indulgent at one time and
needlessly severe at another.

It would be out of place here to enter at any length into
the subject of education, but it is desirable that a few words
should be said on the danger to mental and bodily health
arising from the too prevalent practice of over-exciting the
brain by a variety of useless studies. It is an established fact
that precocious children are often scrofulous; parents are
delighted with an early exhibition of talent, and take a fond,
foolish pride in displaying the accomplishments of their child,
not knowing that they are thereby stimulating a brain already
morbidly active, and are disposed to keep him at his books and
studies when he ought to be romping with his companions in
the playground. The same attention to hygienic rules is
* It is a deplorable fact, in which I am borne out by a medical man engaged
in an extensiyo obstetric practice in the West End, that it is quite the exception
for fashionable mothers to suckle their infants. The Saturday Review for July
24,1875, contains a satirical and well-timed article, entitled "The Modern Mother,"
in which the writer says, "From the first the mother in the well-to-do classes acts
much the part of the ostrich with her eggs. She trusts to the kindly influence of
external circumstances, rather than to her own care, to make the hatching success-
ful. Nurses, governesses, schools, in turn relieve her of the irksome duties of
maternity."required as the child advances in years, and especially during
the period of puberty. The modern institution of competitive
examinations has been the means of seriously injuring the
health of many an ardent youth who had not stamina enough
to bear the intense application necessary for such an ordeal.
I have been consulted in many cases where constitutional disease
has been developed by this forcing system.

The most critical period of life for those who are liable to
hereditary diseases, especially epilepsy or phthisis, is the
interval between the ages of fifteen and twenty-five. This fact
shows the importance of controlling the sexual passions at this
important epoch; but long after this period it will be necessary
to follow the general precautions I have recommended.
From long observation, I have come to the conclusion that
there is a numerous class of persons disposed to hereditary
maladies who would have escaped disease, had they been careful
to choose the profession or vocation best suited to their con-
stitutional powers. No one can command the circumstances
of his position, and no care on our part can secure us from the
various accidents, and moral shocks, which are inseparable from
the condition of humanity; but as it is generally an apparently
accidental cause that determines the particular form that
disease assumes, it should be borne in mind that if a person
disposed to hereditary complaints is exposed to the debilitating
effects of impure air, and in-door employment, it will probably
be the lungs that will suffer; if, to the wear and tear of an
anxious profession, or if impelled by an eager desire for literary
fame, he over-exerts his intellectual faculties, he is more likely
to become the victim of some brain affection. It is therefore
most desirable that he should cultivate a taste for all such
pursuits and employments as should keep him constantly in
free exercise in the open air, and give occupation for the mind,
without excessive fatigue. The benefit of change of climate
cannot be too strongly insisted on. Many years ago I was
called to attend a gentleman, apparently sinking fast from the
effects of phthisis. As a last resource, I sent him to a warm
and dry climate in the south of Europe. He perfectly re-
covered, and lived abroad for about twelve years in the enjoy-
ment of good health. He then returned to England, when he
soon after became insane, and it was found necessary to place
him in an asylum. This case not only displays the advantages
of change of climate, but also gives a striking example of a
mutual relation of morbific forces.

In selecting a climate, it is necessary to fix on a dry as well
as warm atmosphere. Dr Crisp read a valuable paper at a
meeting of the St. Andrew's Graduates' Association, " On the
influence of a moist atmosphere in the production of pul-
monary consumption," giving an analysis of 623 cases in
various parts of England and Wales, to show that phthisis
prevails mostly in places where not only the atmosphere, but
the air is moist, and most especially " where there is a want
of the free circulation of air, from the presence of woods,
houses, bad drainage, &c." One of the greatest advantages of a
warm climate is, that it enables an invalid to be almost con-
stantly in the open air without risk of cold.

Begular daily exercise in the open air?either walking,,
riding, or driving, according to the strength of the patient?
is perhaps the most powerful therapeutical agent in the class
of diseases under our notice. In insanity, phthisis, scrofula,
and epilepsy, it is generally admitted to be of immense value.
Many years ago, an empiric gained great celebrity for his cure
of epilepsy. His plan was simply to order his patients to walk
a considerable number of miles every day. Now, making
allowance for the benefit which his patients derived from faith
in their adviser, we may conclude that the success lay, in a
great degree, in the far larger amount of outdoor exercise which
they were induced to take, than most people can be prevailed on
to try.

Whilst on the subject of prophylactic treatment, I must add
a few words respecting the great value of cod liver oil, which
seems to stand somewhat in the same relation to hereditary,
that quinine does to zymotic disease. Its utility in scrofula,
phthisis, and cutaneous diseases is universally admitted.
Although we cannot explain its modus operandi by any che-
mical theory,* its beneficial effects as an alterative are un-
mistakable.

It is a great mistake to administer this remedy in large
and nauseating doses, and I have never found it necessary to
give more than one teaspoonful at a time.

It is also an error to think that glycerine, cream, or any
other kind of oil can be used as a substitute for cod liver oil.
The prevalent notion that it acts chiefly as a nourishing article
of food has often led to the neglect of its use, when the disease
is not attended with loss of fat and muscle. I have found it
act as a cure in skin disease, where the robust and plethoric
* The following singular fact I found recorded in the second volume of Saint
jPaul's Annual for 1872, relating to the birds of the Hebrides, by Mr. Robert
Buchanan, on the authority of Mr. Graham. Ho states that he reared somo
young stormy petrels solely on " cod liver oil, "which they sucked from a feather
dipped into it, clattering their beaks and shaking their heads -with evident satis-
faction." This fact shows that, apart from its medical virtues, cod liver oil
possesses a wonderful power of sustaining life, which cannot be reconciled with
the commonly accepted chemical theory of nutrition. t
condition of the patient would have contra-indicated its use,
were it a dietetic remedy.

As an auxiliary for arresting hereditary disease, I think
that issues and small open blisters, once so much in vogue,
should not be overlooked; combined with cod liver oil, they
are often of the greatest use.

The subject of marriage is one in which the health and
.happiness of mankind is so much involved, that it demands the
earnest attention not only of medical men, but of all man-
kind. Nothing can be more difficult to determine than the
degree of moral and social responsibility which is incurred in
the marriage of those who are conscious that they are themselves
the victims of hereditary taint, or at least are members of a
family whose ancestors or relatives are known to have been
.so. There cannot be a doubt as to the danger of two indi-
viduals marrying, where there is hereditary taint on both sides.
It is not necessary, if the view that I have introduced be cor-
rect, that the form of disease exhibited should be precisely the
same; it is sufficient that it belongs to the same class.
The ordinary rule of hereditary transmission is from the
parents uninterruptedly to the children, and from them to the
grandchildren, frequently with an interruption from the grand-
parents to the grandchildren. Sometimes the taint is commu-
nicated indirectly to the collateral branches.

When I have been consulted as to the advisability of an
individual's marrying into a family of which one or more mem-
bers have suffered from constitutional disease, I have thought
it best to lay before him, for his guidance, the following rules,
which I drew up and published, with a view to estimate the
different degrees of risk which would be incurred as to the
transmission of disease, with reference to the various degrees
of relationship.

1. If there be a constitutional taint of any kind in either
father or mother on both sides of the contracting parties, the
risk is so great as almost to amount to a certainty, that their
offspring would inherit some form of disease belonging to the
class to which these investigations refer.

2. If the constitutional disease is only on one side, either
directly, or collaterally through uncles or aunts, and the con-
tracting parties are both in good bodily health, the risk is
diminished one-half, and healthy offspring may be the issue of
the marriage.

3. If there have been no signs of constitutional disease for
a whole generation, we can scarcely consider the risk materially
lessened, as it so frequently reappears, after being in abeyance
for a whole generation.

4. If two whole generations have escaped any symptoms of
hereditary disease, we may fairly hope that the danger hag
passed, and that the morbific force has expended itself.
It must be borne in mind that I do not include in these
rules any cases of phthisis, insanity, &c., which may have been
produced by accidental causes.

And here I come to the consideration of a vexed question,
which bears strongly on the subject before us. It is one that
has been regarded as a fruitful cause of disease: I mean the
intermarriage of blood relations. Perhaps the true reason why
near consanguinity is deemed an objection to marriage, and
why it is so often followed by ill effects, is, that if there should'
be any latent morbific force in the constitution of either of
the parties (both of whom are derived from a common ancestor)
which may have been lying dormant for one or two generations,,
there would be, I believe, in the event of such a union, a double
amount of probability that the old hereditary disease would
reappear in some form in the offspring. If this solution of the
matter be the true one, we may infer that where there is no'
hereditary tendency to disease, and both individuals are in
perfectly sound health, there can be no fair or reasonable-
ground for objecting to the marriage of cousins. On this
subject, however, opinions are conflicting. A friend of mine,,
a gentleman who has devoted much attention to social questions,-
has obligingly given me the result of his observations on-
consanguineous marriages. He resides in a locality whichy
from its insular position and the fact of the inhabitants having
intermarried for many generations, affords especial facilities for
studying this point. He writes:?" In many cases more than
in ordinary marriages, first cousins have no children. 4 Le sang"
ne se marie pas,' is a common saying. Where children are
born they are generally females, and for the most part die-
young?fortunately so, for they are usually weak in mind as-
* Feuchtersleben, in his work on The Principles of Medical Psychology, trans-
lated by the Sydenham Society, gives it as his opinion that one-half of the cases'
of insanity that are met with owe their origin to hereditary causes.
With regard to the frequency of hereditary phthisis, the late Dr Theophilus
Thompson, in his Clinical Lectures on Pulmonary Consumption, after referring to
his statistical tables, says: " You will learn that amongst a thousand patients;
questioned on the subject, above one-third mentioned have lost one parent by it."
I am inclined to believe that hereditary disease is much more frequent than
is generally supposed, and that a vast number of cases of insanity that have been
attributed to some moral or physical shock, which has apparently produced them,
aro really only the manifestations of latent disease brought into existence by
external accident. This applies to puerperal mania. In 1854 I read a paper
before the Medical Society, afterwards published in the Psychological Journal of
Medicine, in which I observed that the term puerperal mania, used in a specific
sense, had led to serious errors. As an expression of a mere variety of insanity,
it was sufficiently distinctive; but puerperal mania was not a special form of
insanity requiring a treatment entirely different from that of mania in general, &c.
well as body. Where sons are born they have generally a
strong tendency to take stimulating drinks."

On the other hand, a note appeared in the Lancet for
February 26, 1870, in answer to an enquiry respecting the
advisability of the marriage of cousins, in which the writer
observes:?(i The matter as we understand it may be stated
thus: the marriage of cousins, provided both are healthy, has
no tendency to produce disease in offspring. If, however, the
cousins inherit the disease or the proclivity to disease of their
common ancestor, their children would have a strong tendency
to this disease, which might be fostered or suppressed by
?circumstances." This agrees with the opinion I have given
above, which appeared in my treatise published in 1869.
After all, it may be argued that it is of little avail to give
prudential rules respecting marriage where the affections are
strongly engaged, and that the stamping out of hereditary
disease is a Utopian notion; but medical science should aim at
a high ideal, and it is the province of the physician to point
out the best means of preventing physical evils, as it is that of
the moral philosopher to exhibit the disastrous consequences of
a violation of moral laws.

Whether the rules I have suggested concerning marriage
be adopted or not, there can be no doubt that hygienic means
have done much to arrest and alleviate hereditary disease.
A medical man is often rewarded for his care and attention by
seeing delicate children grow up strong and healthy men and
women, the morbific force either expending itself or continuing
latent. Sometimes, if disease cannot be eradicated, a favourable
change of type occurs; a grave malady being transmuted into
one of a less fatal character. One case of this kind especially
recurs to me?that of a professional man, who was very delicate
in his youth, and subject to haemoptysis. In after years he
became subject to attacks of gout. He is now in his ninetieth
year, and able to ride on horseback and attend to business,
although still occasionally laid up with gout.
