4. The Building of a Brain
===========================

:Author: Edward H. Clarke, M.D., Boston,
Massachusetts. London : Bailliere, Tindall, & Cox.
We have read with great pleasure and interest this little book.
The author during last year produced a work entitled " Sex in Educa-
tion." This was very well received, and its various articles reappeared
in the public press, and we now welcome another contribution from
the same pen.

Dr. Clarke commences his book with a chapter on " Nature's
Working Plan "; this chapter contains some very original and interesting
observations upon the various races which have been born and have
disappeared. Dr. Clarke says: " The Indian whom our ancestors
confronted, was losing his hold on the continent when the Mayflower
anchored in Plymouth Bay, and is now rapidly disappearing. It
remains to be seen if the Anglo-Saxon race, which has ventured upon
a continent that has proved the tomb of antecedent races, can be more
fortunate than they in maintaining a permanent grasp upon this western
world. One thing, at least, is sure?it will fail, as previous races
have failed, unless it can produce a physique and a brain capable of
meeting successfully the demands that our climate and civilisation
make upon it."


The observations here made are deserving of praise for originality.
We are told " that no perfect brain ever crowns an imperfectly deve-
loped body," but with this we must take exception; cases may be
brought forward of persons, even though deformed, with most active
intelligences, and, consequently, we must assume a perfect brain. Many
of our leading statesmen have been deformed. Idiots who are deformed
have imperfect brains; but Ave cannot agree with Dr. Clarke in the
assertion that no perfect brain exists in an imperfectly developed
body.

Part II. is devoted to a chapter on " An Error in Female Building."
We have a number of replies given in answer to questions mooted in
the State Report of Massachusetts.
    " 1st. Is one sex more liable than the other to suffer in health from
    attendance on school ? "

    " 2nd. Does the advent of puberty increase this liability ? "

In reply to these questions, answers to the number of 160 were
received. In reply to the first question the answers were as follows :
received. 

    "Females more liable than males," by ... 109
    
    " Males more liable than females," by ... 1
    
    "Both alike liable," by ... ... ... 31

    "Neither is in danger," by ... ... 4

    " Not in district schools," by ? ? ? . ? ? ? 1

    " Not if both sexes exercise alike in the open air," by ... ... ??? ??? 1

    " Unable to answer," by ... ... ... 5

A number of verbatim answers are given; but it is impossible to
give the substance of the replies; they are very well worth reading.
In reply to the second question:

    " Yes," by  120
    "No," by  12
    " Uncertain," by ... ... ... ... 9

Dr. Clarke concludes his work Avith a chapter on " A Glimpse at
English Brain Building." The subjects of diet, fresh air, sleep, tran-
quillity of life, as met Avith in our English boarding-schools, are care-
fully considered, and compared Avith the life as existing in the American
schools, and Ave are glad to say that the training of the young in every
respect is superior to that adopted in America.
In conclusion, Ave most heartily recommend this little Avork, Avhich
must be read carefully through before it can be properly appreciated.
