3. The Skull and Brain
========================

their Indications of Character and Anato-
mical Relations.
:Author: Nicholas Morgan. London. (Pp. 208.)

One of tlie chief desiderata of modern thinkers is the reconciliation
of the old and new philosophies?a via media between the creed which
holds intelligence to be altogether independent of matter, and that
which holds mind to be a function of the brain?a fusion between the
pure metaphysicians and the ultra-psychologists. And, now when
animals are declared to be automata, Avhen the onward movements of
the headless water-beetle and of the vivisected centipede, evidently
depending upon impulses imparted to the general nervous system
previous to or at the moment of decapitation or dismemberment, in
virtue of the same law which leads to the growth of the nails in the
dead, have become the gage of battle between such combatants as
Huxley, Carpenter, &c., the necessity for such a reconciliation has
become more clamant. Mr. Morgan's work seems calculated, in a
certain measure, to promote this union: for, although he proclaims
the doctrine that mind is connected with the brain, that all psychical
acts depend upon or are influenced by the integrity and condition of
the nervous system, a doctrine which few will repudiate who have
traversed the wards of a Lunatic Asylum, or who have had a friendly
mind dulled or darkened by a blow on the head, or a friendly voice
silenced for ever by a structural change in a small convolution, he
shows very clearly that the division of mind into classes of faculties or
powers, and the localisation of these, very slightly, if at all, affect the
analysis of their nature and scope, or the results obtained by observation
and experience. His chapters on the " Exposition of the Will " and on
the " Science and Attributes of Mind " demonstrate that there is a meta-
physics of Phrenology, and that its principles do not differ more widely
from those upon which other systems of philosophy are founded than
these do from each other. As may be inferred from the title of the
work, large portions are devoted to the consideration of the objections
urged against the principal dogmas of Phrenology; of the recent cor-
roborations of its truth derived from collateral sources, such as the
observations and experiments of Turner, Ferrier, and Ecker; of the
anatomy and physiology of the brain and its dependencies, as affording
direct support to these truths; of the classification and combinations
of intellectual, emotive, and instinctive faculties; and of the practical
application of the external cranial signs of these faculties in under-
standing the character and conduct of individuals and nations, and in
elucidating the complexities and difficulties which are involved in every
social and domestic relation. The book is not, however, a mere Phre-
nological Vade-Mecum, although it may serve as such, but a lucid
exposition of mental conditions in relation to matter, which should in-
terest, inasmuch as it affects, every individual. To those who barely
know the rudiments of phrenology the volume may prove a valuable
elementary treatise ; to those who are more advanced in the study and
knowledge of the science, there will be afforded much information, and
many new views as to the present state and the future development of
what must ultimately become, although perhaps in a somewhat modified
form, the trustworthy exponent of the attributes and capacities of
human nature.
