On The Pathology and Treatment of Cerebral Disease
===================================================

190 r Art. IV.?O
BY ROBERT HUNTER SEMPLE, M.D.,
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London.
In a paper on Cerebral Disease written many years ago, and
read before the Westminster Medical Society, I remarked that
the only true basis of the classification of the diseases of the
nervous system was to be sought in Pathology, and that in all
fatal cases a diligent post-mortem examination should be in-
stituted. In making this remark, however, I admit that in the
present state of our knowledge the seat of disease in the nervous
centres cannot always be precisely determined by the scalpel
of the anatomist, even when aided by the magnifying powers
of the microscope. Nevertheless, the attempt should always
be made, and it is almost a truism to affirm that no person can
be qualified to give a positive opinion upon a fatal case of
cerebral disease unless such an investigation has taken place.
In accordance with these views, I have, in all cases where I
found it practicable, made post-mortem examinations of the
patients I have attended during life, as well as of many others
where, to satisfy my own mind, I have examined the bodies of
those who had died suddenly before medical aid could be
obtained. From a diligent series of enquiries of this descrip-
tion, I have collected a large amount of materials, some of
which are of a negative character, and others are in contra-
diction to nosological systems and theories; but others, again,
have thrown so much light upon cerebral disease, and have
often cleared up so much obscurity, that I feel grateful that
such opportunities for enquiry have been presented to me, and
I earnestly advise others to pursue a similar course, and to
record the phenomena they observe.
To one who has been taught by the practical lessons of the
dead-house, the artificial distinctions laid down and insisted
upon by nosographers are comparatively unimportant; and
although it is of course necessary to retain such terms as
apoplexy, epilepsy, &c., yet these and similar words merely
help to define certain groups of symptoms, which often depend
upon causes wholly distinct from one another, and sometimes
opposite in their nature. Thus, convulsions may arise from
dentition, from inflammation of the cerebral membranes, from
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 191
the pressure of exostoses or of specula of bone, from the pre-
sence of undigested or indigestible matter in the alimentary
canal, from worms, from uterine irritation, from toxaemia,
from excess of blood in the system or from a deficiency of
the same fluid, or from the action of certain poisons. The
abolition of sense or motion, or of both?or, in other words,
the condition usually called apoplexy?may be caused by
narcotic agents, by the inhalation of deleterious gases, by
mechanical pressure, by drunkenness, by congestion of the
cerebral vessels, by hysteria, by effusion of blood or of serum
within the cranium, by softening of the brain, by intracranial
tumours, or by hydatids.
In many cases it must be fairly and honestly admitted that
a correct diagnosis during life is simply impossible, and in
such cases a post-mortem examination is the only mode of
solving the difficulty. As I intend, as far as possible, to
illustrate the remarks made in this paper by a reference to
facts observed by myself, I adduce the following example of
the observation just made. A year or two ago a young
woman, of slender make, without any hereditary disease, was
a patient under my care at the Bloomsbury Dispensary; she
complained of violent pain in the head, but otherwise did not
seem seriously ill, and was manifestly hysterical. The senses
and the intellect were not impaired. She died rather un-
expectedly, and it was totally impossible to assign any cause
for the fatal event. But on making a post-mortem examina-
tion, a large abscess, of about the size of a hen's egg, was
found on the right side of the brain, and connected with, and
indeed caused by, a carious condition of the petrous portion of
the temporal bone on that side. I made a diligent examina-
tion of the course of the disease, but could not find any com-
munication towards the exterior of the body, and no discharge
from the ear had ever occurred during life. It was certainly
most extraordinary that so serious and extensive a disease
should have caused during life such comparatively slight sym-
ptoms, but the case is far from being an uncommon one in the
records of cerebral pathology.
The case now to be recorded is even more curious; and
although it occurred many years ago, I have never seen a
similar instance. There was, indeed, evidence at the last of
some brain-disease, but what that disease was must have re-
mained a mystery but for the revelation made by the post-
mortem examination. The patient was forty-six years old, and
was an inmate of an infirmary which I at the time attended.
She had a bloated, leuco-phlegmatic appearance, and was of
rather torpid intellect, but she had not suffered from any
192 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
remarkable ailment imtil the period of the fatal attack. She
was sensible at first, but complained only of cough, difficulty
of breathing, and general uneasiness. She was, however,
anasarcous, and the face was swollen and the lips were livid, and
she gradually sank into a state of coma, her breathing being
stertorous, her pulse very feeble, and her extremities cold;
and in this state she died. The post-mortem examination
showed that the kidneys were healthy, although the anasarcous
condition of the body might have led to the suspicion of
renal disease, and the abdominal viscera, heart, and lungs
were likewise healthy, with the exception of some evidence
of chronic bronchitis, which had been detected and pre-
scribed for during life. The brain, however, to my surprise,
presented the following remarkable appearances. As I was
examining the surface beneath the arachnoid membrane, I
observed some semi-transparent masses in one or two places,
and at first imagined them to be local effusions of serum ; but
on investigating them more closely, I found that they could
readily be detached from the surrounding tissues, and were in
fact hydatids, each consisting of a flask-shaped mass, having a
thick skin and a gelatinous interior. I now instituted a diligent
search for these hydatids in all parts of the brain, and found
many of them on the exterior lying between the sulci, and
overlapped and hidden by the convolutions?all being beneath
the arachnoid membrane. One of them was found lying, free
and unattached, in the left ventricle ; it was much softer than
the others, and resembled a small oval mass of jelly of a
yellow colour. Another, much smaller, and rather hard, was
found lying upon the optic nerve, on the right side, at the part
where the nerve winds round the crus cerebri. Altogether I
collected about eighteen of these hydatids, varying in size from
that of a bean to that of a small pea, and there were also a
number of others scattered about in various parts of the brain,
but they were so small that I could not extract them entire.
They did not exist so abundantly in the white as in the
cineritious substance, and they were wholly wanting in the
cerebellum. None were found in any other part of the body.
The hydatids were taken by me to Professor Sharpey, who
recognised them as examples of the cysticercus cellulosce, and
they are now in the Museum of University College, London.
I have never seen another case of this kind, either before
or since, and I believe the occurrence to be very rare. I, how-
ever, at the time investigated the literature of the subject, and
saw a coloured plate in the University College Museum, and
executed by the late Sir Robert Carswell, representing a number
of subarachnoid cysts, similar to those I have described.
PATIIOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 193
Dr Copland, in liis Dictionary, mentions the fact of hydatids
being found on the surface of the brain, but gives no case from
his own experience; Dr Abercrombie, in his work on Diseases
of the Brain and Spinal Cord, also mentions the fact, but
gives no case of his own. Mr. Solly, in his work on the Brain,
alludes to the existence of hydatids in that organ, but gives
no case from his own practice; and the French pathologist
Cruveilhier states that he has met with hydatids beneath the
arachnoid membrane, but gives only one illustration, which
appears in the plate more like a large cyst than a true example
of a cysticercus.
In determining the causes of sudden death, post-mortem
examination is absolutely essential in arriving at any conclu-
sion; and although I fully admit that many such cases are
attributable to disease of the heart, yet cerebral disturbance
accounts for a far greater number than is usually sup-
posed. I agree with Trousseau, however, in the statement
he makes, that haimorrhagic apoplexy does not occur suddenly,
but gradually; and lest I should be accused of presumption in
placing my own experience in juxtaposition with that of so
distinguished an observer, even for the purpose of confirming
it, I may state that for many years of my life I had peculiar
opportunities of watching the mode of death in apoplexy, for I
attended a large infirmary, in which there was a great number
of old people, and I was often present when the apoplectic
attacks took place, or attended very soon after they occurred.
I had, therefore, good means of observing the progress and
termination of the disease, and as I have before remarked, I
made post-mortem examinations in every case where it was
possible to do so?that is to say, whenever the violent opposi-
tion of the relatives did not forbid such an enquiry. I may
also state that I had opportunities, which the medical officers
of large hospitals seldom enjoy, of watching the cases which
recovered for many years afterwards, and also of knowing for
many years beforehand the history and habits of those who
were attacked.
Although, therefore, many of these cases of cerebral disease
died suddenly, they were not instances of hemorrhagic apoplexy,
but of the congestive form of the malady; and in those who
died of the former variety, although I frequently witnessed the
first attack, yet there was an appreciable interval of some hours,
or of some days, between the onset and the fatal termination.
As the cases of sudden death from apoplexy of any kind are cer-
tainly somewhat rare, though not so rare as is generally supposed,
I subjoin the following as an instance :?A girl, aged 17, an
inmate of the infirmary alluded to, had been under medical
194 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
treatment for some time, on account of suppression of the
menses; she was stout, healthy-looking, and of a florid com-
plexion. The menstrual discharge was not restored, but one
night, after eating her supper, she complained when in bed of
some pain and uneasiness, but not of so severe a character as to
induce her to ask for medical assistance. The next morning
she was found dead in her bed, with her face downwards. A
coroner's inquest was held on the body, and, as there were no
circumstances of suspicion attaching to the case, a verdict of
" Natural Death" was returned. After the inquest I made a
post-mortem examination, and found the vessels of the scalp
turgid with blood; and on removing the skull, the brain was
seen to be in a high state of congestion, the veins and sinuses
being greatly distended with fluid blood. Beyond this general
congestion, however, the brain presented no morbid appearance,
and no extravasation could be detected in any part. The heart
and lungs were quite healthy, and so were the stomach, in-
testines, and liver. The bladder was empty, and the uterus
was small, of healthy structure, and with its cavity empty.
In this case there can be little doubt that death was due to
cerebral congestion, and in all probability this congestion was
connected with the suppression of the menses, and might have
been relieved or averted if that natural evacuation of blood had
taken place.
The following is another case of sudden death from cerebral
congestion, or congestive apoplexy, although in a very different
subject:?A gentleman, about 55 years of age, of a stout and
plethoric configuration, of perfectly strict habits, and in easy
circumstances, but fond, for amusement, of making abstruse
mathematical calculations, had always enjoyed perfectly good
health up to the time of the fatal seizure. He lived next-door
to me, and I was well acquainted with him, but for the reason
just mentioned I had never been requested to attend him pro-
fessionally. One morning, about 10 o'clock, I was requested
to see him immediately, as he had fallen down in a fit. I lost
not a moment in going to him, but before I arrived he was
dead. There were no circumstances of suspicion attaching to
any person, and a coroner's inquest returned a verdict of
" Natural Death." I made a post-mortem examination, and
found great congestion of the scalp, and, on removing the
skull, the veins and sinuses on the surface of the brain were all
turgid with blood, which flowed freely when they were cut, but
on the most careful examination no extravasation could be
detected in any part of the brain. All the other parts of the
body were minutely investigated, but, beyond congestion of
some of the organs, and a large quantity of fluid blood in the
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 195
right side of the heart, no morbid appearances could be
anywhere detected. This case was, I think, undoubtedly one of
congestive apoplexy, or apoplectiform cerebral congestion.
Among the anomalous diseases which sometimes simulate
apoplexy, softening of the brain is one of the most prominent
and remarkable. Many attempts have been made to establish
the diagnosis of this mysterious malady during life, but none
have hitherto been entirely successful. The distinguishing-
features of it after death are plain enough, and its pathology,
or rather its pathogeny, in many instances is quite intelligible;
but it is still a desideratum in practical medicine to determine
the symptoms which clearly denote its presence. I myself'
have long been convinced of the inutility and, indeed, the pre-
sumption of attempting to form any dogmatic views on the
subject; and Trousseau was evidently of the same opinion, for
in one of his lectures he declares, in answer to enquiries from
his pupils, that the diagnosis between cerebral hemorrhage and
softening of the brain is " one of the most difficult problems
in pathology." He, however, agrees with Recamier in thinking-
that the sudden occurrence of hemiplegia (he insists on the
suddenness of the attack), without loss of consciousness, is cha-
racteristic of softening of the brain; and Dr Todd, in his-
" Clinical Lectures on Nervous Diseases," entertains a similar
opinion. Notwithstanding these high authorities, however, I
maintain that the diagnosis is still exceedingly obscure, as the
following case of undoubted softening of the brain will amply
demonstrate.
A man, aged 62, of middle size, stout, and with short neck,
said to have been of intemperate habits, was attended by me
some years ago. He had a bewildered air, though he was quite
able to answer questions put to him, but his appearance was
dull and heavy. The head was rather hot, and he complained
of great pain; the pupils were fixed between contraction and
dilatation. Pulse 100, full and strong; tongue clear; bowels
rather confined. There was no paralysis, convulsion, or spasm
of any part of the body. My impression was that the man
was on the point of having an apoplectic attack, and I strongly
advised his wife to place him under careful medical supervision;
and in the meantime I directed him to be bled, which was
done. Although I now admit, after reviewing the whole history
of the case, that this step did no real good, it certainly did no
harm, for the patient experienced great relief from the pain in
his head, and, in fact, left the infirmary and went home. He
was, however, soon brought back again, as he had not materially
improved. He did not present any peculiar appearance, but his
intellect seemed rather dull; he, however, answered questions
196 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
quite rationally. He was not paralysed, and bad no rigidity or
convulsions in any part. My notes, made at the time, state that
"2 ivas satisfied of this from my own observation; and al-
though I frequently sought for and expected some of these
symptoms, none made their appearance" The head -was cool
and moist; tongue clean; pulse 80, weak, and occasionally
intermittent. The urine was albuminous. The hair of the head
was cut close, and a blister was applied to the nape of the neck.
The other symptoms were very anomalous, and he was rest-
less and irritable, tearing off the blister, which, however,
had risen previously. Rather more than a week after his re-
admission under medical treatment, this patient was seized with
violent epistaxis from the left nostril, which was therefore
plugged, and he died soon afterwards somewhat unexpectedly.
The post-mortem examination revealed an extraordinary amount
of softening of the brain, together with extensive disease of the
cerebral arteries, to which the softening was of course due. The
internal surface of these vessels was lined with an atheromatous
and calcareous deposit, giving them the feeling and consistence
of hard rigid tubes. The surface of the brain was almost uni-
versally healthy in appearance, and the colour pale ; but on
removing the upper portion of the cerebral mass on a level with
the corpus callosum, and then examining the ventricles, I found
that the fornix, the optic thalami, the corpora striata, and the
substance adjoining, were all in a softened state and of about
the consistence of clotted cream; but the colour of these struc-
tures was not changed. Some portions of the softened mass
were examined by the microscope, and found to present a number
of fat and pus-globules, oil-cells, and disintegrated nerve-cells
and fibres. As to the other organs of the body, there was found
hypertrophy of the left ventricle of the heart, but without
valvular disease, and the kidneys were contracted and cirrhotic.
This is, perhaps, as striking an instance of softening of the
brain as can be adduced, and its cause, the rigidity and calci-
fication of the arterial coats, is clearly manifested.
In reference to treatment, my present remarks apply only
to the subject of apoplectiform seizures.
The treatment of the diseases usually called apoplexy?
which, according to the views already expressed in the preceding
pages, is a rather vague term?is a subject still involved in
considerable doubt, and one on which great difference of
opinion is now entertained. At no remote period in the
history of Medicine, the principles of treatment of this disease
were clearly laid down, and the practice followed logically
from the principles. It was supposed that apoplexy was a
disease especially and uniformly caused by a superabundance
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 197
of blood in the cranial cavity, that this blood pressed upon
and so impaired the functions of the brain, and that the
remedy therefore was to withdraw blood from the current of
the circulation. Nor can it be alleged that these principles
and this practice were incapable of being defended by strong
arguments. A patient meets with an accident, by which a
portion of the skull is depressed upon the surface of the brain,
and apoplectic phenomena necessarily and almost constantly
ensue; but when this pressure is artificially removed, by the
operation of trephining, the functions of the brain are restored.
Equally striking are the beneficial changes which often ensue
from a spontaneous discharge of blood from some of the natural
outlets of the body in cases of cerebral congestion?as, for
instance, where a threatened apoplexy is warded off, or an
apoplectic condition is relieved, in a female by the flow of the
menses, or in a man by the hemorrhage from piles. Examples,
too, were by no means wanting (and I have often seen such
cases myself), where a prompt bleeding, practised in the case of
a patient who had fallen down in an apoplectic fit, was attended
with immediate relief, and followed by a disappearance of all
the symptoms. Such a person, in fact, was overpowered by
the pressure of blood on his brain, and experienced the same
partial abolition of the vital powers as he would have done if
some extraneous body had been artificially introduced between
the skull and the cerebral mass, or as if some depressed portion
of the skull had produced a similar effect; and the removal of
the pressure, whether caused by mechanical means, or by
abnormal fulness of the cerebral vessels, would be followed by
immediate relief.
Such are the modes of reasoning which may be adopted in
favour of the abstraction of blood from the system in cases of
apoplexy; and if it were proved that the disease always de-
pended upon mere fulness of blood within the cranial cavity,
the practice might still perhaps be amply justified. But,
unfortunately, the progress of pathological enquiry has shown
that mere superabundance or deficiency of blood has but little
connection with the causation, or the prevention, or the cure of
many cases of apoplexy; and that the conditions of the disease
are to be sought very often in diathetic and molecular changes
in the composition of the tissues, rather than in any excess in
quantity, or abnormality in composition, of the circulating fluid
itself. The view formerly entertained as to the nature of
apoplexy assumed the integrity of the vessels, and attributed
the morbid phenomena to the force exercised upon those tubes
by blood, superabundant in quantity and rich in solid con-
stituents ; but recent researches have compelled the physician
198 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
to regard the whole question from a totally different point of
view. There are, it is true, some human beings so happily
constituted that, during a long life, no diathetic malady has
sapped the foundations of their health, or led to degeneration
of any of their tissues; and such persons attain to a tranquil
old age, and at last die from sheer wearing-out of the bodily
framework. But in too many instances, either latent maladies,
hereditary or acquired, or more open and obvious visitations of
disease, are exerting their baneful influence among the tissues,
are causing hypertrophy in some and atrophy in others, are
softening one set of organs and hardening another set, are
converting elastic vessels into brittle or rigid tubes, or are
"blocking up those tubes with solid plugs, or are introducing
oil-globules in the place of healthy cells and fibres and sarcous
elements; and, in short, like the trap-doors lying concealed on
the bridge rof life, as seen in the vision of Mirza,* they are
stealthily undermining the integrity of the organs and tissues
?of the body, and a " plurima mortis imago," as Virgil expresses
it, is leading the victims, by multiform aspects of disease, into
the gulf of eternity.
When, therefore, the essence of apoplexy is proved to
consist of a brittleness of the coats of arteries, leading to their
easy rupture and the extravasation of their contents, or when
the same disease is induced by the bursting of a cerebral
aneurism, it is idle to expect that blood-letting, or indeed any
other measure, will remedy the primary source of the mischief.
But, on the other hand, it must be recollected that, during life,
it is often impossible to distinguish with certainty the cases
due only to congestion from those in which there is disease of
the arterial coats; and it is still more important to bear in
mind that, even when extravasation has ensued from the latter
condition, the case is not hopeless. The effused blood may be,
and very often is, absorbed, and the patient is restored to
health, perhaps to undergo subsequently another seizure, or
even a succession of seizures.
I cannot, therefore, altogether agree with Trousseau in his
indiscriminate condemnation of blood-letting, in any form, in
every case of apoplexy; and looking back to three of the
cases recorded in the present paper, I cannot help thinking,
if the menses had returned (or, in other words, if there had
been a loss of blood), in the case of the girl who died of
congestive apoplexy, and if, in the case of the gentleman, who
died suddenly from the same cause, some blood could have
been abstracted, that in both cases life might have been pre-
served. In the case of softening of the brain, too, although I
* Addison's Spectator.
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 199
have admitted that the bleeding did no good, it clearly did no
harm, and, indeed, Nature made a spontaneous effort to relieve
the symptoms, a copious epistaxis taking place a very short time
before death. Nor, while I agree with Trousseau that blood-
letting is often useless in sanguineous apoplexy, can I admit
that such a measure is always injurious; and I altogether
disagree with him in regarding congestive apoplexy and
epilepsy as identical diseases, a view which he clearly sets
forth in his lectures.*
The subject of treatment in cerebral diseases is a very wide
and a very difficult one, and one on which I have no dogmatic
opinions to offer. For the present, I must repeat the observa-
tions which I made and published many years since?namely,
that the treatment must depend, not upon the name given to
the disease, but upon its pathology, as indicated by its diagnosis.
The diagnosis is often very difficult, and this difficulty should
inspire great caution in the therapeutical means employed.
Still there are positive and negative indications which should
guide our treatment, and which are often sufficiently plain
when carefully considered. I fully indorse the opinion of
Trousseau, that blood-letting has too often been performed in
an unnecessary and injurious manner in cerebral disease; but,
nevertheless, I still think that this mode of depletion is very
valuable when cautiously performed, and when the state of the
pulse admits of its adoption. As to other measures, they are,
and must be, of the most varied description, for one case may
be benefited by emetics and cold affusion; a second shall yield
to opium and brandy; a third shall require the cautious
abstraction of blood; a fourth shall demand the use of calomel
and purgatives; a fifth shall be relieved by generous diet; a
sixth shall imperatively necessitate a system of rigid abstinence;
and a seventh shall with propriety be left to take its course.
Nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri,
Quo me cunque ferat tempestas deferer hospes.
* Lectures on Clinical Medicine, Lecture II.
