Notes on Asylum Surgery
========================

!75 Art. X.?
:Author: Robert Lawson, M.B., Pathologist and Assistant Medical Officer,
West Riding Lunatic Asylum.

During the past month two surgical cases have occurred in the
West Riding Asylum which are, in certain respects, instructive
and interesting. The first was the removal of a darning needle
from the abdominal parietes of a female patient, and the
second the excision of a large mammary tumour of fibro-cystia/
structure.

The patient in the first case was admitted in March last.
She suffered from simple melancholia, and had made repeated
attempts to cut her throat. She was depressed on account of
business embarrassments into which her husband had fallen,,
and had excessive feelings of regret for having taken a small
sum of money from his till, for the use of her own sister. Her
delusion was that if she were out of the way there would be
nothing to prevent her husband's prosperity. When admitted
she was low-spirited, owing to a vague feeling that everything-
was going wrong. She had a recent incision on the left side
of the neck. Her physical health was fair, and she appeared to
be at the menopause. In a month she was so much improved
that she was employed in the kitchen, but had again to be sent
to the wards on account of the occurrence of a certain amount
of depression. In June she was much depressed, and showed
great listlessness and want of appetite. She retained the
obscure delusions which she had manifested on admission; and
after a visit from her husband appears to have become much
worse than she had formerly been. On the 18th of August she
complained of pain in the left hypochondriac region, and on
examination it was found that some sharp body was pointing
underneath the skin at that part. On' cutting down upon the
spot a needle, measuring 3f inches in length and one-eighth
of an inch thick, was readily removed. She stated that during
the period of depression which has just been noted she swallowed
a darning needle, a large piece of glass, and a portion of a
bent knitting needle, in the expectation that they would occlude
the windpipe and cause suffocation. The nurse remembered
that at the time referred to the patient was refusing her
food, but that the refusal appeared to arise more from defect
of appetite or suicidal intent than on account of pain during
or after swallowing. The patient herself observed that for
about twenty-four hours after swallowing the needle there was
a sense of obstruction in the throat, followed by a strange
sensation at the pit of the stomach which she described as a
hungry feeling. This feeling also disappeared, and was followed
by pain in the left side, which was increased by movement, and
especially prevented her raising herself up when she had lain
down in bed. When removed the needle presented appearances
which led to the conclusion that it had passed through the cardiac
end of the stomach wall and found its way directly into the
abdominal parietes. The point was but little eroded, while
the metal surrounding the eye was on one side completely eaten
away, evidently on account of prolonged exposure to the action
of gastric juice. This roughening of the posterior part of the
needle caused a considerable amount of laceration during re-
moval, but the small aperture closed in two or three days, and
no threatenings of peritonitis were ever observed. The needle
did not smell of fsecal matter, and had no trace of digestion
products on its roughened surface, so that the natural conclusion
is that the needle had been lying entirely in the abdominal
parietes for a considerable time.

The patient in the second case was also admitted in March
1875, and presented symptoms of subacute mania. She was a
criminal, and at the expiry of her sentence was certified for
admission into the asylum. She had numerous delusions and
hallucinations, and was said to be at times violent. On exami-
nation it was found that she was exceedingly irrational and
incoherent, morose and suspicious. She refused her food, and
had to be fed with the stomach tube. She had hallucinations
of hearing during the time of examination, and imagined that
she heard the voice of a distant friend. A large fibro-cystic
tumour was found to occupy the place of the left breast. It
was not adherent to the subjacent textures. There was no re-
traction of the nipple, no enlargement of axillary glands, and
no pain. The only discomfort caused by the tumour was a
dragging sense of weight. The patient was somewhat sallow
and very thin. She stated that the tumour had been growing
for about three years, but her evidence was not reliable. In a
week after admission the patient was somewhat better and had
begun to take her food. In a month it was noted that she was
losing flesh and that the tumour was undergoing no change.
On August 18th a special examination was made, and it was
determined that, as she was gradually becoming weaker, and as
the growth was very rapidly increasing in size, it would be
necessary to remove it.

Before removal it measured at the base, which was the
smallest part of it, 12\ inches in circumference. The skin
over the upper surface was very tensely stretched, that on
the under surface was flaccid. The larger flap was conse-
quently taken from below by means of a modified circular
incision. There was a considerable amount of adhesion be-
tween the peripheral part of the tumour and the subcutaneous
textures. The skin was exceedingly attenuated. On the under
surface the growth was not to any extent adherent, but the pec-
toral muscle was much atrophied. On removal, the growth,
including the fluid which escaped from cut cysts, was found to
weigh rather more than 61bs. In form it was lobulated,
and on section exceedingly tough. Owing to the mental con-
dition of the patient, it was impossible to employ the antiseptic
system completely, but the skin surrounding the tumour was
widely cleaned with carbolic lotion; the instruments, ligatures,
&c. were steeped in carbolic oil, and the cavity left by enu-
cleation of the tumour was thoroughly drenched with a solution
of carbolic acid of the strength of 1 to 20.

The incision was dressed with carbolic oil of the same
strength ; and though the patient was so restless that two nurses
were sometimes required to restrain her, the wound almost
entirely healed by first intention. Around one ligature there
was found at one or two dressings a small quantity of pus, and
only at the extremities of the incision, where space was left for
the draining away of discharge, was the healing action accom-
plished by granulations. From the date of the operation her
appetite has increased, her pulse has gradually gained strength,
and her mental condition has undergone at least temporary
improvement. She has become more manageable, but is exceed-
ingly mischievous. On the day after the operation she made
several attempts to get out of bed, for the sake of annoying
the attendants; yet, notwithstanding the disadvantages result-
ing from her frolicsomeness of disposition and her great pros-
tration previous to the operation, the healing of the wound
has advanced in every particular in the most advantageous
manner possible. Perhaps it is not too much to say that this
result is in no small measure due to 'the protection afforded
by the use of a rough and ready form of the antiseptic system of
treatment.

On microscopic examination the structure of the tumour
was found to be made up of bundles of white fibres along with
spindle-shaped cells. The fluid in the cysts was sero-purulent
in character.
