2. Insanity in Massachusetts
==============================

We have been favoured with the " Fifth Annual Keport of the State
Board of Health of Massachusetts," and it is our intention briefly to
draw our readers' attention to that part of the report which has special
reference to insanity in that State.

At the commencement of the chapter on Insanity, we are told that it
is prominent in the State " by its frequency and persistence," and that
" if the persons who are attacked with this disorder are as promptly
cared for as others when attacked with fever, dysentery, and pneumonia,
eighty or ninety per cent, can be restored to health and usefulness."

This account of the probability of recovery of patients in the State takes
us by surprise, and seems quite contradictory to our own statistics of
insanity. In England the probability of recovery is at the most thirty-
three per cent., and we cannot help thinking that in preparing these
returns of the recoveries an error must have been unwittingly made.
The report goes on to tell us that, " if neglected, the disease tends
rapidly to fix itself upon the brain, and becomes more and more
difficult to be removed." Here we would draw attention to the fact
that insanity, whether acute or chronic, is per se a disease of the brain or
its membranes, and as a consequence the organ is functionally or
organically disordered; however, we should be glad to be informed
rather more clearly what is here meant, as it is contrary to all our
accepted psychological doctrines. Insanity is as much a disease of the
brain as pneumonia is a disease of the lungs; but we quite agree with
the writer that it is most important to endeavour to treat the incubatory
symptoms of insanity, and that much evil has resulted, and the treatment
been rendered more difficult and obstinate, from failing to observe the
precursory indications of mental disorder. The writer informs us that
" the period of the healing power varies with many circumstances and
conditions?from a few days or weeks to many years." Here, again,
we must take exception to the views propounded. Insanity is never
cured in a few days, and the cases referred to here, and supposed to
have been cured in three days, could not have been pure cases of
insanity.

It is rather a bold assertion for a writer on insanity to state generally
that " the disease is not immediately destructive to life," and that " some
lunatics live five, some ten, others fifteen, and a few live forty and fifty
years, while suffering from their mental malady." I think here a little
classification would have been desirable, for there are some varieties of
insanity which must be regarded as immediately destructive to life.

The cost for supporting insane patients in the State of Massachusetts
is at the rate of four dollars a week, and according to the statistics the
average time required to restore a patient is twenty-six weeks.

The writer now passes on to consider minutely a comparison between
what a lunatic, ast. 20, who recovers in the average number of weeks,
will cost the State, or if not restored, what will be the loss to the State,
provided he be of a certain age, and live a certain number of years, in
comparison to what the said lunatic who recovers in the twenty-six
weeks, and lives for the same number of years, earning so much as a
labourer.

The subject is thus summed up : The cost and the profits of healing
lunacy may thus be compared, in the cases of labourers becoming insane
at twenty years:

Gain, present value of his future labour . . $2,665 37
Present value of the cost of his support, if not healed 2,121 00
Total saved and gained .... $4,786 37
Cost of healing . ...... 134 00
Net gain $4,652 37"

On an average, a lunatic aged twenty not recovering would entail a
loss of 4,786 dollars to the State, and if recovering a gain of 4,652
dollars.

The example given above has only reference to a common labourer,
without trade or profession, who earns thirteen dollars a month, besides
board, which costs three dollars a week. At the present time there are
3,300 persons of unsound mind in the State, whereas twenty years ago
the number was 2,630, the proportion to the population being 1
in 1,357.

The chief causes for insanity enumerated are " physical disorders
and forms of vital depression," which are supposed to originate out of
perversions, excesses, abuses of the mental, moral and bodily powers,
especially the appetite and lower passions.

With regard to the partial abolition of restraint in the State, a paper
containing a number of questions has been issued and sent to the
proprietors of our asylums, for their views on the subject.
