Clement's Asylum, Venice
=========================

132 Art. X.?A VISIT TO ST. .
This asylum, one of the largest in Italy, is exclusively for
female patients, containing upwards of six hundred inmates.
It is situated on a small island east of San Servolo, near Venice.
The island of St. Clement's was formerly the dwelling-place of
the hermits of Rua, and refractory priests were originally confined
there. It has recently been enlarged, and at the beginning of
1873 a large asylum was opened, at a cost of two million and a
half francs.
The asylum is a large, handsome, and well-constructed
building ; the rooms lofty, spacious, and well ventilated. The
building is quadrilateral in shape, containing eleven long cor-
ridors. On each side of the building two of the corridors are
used for day wards, the length of these being one hundred and
thirty-five Italian metres, or about one hundred and seventy
yards in length, and well lighted by means of thirty large
windows. The two sides of the corridors are joined by wings
eighty-five yards in length, and the floors of these are composed
of handsome tessellated marble. The dormitories are equally
large and well lighted, containing beds varying in number from
four to thirty. An infirmary connected with the asylum is
separated only from it by means of iron gates. At the time of
my visit there were about fifty of the inmates in the infirmary
under medical treatment. The patients were severally employed
in various occupations, some working in the laundry and others
at needlework. There are several small courtyards, in which
about eighty of the patients take exercise at a time, and one very
large courtyard, and in this I saw about two hundred and fifty
patients walking about, with naked feet, and some in chains.
The staff of attendants is very small, and this no doubt accounts
for the free use of restraint. The principal means used for re-
straining patients is by thick leather straps round the waist,
attached by means of chains to small manacles fastened round
the feet or hands, and sometimes both. I saw some cases
where considerable ecchymosis and swelling had been produced
by the pressure of these chains. One patient, whose hands
were chained, was able to play the harmonium without appa-
rently any inconvenience. Many of the patients in the asylum
were either chronic or incurable cases, and a considerable
proportion were idiots.
During my visit I had an opportunity of witnessing the
mechanical feeding of a patient who refused her food. A
a visit to st. Clement's asylum, Venice. 133
catheter was passed into the nose, and an instrument called
chestone de peltron, consisting of a large syringe with a small
tube at the end, was placed in the upper end of the catheter,
and the food was then forced through the catheter down the
nose, the whole process occupying less than a minute, and only
a few drops being wasted ; but I question whether it is advisable
to suddenly gorge the stomach of a patient who has doubtless
fasted for some considerable time. Seclusion was sparingly
used here, and I only saw two rooms for this purpose.
The asylum is supported by voluntary contributions, but
there are about fifty private cases who pay at the rate of one
pound per week, and who receive first-class accommodation and
care. The private cases are kept distinct from the pensioners.
In conclusion, it is a matter of great regret that the asylum is
not subjected to official visitation. During my visit I met with
the greatest courtesy from the medical officers, who were desirous
of giving me every information.
I am unable to give particulars relative to statistics or other
matters connected with the asylum, for being of so recent a
date none have been as yet published; but hope on a future
occasion to be furnished with further details for publication in
this Journal.
