Psychiatry in the National Health Service of the Future
=========================================================

:Author:  C. H. Rogerson, M.D., D.P.M. \y
Medical Director, Cassel Hospital for Functional Nervous Disorders

The first German war revealed to those who were
filing to listen?and I include among this number
a section of the medical profession and a number of
^lightened and understanding laymen?the fact
that psychoneurosis accounted for a very large
faction of the total of human ill-health. Widely
Offering estimates of this fraction have been made
at. different times. I have discussed the problem
Wlth general practitioners, some of whom have
stated that 30 to 50 per cent, of their practice was
concerned with the treatment of functional nervous
disorder in its various manifestations. More precise
assessments have been attempted by other physicians,
for example, by Bruce-Pearson who found that
approximately 17 per cent, of all patients referred
for advice to the general, medical out-patient
department at Guy's Hospital were suffering from
psychological illness without any serious organic
component. This figure is the more striking since
from it is eliminated all those, and they are many,
who have some organic disorder in addition to their
psychoneurosis. Hope-Gosse, in an analysis of the
* Substance of an address given at the Annual Meeting of the Liverpool Psychiatric Clinic, 1945.
health of the medical profession based upon
insurance statistics, found that of the disorders
coming under his review, the psychoneuroses were
fifth in numerical importance. The problem is not
therefore confined to one section or class of the
population.

I mentioned the first German war as a great
stimulus to the appreciation of psychological factors
in disease. At the beginning there was a tendency
to regard those cases in which physical symptoms
were prominent, as suffering from the ill defined
effects of physical disease or trauma. The diagnosis
" shell-shock " gained enormous popularity and
was at first regarded as a disease due to the effect
of explosives upon the physical structure of the
brain. A study of the literature of those times shows
the gradual realization that the majority of shell-
shocked patients were in fact suffering from
psychological rather than physical trauma. Slow
as was this realization, the change of attitude
towards the psychologically sick was even slower.
Psychiatry has always been cursed with a great
weight of bogus moralizing. Those who know
least about the subject are often the most apt to
inform their fellowmen how they ought to behave or
to react to a given situation and to pass ethical
judgments on the failures. Thus it was, and to
some extent still is, slightly improper to develop a
functional nervous disorder, whereas a " tired
heart " remains eminently respectable.
However, by the end of the war the weight of
evidence had piled up and it was no longer possible
to ignore the volume of psychoneurotic disorder
nor to dismiss the sufferers with a contemptuous
sniff.

It was one thing to recognize the importance of
psychological treatment but quite another to make
it available to the civilian population. During the
war a number of special psychiatric hospitals had
been developed for the treatment of service
casualties. There was as yet practically no
equivalent civilian organization. The Cassel
Hospital, with which I am associated, was founded
in response to this need. The late Sir Ernest Cassel
paid a visit to the army psychiatric hospital at Seale
Hayne near Newton Abbot in Devon in 1918. He
was deeply impressed with what he saw and enquired
what similar resources were available to the civilian.
The answer made him determined to endow a
hospital which should undertake the treatment of
psychoneurosis in the civilian population at a cost
which should be quite moderate.

He rightly placed his finger upon the crux of the
problem, namely that even if sufficient trained
psychiatrists were, available the cost of treatment
would be beyond the means of the average individual.
Unfortunately adequate psychological treatment
requires both skill and time. The psychiatrist must
pass through the long probationship of a full medical
training and must then acquire considerable post-
graduate experience before he is fit to undertake
the work he has chosen for himself. He is thus a
very expensive individual to produce. Unfortunately
he cannot then solve the problems of his patients in
the twinkling of an eye. He must sit down with
them, often for many long sessions and help them
gradually to work out their difficulties. For this
reason, without charitable help the psychotherapist
would be a luxury reserved for the well-to-do
patient.

For this reason also the curious compromise
created by the National Health Insurance Act was
most unhelpful for the psychiatric patient. We are all
very well aware just now that the Act set up a scheme
of health insurance which provided only those
services which lay within the competence of the
average general practitioner. It has been the usual
custom of the general practitioner to refer those
patients not able to afford a consultation fee, to the
voluntary hospital where they are seen by the
visiting consultant. In many branches of medicine
this arrangement has worked well but there can
scarcely be a hospital in England where the
psychiatric out-patient department is not a travesty
of what it ought to be. It is simply not possible
for the diagnosis and treatment of psychological
illness to be carried out within the time and space
available. It is like trying to put, not a quart, but
about 10 gallons into the proverbial pint pot. The
situation is a dangerous, indeed potentially a
disastrous one. The enlightened physician who
refers a patient for psychiatric treatment to such a
department is apt to complain that though much is
talked about psychological factors in disease, little
or nothing is actually done for the patient when he
is referred to the psychiatrist.

In most places it remains true in fact, that in
order to obtain adequate psychological treatment
for neurosis, it is necessary to possess adequate
means. This is where the voluntary Clinics perform
such a valuable task in keeping before the profession
and the public the knowledge of what proper
psychiatric treatment really ought to be. A
voluntary organization can carry out pioneer work
and show the way in a fashion which is denied to the
machinery of the State. The State can take over
an idea or an organization which has been shown to
be necessary and to work, but at least in the medical
world it finds great difficulty in initiation. One can
understand how this is so. The State must think in
terms of large scale organizations and large scale
expenditure of funds which it holds in trust. Before
it can act it must be convinced that action is
necessary and will be of value. It is the task of
voluntary organizations to point out the necessity
and to demonstrate the value.

We are on the eve of great developments in the
organization of medicine. Whatever the final
nature of the changes which will come about it is
certain that specialist medical practice including
psychiatry will be made more widely available to
the population as a whole. Will this solve the
problem ? Emphatically I think not. It is rather
like a rearmament programme. For years a few
voices are raised pointing out the need for arms, at
last the Government awakens and declares that
arms shall be produced. That is where the
difficulties really begin. The factories, the materials,
even the machine tools are not available. All these
things have to be got together before the flow of
armaments begins. Fortunately there are the
Prototypes which have been produced by a few
enthusiasts, possessed of vision, often working
against the greatest discouragement and difficulty.
This is our position to-day. Fortunately we also
have our prototypes in the Psychiatric Clinics which
have been established up and down the country.
If I may pursue this very elementary analogy
I should say that the element in which we are
most lacking is the machine tools. The machine
tools of psychiatry are of course the psychiatrists
themselves.

I venture to say that at the present time the
Provision of an adequate nation-wide service for the
treatment of neuroses is entirely impossible under
any organization because there are not sufficient
Psychiatrists to staff it. Let us suppose that on
Paper at least provision is made for the compre-
hensive treatment of sickness on a national basis.
Let us assume that a reasonable proportion of the
Psychoneurotic sick are actually referred to us. We
should at once be overwhelmed. We ourselves are
Partly to blame for this position. We have not
made it sufficiently clear that at the present time
We are only dealing with a drop in the ocean of the
Problem. We have not emphasized enough the
number of trained psychiatrists and the time which
*s necessary. I should like to quote from an address
delivered last year to the American Psychiatric
Association by the Medical Director of the Rocke-
feller foundation. He said:

" The historian of Medicine in the last 50
years contemplating the growth of psychiatry
might well employ the psalmist's prophecy.
' The stone which the builders rejected, the same
is become the headstone of the corner.'' After
decades of neglect and at times but thinly
veiled derision from the rest of the medical
profession, psychiatry is now being accepted as
an essential for the practice of medicine. Your
hundredth anniversary falls in a year when
campaign casualties are being reported as
one-third psychiatric, when reforms of medical
education contemplate putting into every one
of the students' (clinical) years, instruction in
psychiatry; when the emotional and mental
concomitants of every organic disease are the
subject of respectable research and the toll of
functional disease is no longer evaded or
reluctantly admitted but now bluntly declared."
To quote further:

But " I urge you to tell society the present,
the actual burdens psychiatrists are trying in
vain to carry. For until you insist, until you
are heard to state with your authority that your
present resources are unequal to the demand,
you are derelict in your duty, to yourselves, to
your nurses and attendants, and to your
patients.'"'

and again : "You are inarticulate. I do not
blame you for your exasperation at being
ignored but at the risk of seeming to add insult
to your injury I tell you that you and your
millions of charges deserve better champions
and more articulate spokesmen than have risen
from your ranks. When William Lloyd
Garrison on behalf of abolition shouted ' I am
in earnest, I will not equivocate, I will not
excuse, I will not retreat a single word, and
I will be heard..'' He showed a fiery tenacity of
purpose that accomplished more for adequate
psychiatric care, for research and teaching in
your field than a hundred centenary celebra-
tions. . . . Must you forever rely on
outsiders to tell the laity your overwhelming
truths ? Are you relying on another Clifford
Beers, another Dorothea Dix to tell the public
you are hopelessly overburdened and starved
of adequate support and understanding ? "
The introduction of a comprehensive medical
service, under whatever aegis or of whatever political
shade of colour will immediately bring to the fore
these inescapable facts.

The question is therefore what is to be done
about it. One answer, and one with which I fear
we may have to contend, is that expressed solely in
terms of immediate expediency. The psychiatrists,
so this answer may run, are asking for what is quite
impossible. They want the opportunity to sit down
with each of their patients to a first interview of at
least an hour. Then they want a further oppor-
tunity in selected cases of several more hours' work
with the same patient. They also want to bring
to bear upon his problems the skill and special
knowledge of psychiatric social workers, psycholo-
gists and occupational therapists. Since this is out
of the question the psychiatrists must make a very
different set of arrangements. They must continue
to do what was the custom at hospital out-patients
in the past, seeing perhaps ten new patients and
thirty old ones in the course of a morning session.
If it seems ridiculous to you that any such answer
should be given I may remind you that in an
enlightened country such as the United States at the
beginning of the war, three minutes per recruit was
allotted for a psychiatric interview. That was three
minutes better than the time allotted here.
Clearly there must be an expedient to cover the
next few years during which an adequate number of
psychiatrists is being trained. Let us hope, however,
that it will be frankly recognized as such and that
it will give place to a better arrangement as soon as
that is possible.

The problem, then, which we have to try to solve,
and -in which we voluntary organizations have to
offer our guidance and example to the nation, is
firstly how best to meet the situation which lies
immediately ahead, and secondly how best to plan
for the future. It is our duty at all times to consider
ways by which we may economize in the time spent
upon treatment provided that economy is compatible
with full efficiency. To sacrifice our ideal of proper
treatment would be false economy indeed. We
should not think very highly of a surgical unit in
which certain operations were excluded because they
took too much time.

There are two ways at least in which possible
economies can be effected without the sacrifice of
efficiency. They are by research leading to new
methods of treatment and by the training and
education of others to undertake part of the work
previously done by psychiatrists.

Of the first I will say little save that it would be a
false expedient to force us all to undertake so much
of the routine work of treatment that we had no
time for systematic research and proper evaluation
of our results. Already we have available physical
methods of treatment of certain psychological
illnesses which are capable of reducing greatly the
period of incapacity and of consequent medical
treatment of the patient. These and others must be
fully and carefully explored.

Of the second much could be said. The social
worker can carry our ideas into the homes of our
patients and can help us in a hundred ways to
convey to others the prerequisites of mental hygiene.
The trained psychologist can help us in the evalua-
tion of intelligence and personality and in the
treatment of certain disorders. The occupational
therapist can help us in the work of recreation and
rehabilitation.

In hospital practice, too, the nurse has a much
greater part to play than has yet been allowed to her.
The level of training and understanding of the
nurse, especially in mental hospitals, needs to be
raised so that she becomes, everywhere a valuable
psychiatric assistant, skilled in creating the best
possible environment for her patient.

We have to devote as much of our energies as
possible to the selection and training of suitable
workers in all these allied branches of our speciality
so that the treatment of psychological illness
becomes a matter of the closest team work between
all of us. We have also to spread our gospel
among other workers in fields which touch our own,
among magistrates, probation officers, teachers,
workers in children's homes, etc.

Among most of these we shall be already preach-
ing to the converted with the exception of a few
diehards. With these events will have to speak for
themselves. We must not grudge the time so spent
even though it takes away from our clinical work.
We must bear in mind that in such fashion we can
particularly further the work of prevention which is
undoubtedly the most fruitful direction in which
medical science can grow. I think the most pleasing
prospect of a comprehensive National Medical
Service is that it should for the first time give real
scope to the possibility of preventive medicine.
This leads me to a further point. Since our
resources are so limited we must expend them in our
actual clinical work as best we can. Here I would
give first priority to the treatment of children and
young adolescents. This is not sentimentality?it
is the logical pursuit of preventive methods. A
neurosis may often be curable in a few short sessions
in its early stages, but once secondary fears grow
round it, and the patient becomes a chronic semi-
invalid whose whole life is built upon his symptoms,
then months may be necessary before any impression
can be made by treatment. Indeed, in some of
these cases, the original cause may have vanished
altogether. In work with children, too, there is
more scope for team work and a great chance to
give positive education to all sorts of people con-
cerning psychological factors in illness. Parents,
teachers, may all be influenced, and since the child's
response to simple methods that are readily under-
stood is often gratifying, the influence is all the more
beneficial. In respect of other cases we have to be
careful both in our selection and our expectation.
We must recognize the fact that not every psycho-
logical illness is amenable to psychotherapy. We
deal with intangibles, the very existence of which
has often been overlooked. But there is also a
danger that once these intangibles are recognized,
their intangibility may cause their seriousness to be
imperfectly understood. No one would expect the
surgeon to replace a diseased kidney with one as
good as new; yet one is often expected to work an
equivalent miracle upon a patient who is hopelessly
deficient in the moral or temperamental sphere.
The deficiency cannot be seen or touched, neverthe-
less it may be there and may offer an absolute
barrier to therapeutic progress.

We ourselves have been partly to blame for this
state of affairs by confusing optimism with wishful
thinking. Optimism is essential in psychological
treatment. The patient must always have the
benefit of the doubt and every real chance of
betterment must be seized. But we must recognize
our limitations, and not waste endless time upon the
analysis of psychological difficulties which are
incidental to the main problem, the solution of
which may be beyond our grasp. One might
illustrate this problem by citing two apparently
similar cases of young adults referred for treatment
on account of petty thieving and lying. In the first
case the trouble lay in the patient's upbringing at
the hands of a harsh and exacting father whose
demands upon him created rebellion and delin-
quency. In the second case there was also rebellion
towards the father, but it was not the father's
attitude which was primarily responsible, but the
patient's inability to accept ordinary decent standards
of behaviour which had been manifested from an
early age. The rebellion against the father's authority
was simply an incident in an unfolding story of
repeated moral delinquency.

In the first case analytical psychotherapy could
helpfully be directed towards the patient's relation-
ship with his father. In the second case, an
intensive study of this relationship would be a waste
of time.

I have concerned myself so far mainly with what
we have to do to gain the maximum efficiency
within the psychiatric clinic. I have suggested that
we should delegate as much as possible of the work
of investigation and treatment to our associates in
the psychiatric team, the nurse, the social worker,
the psychologist and the occupational therapist.
We should pursue all promising lines of research
towards better and quicker treatment. We should
give as much as possible of our time to the children
and adolescents, and we should employ the lengthier,
more time-consuming methods of psychotherapy
where they will be most likely to give the best results.
I have mentioned only in passing the problem of
prevention which is nevertheless the most hopeful
Point of departure for future planning.
Clearly it is our duty at all times to entertain the
most lively death wishes towards our professional
selves ! We ought to proceed by every means to
try to make ourselves unwanted. An individual
who never needs to come to the clinic at all must be
regarded as a more solid success than one who has
heen treated, however brilliantly and efficiently, by
the most modern techniques.

Do we know enough about mental hygiene to be
able to make sensible and worthwhile inroads into
the problem of neurosis ? Let us avoid pious
generalizations and ask ourselves the question in a
more concrete form. Would it have been possible,
with the aid of simple non-Utopian measures, to
Prevent onset of neurosis in, say, 10 per cent, of our
Present patients ? I believe it would.

. We are beginning to appreciate that most neurosis
ls caused by the remorseless pressure of events
operating for a long period upon a susceptible
constitution. There is now much less emphasis
Upon the single non-recurrent event, however
dramatic, as a cause of breakdown. Often the
Pressure of events occurs during childhood and
takes the shape of lack of parental affection or of
excessive over protection. The results may not
show clearly for years until some strain in adult life
reveals the hidden weakness.

Better education can solve some of these problems.
% that I do not simply mean cramming psycho-
logical knowledge into the minds of prospective
Patients. We have, I think, already enough of such
Passive methods of teaching and we know their
hrnitations. I would rather suggest that we should
try to create in those to whom the public normally
?ooks for guidance, a positive awareness of the rules
?f mental health so that from many directions there
ls an equally steady counter pressure working for
good. I have especially in mind doctors, nurses,
teachers, clergymen and last, but certainly not least,
business administrators.

It is a painful fact that a certain proportion of
neurosis is created unconsciously by the medical
Profession itself. Insufficient time has been devoted
to the proper training of doctors in psychology.
Many build up for themselves a sound and sensible
outlook towards mental health but a few remain
Unaware or afraid of its implications. It is easy to
Play safe " to order medicine or rest in bed for
the early stages of an anxiety neurosis. It is also
thus fatally easy to perpetuate symptoms which
might have been banished in a few minutes. It may
be said with some justification that there is not time
to investigate a patient's worries. It is our duty as
psychiatrists to ensure that this lack of time is not
accepted complacently. We must be sure that no
national health service is regarded as satisfactory
until there is time for such matters and until the
general practitioners of the future are properly
educated in them.

The training of the nurse, too, is sadly lacking
in the psychological viewpoint. The new syllabus
of the General Nursing Council, just issued,
contains no reference whatever to the teaching of
normal psychology. I am not speaking of an
advanced knowledge of psychological theory, but
of the application of simple working principles, of
some knowledge of individual personality, and of
the common stresses and strains to which the mind
is subject. We must be very careful in this direction
not to air doctrines or theories of a speculative
kind, however attractive, which do not offer
immediate practical guidance and help. Much
harm has been done to psychiatry in the past by
such practices. Hypothesis and speculation are
valuable in the professional group since they open
the way to new advances, but in our approach to
the lay public the question " does this suggestion
work in practice" ? must be always in our
minds.

We have also to stick to our own last. I view
with unmitigated horror pronouncements by
psychologists about political, social, economic and
other matters about which they have only the most
partial knowledge. Psychology does not hold the
key to all the world's problems, but it can help in
the solution of many of them provided it goes to
work modestly. It cannot produce the Millenium,
but it can describe some of the criteria which must
be fulfilled before that period arrives. Man does
not live by bread alone and will certainly not achieve
happiness merely by the introduction of social
security, however perfectly achieved. He needs to
have the sense of being an individual within a
community to which he has a contribution to make;
he needs a sense of adventure, of purpose and of
meaning in his life. We ignore these needs at our
peril.

I have said nothing in this paper about the
particular methods of organization and administra-
tion which I favour in this new National Health
service. This is not because I do not think such
matters important but because I do not regard them
as within my sphere of expert knowledge. If a
house is to be built we are wise to tell the architect
exactly what we want and to let him draw up the
plans. When he has done so it is our duty to see
how far the plans fall short of our needs and to point
out to him their deficiencies that he may correct
them. We are not wise to try to play the political
architect unless we possess the special qualifications
necessary. I have tried, therefore, simply to indicate
what I believe to be something of the proper aims,
the scope and the limitation of psychiatry in the
Health Service of the future.
