The Search for Foster Parents
=============================

Children in Need of Homes

Some Suggestions by two Psychiatric Social Workers
It seems likely that the future demand for foster
homes will far exceed supply if, as seems probable,
public opinion swings in the direction of placing
destitute and problem children in private families,
rather than in Homes and Institutions.

Up to the present, search for foster homes has
generally been made amongst those sections of the
community in which desire to take a child into the
family has been influenced by economic needs. To
some extent the child has been an economic asset.
This does not necessarily militate against the child's
interests if the foster home can at the same time
provide him with the emotional satisfactions that he
needs although every social worker with experience
of foster home placement can testify to the happiness
which membership of an intelligent artisan family
with varied community contacts, can bring to an
insecure child.

But the tendency to look for foster homes solely
from amongst the poorer groups of the community
limits choice and may discourage offers from people
in other walks of life. It may also deprive children
of the advantages and opportunities that more
lavish and cultured homes might provide.

It seems likely that there are untapped sources of
supply that could be reached if, on the one hand,
the need for foster homes were more widely adver-
tised and, if on the other, the work of caring for
other people's children received the recognition and
status that it so justly deserves.

While the experiences of evacuation during the
war have illustrated many of the difficulties and less
agreeable features that may accompany it, there are
many foster parents who have enjoyed opening their
homes to other people's children. There are families,
too, who evacuated their own children either to
other parts of the country or abroad and, as a
result, are grateful beyond measure for the care and
affection the children received at the hands of
complete strangers.

Many of the children who spent the war years
overseas came from suburban or business homes
and from social groups who, because perhaps of
their geographical isolation from areas of poverty, or
because of the self-contained nature of their habits
of life and thought, have not been as aware as many
others, of the needs of those less economically secure
than themselves. Is it possible to arouse the interest
of this group in taking foster children into their
homes now that the war in Europe is over ? In
many cases the children who have returned from
abroad have come back to join the Services or are
already out in the world, so that the question of
accommodation is not necessarily an insuperable
one, even in spite of the present housing shortage.
It may be argued that on account of the widespread
housing difficulties the moment is an unpropitious
one in which to seek for foster homes in almost any
district. On the other hand, the welfare of home-
less and neglected children now lies heavily on
the public conscience and the need is urgent.
Receiving Homes where children could go to be
prepared for the homes to which they would
ultimately be sent, would probably be required and
skilful selection would be necessary.

Undoubtedly if interest in taking on this important
work is to develop, it must as has been said, be
accorded the dignity and position it deserves. It
must become a national service recognized as
one demanding a high degree of skill and under-
standing. It must be supported, too, by an adequate
supervisory service with trained and skilled personnel
available to the foster parents, attached to local
authorities or to social organizations of reputation.
It is quite insufficiently realized at the present time
to what extent the supply of foster homes depends
on adequate supervision. This is the reverse of
what many people outside the work might think,
as their view of the function of the supervisor is
based on ideas of inspection rather than that of
intelligent co-operation with the foster parents in
the interest of the child. This misconception which,
particularly since the O'Neill case, is widespread,
has serious practical results for it deters people from
coming forward as foster parents through fear of
unwarrantable interference by frequently intruding
officials. The truth is, however, that once an
intelligent foster parent recognizes the value of the
help and skilled advice which an experienced
supervisor is able to give, such help and advice is
not only tolerated but eagerly sought. And it is
co-operating and responsive foster parents of this
type, whom we so urgently need.

It seems regrettable that even yet, many local
authorities have not considered the question of
appointing a Boarding-Out Officer responsible for
placing children who come under the care of Public
Assistance Departments, Education Committees,
etc., and this although Treasury help is available.
The appointment of a number of suitably trained
workers might well help to establish the work on a
broader and more professional basis and do much
to raise its general status.

NOEL K. HUNNYBUN
MENTAL HEALTH 51
HAPPINESS FOR THE ADOPTED CHILD
Loving parents and a secure home are the prime
needs of childhood. Where his own family cannot
supply these it may seem that adoption will provide
a complete substitute, but there are many points
to be considered. Cases where an adopted child
ls brought to a Child Guidance Clinic illustrate
some of the difficulties which may arise.
Even if the child is too young to realize what is
happening when he is brought to the Juvenile
Court for the Adoption Order to be approved,
there is always the risk that later in life some hint
?f his origin will reach him. If the adoptive
Parents have taken him into their confidence so
that he knows he was chosen by them and that
by law he belongs to them for always, he will better
be able to stand the shock of learning that his own
Mother could not or would not keep him.

Adoptive parents wisely hesitate before breaking
the knowledge of the situation to the child when
he is at an age to realize its implication, but they
JTiay be faced with the painful necessity if their
hands are forced by circumstances. The only
vyay of avoiding this risk is by telling the child of
the adoption as soon as he is able to understand
at all. The fact will probably need to be repeated
jf?rn time to time as the child's grasp of the situa-
tion grows. An intelligent five year old who had
een adopted two years before, apparently took
n? notice of the revelation, but a fortnight later
ran up to a grown-up friend saying eagerly : "I
?nce had another Mummy." At intervals, some-
times with years between, he would refer to the
subject and maintained the happiest relationship
^ith his new mummy.

Experience in dealing with the difficulties which
n^ay arise, the adoptive parents fear of losing the
child's love, and his resentment at their withholding
tacts of such importance to himself, gives the
conviction that this is too big a risk to run. Telling
the child shows confidence in him and should build
up mutual trust. It is essential that this should
be done from early years, as soon as the child asks
any questions about his birth, or other opportunity
arises.

Many children living with their own parents
have phantasies of being changelings. When
feeling neglected or unsuccessful they will dream
of being claimed by princely parents and carried
away from their sordid difficulties. This phantasy
is so common that it is not surprising that it arises
in adopted children as well, so that they quickly
seize on any clue which suggests a different parentage.
It is most important that they should know some-
thing of the true facts as illegitimate children are
sometimes found to evade responsibility when
grown-up by imagining rights to a fortune or
blaming a bad heredity.

Such vexed questions as to how to ensure a
reasonable chance of success in adoption by study
of the child's antecedents and at what age adoption
should take place, have no complete answer. How
far temperament is inherited, what is the earliest
age at which mental or physical defect can be
detected, are still subjects of research.

On whatever principles the child is adopted,
mental health considerations still hold good. He
needs a close personal relationship which adoptive
parents can well give him, and this must be founded
on mutual confidence. It therefore seems essential
that for the peace of mind of both parties, the fact
of the adoption should be faced and tackled. If
this is done from a sufficiently early age, much
suffering may be avoided. A frank sharing of the
knowledge with the child, perhaps keeping it as a
family secret so that no one else need know, may
actually contribute to creating the desired close
and personal relationship.
Robin a S. Addis.

THE RETURN FROM EVACUATION

After " Evacuation Problems " come problems
Rising out of the ending of Evacuation, and a Joint
\i?rnrr|ittee on this subject has been set up by the
^omen's Group on Public Welfare (National
^ouncil for Social Service) and the National
Council for Maternity and Child Welfare.
Arising out of discussions of this Committee,
toe National Provisional Council for Mental Health
^ published a pamphlet under the title " Advice
.^Parents on the Return from Evacuation ", which
11 's hoped may be helpful also to social workers in
c?ntact with homes to which evacuees have returned.

The pamphlet consists of some general advice to
mothers on adjustment to post-war conditions,
refers to special problems which will confront
mothers who have themselves been evacuated, and
deals with the needs of Nursery children, school
children and children from Hostels in relation to
their adaptation to home life.

Single copies can be obtained from the
Provisional Council (39 Queen Anne Street, London,
W.l) at Id. post free, but for larger quantities
some charge over and above postage, will have to
be made.
