Rebel Without a Cause: The Hypnoanalysis of a Criminal Psychopath
==================================================================

:Type: Reviews
:Author:  Robert M. Lindner, Ph.D. United
States Public Health service. Wm. Heinemann (for
Research Books Ltd.). Pp. 259. 21s.

It is characteristic of modern clinical psychology and
psychiatry that every now and then their devotees make
remarkable rediscoveries which are promptly hailed,
sometimes even by experienced colleagues, as milestones
on the road to a new understanding of mental function
or to a new technique of mental treatment. This naive
book is a case in point. Rated by the publisher as a
" unique accomplishment" and by two reputable
sponsors, Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck, as a " significant
milestone "?assessments, by the way, with which the
author himself appears to be in entire agreement?the
book falls heavily between two stools. This is already
manifest in the title which combines a popular appeal
with a formal suggestion of scientific pioneering. These
approaches, although not strictly speaking incom-
patible, call for entirely distinct techniques of
presentation.

The first two chapters, to the publication of which the
author would have been well advised to restrict himself,
discuss respectively the nature of criminal psychopathy
and the therapeutic method, by no means new, to which
he gives the new name of hypnoanalysis. Criminal
psychopathy which Dr. Lindner, in common with the
Gluecks, appears to regard as identical with psycho-
pathic personality, is, according to him, characterized
by the following features: the desire for immediate
gratification of instinct leading to infantile forms of
behaviour; an aggressive reaction to frustration; a
shrewdness and secretive cunning which tend to give a
false suggestion of high intelligence; a homoerotic or
otherwise perverse sexual organization, underlying which
is to be found profound hate of the father, associated
with unresolved Oedipus conflict and castration anxiety;
and a complete incomprehension of the rights of others.
The psychopath is burdened with guilt and seeks punish-
ment in order to expiate it. All this Dr. Lindner thinks,
may be a " homeostatic " adjustment to a disturbance
of organic balance, but, whether or no, psychopathic
behaviour is, according to him, " relative to the culture
in which it flourishes and can be measured by no other
rule than that of the prevailing ethic and morality "
This perfectly legitimate though by no means uncon-
troversial set of formulations ends with a disarming
comment to which the author himself might well have
paid more attention. " It is ", says the writer, " of
paramount importance that we know more about
psychopathic personalities than the tentative conclusions
we have so far outlined."

As for the method, it is perhaps sufficient to say that
Dr. Lindner describes it as " compounded of psycho-
analysis and hypnosis Many years ago Freud
considered the possibility of combining psycho-analytical
procedures with hypnotic and other non-analytical
devices in order to meet the increasing demand for
psychological treatment: but he was careful to point
out that this combination could not be regarded as true
psycho-analysis. Subsequently he gave it as his final
opinion that the best way to carry out an analysis was to
follow the established technique. Nevertheless many
experiments in " short treatment " have been carried out
by non-Freudian analysts. There are many reputable
exponents of " combined " methods in this country:
and, of course, wartime psychiatry has given a fillip to
the already established use of hypnotic or drug therapies
in conjunction with a kind of complex-hunting based
on psycho-analytical understanding. None of this is-'
really psycho-analysis. Indeed Dr. Lindner's own
technique of testing the depth of trances by applying a
live cigarette to the dorsal surface of the patient's hand
could scarcely be regarded as conducive to psycho-
analytical progress.

Nor for that matter can the concealment of a micro-
phone in the consulting room be regarded as a very
progressive device, although, in fact, it was by this means
that a transcript of the " hypnoanalysis " of the case
was secured. Perhaps the most useful comment on this
transcript, which covers forty-six sessions and occupies
over seven-eighths of the whole book, is that, contrary
to Dr. Lindner's expectations, it adds no more to our
knowledge of psychopathy than he had already outlined
in his introductory chapters. The psychogenesis of his
patient's disordered conduct and of some eye-symptoms
is traced to the witnessing between the sixth to eighth
month of life of a " primal scene " of parental coitus
and to the fear, jealousy, frustration and father-hostility
that ensued. Evidence for the authenticity of this scene
is considerably weakened by the factor of hypnotic
dressage. In any case the most striking feature of this
" hypnoanalytic " investigation is precisely the barren-
ness of the " personality" formulations, and the
emphasis laid on purely traumatic factors. Something
more than a simple primal scene formula is needed to
account for the complications and perversities of the
psychopathic character.

So much by way of criticism, which, incidentally, the
author goes out of his way to invite by claiming that his
method is a new form of personality research. On the
other hand Dr. Lindner's enterprise in tackling the
therapeutic problem of the chronic delinquent calls for
unstinted praise; I know of only one psycho-
therapeutist in this country who has had the courage and
conviction to apply analytical procedures to the
" hardened criminal " and to do so under " ambulant
conditions, that is to say under conditions of freedoit!-
Recent experience in the handling of delinquents leads
beyond the obvious view that the recidivist is a hard nu?
to crack. One of the stumbling blocks to progress i11
this direction lies in the fact that court authorities tak6
a dim view of cases relapsing during treatment, and are
only too ready to regard such lapses as a proof of the
Mutations of psycho-therapeutic procedure in delin-
quency. But even if the therapeutic results of treating
?hronic cases were entirely negative, this would not
Justify neglect of a psychological approach to the
Problem. If only for purposes of research it is essential
that chronic cases should not be left to the untender
^rcies of purely legal disposal. Psychological study of
Tronic insanity has provided invaluable information
011 the nature of mental regression and thereby accelerated
Progress in the handling of borderline cases. There is
n? reason to suppose that similar benefits could not be
reaped from the study of chronic delinquency.

As for the actual technique there is no question that
treatment of delinquency calls for considerable
Modifications of the procedures applied, for example,
'I the psycho-analysis of the psycho-neurotic. But not
t course for modifications of the principles regulating
approach. Had Dr. Lindner borne this reservation
.n rnind, he might have produced a book more modest
ft size and in pretension yet of unquestionable value to
ne experimenter in the psycho-therapy of delinquency.
Edward Glover
