A Study of the School Inquiry Report on Ungraded Classes
=========================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1914, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VIII, No. 3. May 15, 1914

By Elizabeth E. Farrell,
Inspector of Ungraded Classes, New York City, N. Y.
(Continued.)
Organization.
The following quotations from the School Inquiry Report
relate to the type of organization to be recommended for special
classes:
"Separate schools would thus be established for these children. * * *
In such schools grading would be possible. The lowest grade cases, for whom
little can be done, could be put in one group, and the teacher in charge would
only be required to keep them happy, train them in simple habits, and do for
them what their condition allows. Those who are a little higher could be put
together in another class, which might well be a class of border-line cases. Of
these, some might get back into the grades." (Pages 18, 19.)
"Ultimately these schools should develop into home schools, keeping the
children as many hours as possible, and many of them even over night. And,
finally, they should develop into city institutions for defectives, thus largely
solving the problem." (Page 19.)
"By the establishment as fast as possible of special schools to take as many
as possible of these ungraded classes out of the regular schools, to the end that
the children may be more adequately directed, supervised, graded, and given
appropriate manual training and vocational work." (Page 22.)
According to the report the facts upon which the above statements are based are as follows:?
"Again teachers and principals feel almost universally that these children,
although cared for by the school system, should not be in separate classes in the
regular schools; but that centers or schools should be established for these
children, so located that they could take all of the children who are now in these
ungraded classes, and those that ought to be in them, in a given area; there,
brought together in one building, they could be cared for and supervised and
directed as necessity required." (Page 10.)
(57)
58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Discussion.
It seems well established here in New York City that we do
need a special school center, but of a somewhat different type from
that presented in the report. The character of such a special school
center can be determined only by a consideration of the purposes
and aims of ungraded classes. These are three: (a) normal
children should not have their school time wasted and their work
interfered with by the presence of children so stupid as to need a
large part of the teacher's time; (6) the stupid children should not
be subjected to the process of losing their self-respect because they
are unable to do the work required of them; (c) the ungraded class
is the means of educating public opinion with regard to a group of
persons heretofore but little understood: it seems to be well indicated that the anti-social classes, the ne'er-do-wells, and many of
the pauper class are recruited from generation to generation by
those of feeble mentality who were, at some time, children in the
public schools. If this latter aim is accepted it is only a matter
of time when we will provide care instead of allowing the irresponsible to wander at large.
The special school center which New York City needs at this
time, is a pre-vocational school center. For the high grade type of
mental defective there is little hope of securing permanent custodial
care. Reasons for this are obvious. To train them to be in some
degree efficient and if possible self-supporting, requires years of
application in some simple industry. Ungraded classes of prevocational type for the high grade mental defective have been in
existence during the past two and a half years. Their activities
and usefulness would be greatly augmented were they centered.
The present vocational schools are designed for children who make
considerable progress in the regular grade work. It is acknowledged that many children who would profit by such training in the
vocational schools, are unable to get it because of the poor quality
of their minds. A pre-vocational school would provide this opportunity.
Children for such a pre-vocational school, as far as they would
be recruited from ungraded classes, would in no sense represent what
is usually and popularly accepted as the feebleminded type. These
children (the feebleminded type) the ungraded class should pass on
to state institutions for permanent care. It is desirable that a working co-operation be established in accordance with the recommendation of the City Superintendent of Schools in his Annual Report
for 1911. "I suggest, therefore, that your Board, * * *, enter
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 59
into an arrangement with the Trustees of the Syracuse institution,
by which your representatives shall examine all children proposed
for commitment from our city, to the ends that no children shall
be committed who are not properly institutional cases, and that all
pupils who are susceptible only of institutional treatment may be
removed from the public schools."
Information as to the experience of other localities on the
question follows:
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
February 27, 1913.
My dear ,
Replying for Dr Brumbaugh to your inquiry of the 25th, I would say that
our plan of having special classes in regular elementary schools has the advantage of providing accessible accommodation where it is most needed.
Very truly yours,
(Signed) Oliver P. Cornman
Associate Superintendent of Schools.
From the New York Tribune, November 12, 1912.
"The work of the Detroit special rooms might be said to be three-fold; it
acts as a clearing house to eliminate low grade children from the schools. It provides a place where middle grade, feebleminded children may be given the advantage of some slight educational training. It provides a place where children who
are merely backward for various reasons may be placed for a length of time
varying from one year to two in order that special assistance may be given them
to make up their grade work. * * * The present method, however, has its
advantages in that there is less opposition to the segregation of feebleminded
children where all are classed as backward than there would be if these unfortunate children were placed in a room known to be maintained for the express
purpose of caring for mentally defective children. For the same reason special
rooms in Detroit have not been centralized, but one room is set aside in each
of nine different buildings. These children, therefore, come into contact with
normal children on their way to and from school and at recess time, which is no
doubt of much benefit to them, and at the same time it makes the special rooms
of much easier access to the children who are enrolled there."
"Mr. George Shann, M.A., F.R.S., City Councilman and Member of the
School Committee, Birmingham, England, who visited ungraded classes in this
city within the last few months, stated that in his city they were changing their
organization of special work from the special school to the special class. He
added, 'As a member of the School Committee a great deal of my time is taken
seeing parents whose children have been ordered to attend the special school
center. I try to convince them that the children will really have a better chance
there. The result is, however, that we get in the special center only those who
are obviously defective, those about whom there is no question of a doubt, those
who are in fact institutional cases. The high grade defective boy or girl, the
border line case, who must live in the community and whose education would
be more profitable if it were of a special character, does not get it because we
realize that on the whole the chances are better if the pupil does not begin his
industrial career from a special school center in which are low grade institutional
cases.' "
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The matter of the development of city institutions for defectives
under the Board of Education involves questions of law and
precedent. The city already maintains an institution for dependent
defectives on Randall's Island. The State of New York has already
acknowledged its duty to the defective. It stands willing to discharge it if public opinion is strong enough to warrant the obligations, financial and other, involved in any adequate scheme for the
care of the feebleminded. To help to form this public opinion,
while it provides for the needs of the children, is a legitimate function of the ungraded class.
The question of the type of organization was discussed in the
report of the City Superintendent of Schools for 1912. This discussion is attached as Appendix A.
Child Labor.
With regard to child labor the School Inquiry Report makes
the following recommendation:
"The child labor law should be so modified as not to apply in its present
form to children who have been declared mentally defective. These children
should be allowed to go to work as soon as those in charge of the schools or
classes conclude that it is more profitable for these children to be under the
direction of their parents or in regular work than in the schools. However,
this should apply to such cases only as cannot be placed in an institution or
colony." (Page 23.)
Discussion.
The attitude of the National Child Labor Committee toward
the above recommendation has been put into words by the Secretary,
Mr. Owen R. Lovejoy, as follows:
"The National Child Labor Committee believes that it would
be a serious blunder to adopt the Tenth Recommendation in Dr.
Goddard's Report, and that this recommendation is out of harmony
with the report itself. He urges here that the Child Labor Law in
its present form should not be made to apply to mentally defective
children, but that such children 'should be allowed to go to work
as soon as those in charge of the schools or classes conclude that it
is more profitable for these children to be under the direction of
their parents or in regular work than in the schools.'
"He has elsewhere urged the more complete equipment of the
schools for training or caring for defectives, the better training of
teachers for special classes, and makes an emphatic point of the
fact that from 65 per cent to 90 per cent of our feebleminded chilA STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 61
dren are due to 'morbid heredity.' He also states in his report
that the great menace of this problem of feeblemindedness is in having these children left unprotected in their unfavorable environment.
"Yet here he turns upon himself and urges that the only bar
which at present even feebly protects the subnormal child shall be
let down and he be exposed to the care of his feebleminded parents
or employed 'in regular work.'
"If it is proposed that the public, through the school system,
shall take upon itself the problem of caring for these unfortunate
ones, we see no objection to the development of such methods as
will train them to self-supporting, or partially self-supporting, handwork. But to amend the child labor law so as to have them the
prey of private enterprise, to expose them to the rigors of our
present industrial competition, where even now the efficient workman suffers in the labor market from the pressure of the ignorant,
the inefficient, and the child laborer, would be a serious economic
blunder.
"Who is to decide when the child is better off 'in regular work'
than in school? The teacher who is already sorely vexed by the
presence of the backward child? Suppose only the lowest cases,
the most defective, were first weeded out of the schools. Who shall
guard the border-line if this safeguard is removed? With the
ignorant parent clamoring for the child's wages and the thrifty
employer glad to 'give him work' for a pittance and the teacher
glad to rid her class of him?it requires no great wisdom to foresee
the sequel of such a suggestion.
"The principles of modern social welfare require protection for
the helpless. It is not well to abandon the principle in case of the
most helpless.
"A hundred years ago the churches in England piously sold
their pauper children to the factories for money. Let us not today
propose to sell our mental paupers to the factories for convenience."
Teachers of Ungraded Classes.
From the School Inquiry Report are taken the following
extracts relating to the quality of teaching, selection of teachers,
salary of teachers, and training of teachers.
" * * * the work is seldom satisfactory. * * * the teachers are
inadequately trained. * * * have little understanding of manual work."
(Page 7.)
"A few teachers are utterly incompetent, and some of these are substitutes." (Page 8.)
62 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
"The grade teachers of three years' experience are encouraged to take the
special examination for teachers of these ungraded classes. * * * The
difficulty here is the difficulty that we always meet when we encounter anything
like a civil service examination or a fixed examination of people for these positions. No one has yet discovered any sure way of selecting the right person by
means of a fixed examination. The result is that we have found certified
teachers in these classes who are in no way fitted for the work. On the other
hand, we have found people who are teaching as substitutes, having failed in
their examination, who are nevertheless doing excellent work." (Page 8.)
" * * * many principals say that they could select teachers from their
schools that could pass the examinations and would make ideal teachers for
these classes; but that the teachers are unwilling to undertake the work, feeling
that it is difficult and arduous, and has many drawbacks and that there is not
sufficient compensation to induce them to make the change." (Page 11.)
"These teachers could also be paid an ample salary, enough at the start to
induce them to take up this work, with an ample increase to those who prove
effective, who show by their zeal, enthusiasm, and willingness to study the
problem, that they are of the right kind." (Page 19.)
"The teacher of the ungraded class, who comes properly qualified, to receive
a bonus of $100 the first year, $200 the second, $300 the third, and so on, until
it becomes $500?this in addition to the regular salary of the grade teacher."
(Page 19.)
"Suitable steps should be taken as rapidly as possible to provide training
classes for teachers of defectives. In addition to the class work and theoretical
instruction, teachers in training should have access to model schools. These
could perhaps be secured at Letchworth Village, or other institutions for the
feebleminded. It is important that such model schools for the teachers in
training should be institutional schools. Only in such schools do the teachers
see that the children are distinctly feebleminded. If they see only the children
in the ungraded class or special schools, they tend more or less to retain the
impression that the children are really normal, or will yet prove normal; and
this impression (or conviction) is a serious handicap to their work." (Page 22.)
As stated in the report the facts upon which the above statements are based are as follows:?
"One hundred and twenty-five classes were visited." (Page 3.)
"At least two states (New Jersey and Michigan) are proposing a scale such
as the following: The teacher of the ungraded class, who comes properly qualified, to receive a bonus of $100 the first year, $200 the second, $300 the third,
and so on, until it becomes $500?this in addition to the regular salary of the
grade teacher. To those unfamiliar with this work this may seem like a large
bonus. Few people realize the special ability, skill, and training required.
These teachers have to be specialists, and, therefore, experts. Again, few realize
the nerve-racking work, the discouragements, difficulties, and even dangers
these teachers have to face. An adequate salary is the least we can do for
them." (Page 19.)
Discussion (Quality of Teaching).
It is a matter of sincere regret that this report does not set up
standards by which ungraded class teaching is to be measured. We
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 63
do not know whether the work was judged from the point of view of
technique, of psychological or of logical sequence. Was the teaching judged by the content and purpose of the subject matter of
instruction, or from its value in disciplinary training? Without
such known standards the discussion must deal with what is only one
individual's opinion of the quality of teaching in ungraded classes.
It is permissible, therefore, to reproduce here the official record
made by elementary school principals and district superintendents
with regard to the quality of teaching in ungraded classes during
the year of the School Inquiry. Twenty-six teachers had a rating
of A - A from both the principal and the district superintendent;
fourteen had A - A from the principal and B plus - B plus from
the district superintendent; thirteen had B plus - B plus from
both the principal and the district superintendent; thirty-two
others received at least one A; twenty-eight others had some combination of B plus and B, while only one teacher was rated C -? C
by both the principal and the district superintendent. The question
here is the value of the judgment of men and women whose
business is the supervision and rating of teachers, as compared with
the opinion of a research student in psychology.1
Discussion (Selection of Teachers).
The selection of teachers by means of examination is a fruitful
topic for discussion. Except in those parts of an examination which
deal entirely with matters of fact, much is left to the judgment of
the examiner. In examining candidates for license to teach in
ungraded classes, the method of the examination requires that, in
addition to being able to express in writing what one knows about
backward children and the means of training them, the candidate
shall demonstrate her ability to teach bench work, to tell a story, to
give corrective gymnastics, and to give training for the simpler
speech defects. All of this last stated work is given to children in
the presence of the examiner.
The by-laws of the Board of Education permit a teacher holding License No. 1, who has three years' experience in teaching, to
take up ungraded class work. No examination is required. This
reassignment is made by the Board of Superintendents. In order
that teachers so reassigned may be able to help the children, it has
been expected that candidates shall have made, and be willing to
continue, their study of ungraded class teaching. As a foundation
1 Teachers are rated as meritorious and non-meritorious. Meritorious teachers are graded
according to excellence as A, B plus, B.
64 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
for this graduate work there were in the teaching corps during the
period of the School Inquiry, seven college graduates; one hundred
and four normal college, normal school, or training school graduates; while ten had no professional training. Upon this as a
foundation the following record of graduate study pursued by these
same teachers was available at the time under discussion:
4 University of Pennsylvania
2 Harvard University
63 New York University
36 Yineland Training School
26 Adelphi College
51 College of the City of New York
42 Brooklyn Teachers Association
Total 224 records of advanced work by 114 teachers
While it is true that every teacher should embrace every opportunity to promote her professional knowledge and technical skill,
it is a matter of congratulation that out of a present staff of one
hundred and thirty one, one hundred and fourteen could make the
above showing. In this connection it may be in place to say that
all but three of the institutions named above gave the work indicated
under the personal direction of the School Inquiry Investigator of
Ungraded Classes.
Discussion (Salary of Teachers).
There can be no question about the need for recognition of good
ungraded class teaching. Like any other group of professional
people, the ungraded class teachers want professional recognition
quite as much as increased salary. A method combining these two
points of view would be ideal. Exemption from examination for
certain of the higher licenses, when satisfactory experience in
ungraded class work with its consequent graduate study in such
subjects as English phonetics and speech, corrective gymnastics,
psychology, and mental tests, are offered as a basis of such exemption, would result in a source of supply of ungraded class teachers.
Such an arrangement would offer to ambitious teachers an opening
for future promotion. Since ungraded class work is admittedly
more difficult, the advisability of recognizing a year's service as
equivalent to two years in the regular grade, is worthy of consideration. Then too, making ungraded class teachers eligible for the
higher grades in the elementary school would be the means of having
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 65
them placed in the B II salary schedule, while at the same time it
would afford professional recognition.
Discussion (Training).
In 1906 when the Department of Ungraded Classes was
organized the need for special training of teachers of defective children was recognized. An effort was made to have certain of the
best institutions for the feebleminded devise means of training
teachers for service in the public schools. This was unavailing. In
1910, and again in 1911, the City Superintendent of Schools recommended in his annual report that a department for the training of
teachers of mentally defective children be established in the Brooklyn Training School for Teachers. At the time of the School
Inquiry the proposed course of study for such a department was
under consideration by the Committee on Studies of the Board of
Education. This course of study provides training in the theory
and practice of teaching mental defectives. The institutions are
used as laboratories. The problem presented by children who live
twenty-four hours a day under control is quite different from that
presented by public school children. On the whole it seems better
to put before these teachers in training, conditions similar to those
under which they must work.
Equipment.
The School Inquiry Report says of the equipment of ungraded
classes:
"Some of them, indeed, have not any equipment." (Page 6.)
"Many children are not getting what they might get because of lack of
equipment * * * in the classroom." (Page 23.)
As stated in the report these statements are based upon the
following facts:
1. Conversation with principals and teachers while visiting one hundred
and twenty-five ungraded classes.
2. A letter from an elementary school principal. (Page 7.)
"New York, March 20, 1912.
"My dear Dr  :
"In regard to the need of equipment in our ungraded class, about which
you asked me, I find that:
"The class was established in November, 1910, and I supposed that the
installing of an equipment would be automatic. When it did not come, allowing
for the slowness of things in general, I wrote that we needed it, and
waited. I wrote also to   on Dec. 1, 1911, and to the Board of Super66 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
intendents on Feb. 12, 1912. To none of these letters have I ever received a
direct reply, so that officially I do not know that they were ever received.
"I have written Miss Farrell at least four times on the matter, and have
called her and the District Superintendent on the telephone several times. Last
October I called on Miss Farrell at the office and mentioned the subject. Once
she called me up and told me she had heard that there were three sets of apparatus on hand and that I had better speak for them. I did so immediately, but
have heard nothing as yet concerning it.
"Very truly yours,"
Discussion (Equipment).
There is no evidence in the report that documentary material,
such as the minutes of the Board of Superintendents, or of the
Committee on Buildings; communications from the supervisory
staff; budget allowance, etc., etc., were consulted. Neither can
any requests be found for such information or any indication of a
critical study of the method of work, in matters of equipment,
pursued by the supervisory staff, the Board of Superintendents, and
the Committee on Buildings, etc.
A study of official communications from the elementary school
principals to the supervisory staff under date of May 24, 1912,
would have revealed the followings:
Manhattan.
The Bronx.
Brooklyn...
Queens
Richmond. .
Total.
63 classrooms
12 "
46
9
2
132
4 classrooms not equipped
1 classroom " "
14 classrooms " "
1 classroom " "
(( (( ((
21 classrooms
I
Fig. 1.?Shows relative number of ungraded classrooms not equipped
May 24, 1912.
A?Manhattan; B?The Bronx; C?Brooklyn; D?Queens; E?Richmond.
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 67
If this subject were pursued in the minutes of the Committee
on Buildings the following results would have appeared:
EQUIPMENT ORDERED FOR UNGRADED CLASSROOMS FEBRUARY 1, 1912,
TO MAY 24, 1912.
February, 1912  1 classroom
March, "   6 classrooms
April, "   7
May, "   1 classroom
Total  15 classrooms
There remained then at the time the Report was made, 2 classrooms in Manhattan and 4 classrooms in Brooklyn for which equipment was not ordered previous to May 24, 1912. Thus it will be
seen that on May 24, 1912, there were six out of a total of one hundred and thirty-two classrooms for which equipment had not been
ordered. Four and one-half per cent of all ungraded classrooms,
(90 children out of 2500) furnish the basis of the investigator's
statement that 11 Many children are not getting what they might
get because of lack of equipment * * * in the classroom."
If the subject were pursued still further in order to understand
just why a class authorized by the Board of Superintendents in
November, 1910, was not yet equipped (April, 1912) with proper
furniture, it would have led to a consideration of the budget allowances made by the Board of Estimate and Apportionment.
Since the recommendation as to equipment of ungraded classrooms appears to have been made on a basis of individual conferences with teachers and elementary school principals, and since
the School Inquiry Report gives no evidence of a study of documentary material, method of work, budget allowances, etc., etc.,
and in view of the evidence here presented, which was in existence when the recommendation under discussion was made, it
appears that this section of the School Inquiry Report is not
justified by facts.
Supplies.
In the School Inquiry Report the following statements are
made as to the quality, quantity, and distribution of supplies.
"It is certainly the duty of the Department of Education to see that the
present method of administering supplies is revised, so that the ungraded classes
68 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
shall not be hampered in their work by the difficulty of obtaining the material
* * * which they need." (Page 22.)
"In the first place, very few classes have any adequate supply of material
to work upon. * * * The classes that have enough wood, raffia, reed, yarn,
twine, cloth, thread, needles, etc., to carry on their manual work are very few
indeed. * * * In some classes the only lumber they have to work with is
pieces of old boxes which the children are able to bring in. In another school
remnants have sometimes been begged of John Wanamaker with which they
could do some of their needlework. In other schools some of the mats and rugs
which they have made were, when made, unraveled and torn to pieces in order
that the material could be used again! Much of the material furnished is poor
or not adapted to the defective child." (Page 6.)
"Practically all principals were agreed that some more efficient and available means for giving these teachers the material they require should be provided.
Many state that some better method of distributing supplies should be provided
for these classes so that they could have the material that they need, of the kind
that they need, and when they need it; and not be compelled to spend their
own money to get those things that they cannot get along without, and yet
which they are not provided with by the authorities." (Pages 10, 11.)
Discussion (Supplies).
Supplies for ungraded classes are secured in the usual way as
prescribed by the Department of Supplies. The principal makes
requisition for such materials as he deems necessary, this is approved
by the District Superintendent, or disapproved as he may see fit.
The requisition is then forwarded to the Department of Supplies
and the materials furnished more or less promptly. The amount
and variety of materials found in several ungraded classes are not
uniform. This variation, in all probability, is in direct proportion
to the intelligent sympathy of the officials charged with the duty
of securing supplies with the problems of the ungraded class.
The official records on file in the office of the City Superintendent of Schools, under date of May 24, 1912 (period of the
School Inquiry), reveal the following:?
Manhattan.
The Bronx.
Brooklyn...
Queens
Richmond..
Total.
63 ungraded classes
12 " "
46 "
9 "
2 " "
132 " "
9 classes had trouble
^ (C (( ((
10 " "
q u a u
q (( a a
23 " " "
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 69
A recent study of the printed reports of the school departments
of institutions for the feebleminded throws some light on the question of the "kind of supplies needed." The work indicated for New
York City schools is done in all ungraded classes where possible and
profitable.
New York City Schools. Waverley, Mass.2 Vineland, N. J.3
Brush Making Brush Making Brass Work
Chair Caning Cobbling Needlework
Clay Modelling Domestic Science Raffia
Domestic Science Farm and Garden Work Reed
Cooking Printing Weaving
Cleaning Needlework Wood Work
Laundering Raffia
Serving Reed
Gardening Weaving
Metal Work Wood Work
Millinery
Needlework
Darning
Embroidery
Garment Making
Mending
Painting
Raffia
Reed
Rush Bottoming
Weaving
Willow Basketry
Wood Work
2 Massachusetts School for the Feeble minded, Annual Report, 1913, p. 35.
3 Vineland Training School, Annual Report, 1912, page 33.
Fig. 2.?Shows relative number of ungraded classes having trouble about supplies,
May 24, 1912.
A?Manhattan; B?The Bronx; C?Brooklyn; D?Queens; E?Richmond.
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
In order that there may be more uniformity in the quantity of
material supplied, it is suggested that (a) requisitions for ungraded
class supplies be made on a separate blank and independent from
any other requisition; (6) supplies so ordered should be delivered
for and marked "Ungraded Class Supplies"; (c) an extra appropriation of three dollars per child be set aside for the purchase of
supplies listed or unlisted, the same to be purchased through the
Bureau of Supplies, at the request of the principal and the Department of Ungraded Classes.
The statement that "remnants have sometimes been begged of
John Wanamaker" might have been made wide enough to include
the fact that numberless ungraded children have asked grocers for
soap boxes and egg boxes, and have had such educational treatment
while working with them as was not possible in any other way.
One has but to be familiar with the educational creed of John
Dewey, the McMurrys, and the Herbartian School of teachers in
general to appreciate that the best education, if not the only education possible is that which touches the present-day life of the child.
To write letters to congressmen asking for seeds, to ask manufacturers all over the country for samples of their products, to ask
John Wanamaker, Marshall Field and Company, the Belding Silk
Company, the Hecker Flour Company, and dozens of others to
give their old samples, or sample books, of cottons, velvets, wallpaper, threads, colors, etc., is to supply motive for English composition, letter writing, spelling, reading, number, sense training, study
of textiles, geography, American government,?postal service,
agricultural service, etc., etc., ad infinitum.
Dr Arthur Holmes, commenting upon the organization and
equipment of the special class conducted at the University of Penn-.
sylvania Summer School of 1911, says:4
"Necessary as all these items of equipment are, nevertheless
it remains true that the success * * * depended ultimately
upon their [the teachers'] fundamental psychological viewpoint.
They looked upon their work as a part of a consistent whole; they
recognized clearly that to deal intelligently with the children in their
hands it was necessary to make a psychological study of each individual child * * *. Their teaching, therefore, was not teaching in
the ordinary accepted sense of the term, but it was in reality and
4 The Special Class for Backward Children, An Educational Experiment conducted for the
Instruction of Teachers and other students of child welfare by the Psychological Laboratory and
Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania. Reported by Lightner Witmer, Ph.D., Phila.: The
Psychological Clinic Press, 1911; pp. 24 and 16.
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 71
essentially an individual treatment of a pathological case, and their
genius showed itself in their ability to apply psychological principles in the ordinary classroom. * * * Undoubtedly the ideal
special class teacher could produce wonderful results with her pupils
if given nothing but an empty room, and the mechanical teacher
would fail miserably of real results in an ideally equipped room,
furnished with all the paraphernalia that mind could conceive or
fancy desire. This fact will be noted in studying the methods
* * * described further on and illustrated in the photographs of
manual work done; for the chief piece of carpentry done by the
pupils consisted of building a house out of an ordinary packing soap
box."
APPENDIX A.
Ungraded Class vs. Special School Centers.
In order to secure the greatest economy of time and of effort,
as well as to bring to the children the broadest and most comprehensive opportunity, two types of organization and systematization
have developed, where work for mentally defective children has
been inaugurated.
The first and oldest is the special school, which is found as the
"Hilfsschule" and the "auxiliary" school in Germany; the "secondary" school in some Belgian cities and the "special school
center" in England. The second type is the special class found
chiefly in this country and in Canada and known as "the ungraded
class," "the special class," or as "classes for special instruction."
The special school idea makes necessary the expenditure of
rather large sums of money for the erection and equipment of buildings. To these buildings the children are required to travel. In
England the law provides that the transportation of the child and of
a guide who is to bring him, must be met by the community.
The special school, as its name in this connection indicates, is a
school made up entirely of mentally sub-normal children. The
number in a school varies from one hundred to four hundred,
according to the number of such children found in a given area.
The children represent all ages, abilities, abnormalities of physical
and mental make-up. The English special school center is typical
of the special school idea and for the purpose of presenting this
method of organization it will serve as illustration. While considering this it should be borne in mind that the special school tends to
and does separate in play as well as in work the abnormally dull
child from those not so characterized. This complete segregation
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
in school is brought about by providing a school building to which
only dull children are sent. This building, usually two stories high,
is built on a remote corner of the playground used by the regular
county council school children but separated from it by a high
board fence. For this special school building there are separate
entrances, separate playgrounds, separate gymnasiums, lavatories,
passages and offices. All of this is to prevent the association in
school of the mentally defective and the so-called normal child.
One has the impression that here is something different and depressing and the question arises what are the advantages afforded by the
special school. The great gain from the point of view of the work
of the school is found in the possibilities of grading the children on
the basis of mental power. This allows the teacher to do class work
rather than group and individual teaching. Where class work can be
done a few more children can be cared for by each teacher than
would be possible otherwise. To get the graded classes within the
special school and thereby to care for a few more children per
teacher is the great advantage of the special school idea. Other
things being equal, this then would commend itself to the school
administrator. Before deciding, however, it is one's duty to inquire
whether, other things being equal, there are any disadvantages in
the special school idea. If so, what are they?
The great disadvantage in the special school idea has to do,
not so much with the work of the school, though on this side it is
open to criticism, but with the individual child who is sent to
the special school. The special school with its " separateness"
emphasized in its construction and in its administration, differentiates, sets aside, classifies, and of necessity, stigmatizes the pupils
whom it receives. How could it be otherwise? Mental subnormality is so often associated with lack of beauty, proportion,
and grace in the physical body of the child, that we may say mental
sub-normality and physical anomalies go hand in hand. Now bring
together a rather large group?a hundred such children?and there
are assembled countless degrees of awkwardness and of slovenliness;
infinite variations in over-development or in arrested development
and a dozen other mute witnesses of a mind infantile or warped.
It would be next to impossible to save these helpless ones from the
jibes of a not too kind world. The school which is to serve best
must conserve the moral as well as the mental, the spiritual as well
as the physical, nature of the pupil.
The special class rather than the special school seems to meet
American conditions best. It is found in the school systems of
Springfield, Mass.; Worcester, Mass.; Chicago, 111.; Los Angeles,
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 7
Cal.; Boston, Mass.; Cleveland, Ohio; and New York City. Some
years ago Philadelphia organized a system of special schools, but
is now in process of establishing special classes because of the obvious
disadvantages, in addition to which the opposition of parents whose
children were sent to special schools was an insuperable barrier to
the hoped-for success.
The special class?the ungraded class in New York City?occupies
a classroom in an ordinary elementary school building. It cares for
the mentally sub-normal children in that immediate neighborhood.
In such a class there are fifteen or sixteen children. It forms one
of forty or fifty classes in the school. The ungraded class child is
segregated for the purpose of instruction only. He goes to and
from school with the children who live near him; he plays with the
children who attend his school, as well as with those in his class; he
uses the same stairways, gymnasiums, lavatories, passages and halls.
He attends the opening exercises of his school; he associates in school
and on the playground with the children whom he meets on the
street outside of school hours. In all its work the ungraded class
emphasizes, for the purpose of preserving and enhancing his selfrespect and his personal esteem, those things which the mentally
sub-normal child has in common with his more fortunate brothers
and sisters; it believes his differences are already too apparent;
it preaches as well as practices its belief and knowledge that his
mental power is the same as theirs, only of less degree. By having
one such class in an elementary school it is possible to get the moral
support of the whole body of pupils in developing and molding the
child who is "different". May this class not be made an opportunity for the normal child to feel the obligation of the strong to
the weak? A school organization such as this is "twice bless'd".
The special, ungraded class offers to the mentally defective
child the opportunity for individual instruction while it presents
to him, when he is able to grasp it, the chance of doing class work.
An illustration will make this plain. A child, hopelessly unable
to comprehend even the simplest truths of arithmetic and further
handicapped by a speech defect, which prohibited his taking part
in a recitation period requiring spoken language, was found to have
more than ordinary ability and interest in reading. The ungraded
class teacher was able to help him along the line of his interests.
When he was able to write his answers he attended a sixth-year
class for those studies in which he could excel. His own self-respect
and the increased prestige of the ungraded class were the result of
his excellent work. In many schools the upper grade children are
invited to visit the ungraded classroom to see the manual training
74 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
exhibit. The children who were in danger of being pseudo-intellectual snobs because of scholastic achievements, realized when viewing
the excellence of work identical with their own shopwork exercises,
that to each has been given a talent, and that this group of "different" children has contributions to make to the life of the school
no less valuable because they are unlike.
The special class idea carries with it the possibilities of grading the children. This is, perhaps, more easily achieved in urban
communities. More essential, perhaps, than grading "ungraded"
class children on the basis of mental power is the necessity of
separating them on the basis of sex. The older boys (from fourteen
to sixteen years) should, whenever possible, be put in a class by
themselves in a boys' school. This is a logical separation based on
the principle that ungraded children are to be treated as nearly like
other children as is desirable for the best good of all. The older
girls and younger boys may be left in the same class until another
classification can be made when the older girls should be organized
as a class in a girls' school. Until there is closer co-operation between the state institutions for defective children and the public
schools, it is desirable, as soon as the teaching supply is adequate,
to make a sub-classification on the basis of mental power; i. e.
separate the high grade from the low grade. This will give a class
for older high grade boys and one for older low grade boys; a
class for younger high grade and for younger low grade boys. A
similar classification will exist for the girls, thereby bringing the advantages of grading without the dangers and expense of the special
school. This plan of organization is being put in operation as
rapidly as possible. The most unqualified approval is given to it by
the school principals in whose charge the classes for older boys have
been placed.
(To be concluded.)
