The Hygiene of Eugenic Generation
==================================

. O By J. E. Wallace "VVallin, Ph.D.,
fcj V
v' Director Psyclio-educational Clinic, St. Louis Public Schools.
0Concluded.)
Of 57 children of 10 alcoholic families, only 15 per cent were
entirely normal, while of 61 children of 10 non-alcoholic parents
82 per cent were entirely normal. Eighty-five per cent of the
alcoholized progeny were idiots, epileptics, choreics, dwarfs, deformed, or died in early infancy (Demme). A study of about 20,000
children from 5846 families indicated in general that the percentage
of miscarriages and deaths varied with the amount of alcohol consumed (Laitenen). On the other hand, it has been shown that the
number of deaths and miscarriages has decreased as national
sobriety has increased (English study).
The vitality or chances for survival are less for the children of
later pregnancies of maternal inebriates. Thus the mortality among
the first born of a certain group of alcoholic mothers was 33.7 per
cent as against 72 per cent among the sixth to tenth born; while
the number of still-births among the first born was 6.2 per cent
as against 17.2 per cent for the later pregnancies. The injury which
alcohol exerts upon the generative processes apparently increases
with time.
Both paternal and maternal alcoholism imperil the ability of
mothers to nurse their offspring. Of the daughters of a given group
of confirmed topers, only 21 per cent were able to nurse their babies.
In a group of non-habitual drinkers, 50 per cent of the mothers
retained their nursing capacity, while only 2.6 per cent of daughters
of confirmed paternal drinkers were able to lactate (Bunge). Whatever impairs natural nursing is of moment to eugenics, owing to the
vital relation of breast feeding to the normal growth and development of the infant.
In a German investigation covering the first five years of the
children's lives, it was found that not a single death had occurred
among 109 breast fed children from 24 families, while during the
corresponding period every one of 33 families in which the babies
were all bottle fed had lost one or more infants. In another group
of 29 families with 85 breast fed infants and 109 bottle fed, all the
breast fed were alive at the end of eleven years, while 57 per cent
of the bottle fed were dead. A third group of 13 families con(170)
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 171
tained 48 breast fed infants, all alive at the end of ten years, and
23 bottle fed babies, all dead at the end of the same period. In
certain districts in Austria where mothers are accustomed to giving
the babies the breast, from 16 to 17 out of every 100 born alive die
during the first year, from 6 to 7 die during the first month, while
the number of still-births is from 9 to 15 per 1000. In other
districts (apparently industrial) where breast feeding is abandoned
during the period from the first to the fifth month, the mortality is
from 18 to 23 during the first year, 6 to 8 during the first month;
while the still-births number from 20 to 41 in 1000. The mortality
among breast fed infants less than nine months old which came
under the supervision of the Board of Health of New York City
in 1907 amounted to 25 per cent, while the mortality among the
artificially fed was 74.9 per cent. Of 3000 infant deaths in Birmingham, the rate for the breast fed was 8 per 1000, while for the artificially fed it was 252. One authority estimates the mortality of the
bottle fed as three times that of the breast fed (C. L. Wilbur),
another from eight to ten times (Collins H. Johnston) and a third
fifteen times. While there has been considerable improvement in
the art of artificial feeding within recent years, and while the
decrease in the mortality of nursing babies cannot be wholly due to
the influence of the mother's milk but to favorable factors which
go with nursing but do not go with bottle feeding, there is no doubt
that the milk of the mother is the natural food for the baby. The
mother's breast is not only the best instrument at our command for
combatting fatal issue, but it is the source of the prime nutritive
elements upon which to rear a strong and hardy stock. There is
no specific superior to the mother's milk as a prophylactic against
acute infectious diseases, intestinal catarrh, scurvy, rickets, marasmus, soft teeth and bones, and retarded development. Breast fed
babies grow more rapidly than bottle fed, the former doubling their
weight at the end of the fifth month and trebling it at the end of the
twelfth month, while the latter require a year to double, and treble
only in the course of the second year.
These truths need to be dinned into the ears of the motherhood
of America, for there has been a growing tendency for years to
substitute artificial feeding for natural nursing, particularly in the
centers of congestion. In the majority of cases the reluctance of
mothers to nurse their babies is due purely to social and psychological causes; to a combination of indolence, selfishness, the desire
to pursue pleasure at all hours, in and out of season, in drawing
rooms, theatres, teas and clubs and the shirking of any duty that
interferes with the regular satisfaction of such desires; and, finally,
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
subservience to the Zeitgeist: the apish adherence to the conventions, fads and fashions of the day no matter how trivial, ridiculous,
barbarous or eugenically indefensible. Presupposing hygienic preparatory care, it rarely happens that mothers are physically incapacitated from nursing their offspring. To uproot, in a measure, some
of these noxious psychic weeds, maidens who look forward to assuming the function of maternity should be given courses in young
motherhood classes on the hygiene of infant feeding. They should
be taught that one of the effective ways to kill, maim, or impair
the lives of many infants is to feed them at the bottle, that artificial
feeding is eugenically and morally indefensible, unless breast feeding
is contraindicated, and that the only contraindications in the mother
to nursing are certain cardiac disorders, eclampsia, nephritis, serious
anaemia, tuberculosis, pregnancy, prolonged infection, and possibly
various acute infections, epilepsy and insanity. Personally, I
believe that a race of naturally nursed people will, all in all, be more
eugenically fit than a race of artificially fed people. I am not sure
that unwilling mothers can be legislated into hygienic practices by
the imposition of fines upon those who can but will not nurse their
babies, and I would advocate the enactment of such laws only as
an extreme measure. But I do feel that the eugenic appeal should
be presented and that, if properly presented, it cannot fail to stir
countless mothers to perform more conscientiously their physical
duties to their dependent offspring.
The weight of evidence seems to indicate that parental alcoholism may produce at least a certain amount of mental and moral
deficiency, disorder or degeneracy in the offspring. The role of the
alcoholic factor, however, is very differently estimated by different
investigators and various surveys have given flatly contradictory
results.
Forty per cent of the pupils in the special classes for deficient
children in London and Birmingham were found to have intemperate
parents, while the corresponding per cent for pupils of the same
age in the regular classes was only 6 per cent. In another inquiry
32 per cent of school children doing satisfactory work were found
to have alcoholic parents and 68 per cent abstaining parents; while
85 per cent of the pupils doing unsatisfactory work had intemperate
parents and only 15 per cent abstemious parents. Of 6624 pupils
studied in 1901 in the New York schools who had alcoholic parents,
53 per cent were laggards ("dullards, very deficient and deficient"),
while only 10 per cent of 13,523 children of abstaining parents were
laggards. The alcoholic habits were traced through three generations for 3711 children. In the families which were free from
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 173
alcoholic taint, 96 per cent of the children were proficient while 18
per cent had some organic or nervous abnormality and only 4 per
cent were classed as laggards. On the other hand, in the alcoholically tainted families, 77 per cent of the children were dullards,
76 per cent had nervous or organic disorders, while only 23 per
cent were proficient (Alexander MacNicholl).
In an academy in Utah the students of narcotized parentage
required about one year longer to graduate from the grades and
averaged one year and seven months older in the academy than
their classmates (J. E. Hickman).
The percentage of parental alcoholism found in the study of
1200 English institutional feebleminded cases varied from 13.2 per
cent (Royal Albert Asylum) to 19.5 per cent (Darenth,?Shuttleworth and Beach); 7.7 per cent of 250 defective children in Manchester gave a marked alcoholic history while no other factor was
discernible in 1.9 per cent of the cases (Lapage). A very careful
investigation into the family histories for three or four generations
of 150 cases living in and around London showed paternal inebriety
in 46.5 per cent of the cases, although five-sixths of these showed
a prior neuropathic heredity (Tredgold). A comparative study of
the family histories of 250 mentally defective and 100 normal children in Birmingham indicated alcoholic parentage for 41.6 per
cent of the former and 22 per cent of the latter group. Parental
alcoholism was found in 62 per cent of 1000 French 'idiots'
(Bourneville), in from 50 to 60 per cent of one group of Norwegian
idiots (Dahl), in 3.7 per cent of another Norwegian group (Karl
Looft) and in 11 per cent of German (Kind) cases investigated.
Of 800 feebleminded cases in a Pennsylvania institution, 14 per
cent gave a history of chronic alcoholism in one or both parents
(J. M. Murdoch). In other American investigations, the per cent
of parental alcoholism has been found to be 38 per cent (Kerlin)
and 50 per cent (Howe).
It is reported that in some wine-growing cantons in France and
in wine-growing districts of Austria the schools have been flooded
with an army of laggards seven years after good wine years. In a
study based on 8196 feebleminded children in Switzerland, the conception in the majority of cases took place during the periods of
greatest debauch (New Years, the Carnival and the grape harvest:
Bezzola).
Parental alcoholism, it is alleged, produces more epilepsy than
parental epilepsy itself. Thus in a group of 572 epileptics, 15 per
cent showed parental insanity associated with epilepsy, while 17.5
per cent showed parental intemperance (Echeverria). In another
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
study 30 to 40 per cent of the children of inebriates were epileptics
(Molli). Of 150 insane epileptics in the Salpetriere, 60 per cent had
intemperate parents; of 200 descendants of 90 alcoholized parents,
75 per cent were epileptics who were mentally degenerate before the
seizures became established (Alfred Gordon). While an American
investigator (Sprattling) found that 16 per cent of 1000 institutional
cases of epilepsy had epileptic parents and only 14 per cent inebriate
parents, a French investigator (Dejerine) found that 51.5 per cent
of the child epileptics investigated showed alcoholic parents, while
only 21 per cent showed parental epilepsy; and a German investigator (Binswanger) found chronic parental alcoholism in 21 per
cent and parental epilepsy in only 11 per cent of the cases studied.
Moreover, a first and only alcoholic debauch on the part of the
father at the time of conception is said to have been the causative
factor in seven cases of epilepsy recently studied in Philadelphia
(Matthew Woods).
That mental defectiveness and alcoholism are frequently associated admits of no doubt. But there is considerable diversity of
opinion as to whether the antecedent condition is alcoholism or
mental defectiveness. The Galton workers strenuously maintain
that the causative factor is defective, neuropathic heredity, and
that inebriety is merely the effect. All careful observers of mentally
degenerate stocks know that degenerates manifest an excessive
propensity for alcohol?a sort of hereditary alcoholic diathesis?as
well as an extreme susceptibility to its demoralizing influence. But
this tendency must itself be explained. May it not be that ultimately the alcoholic tendency of degenerates is resolvable into the
alcoholic habits of generations of ancestors?
Not the least pernicious accompaniment of parental alcoholism
is the drugging of children with alcohol by parents who are addicted
to its use. Of large numbers of children investigated in New York
27 per cent of those rated "good and prosperous" as against 50 per
cent of those rated "poor" consumed some form of alcoholic
beverage. Only 30 per cent of the good pupils had drinking parents
as against 85 per cent of the "poor" (MacNicholl). Small quantities
of wine administered experimentally to 20 children between six and
fifteen years of age produced mental impairment after its use
(Maurice Kende). An examination of 591 Viennese school children
showed that the best scholarship certificates were held by those who
entirely abstained from alcoholic indulgence, while the poorest certificates were held by those who took alcohol two or three times a
day (Hercord). In Hungary, children are frequently found in school
in a dazed condition due to the use of alcoholic beverages. Recently
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 175
in examining children in a western Pennsylvania city I was struck
by the fact that most of the children had unusually small heads and
were deficient in stature. The head girth of many boys from
thirteen to fifteen years of age was like that of a five or six year old
child. Out of twenty-one cases examined seven were feebleminded.
Many of these were children of Hungarian immigrants who, judging
by the available reports, were addicted to excessive indulgence in
alcohol. In the London County Council Schools 40 per cent of the
children investigated under the age of eight imbibed alcohol more or
less regularly. In one school of 300 pupils, 11.8 per cent drank
daily, while 34.1 per cent drank occasionally. Much of the mental
and physical torpor, scholastic retardation, and proneness to infectious diseases of school children is due to precocious inebriety.
Precocious inebriety is, no doubt, also partly responsible for the
social and industrial inefficiency of many adults. Juvenile alcoholism is essentially anti-eugenic.
My own conclusions of the relation of alcohol to eugenics may
be summarized as follows: children conceived in drunkenness frequently come into the world with diminished powers of mental and
physical development (sometimes resulting in pronounced infantilism), with lessened immunity to diseases of an infectious origin
(e. g., tuberculosis, pneumonia, diphtheria), and with increased
predisposition toward the development of nervous disorders, peevishness, infantile marasmus, infantile colic, carious teeth, bodily
deformities and disharmonies, convulsions, inanition, and mental
and moral abnormalities. Sometimes parental alcoholism slays the
progeny outright; sometimes it dooms it to temporary or lifelong
invalidism, inefficiency, dependency, and mental and moral bankruptcy. Children fed on alcohol before they are born cannot be
regarded as fit progenitors of a race of men and women healthy in
body and mind. At the same time, I cannot agree with those who
maintain that even could we eliminate the entire army of eugenically unfit with one fell swoop, two or three generations of inebriety,
gonorrhea, and syphilis would restore the original number of degenerates. To reach the eugenic Utopia we must do more than restrict
the evils of inebriety and venereal infection. We must make it
impossible for persons to breed who suffer from transmissible defects,
whatever the cause of the defects may be.
4. From the standpoint of the eugenic ideal it is desirable to
prevent procreation during the periods of physiological immaturity
and of involution, and to prevent over-many or unwilling conceptions. Precocious marriages tend either to curtail the life expectancy
of the progeny, to retard the development of the foetus, or to issue
176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
in sterility. Statistics indicate that the highest percentage of child
mortality occurs when the pregnancies take place at or before the
age of 16, and the lowest when they take place between 29 and
32 (Quetelet). Based on a study of the families of English peers
the percentages of children dying before attaining a marriageable
age were as follows: for parents 15 years old at time of marriage,
35 per cent; for those between 16 and 19, 20 per cent; for those
between 20 and 23, 19 per cent; and for those between 24 and 27,
12 per cent (Sandler). As regards weight, one investigation showed
that when mothers at the birth of their first child were under 20
years and weighed less than 120 pounds the children were of inferior
weight (Schafer). A second investigation showed that the first
born males of poor mothers between 14 and 16 years of age average
only about 6| pounds (3.124 grams) as against 7yV pounds (3.310
grams) for the first born males of mothers of the same class between
30 and 35 (Sigismund Peller); while a third investigation indicated
that those children weighed the most who were born of mothers
between 25 and 30 (Matthews Duncan). Deficiency of weight at
full-term birth means retarded or arrested development in utero.
Not only so, the fertility rate seems to be higher for those who
marry during the more favorable child-bearing years. The average
number of births for each family of English peers was as follows:
for those marrying at 15, 4.40; for those marrying between 16 and
19, 4.63; between 20 and 23, 5.21, and between 24 and 27, 5.43
(Sandler). Moreover, the claim has been advanced that most
famous men have been begotten between 25 and 36. It thus appears
from several points of view that the eugenic age for procreation is
between 25 and 35. The marriage legislation of the ancient Spartans indicates remarkable prescience of eugenic laws. The Spartans
by legislative enactment established 25 years as the age for the
beginning of procreation. It is not certain that it will be to the
advantage of the race to defer marriage to the middle twenties so
far as concerns the mass of the population (marriage is frequently
an effective prophylactic against eroticism and vice), but eugenically it seems advisable to restrict generation to the period which
is 'biologically most apt' for child bearing. At any rate, this is
a question which it is well worth while for the eugenist to subject to
unbiased and fearless scientific investigation.
Too frequent pregnancies are also anti-eugenic. Thus it is
known that very short intervals between pregnancies upset the
progressive increase in weight which is known to occur from the
first to the last born (average weight of 1729 first born, 3254 grams;
of the second and subsequent births, 3412 grams?Ingerslevs),
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 177
while long intervals do not disturb the increase (Wernicke). There
are numerous women who are in an almost chronic state of semiinvalidism because of the strain and exhaustion incident to frequent
parturition. Many women who are nervously exhausted, anemic,
or run down cannot bear healthy, vigorous children and it is
eminently humane and in accord with scientific and eugenic principles to relieve them of the burden. We know that by giving
expectant mothers a ten-day rest period before confinement the
weight of the newly born can be increased 10 per cent. The cause
most frequently ascribed to Mongolian imbecility is uterine exhaustion. In a considerable number of my clinic cases of backward children I have been able to find no other factor than the nervous
exhaustion of the mother during gestation.
Not only so, there are hundreds of thousands of families producing a progeny too multitudinous for their bank account. As a
consequence the children grow up in squalor, inadequately fed and
clothed, poorly safeguarded from moral contamination and physical
injury, and indifferently disciplined and educated. Moreover, the
parents involuntarily transmit their poverty as a social heritage to
their offspring. Poverty tends to increase with the number of
children, at least under modern urban conditions. Since the children are forced to go to work before they have been trained to the
point of social and industrial efficiency, they are obliged to engage
in unskilled labor which offers practically no opportunity for
advancement with increasing maturity, and which, while it may
yield returns sufficient for the needs of one person, will not provide
food and shelter for the large family which seems to be the birthright of the degenerate and the poor. The associations for the
improvement of the poor know only too well that the inadequately
trained children of the poor who are forced into early employment
are rarely able to earn a family wage in a modern urban industrial
environment.
Again, many of these poor children?as well as children born
in better circumstances?are unwelcome arrivals. The parents
frankly did not want them, and because they were not desired, the
children are neglected or abused. To prevent their birth attempts
are frequently made to abort them, sometimes successfully, sometimes unsuccessfully, and sometimes to the permanent injury of the
mother or the child. The public at large has no idea of the great
number of unwelcome embryos which are murdered year in and
year out, of the number of premature or still-births which are
directly due to instrumental interference or the use of abortifacients,
and of the number of infanticides which are committed by parents of
178 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
unwelcome children. For the greater number of illegal abortions
never become a matter of record. It is claimed that the abortion
rate is increasing in all civilized countries (Kaye). Since 1870 the
number of abortions, still-births, deaths from prematurity, and the
sale of abortifacients, have greatly increased in England. Among
14,000 confinements in 1904 and 1905 there were 49 miscarriages to
every 1000 labors?how many of these were due to attempted interference with normal generation no one can say. The number of
women brought to Berlin hospitals for treatment after abortion
(exclusive of syphilitic cases) amounted to 317 in 1900, 841 in 1910,
and to 1694 in 1913. This increase of over 500 per cent in 13 years
was mainly among younger women (Bleichroder).
A concrete case recently came to my notice, that of a married
woman who had been deliberately and successfully aborting her
unborn children for years. She failed, however, in her last attempt
and it is alleged that she now often neglects her unwelcome child,
sometimes leaving it to squall for hours at a time. One of the
saddest tragedies of life is to permit the birth of unwelcome children;
but there are no more heartless crimes recorded in the annals of
man's brutality to man than infanticide or the annihilation of the
unborn innocents who have become quick with life. No nation in
antiquity or in modern times has ever been able to enact criminal
statutes sufficiently terrifying to suppress the practice of abortion,
just as no statutes ever have or ever can be enacted that will
effectually suppress the prompting of the sex instinct, or the exercise
of the marital functions between countless pairs of mates who
ought not to beget children. These facts suggest the query whether
it is not in the interest of social morality to instruct people in the
use of harmless regulatives or to encourage the practice of sterilization, especially in the harmless forms of vasectomy and fallectomy.
The objection to vasectomy is largely, if not entirely, sentimental:
the mutilation of an alleged sacred function. Nature herself, however, does not regard the function as sacred: she sterilizes both
the man and the woman who will not live within the moral law.
The compulsory sterilization of all who ought not to beget children
and the optional sterilization of those who do not want children
will, I believe, some day become the practice of the land. The
objection to enlightenment in the use of harmless regulatives is
based on the fear that we should all lapse into libertinism and that
the population would become decimated. But does the fear of
venereal infection and of illegitimate issue now deter men and
women from illicit indulgence? I do not believe that fear of consequences exercises any considerable restraining terror on those who
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 179
will not live within the moral law. People who now live moral
lives would probably do so under any other system of privileges or
penalties. Possibly the results would tend to a slight decrease in
the population. But even relative depopulation is better than
degeneration. Limitation of offspring is better than corruption,
pauperization, or criminalization. Moreover, the depopulation
would principally affect the lower social strata?and this would be
a blessing rather than a curse?because interference in some form or
other is now very widespread in the higher social strata. Yet so
barbarous are the laws of our country that should anyone attempt
to give specific advice to those who most need it, he would be given
a term of from five to ten years in prison. It is otherwise in various
European countries where scientific books may be circulated through
the mails, and where hygienic advice on the limitation of offspring
may be, and frequently is, given in public lectures. Thanks to the
science of eugenics it is now possible even in America to discuss in
a broad scientific spirit at least the foundations and implications of
the sex relationship. Not only so, the ethics of the future will
increasingly get its sanction from eugenics. When the ethics of
eugenics has become ingrained into the psychic warp and woof of
the leaders of thought and action some of our barbarous laws and
practices will be relegated to the limbo of the past. Eugenics is not
merely a biological conception of life; it is a system of dynamic
ethics that must function in the workaday life of the people.
