The Montessori Method
=======================

L i BRARY^
OCT. -2 1916.
The Psycho
Copyright, 1914, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VIII, No. 1 March 15, 1914
:Author:  Lightner Witmer, Ph.D., jiC
University of Pennsylvania.

Critics of Montessori claim that there is nothing new in the
Montessori method?that even her apparatus for sense training
is derived from Seguin and Bourneville?that many schools for the
training of feebleminded children employ apparatus equally as
good as hers, and some, notably the Massachusetts Training School
at Waverly, under Dr Fernald, have developed sense training
apparatus which is far superior. But these claims?true enough
so far as they go?miss the mark, for no one can invent or discover
an educational method of entirely original elements. What is new
about the Montessori method?and it can in my opinion be considered a new method?is the particular combination of elements,
the peculiar emphasis laid upon certain ideals and certain details of
procedure. Above all, Montessori is the first to do?and with striking
success?what others have only talked about.

Others, like Montessori, employing their talents in the education
of feebleminded children, have, from Seguin to Fernald, believed
and asserted that the methods of training feebleminded children
were applicable to the training of normal children. Montessori
applied them, giving the world the first convincing demonstration
that methods which are successful in developing the mental capacities
of feebleminded children, are even more successful in developing
the mental powers of normal children.

Others, philosophical educators from time immemorial, have
characterized the educational process as an unfolding of the child s
natural aptitudes and powers. But no one except Montessori
has had the courage to make this a fundamental classroom principle.
Is the teacher an "instructor,"?a builder who places brick upon
brick and mortar to erect the edifice of a child's mind? Or is the
teacher an "educator," a "kindergartner,"?the grower of a plant
who waters and cultivates the soil in order that the plant may develop
leaf and flower in accordance with its own nature? Montessori,
like Froebel, accepts the latter alternative, but unlike Froebel she
makes it the cardinal principle of the teacher's practice in the school
room.

In the Casa dei Bambini, at Rome, I saw little children three to
seven years old, independently and resolutely setting about and
executing fairly difficult tasks. They did not wait for the teacher
to provide them with the material they needed, nor if they failed
in accomplishing a task did they look to the teacher for assistance.
They were let alone to work and grow in their own way. And yet
there was much direction; a well conceived set of apparatus was
provided upon which the children could work and through some of
this material Montessori had been able to secure the really remarkable
result of teaching four and five year old children to write without
effort or even the knowledge that they were being taught penmanship. As they served one another at luncheon they had the tottering
and unsteady gait of little children, and yet everything was carried
forward with precision. The greatest failures in this room were
teacher-visitors from England and America, who could not be
restrained from helping children whom they saw making mistake
after mistake. These spectators were gradually to acquire from the
Montessori school the understanding to let the child alone to work
out his own salvation.

In how many American kindergartens do dear little children
still sit on nice little stools waiting for devoted teachers to tell them
what to do! Like little birds in a nest they sit with their mouths wide
open until the foster mother bird drops in the appropriate worm.
Where the teacher's help is reduced to a minimum in the Montessori
school, it is at a maximum in many kindergartens. Where the
Montessori teacher is told to repress herself, the kindergarten teacher
is too often the conspicuous center of the performance. The children
like marionettes respond to hidden strings which are being pulled
at the dictates of a symbolic philosophy, honeyed over with the
affectation of an exaggerated mother love.

The Montessori teacher is to be tied and gagged in the classroom,
but not blindfolded. She is an observer who must note carefully
the stages of development through which her children are passing
and see that the proper agencies are provided which will make it
possible for them to take the next step forward. She places her
apparatus, the materials of instruction, as it were upon shelves. It is
the teacher's duty to see that they are all in place and ready to be
seized upon by the child as he requires each piece for his individual
development. But she is not to give the child what she thinks he
needs, much less to insist upon his using it; she must not point out
the objects on the shelf nor lift the child in her arms that he may
reach them. She must not even show the child that a chair may be
employed to get at the shelf. She must permit the child to make
this discovery for himself. The demands of his own nature for
occupation will teach the child the ways and means of satisfying
these demands. The best kind of education, according to Montessori,
is that which the child gives himself.

Many other educators and psychologists before Montessori,
have insisted that psychology, which is the science of mental development, should be made the basis of educational practice. Even the
kindergartner talks about the psychology of the child. But no one
except Montessori has presented to the world an educational system
founded solely upon psychological principles and evolved directly
out of the psychological laboratory. Indeed the Montessori schoolroom is a laboratory, and the Montessori teacher is its director. We
know practically nothing, says Montessori, of the psychology of
the child of from three to seven. Let us learn. Let the teacher of
the Montessori classroom learn her psychology from her pupils.
This does not mean that a teacher untrained in psychology is to be
considered proficient in understanding what she sees in the Montessori
classroom or in employing the Montessori method. Indeed no
system of education has ever laid such demands upon the teacher to
secure an adequate professional equipment from the thorough
study of the principles of psychology. And it must be a modern
and a comprehensive psychology, involving a knowledge of the
functions of the brain, of hygiene, of the home and social life of the
child. It must not be philosophy masquerading as psychology,
such as we find in Froebel and Herbart.

Others, although only within the last few jrears, have emphasized
the social function of the school. Many of us believe that the school
must be conceived to be the most important social agency for conserving and developing the human race. No one has ever applied
this modern conception of education with the thoroughness of the
Montessori Houses of Childhood. In one aspect to which I have
already referred, the Montessori teacher is a psychological observer,
but in a more important aspect the Montessori teacher is a welltrained, intelligent mother, whose primary function is to see that
the growing child is adjusted to his home and social environments.
For this reason Montessori has included within her system of education, occupations which fit the child for domestic life, to dress
himself, to feed himself, and do his share in caring for the home.
The Froebelian kindergarten also emphasizes the mother aspect
of the kindergartener but it is a very different kind of mother. The
kindergarten-mother-teacher too often seems to make it her prime
object to provide the child with a "joy ride" through the year or
two preceding his arrival at school age.

These are the distinguishing characteristics of the Montessori
method as I observed them in the Montessori schools at Rome, and
as I derive them from Montessori's publications. Many details
of her method remain for consideration, but Dr Montessori would,
I believe, leave the exact details of her method to the well-trained
Montessori teacher, for she would no more wish to prescribe exact
formulas for the teacher than she would prescribe them for the child.
The teacher must work out her own salvation, as well as the child,
and this arouses our expectation of important results from the
application of the Montessori method. With Montessori, I believe
we know very little concerning the natural aptitudes of the child,
and that we tend to circumscribe too narrowly the possible limits
of a child's development. Out of the Montessori practice will
come in time the most astonishing revelations as to what may be
accomplished in child development. Already as one of its first
fruits, we have learned that a little child of four or five may be taught
to read and write with no more painful effort than is involved in
playing with a set of blocks.

Doubtless there are details of the Montessori system which are
open to criticism. However, this is not the time for criticism but
for interpretation and understanding. To some it would appear that
Montessori dispenses entirely with discipline. I do not believe that
she goes farther than to emphasize the importance of providing for
the child's freedom in the schoolroom. Freedom and discipline
appear to be contradictory educational principles. Emerson was
once asked whether one of his statements did not contradict another.
He replied that he had no fear of contradicting himself, indeed he had
made the one statement because the world had need of it, and the
contradictory statement because the world had need of that too.
In the political and social life of the community, an over-emphasis
on personal liberty may bring us close to the peril of license. I do
not think Montessori's practice over-emphasizes the freedom of the
child in the schoolroom to the point of ignoring the importance of
discipline and obedience. Moreover it is primarily a question of
what is opportune, and in our present school practice, the Montessori
principle of freedom certainly cannot be too greatly stressed. I
know a school superintendent in a large city who requires his
kindergarten teachers to follow a rigid program provided at the
beginning of the school year. To secure well-disciplined pupils
for his first grades, the kindergarten teachers are ordered to prohibit
their pupils from speaking without having first secured the express
permission of the teacher. This superintendent should be required,
as an alternative to official decapitation for being an enemy of the
human race, to take a course in Montessori with the hope that after
having completed it, he would cease exercising his authority to
cripple perhaps forever, the natural and free development of the
children and teachers under his jurisdiction.

I would distinguish between the Montessori idea and the Montessori system. The Montessori idea is a group of scientific principles
put together by an enthusiastic student of modern psychology. No
educational system can be successfully conducted in these modern
times which does not realize more or less fully that education is a
social process, that it must be founded upon the approved principles
and demonstrable facts of psychology, that it must look upon the
free development of the child as its most important object, and that
methods which psychological experts find of service in the educational
treatment of exceptional children, must be applied to normal children.
The Montessori system comprises a set of apparatus and definite
methods of procedure. Whether this system is already complete
in itself or whether it must be supplemented by additional materials
of instruction and additional methods of procedure, is an open
question. I do not believe Dr Montessori wants us to understand
that her system is now a closed one. To my mind it is not the least
valuable feature of her system, that it will never be closed, but will
always develop as our knowledge of the child develops.
(To be continued)
