School Hygiene
================

By Fletcher B. Dresslar, Ph.D. New York: The Macmillan
uo., iyia. rp. xi + 309. nius.
Dr. Dresslar, who is now specialist in school hygiene and sanitation for
the United States Bureau of Education, was for several years professor of educa-
tion and dean of the School of Education of the University of Alabama. He is
an acknowledged authority, therefore, upon the correlated sciences included
under the term which serves as title for his manual, "School Hygiene." His treat-
ment of this very complicated body of fact is simple and untechnical. He says
that his book is "not written for the specialist in school hygiene, but for busy
teachers, and the author hopes that it will do some small service in convincing
them of the great importance of making school life wholesome and healthful,
and of instructing the children, directly and indirectly, in matters relating to
(261)
262 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
hygienic living in school and at home." It seems to the reviewer that Dr. Dress-
lar has fully succeeded in making his book impressive, and yet not at all forbidding.
In his introductory chapter Dr. Dresslar divides school hygiene into two
main divisions. "One division has to do with the physical environment of the
child during his school life; the other takes cognizance of the laws of mental
hygiene as illustrated by the proper adjustment of the subjects of the curriculum
to the mental powers and needs of the children." His sound and comprehensive
consideration of the second purpose of school hygiene, i. e. the adjustment of the
curriculum to mental powers and needs, combined with his thorough discussion
of the physical conditions of schoolroom efficiency, makes his book a valuable
reference for educational experts, as well as a manual for teachers.
The chapters are conveniently broken up into sections, with paragraph
headings which make it easy to find what one is looking for, and each chapter is
followed by several topics suggested for study or investigation, and by a short
list of selected references. As there are twenty-six chapters altogether, the bibli-
ography thus given represents a fairly complete survey of the related subjects.
A. T.
