The Scope of Education as a University Department
==================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1914, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VII, No. 9 February 15, 1914

By Lightner Witmer, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.
At the dawn of civilization, education probably began as an
induction of the young adolescent to full social union with the adult
members of the tribe, through ceremonial rites, tests of endurance
and efficiency, and something approximating to a course of study.
Perhaps from the beginning, although more likely later in the race's
development, this training of the young adolescent assumed a religious
aspect, preserved up to the present time by most churches as an
indoctrinating of the youth in the truths of religion, usually by
means of a course of instruction based upon a catechism, the direct
purpose of which is to prepare the boy or girl for the ceremonial
of confirmation.
Later on civilization developed a body of useful or supposedly
useful knowledge, and we find each generation ardently assuming the
task of transmitting to the next generation its traditional and acquired
culture. Education thus came to involve a course of instruction in
one or more subjects, these subjects only at later stages of develop-
ment becoming differentiated from philosophy, the mother of all
knowledge. In consequence it is natural to find throughout the
history of education, that attention has been chiefly directed to the
subject matter of instruction. The needs of an individual boy or
girl or even of a group were ignored; and really they are even yet
a secondary consideration, for the culture and traditions of the
race must be upheld at any cost. This ideal of education we find
best represented in the college course, which originally undertook
the instruction of the young adolescent in the cultural elements
of the philosophy of his day, though not always of his generation,
for the traditional element in this instruction has always given the
(237)
238 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
college curriculum an inclination backward rather than forward.
Nevertheless there has been a development, an augmentation of
the subject matter of instruction, leading to a lengthening of the
course, until at the present time the standard cultural course for
adolescents has been increased from four to eight years, comprising
four years in the high school, followed by four years in the college.
It should be remembered in all discussions of the relation of the
college curriculum to the students and to the culture of our genera-
tion, that the high school pupil comes to college today at about the
age and with the equipment which our grandfathers had when they
left college.
A different type of education also developed very early in the
history of civilization, a technical or professional training, first
perhaps for the priesthood, then for medicine, then for law, and now
only recently for what in my opinion is to become the greatest of
all professions, the profession of teaching. Differentiated from
what a real professional training should be, there has been and
always must be a training of a more mechanical or technical sort,
although it is not an easy matter to draw a sharp line between a
professional and technical training. Nevertheless the acquisition
of a technique rather than a wide range of information and high
degree of intellectual functioning, is the chief aim of the training
of the musician, the artist, the engineer, and those employed in
vocations supposed to represent a lower level of intellectual attain-
ment, the trades and business.
At first concerned only with the adolescent period, the train-
ing of the pre-adolescent being left to the amateur efforts of the
family, education finally took over the child from his seventh year
to puberty, and organized for his benefit an eight-year course of
instruction, at first limited to only a few children, but during the
progress of the last century, through the adoption of universal com-
pulsory education, applied in theory at least to all children. In the
elementary course the subjects of instruction, that is the curriculum,
as in the secondary and college courses, have had the center of
attention. In general, the elementary course of study incorporates
the" ideal of modern society that every child before he goes to work
should know at least how to read and write and cipher. To this
irreducible minimum other subjects have been added, as many
indeed as are permitted by the limitations of time and the necessity
of the child to contribute to his own support. With a general ideal
of the content of popular education, formal pedagogical methods
have been devised and directed to group units, representing the
eight grades of the primary school, wherein attention is centered on
the passage of groups of children from grade to grade, the prescribed
THE SCOPE OF EDUCATION. 239
curriculum of each grade being the same for all children. The chief
agent for the execution of this work is the grade teacher. She must
know what is to be taught; she must know standard pedagogical
methods. In general, the grade teacher is now doing her work
well and is adequately equipped for her task by the normal school.
The development of a conscious social impulse and the growth
of the science of psychology led at first slowly, and then more rapidly,
to a restatement of the motive of education and a reconsideration
of its methods. The first proposal to create a system of education
to fit the recognized needs of a particular group of children, came
from Froebel and led in time to a half-hearted acceptance of the
Froebelian kindergarten as a part of the school system. From the
standpoint of psychology the kindergarten is yet the best attempt
at a scientifically grounded system of education, even though we
are compelled to admit in the same breath that the Froebelian
philosophy has always been a distorting factor, leading to confu-
sion on the part of both its adherents and its critics. In more recent
times the psychological attitude toward the educational problem
has expressed itself in a tentative way through the treatment of
truants and other disciplinary cases, the methods employed in
classes for backward children, and the efforts which are being made
toward a satisfactory vocational training. It is recognized now
that there are groups of exceptional children calling for exceptional
educational treatment, and we even hear it said that the exceptionally
bright child should not be lost in the class group. The problems of
intellectual differences in children and the adjustment of the cur-
riculum and methods to the individual, or at least to groups of
individuals, have come to be accepted as important problems of
school administration. What often fails to be recognized in the
discussion of these problems is that we hereby come to a new depar-
ture in education, revealing a social motive and a psychological
method distinctly different from the accepted and primary aim of
education, i. e. the instruction of youth in the traditional and
acquired knowledge of the adult generation. Undoubtedly there
has always been present in educational discussion a recognition
of the fact that education is after all a process of individual
development, but it is scarcely recognized even yet that the phe-
nomena of individual development fall within the scope of the
science of psychology. The whole problem of the mental develop-
ment of an individual personality belongs to genetic psychology,
and too much emphasis can not be laid upon the fact that competency
to discuss or minister to the mental and physical development
of the individual child must be scientifically grounded upon the
facts, principles, and methods of modern psychology. There is no
240 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
fundamental difference between one kind of psychology and another
kind. All psychology that is worth while is experimental, physio-
logical, and genetic. Nevertheless psychology may address itself
to problems of general mental development, overlooking for the
moment individual differences. On the other hand, it may take
the problem of group differences and through the employment of
the statistical method evolve a comparative psychology. It may
also confine its attention to the ascertainment of the mental and
physical status of a given individual, endeavoring to interpret his
present condition in the light of his past history, and employing this
knowledge to prognosticate his future and select the best agencies
for advancing his development. This field of psychology I have
called clinical psychology. In general its object is to know the
personality of an individual child and to determine how best to get
him to make the longest possible step forward. When the object
of education is defined as the development of a child's natural
endowments to the highest degree of efficiency possible, the object
of education is being defined in terms of a clinical psychology.
Here I believe we can and must draw a line between the pur-
poses of psychology and pedagogy. Pedagogy deals with mass
instruction, and is justified in being content with a psychology which
presents for school purposes an abstraction, the typical or normal
mind. As a psychologist I naturally approach the problem of educa-
tion from the psychological point of view, but I trust I may never
underestimate the importance of the function of the schools to
train groups of children, assumed to be mentally homogeneous,
in the recognized subjects of the curriculum, by approved pedagogical
methods, guided by competent supervisors. But questions relating
to the curriculum and to methods can not be discussed without
confusion and obscurity if we fail to realize that individual differences
must be ignored by those who are engaged in the solution of this
most important part of the public school problem. Because the
schools are required today to take cognizance of individual differ-
ences, and to provide somewhere within the system for an educa-
tion based upon the psychological principles of individual develop-
ment, it must not be assumed that this point of view must be either
hastily or heedlessly injected into the discussion of the general
problem of pedagogical technique. The grade teacher, the high
school teacher, and the college teacher, do not require a thorough
grounding in the facts and methods of psychology. For them to
become psychologists and to regard too intently the individual
personality of their pupils, would seriously diminish the efficiency
of their work. These teachers require a thorough grounding in
the subject matter of the curriculum which they are required to teach,
THE SCOPE OF EDUCATION. 241
combined with an adequate training in the methods of good teach-
ing. Nevertheless there must be officials connected with the school
system who are competent to look upon the problem of education
as a problem of individual development, who know their psychology
as well as their pedagogy, and who are prepared to reclassify groups
and to adjust the curriculum and methods of educational treat-
ment to meet the needs of individuals and groups. In my opinion
it is a mistake to ask or to expect the grade teacher to secure the
training in psychology necessary to undertake this task. It should
be left to those to whom we have assigned the function of super-
vision, among whom I include supervising principals. In other
words, the growing demands of educational practice require us to
recognize within the profession of teaching two groups of differently
trained persons?the grade teacher, who is and must remain a
mechanic, a technician, and the educator who must be a man or
woman of high professional attainments. _
These professional attainments must rest upon a solid basis
of knowledge in such modern sciences as psychology, sociology,
biology, hygiene, physiology, etc., as well as the usual equipment
in administrative procedure and pedagogical technique. The
educational administrator, or as I would call him more briefly,
the educator, should occupy by virtue of his professional attain-
ments a position analogous to that of the general practitioner of
medicine, the family doctor. The requirements of modern school
administration call also for an educational expert, or we may call
him a clinical psychologist, who will perform the functions of a
consultant in connection with difficult problems which may be
referred to him for advice. The clinical psychologist or educational
expert will perform a function in the schools analogous to that of
the medical consultant or specialist in nervous diseases, surgery,
internal medicine, etc.
The diversity of function which I have posited for the grade
teacher on the one hand and the educator or educational expert
on the other, has an important bearing upon the part which our
universities should play in training students for the profession of
teaching. Let us rid ourselves of the notion that grade teachers
and educators can come out of the same mill, namely, the normal
school, even though that normal school be called a teachers' college
and be connected with a university.
It is the function of a normal school to train good teachers
for the grades. It is not so necessary for an educator to be a good
teacher. He needs only to be a good critic of teaching, to know
good teaching when he sees it. It is absurd to believe that a man
must always be able to do expertly what he is able to criticize. One
242 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
does not need to be able to lay an egg, to distinguish between a
good egg and a bad one. Nor does one need to be able to write
good poetry or compose good music, to exercise a discriminating
taste in literature or music. The great successes in administration,
whether they be in education or business, are often achieved by execu-
tives who know enough to select assistants who can do the work
better than they can do it themselves.
There must therefore be a fundamental differentiation between
the training which will equip doctors of education and educational
experts, and the training which wall make a good grade teacher.
In my opinion it is the function of the university through its graduate
school to train the educator and the educational expert. In the
college, courses in education should be offered which may be taken,
along with courses in biology, psychology, sociology and other cult-
ural subjects, in order that college students who feel drawn toward
the profession of education, and even those who are not drawn to it
but only tempted to explore the scope and purpose of the educational
field, may have during their college course the same opportunity
which other students now enjoy, of acquiring a familiarity with the
principles and methods of sciences leading up to specific professional
training. I believe the university has an extremely important func-
tion to perform, no less than the creation of a new profession, a
learned profession of education, which shall receive the same social
recognition as the three older professions.
This work can never be done by the university, unless the
university resigns to the normal school the task of training grade
teachers. The standard of our normal schools is already high, in
fact there is reason for believing that the curriculum of many normal
schools is already overloaded. The failure to recognize and empha-
size the real object of normal school training has led us to put before
the embryo grade teacher, and through institute lectures and exhorta-
tion before the grade teacher in active service who is seeking to
improve his or her professional standing, an assortment of
ill-digested scientific knowledge and points of view in education
which lead not to greater efficiency but to distraction and inefficiency.
Why should those of us who consider so minutely the needs of differ-
ent groups of pupils in the primary grade, not consider with equal
minuteness the diverse needs of grade teachers and educators?
To present the situation as I see it today in the field of educa-
tion, let me turn to the medical profession for an analogy. Medicine
is now a term which comprehends a group of sciences some of which
are not at all medical, i. e. therapeutic, in their intent. Thus
bacteriology is a department of botany; anatomy and physiology
are biological sciences; physiological chemistry is a branch of chemis-
THE SCOPE OF EDUCATION. 243
try; pathology belongs in part to botany and in part to chemistry.
These sciences took their origin within the department of medicine,
but they would now be maintained on their own account whether
medicine endured as a profession or not. Indeed some of the pro-
fessors in these subjects in our medical schools do not now possess
a medical degree. All of these sciences, for example even physiology,
were looked upon at one time as medical sciences, a fact which led
Lotze as late as 1852, when he came to write his treatise on physio-
logical psychology, to call his work Medical Psychology, although
there is not a word in it which has to do with medicine in the narrow
sense of therapeutics.
Within recent years the field of education has been so broadened
that it comprehends within its boundaries many sciences which are
only indirectly related to education in the narrower sense of peda-
gogical practice and school administration. The modern conception
of education as individual development has brought within the scope
of education almost the entire science of psychology, and the sociali-
zation of the schools is rapidly adding to the list of educational
sciences hygiene, sociology, some parts of biology, and even medicine.
We are now awaiting a new definition of education, for the scope of
education as a university department can not be conceived to include
less than all those branches of learning which contribute to our under-
standing of the helps and hindrances to the normal development of
the infant, the child, and the adolescent.
Indeed when we consider that medicine and social service are
conducting a campaign involving the education of adults-to prevent
disease and poverty,?although the education of the adult is often
futile where that of the child may be signally effective,?we see
there is some support for the contention that the ultimate aim of
medicine and social work, i. e. happiness and race betterment, and
the modern aim of education, i. e. normal development and individual
efficiency, are practically the same. A group of sciences exists
today whose direct purpose is to foster normal development with
the ultimate object of race betterment, just as another group of
sciences under the caption of medicine, exists for the cure and pre-
vention of disease. What caption will be chosen for this modern
group of sciences? Will it be psychology? Will it be sociology?
Or will it be education? The science of individual development
for which I have proposed the word orthogenics, is fundamentally
psychological, and one might imagine the coming into existence of
a school of psychology or orthogenics paralleling some of our schools
of education of today. Moreover, within the field of education
psychology will play a part analogous to that which is now played
within the field of medicine by anatomy, physiology, and pathology.
244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Education both in the phase of individual development and in the
phase of group instruction, deals with the human mind, and psy-
chology is the science which informs us as to the nature of the
human mind, its functions, its growth, and its biological or
pathological variations. The student of education must have a
wide range of information to be gleaned only within the field of
psychology, and in addition, if he is to be a member of a learned pro-
fession, he must be trained in scientific method. Psychology is the
science to give him the method as well as the information. Despite
the way in which the science of psychology bulks large within this
field of the new education, I nevertheless believe that the type of
work which I am considering will never be subsumed under the
caption of psychology. While psychology gives the foundations,
education through defining the aim and intent is more likely to
furnish the appropriate caption. In some respects sociology, being
broader than education and having a conscious intent toward race
betterment, suggests itself as the most fitting term of the three.
Unfortunately, however, sociology neither possesses a distinctive
scientific method of inquiry, nor has it been able to define with
exactness its scope of inquiry. Education suffers in the estimation
of men of science and the other learned professions, for a similar
reason. Strip education of its psychology and its history, and
usually we have stripped it of that portion of its content which is
based upon sound scientific procedure. One might suppose that no
one of these terms could ever be expanded to become sufficiently
inclusive to cover the entire field, and that this new department of
learning will be styled a school of education, psychology, and sociology.
I am convinced, however, from observation of the trend of develop-
ment within this field, that the term which society will employ to
comprehend and to designate this group of sciences, is the term
education, unless some new term like orthogenics be substituted
for it, a substitution I consider most unlikely.
A school of education, that is to say, a department of education
in a university or a course in education within the college or graduate
school of a university, must therefore comprehend a number of
sciences. Some of these sciences have such marked educational
intent and application that we may in time come to look upon them
as educational sciences, very much as we look upon physiology
and pathology as medical sciences. Educational psychology is
not what some departments of education would lead us to suppose,
a little cream skimmed from the milk of psychology to make tasty
the subject matter of pedagogy. Almost all of psychology is educa-
tional psychology. Of the thirty-six courses in psychology offered
at the University of Pennsylvania, twenty cover work commonly
THE SCOPE OF EDUCATION. 245
included within the scope of educational psychology, and only three
lie entirely outside this field. Of the remaining thirteen courses,
two are introductory courses which must be completed by students
of education before proceeding to more advanced work; five of
them are in what might properly be considered related fields of
knowledge, i. e. aesthetics and statistics; four are advanced courses
which advanced students of education as well as of psychology
might profitably take, especially those who wish a more thorough-
going training in psychology; and two represent individual labora-
tory work and a seminar course, both of which might be within the
field of educational psychology. At the 1913 summer school of
the University of California, every course offered under the caption
of education, with the exception of one on modern American education
in theory and practice, fell within the field of modern psychology.
Although psychology is perhaps the most closely related to educa-
tion of all the sciences, biology, anthropology, and hygiene must
necessarily form a part of the scientific training of any student who
would seek to become an expert in the modern educational field.
With this end in view, the professional training of the educator
requires, like the professional training of the medical practitioner,
a four-year graduate course in the various sciences comprehended
within the scope of education as I have defined it.
Education in the past has not been a learned profession with
a body of expert opinion to which the world pays deference, because
those who occupy the positions of authority within the profession
have come to fill these positions from the ranks, rising too often
only by seniority of service and political preferment. The differ-
ence between a real profession of education and what we have had
in the past, is just the difference between a professional army and
a volunteer army. Officers and privates in a professional army are
differently trained, and no one today would consider an army efficient
if all the officers had been taken from the ranks. No more important
step can be made in upbuilding a modern profession of education,
than to recognize that the course of preparation and subsequent
training of the grade teacher and of the educator must be made to
follow diverse lines.
In comparing the grade teacher to the private in the ranks, I
would not be understood to wish to minimize the professional and
social value of the grade teacher's functions, nor do I mean to imply
that the grade teacher in the daily practice of her profession has
nothing more to do than to carry out the orders of the officers of
education. I believe a greater measure of freedom in school-room
practice very desirable today, but I also believe that one of the
causes which prevents the exercise of freedom on the part of the
246 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
grade teacher in the classroom is the deficient training of super-
visors. When supervisors are provided with adequate informa-
tion and are inspired by a true scientific spirit, when grade teachers
are thoroughly drilled in the technique of educational practice,
supervisors and grade teachers working together harmoniously will
be able to carry out educational experiments in the classroom which
are today impossible, and which will furnish us with real contribu-
tions to our knowledge of the relative value of different educational
methods. We want grade teachers to have individual initiative and
originality, just as in the army we need some private soldiers with
initiative and originality. Modern educational treatment and mod-
ern warfare are making greater demands upon what may be called
the non-commissioned officers of these two professions, and difficult
practical problems must often be left to their judgment. I only
desire to emphasize that efficiency within the profession of the
grade teacher must be based upon training in technique, and not
upon dribblings of knowledge from history, literature, and science.
Modern requirements within the medical profession have called
into existence within recent times a new branch of this profession
?perhaps I had better say a new profession, that of the hospital
social worker, who is doing a grade of work requiring the exercise
of individual judgment and some ability for research. In con-
nection with such institutions as our Psychological Clinic, the
social worker also exercises a function scarcely second in importance
to that of the clinicians. Both men and women are required for this
work, although women drafted for the service will doubtless always
outnumber the men. As the training of this group of social workers
requires a thorough grounding in the science of psychology, the Psy-
chological Laboratory and Clinic at the University of Pennsylvania
offers courses to college graduates, leading to the Master of Arts
degree and requiring a summer's work and one full academic year
in the graduate school, as a standard course for the professional
training of the social service worker.
Within the field of education also, there is room for a psycho-
logically trained teacher whose professional training should be
superimposed upon a four year college course or its equivalent.
This expert teacher is the trainer of backward children, not of the
feebleminded children who constitute so large a portion of the
classes for backward children, but of those backward children who
give promise of restoration to the normal grades?the teachers of
what I suggest we seek to distinguish as the restoration classes.
I believe too, that the Montessori teacher must represent this grade
of cultural and professional training. Much more than a three
months' course is needed to make a Montessori teacher. Dr. Montes-
THE SCOPE OF EDUCATION. 247
sori herself emphasizes the function of her teachers as psychological
observers and experts, in contradistinction to their function as
instructors. I even venture the assertion that the kindergartner
also should represent a similar type of expert trainer.
The proposal to develop a scientifically trained worker within the
field of education, i. e. the expert teacher or orthogenic trainer,
would remain little more than an impractical dream, if we did not
have in sight the possibility of a recognition of expert service through
an adequate salary and professional rank. This recognition is
already manifest in the action of the Board of Education of New
York City which went into effect January 1,1914, placing the teachers
of the backward or ungraded classes in that city in the professional
rank of eighth grade teachers who receive a higher salary than the
teachers of the other grades. These teachers consequently stand in
rank just below the high school teacher. The kindergartner, if
scientifically trained for her extremely important work, will gain an
equal if not superior position.
The city of New Orleans has adopted a procedure which is likely
to develop in one and the same person a better equipped kinder-
gartner and special teacher for backward children. The kinder-
gartners of that city are being employed to supplement the work of
the grade teachers by giving individual instruction to the backward
pupils of the grades. The kindergartner will thus be compelled to
acquire orthogenic technique, and a type of expert special teacher
will be developed who knows normal children and is familiar with
kindergarten methods. The Froebelian philosophy, bad enough in
itself but doubly bad when filtered through the mind of an immature
girl without scientific training, has hitherto prevented a just apprecia-
tion of the kindergartner's contribution to psychology and education.
If the reconstructed kindergarten, which many kindergartners are
working for with great earnestness, is put upon the same psychological
foundation as the Montessori method, the kindergarten can be made
the most scientifically conducted portion of the public school system.
To achieve this distinction, there will only be required in addition
that the kindergartner be adequately equipped through instruction
in the facts and methods of modern science to perform her task in a
manner to realize this new ideal of the function of the teacher of the
pre-elementary grade. The problem of this expert kindergartner,
the Montessori teacher, and the restoration teacher is identical.
It is the adjustment of the child through individual development
to the more formal work of the elementary grades, and the beginner
should be taken to the point where he is made ready through initia-
tion into reading, writing, and perhaps arithmetic, as well as through
his arrival at a satisfactory stage of mental growth cultivated by
248 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
general training, to master the curriculum of the grades. For many
reasons, psychological and educational, the kindergarten may ser-
viceably be extended to cover much of the work of the first grade.
As this problem of individual adjustment is primarily a psy-
chological one, the department of psychology at the University of
Pennsylvania has organized a course for the professional equipment
of expert special teachers or orthogenic trainers. Students will be
required to have had a college course or its equivalent, upon which
will be superimposed a course planned to cover at least six weeks
of a summer school session and a full academic year of graduate
work, the amount of work required being enough to give those who
may be otherwise qualified a Master of Arts degree. This course is
available also for the scientfic training of ldndergartners and Mon-
tessori teachers.
More than once I have referred to educational experts or clinical
psychologists who will undoubtedly find more and more extensive
employment in connection with the school system. Their training
must be predominantly psychological as that of the educator will
naturally be predominantly pedagogical. In 1896 I began tentative
work in applied psychology, calling this department of the laboratory
of psychology, the Psychological Clinic. It was not until 1907
that I felt sufficiently certain of the methods and scope of the Psycho-
logical Clinic to begin the publication of reports concerning its
organization and function. Up to 1907 the Psychological Clinic
of the University of Pennsylvania remained the only clinic of its
kind in existence. Since that time with amazing rapidity psycho-
logical clinics, sometimes called educational clinics, have been
organized in this country. No more important service can be rendered
by our Psychological Laboratory and Clinic, than the maintenance
of a high standard of professional training in this important field.
A minimum of four years of graduate work in psychology and allied
sciences is necessary and will be required for the training of one
whom we shall be willing to consider a clinical psychologist.
My thesis is that an equal standard should be erected by our
universities as the minimum standard for the adequate training
and professional equipment of the educator. That is to say, there
should be a four-year graduate course fully equal in difficulty and
severity of discipline to a four-year course in medicine, directed to
the purpose of training men and women who will find employment
as supervising principals, administrative officers, and educational
experts. In the college or undergraduate course there should be
offered courses in education and the various branches tributary to
it, and these should be offered to college students because of the
cultural value which they possess, as well as because they will enable
THE SCOPE OF EDUCATION. 249
those students who already look forward to the profession of educa-
tion to prepare themselves in part for this work while still in college.
The educational sciences in the college would therefore have the
same relation to the professional graduate course in education that
college courses in biology bear to the professional course in medicine.
I believe that the definition and scope of education as I have
presented them in this paper, must be adopted by our universities
if the profession of education is ever to win society's deference to
its opinions?a deference which society will pay only to opinions
resting upon expert scientific knowledge. Moreover it is only
through scientific insight and method that the profession of education
can accomplish its present purpose, which I conceive to be the con-
servation and development of the natural endowments of every
child. The orthogenic training of the next generation is the safest
and most practicable road to adult efficiency and race betterment.
Who will deny the appreciation now enjoyed by the learned pro-
fessions to those who patiently and scientifically undertake to
render this important service to humanity?
