How I Kept My Baby Well
========================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 53

By Anna G. Noyes. (Educational Psychology
Monographs, No. 9.) Baltimore: Warwick and York, 1913. Pp. 193.
Illustrated.
Mrs. Noyes, who holds the degree of bachelor of science, dedicates her
book to Professor John Dewey, "whose plea for the extension of the methods of
science to the commonplace things of life gave me courage to believe that a
mother's own baby might be a fit subject for scientific investigation by even
a baby's own mother." She confesses that to begin with, in spite of her college
training, she was "a novice at baby culture," but adds in extenuation of her
shortcomings, that if she were "going in for chickens, or pigs, there would be
schools, universities, and government pamphlets galore at her service, but when
she would raise only a human baby, universities and government bureaus are
silent." Her next remark, by the way, throws a light upon the sort of prepara-
tion for life as a citizen and member of the race, which colleges today are offering,
?"I can not recall any particular instruction given me during my academic
life that so much as intimated that the problem of baby raising existed in the
world. But I had learned, although late in my college career, that there was
such a thing as inductive thinking," Mrs. Noyes is fortunately able to say,
"and armed with the latter power, I was prepared to attack the former prob-
lem."
What she tried to do, and did with notable success, was simply, "to
keep the baby well, so that he could not get sick. . . . This I should call
the common sense way of caring for a baby, and it is the way, of course, in
which many mothers have already brought up their babies. But I can not find
that any one of them has stated the problem consciously, or at least stated it
for publication, or has any data to offer in the shape of records, as to how the
plan worked even in one case. And this is all I claim to have done. I have a
complete record of one baby who was kept well for two years by not being
allowed to get sick."
The record is indeed complete in the utmost fullness of scientific detail.
More than forty charts are presented showing the daily record as to time of
nursing, intervals between nursings, sleep, regurgitation, vomiting, feces, condition
of skin, behavior, crying, and amount of water swallowed. Later on when other
foods were given in addition to the nursing, and later still when the baby was
fully weaned, the charts record just what he ate and how he throve on it. The
author's comments and summaries of the data are thoroughly interesting and
illuminating.
The book is illustrated with about sixty photographs of the baby at different
stages of growth. It is a pity that they are so poorly reproduced in printing
that much of their charm is lost in a greyish fog. Some of the pictures show
the boy with his mother, and one even with his father, although usually it was
the father who managed the camera; but in most of them the youngster appears
alone, climbing, walking, playing, laughing, eating?doing nearly everything
that a jolly, active baby can do when in perfect health.
Mrs. Noyes makes a suggestion which if carried out will work wonders for
the children of the immediate future. "The next thing to do," she urges, "is
to follow this record with the records of, say, fifty babies." What it would
54 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
mean to thousands of intelligent but uninstructed mothers to have such records
available for their guidance, can hardly be imagined. For babies differ normally
within very wide limits as this mother and many others have discovered after
days and months of needless anxiety. Just what variations may be normal,
and what are abnormal or undesirable, still await the research of the psy-
chologist of babyhood, and he in his turn is waiting for records, like this one
by Mrs. Noyes, which can be compiled only by the mother who has the skill to
observe, the patience to record, and the courage to leave false sentiment and
irrelevant moralizing out of what she has to tell us.
