A Study of the School Inquiry Report on Ungraded Classes
=========================================================

By Elizabeth E. Farrell,
Inspector of Ungraded Classes, New York City, N. Y.
(Concluded.)
What is Done for these Children.
With regard to the school progiam, the course of study, and
the place of manual training in the program, the School Inquiry
Report says:
"The usual program is the three R's in the forenoon, and some form of
handwork (manual training) in the afternoon. Nearly all of the experienced
teachers and the principals are agreed that this bookwork is largely wasted upon
these children; but they feel compelled to try to do this because it is the tradi-
tion of the system, and because the parents insist that their children shall be
taught to read and write." (Page 5.)
"That appropriate manual training be made the principal thing in all of
these classes; such reading, writing, and numbers as are taught should be
taught, so far as possible, in connection with the hand work." (Page 23.)
As stated in the report the facts upon which the above state-
ments are based are these:
"Most of the people who are familiar with the feebleminded child as he is
found in institutions and in the Hilfsschulen of Germany and the Special Classes
of London believe that the children in the ungraded classes of our city belong to
the latter group; that is to say, they believe that it is wrong to attempt to
teach such children any of these matters (reading, writing, number)." (Page 5.)
"The experience with such children as these in institutions for feeble-
minded, the country over, is that manual training is the one thing that they can
be taught." (Page Q.)
?* * * ^at book work is practically useless for these children, and
that our work with them, instead of being half manual, should be all manual
and vocational." (Page 18.)
Discussion.
It is a fact, though one not recognized in the report, that the
child in the ungraded class has been the determining factor in the
activities of his school life. It has been consistently held that the
class must be small in order to secure opportunity for individual
instruction. Not less, but more, must be given to the handicapped
child. His opportunity is limited only by his own personality;?
(99)
100 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
reading, numbers, history, water color work, chair caning, dress-
making, cooking, basketry, pottery making, are only a few of the
means used to awaken dormant powers and latent interests.
To enrich the experiences of the handicapped child will do for him
exactly what it does for a more fortunate one. The degree of
enrichment will be less, the kind identical. As the handicapped
child is nearer and dearer to his sorrow-softened parent, so he is to
the school and to the teacher whose joy it is to fan into flame the
spark of interest, to build longer the span of voluntary attention, to
develop to its uttermost his power of good discrimination.
The effort has been made to teach the higher type of backward
child to read and to write. To attempt to teach these subjects to
a child who is obviously defective would be evidence of bad judg-
ment, but in what department of human effort may not bad judg-
ment be found? The school principals and teachers followed
established precedents in offering during the school day of ungraded
class children, activities drawn from the different branches of human
knowledge. In England the Education Act lays certain obligations
on the local school authorities; in Germany the aim of the auxiliary
schools (schools for backward children) is so clearly recognized that
the subject matter of instruction must of necessity be broad, and
in no sense narrowly special. The institution men of this country
also recognize this fact. Quotations bearing precisely on this
point follow:
"It (auxiliary school) aims to develop in its pupils a standard of conduct
which shall not differ from that of a worthy and useful member of human
society. To this end all those subjects of instruction should be introduced into
the auxiliary school which tend to awaken and control the individual will and
impulses to action. * * * Taking this, then, as our general aim, we can
proceed to assign the scope of the several subjects:
"1. Religion.
"2. By practice and observation, speaking, reading, and writing, he should
be helped to understand and reproduce orally and in writing what-
ever he has seen, heard, or experienced.
"3. History.
"4. Drawing.
"5. Manual labor.
"6. Singing and gymnastics.
"7. Home geography.
"8. Arithmetic.
"9. Natural history and nature study."4
"The time table must provide?
"a. Instruction in the elements of reading, writing, and arithmetic;
"b. Singing and recitation;
4 Auxiliary Schools of Germany, page 84.
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 101
"c. Object lessons;
"d. Drawing;
"e. Needle work for girls;
"/. Physical exercises;
"g. Manual instruction."5
"I do not believe it is wise for us to discard the literary training entirely,
as we have in the institution a number of children of the higher types of mental
feebleness and I believe these children are capable of being benefited by the
literary exercises."6
"We endeavor to teach the salient points of the kindergarten, primary,
intermediate, and grammar grades up to the sixth grade."7
"Our educational work is very elaborate and cannot be described in words.
The annual report which I am enclosing gives the best r6sum6 of the work we
have ever printed."8
A report made after visiting the Massachusetts School for the
Feebleminded contains the following:?"At Waverley the whole
morning was devoted to the teaching of reading, arithemtic, draw-
ing and writing to the high grade mentally defective children."
From these quotations it will be seen that it is quite generally
held that the child himself must determine what the school will
do for him. Does it not seem likely that the point of view of insti-
tutional life would be such as would emphasize manual and voca-
tional training? Children in an institution have their future clearly
defined. They can be trained for one thing. With the great
majority of ungraded class children in the public schools, it is not
possible at this time to train for one and only one future, even if
that seemed best. It is right here that the question arises,?is it
manual training or motor training that these children need? If it
is motor training then the author of the report must agree with our
practice in giving the children physical training, rhythmic exercises,
dancing, games, drawing, sense training, gardening, story telling,
dramatization, and the many other activities which are motor in
character. He must agree that the children need opportunity for
gaining experiences of many kinds. "The time spent upon purely
academic work has a value beyond its use to the child, and this is a
point of view not recognized by those whose attention is focused
upon children in institutions. By emphasizing the points of resem-
blance and minimizing the differences between the regular grade
child and the ungraded class child, we foster the self-respect of the
unfortunate one and sacrifice none of his opportunities for mental
growth."
' Elementary Education Acts, England, Defective and Epileptic Children.
6 George Mogridge, M.D., Iowa Institution for the Feebleminded.
7 D. F. Weeks, M.D., Epileptic Colony, Skillman, New Jersey.
8 Walter E. Fernald, M.D., Mass. State School for the Feebleminded.
102 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
In this section, perhaps more than in any other, is the reader
cognizant of a lack of definiteness in the use of terms. We do not
know what is meant by a feebleminded child. We do not know
whether he is always one and the same thing or whether there are
infinite variations and differentiations demanding adaptations and
modifications of educational treatment. It is impossible, therefore,
to be specific in the discussion. The general theory and practice,
here presented, would apply to any scheme of help for these
children.
Increased Appropriations.
The School Inquiry Report recommends increased appropria-
tions in the following terms:?
"By greatly increasing the appropriations for the work in accordance with
the needs, as determined by those in charge of the problem." (Pages 21, 22.)
A. "By the appointment of at least four associate inspectors of ungraded
classes." (Page 22.)
B. "By the appointment at once of five more examiners (psychologists and
physicians), whose duty it should be to determine what children shall
be placed in these classes. Additional examiners should be appointed
as needed. All repeaters and over-age pupils, together with all pupils
now in any of the special classes C, D, E, and ungraded, should be
tested by the Binet-Simon scale in the hands of experts trained in its
use (as is done in Rochester, N. Y., Cleveland, 0., and other places,
with signal benefit to the system." (Page 22.)
C. "By the appointment of a number of special assistants?six or eight?
whose business it should be to follow up the history of these defective
children after they have passed through the schools. After a few
years such histories would throw much-needed light on the value of the
methods used; and they would point the way to further steps toward
protecting society from the future incubus of these irresponsible per-
sons." (Page 22.)
Discussion.
Since September, 1906, the Department of Ungraded Classes
has increased approximately 1100 per cent. The expenditure for
maintaining this department has not changed except for an increase
in salary granted to the Inspector of Ungraded Classes. From 14
classes in 1906, the number has increased to 175 classes in Septem-
ber, 1913. No addition has been made during that time to the
staff of medical examiners. The inadequacy of the machinery of
administration, though presented by the City Superintendent of
Schools at different times, has never had consideration.
It is impossible to say at this time how many associate inspect-
ors of ungraded classes should be appointed. It seems reasonable,
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 103
however, when one considers the newness of this work in public
education; the lack of trained teachers; the fact that we do not yet
know just what constitutes mental defect in the so-called border
line case, to grant at least the amount of supervision which is given
to the much better understood problems in the regular grades of
the elementary school. There could be no question about the
wisdom of establishing a ratio of supervising officials to the number
of ungraded classes, as has been established for assistants to prin-
cipals in elementary schools.
Any adequate scheme for the care of mentally defective chil-
dren must provide not only for their examination but for their
re-examination at regular intervals. This fact was recognized by
the Board of Education when the by-laws regulating ungraded
classes were adopted (1906). This fact, with others which are
obvious, makes it impossible to say how many examiners should
be appointed. To arrive at such information might be possible
by an intensive study of two or more school districts. Such a study
would call for the examination of all over-age children, all delinquent
children, all special class children. Whether the information so
gathered would be indicative of conditions all over the city would,
of course, be questionable. The value of such information, however,
cannot be gainsaid in considering the number of official examiners
needed to carry on the work for mentally defective children.
All that has been said above is applicable to the recommenda-
tion with regard to the appointment of "special assistants." The
work done by Dr. Anne Moore in this particular field in the Depart-
ment of Ungraded Classes, showed conclusively the necessity for
some such activity. Here, again, nothing but investigation will
show whether we need "six or eight," or sixty, or eighty special
assistants.
Another item should be added as a reason for increased appro-
priations. This item is clerical assistance. Unless this is granted
the maximum efficiency will not be possible even though a generous
provision is made for special assistants, medical examiners, and
associate inspectors. To oblige highly trained employees of the
Board of Education to spend their days writing letters, sending out
notices, etc., etc., is to pay a rather high price for such services. I
earnestly recommend that this item be given careful consideration.
To say that four associate inspectors should be appointed is to
treat as stationary a problem which is constantly growing. Because
Dr. Goddard does not give a reason for his recommendation, argu-
ment is impossible. Again we deplore an investigation conducted
without knowledge of documentary material.
104 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Records.
The following quotations from the School Inquiry Report relate
to records:?
"The only way to solve this problem (three R's) is to appeal to experience.
Had a careful record been kept of every child who had been in the ungraded
classes; his actual condition; what he had learned in the way of reading, writ-
ing, and counting; and then of his after history, and the extent to which he had
been able to make a living because of his ability to use his knowledge of the
three R's, we might, by this time, have an answer to the question. As a matter
of fact, no such records have been kept." (Pages 5, 6.)
"Actual data should be accumulated as to what becomes of these children
after they have left the ungraded classes, of the children in E classes, the C
classes, and all others who show in their school work that they are not perfectly
normal, to the end that we may know what effect our methods are having upon
these children, and to what extent we have wisely judged them and treated
them." (Pages 15, 16.)
The above statements seem to be based upon the fact that,?
"We have continually asked teachers * * (Page 6.)
Discussion (Records).
To substantiate in fact the statement that "no such records
have been kept," it is again necessary to study the report for
evidences of the use made of official material,?minutes of the
Board of Superintendents, annual reports of the City Superintendent
of Schools, records in the office of the City Superintendent of
Schools,?and to search for indications that a critical study of
methods of work, budget requests, etc., etc., had been made. There
are no such evidences or indications.
Such a study of the minutes of the Board of Superintendents
would have brought out the fact that a record blank for use in
ungraded classes had been adopted in 1906. If this discovery was
followed up by a study of the records on file in- the office of the
City Superintendent it would have shown that four times each year
each child in an ungraded class is rated. On this approved blank
information is given as to "his actual conditions; what he had
learned in the way of reading, writing, and counting." In addition
to the facts noted, the official records give information as to the
condition at the time of discharge, at whose request he is discharged,
for whom he is to work, and a prognosis as to his probable ability
to succeed.
A study of the annual reports of the City Superintendent of
Schools would have shown the attitude of the school authorities on
A STUDY OF UNGRADED CLASSES. 105
the "after care" of children who left the ungraded class at sixteen
years (none younger may leave) to enter industry. The City Super-
intendent of Schools recommended in 1909-10 "that social workers
be appointed to visit the homes and work with the parents of men-
tally defective children."9
A study of documentary material in the office of the City Super-
intendent of Schools would reveal the work in "after care" done
under the auspices of the school authorities, and at their request
by the College Settlement and the Public Education Association,
whose investigator, Dr. Anne Moore, followed up the industrial
career of all children who had left the ungraded classes up to the
time her investigation was finished in June, 1911. Had such a study
been made it would have been apparent that the school authorities
not only appreciated the value of such material but actually
inaugurated and established on a working basis the first, and to this
time the only, official after care of mentally defective children done in
connection with American public schools. This was begun and has
been continued since 1907, when the Department of Ungraded
Classes was one year old.
The report says we must gather data as to what becomes of the
22,387 E class children; 2691 C class children; 2041 D class chil-
dren; and the 15,000 children said to be feebleminded. The indus-
trial career of these individuals is the point here. The implications
in this suggestion are tremendous. The German system of register-
ing at the police station all people sojourning in the country is a way
to learn about the 42,119 individuals under discussion. This, how-
ever, does not seem feasible just now.
Since,?"We have continually asked teachers" is the only fact
presented as the basis of the statement that "no such records have
been kept," and since the method of recording the data relating to
ungraded class children and the character of such data were not the
material of critical study, this section of the School Inquiry Report
does not appear to be conclusive.
The Report re-states conditions that have been put forward by
the City Superintendent time and again,?children not examined,
inadequate supply of trained teachers, inadequacy of the examining
and supervisory staff, etc. etc. To bring these forward once more
with all the prestige of the School Inquiry Committee will undoubt-
edly be of value.
The report seems to have viewed the ungraded class problem as
the work of a day,?a work without a past and with no future. It
?Thirteenth Annual Report, City Superintendent of Schools, page 149.
106 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
deals with conditions found at a given time with no consideration of
the circumstances which brought them about and those which were
in process of correcting them. Educational administration is not
static, as one might gather from the report. Unless we discount
this static quality we will fail to get the good intended. The force
which has driven this particular problem since 1906 is dynamic. It
has increasingly gathered momentum and is projected in a long
vista ahead. These conditions, or some other condition equally
undesirable, may exist five years from today. The thing which
makes them significant is our attitude towards them.
Throughout the report the terms "mentally defective" and
"feebleminded" are used interchangeably. With this usage in
mind, the question of "mistaken diagnosis" referred to on page 5
is to be considered. There is no better way to show the inaccuracy
implied in this section than to place in juxtaposition the statement
of one of Dr. Goddard's colleagues in psychology: "Feebleminded-
ness in its correct usage, characterizes the individual whose mental
development is retarded. It has no reference whatever to the
matter of whether the condition is curable or permanent. Its literal
meaning excludes all reference to causes and a child might be feeble-
minded at first and become normal later." "A child might progress
at a retarded rate at first and then improve with the removal of
some physical handicap or other cause."10
Those who looked to the School Inquiry Investigation as the
logical means of solving the problems now troubling school adminis-
trators in the field of special education, will study the report in vain
for a philosophy upon which to found their practice. They find,
instead of the broad vision of the function of the school in this its
latest problem, a series of doses prescribed for present ills; a dearth
of positive knowledge which it would be reasonable for Dr. Goddard
to have provided, throws the atmosphere of opinion around the
remarks made on organization, examination, "mistaken diagnosis,"
number of feebleminded children, and vocationalized manual train-
ing,?to enumerate only a few items.
The service given by Rousseau to general education, by Pesta-
lozzi to the education of poor children, by Horace Mann to public
education in the United States, is similar to that expected from Dr.
Goddard for the education of mentally defective children when he
was employed by the School Inquiry Committee to investigate the
aim, methods, and results of ungraded class work. To be unable
to see the forest for the trees is sad. To have missed the vision is
sadder still.
10 Journal of Psycho-Asthenics-?Vol. XVII, No. 4.
