The Psychology of it
=====================

By Charles Keen Taylor, M.A.
Philadelphia, Pa.
If there is one point upon which most of us agree, it is the statement that the morale of our American young people is not what it
should or could be; and moral education "conferences," lecturers,
educators, physicians, and social workers almost unitedly tell us
that the grand and only remedy is instruction in sex hygiene. All
agree that the home is the best place for this instruction, but that
the home is not giving it, that many homes are incapable of so
doing, and therefore the school should do it?yes, down to the first
grade.
It is likely that all these well-intentioned folk are making a
profound mistake, and for many children perhaps a most unfortunate one. The mistake consists in believing in the fatal delusion
that moral reform can be encouraged by teaching "facts," and
that by means of a mere knowledge of anatomy and special hygiene
a child's character can be made and kept clean, strong, and uncontaminated.
Let it be said at once that the immorality found in varying
degrees among young people and children is not nearly so much
caused by a lack of knowledge, as by a lack of a strong moral
stamina, a fundamental power of resistance, which would enable
the possessor to stand firm against the common temptations. Along
with the lack of moral strength there is another cause making for
the downfall of many. Even before adolescence, and particularly
during that critical stage, many influences, in the home and without it, tend to develop in the children a precocious sex interest and
a leaning toward sensuality. In other words, from early childhood
for a great number of children, and especially those in well-to-do
homes, there is a long series of influences, each one of which has
probably little effect, but the cumulative strength of which is
exceedingly great. Let us consider a number of these influences.
The first to come are generally those developed by ill-chosen
games. Properly planned play is of immense value in the mental,
moral, and physical development of a child. The only games likely
to be ultimately bad in their effects are those founded on sex interest
and difference, such as the so-called kissing games, which in themselves, as played by young children, mean very little. Parents
often watch such games and exclaim over the "pretty sight." No
(114)
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF IT. 115
doubt the children are innocent as can be, but even then these
games have a distinct psychic effect in starting a sex interest and
in encouraging familiarity. Again, parents frequently aid in the
precocious sex interest by pairing off the boys and girls at children's
parties, just as adults are paired off, and again it is doubtless a
"pretty sight" to see the couples of miniature men and women,
aping the manners of grown-up men and women. The distinctions
are often emphasized by more or less teasing concerning "sweethearts," "beaux" and the like. It may seem silly and hypersensitive to recognize any psychic effect in such matters, or even
in the direct teasing of young children concerning their "beaux" and
"best girls." But again let it be said that while in themselves such
influences might mean little, every impression and suggestion goes
to the making of character, and it is the cumulative effect which
concerns us.
When children are from five to eleven years old comes dancing.
With people of moderate means this period is likely to be put off
a few years, but the well-to-do support thousands of semi-fashionable
dancing schools for children of this age and older?all under the
pleasing idea that dancing will give them grace and poise. Perhaps
it will, but it frequently brings less desirable gifts also. Be it
understood,?the best authorities give dancing a high rank as a
cultural and moral factor of great value. But the great value is
in the "open" dance, including many beautiful folk dances the
practicing of which would be most valuable for children. But outside of some progressive public schools such dances are not common.
Instead, in the vast majority of dancing schools, we see matters
conducted as among men and women, the children acting like adults
as nearly as possible and being treated as such. Would we not
rather see children acting like children and being treated like
children? It is most unpleasant to see youngsters of twelve, thirteen,
or fourteen years posturing and acting with the blase assurance of
sophisticated and weary adults,?to say nothing of the effect of the
common "round dance" and particularly its later variations. As
exercise these movements have little appeal, the main interest being
a sensual one built upon sex instinct and interest, and early adolescence is distinctly not the time for stimulating such instincts and
interest. The physical contact and its accompanying familiarity
is the basic fault of these dances, and the harm they have done
even among young children is far greater than is supposed by admiring parents and chaperons who look on approvingly in groups around
the walls. True it is that the children are very often quite innocent of wrong thought, though they often are not. Even if a
116 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
wrong idea or impulse never enters their minds, there is nevertheless a strong sex stimulation, which adds greatly to the cumulative
effect we are studying. Sex stimulation has its proper and necessary place and time, but it is the wrong time for it when, in the
bewilderment of early adolescence, children find themselves possessed of a whole new world of instincts and feelings of great power,
over which control has not yet been gained, and concerning which
little useful knowledge has been acquired.
At this very critical time other malign influences make themselves felt. For instance, there are the moving pictures to which
all of us swarm by the hundred thousand. The moving picture is
doubtless one of the most important educational methods discovered
in a century, as well as the bringer of much clean enjoyment to
young and old. On the other hand, what is the most common
type of picture, leaving out those openly obscene or suggestive?
Is it not the so-called "love drama"? Usually these are very clean
and decent, though too often they are the reverse. But even if
entirely clean and proper, what is their effect upon children? It
is not difficult to say. The result is an increasing of sex instinct
and feeling, and though the cffect upon adults might be negligible
or even good, upon the adolescent child the cumulative effect of
even the best pictures is far stronger that we usually imagine, and
as for the effect of suggestive pictures?it is no wonder that young
folk in their 'teens leave such exhibitions with resistance diminished
and with their minds in a psychic whirl of sex-consciousness. And
we have not yet taken into account the effect of seeing, day after
day, a common portrayal of what should be an almost sacred
mystery. The sacredness and mystery are destroyed and imitation becomes an easy step.
Allied to the moving-picture influence is that of the commoner
type of vaudeville, where may be seen dancing and costumes of an
entirely sensual appeal, and where suggestive jokes and songs are
the rule rather than the exception. Children go in swarms to the
vaudeville. The vaudeville and the theater?the latter through
its recent open attempt to commercialize the present abnormal
interest in sex questions, have much to answer for.
Another unfortunate influence is that of that kind of newspaper which publishes every nasty detail of every possible scandal?
and children have a great way of reading such articles. Then there
is a type of paper which on one page prints woeful editorials concerning the poor downtrodden workingman, and on the very next
prints quack advertisements of a disgusting nature, which are often
traps for the sons of those very workingmen. Many journals
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF IT. 117
realize their responsibility as educational factors in their communities, and there are many whose names would be recognized
from one end of the country to the other as strong influences for
good. Unfortunately, all are not of that type.
Other influences might be mentioned, such as the suggestive
jokes and pictures so abundant in some of our comic weeklies and
Sunday supplements, in which the commonest subject is marital
infidelity or strife. Children cannot respect relations which are
continually held up to ridicule. Yet another decided influence is
the fashion of dressing our young girls, who sometimes might be
fourteen, twenty-four, or even forty, as far as could be told from
a distance of a hundred yards. The present bad taste in dress is
at once the result of an excessive sex-feeling and a partial cause of it.
This is an incomplete but amply sufficient list of many influences
which, beginning in early childhood, have a final powerful cumulative effect which makes for a leaning toward sensuality and a precocious sex-interest,?two forces that have much to do with the genesis
of the great modern wave of immorality. Acting with these is
that other great cause,?a lack of moral strength sufficient to resist
and overcome the temptations which our children must meet with
every day of their lives.
Where is the responsibility? In your heart of hearts, if you
are a parent, it is just possible that you may know where the greater
part of the responsibility lies.
