Shall Elective Courses be Established in the Seventh and Eighth Grades of the Elementary School?
=================================================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1913, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VII, No. 8. January 15, 1914

By I. E. Goldwasser,
Principal Public School 62, Manhattan, N. Y.
Table XLI of the Fourteenth Annual Report of the City Super-
intendent of Schools to the Board of Education of the City of New
York presents the following figures:
Register before Promotion, June 30, 1912.
1A  40,489
IB  49,740
2A  40,327
2B  45,986
3A  40,336
3B  43,131
4A  39,568
4B  41,224
5A  37,329
5B  36,783
6A  33,237
6B  32,245
7A  28,875
7B  25,718
8A  22,250
8B  21,169
Total 1A-8B  578,407
In computing registers for the spring terms of the year, it has
been found that the totals for B classes in the various grades are
larger than those for the A classes. This is due to the fact that the
admission into the 1A classes in September of each year is greater than
that in February. The weather conditions are somewhat responsible
(205)
206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
for this situation, parents being reluctant to have their children
begin their attendance at school in the midst of winter. Further-
more, the old tradition that the year begins in September, is also a
factor tending to make the 1A registers larger in the September term
than in the February term. Thus the register in 1A before promo-
tion, January 31, 1912, was 60,962 while that on June 30, 1912, as
already noted, was 40,489. As a result of this, A registers are larger
in the fall term and smaller in the spring term in all the grades.
Despite this fact, the 5B register is less than the 5A register
for the spring term of 1912; and similar conditions obtain in the
case of the 5th, 7th, and 8th years. In addition, it should be noted
that the 6A register is 7252 less than the 1A register, while that of
8B is 12,068 less. It is fair to assume that of a given register in 6A
classes at any specified time, about one-third will leave school with-
out graduation.
There is nothing novel about this inference from the data.
It cannot, however, too frequently be brought before the notice
of those interested in the schools, that under the present forms of
organization and administration, we are not able to hold children
in the schools even to the end of the elementary course.
Economic stress cannot be cited as the cause of this great reduc-
tion. No one who has interviewed the boys and girls applying for
an employment certificate, can fail to have become convinced that
most of these children leave not because there is a real need for their
going to work, but because the remaining years of the course do not
offer features which bind them closely to school. It is not that work
is necessary but rather that school is not attractive.
In order to determine why the course of study seems not to hold
within itself the features that make the school a vital thing to the
pupils, it is not necessary to take the subjects individually and
show wherein they have become narrowed by reason of traditional
influences still operative in our school system. It might, of
course, be shown that the course in English history in the seventh
year, by reason of the lack of preparedness of the teacher, the vast
scope of the subject matter, and the immaturity of the pupils, can
never be made to enter into the real thinking experience of the chil-
dren. We might refer to the 7A review of the United States and the
8B general review in geography and point out that this constant
re-presentation of old material is uninteresting. Or the 8A course
in geography might be cited as a curious relic of the old interest
in science as an academic subject.
In a similar way, the course in grammar could be analyzed
so as to show wherein it demands a power of discrimination and log-
ical thinking beyond the average child of the elementary school in
ELECTIVE COURSES. 207
so cosmopolitan a city as ours. Again, the selection of masterpieces
for literary study might be criticized on the ground that it does not
properly provide for a vital point of contact between the emotional
life of the pupils and the spirit of the selection.
All these criticisms have been made, and with authority. In
fact earnest efforts are now being made to revise the various courses
of study so as to rid them of the burdens of the centuries and make
them adequately representative of the demands of our times. Our
board of education and our superintendents have been at work at
this problem for several years and notable reforms have already
been accomplished. Others are promised for the immediate future.
But even if an ideal situation is created in each of the subjects,
the fact will still remain that the course of study will be essentially
academic. Book knowledge will still be emphasized. General
culture, of the sort that one attributes to the well-read or well-
informed man, will still be the distinguishing mark of the pupil
who has mastered such courses. And the unfortunate fact will still
confront us, so serious in its implications that its import is truly
tragic, that the general fitness which we attempt to secure really
means specific unfitness.
Take if you "will the ordinary graduate of an elementary school.
What is he fit for? Has he an equipment that will make him ready
to take up with even a reasonable degree of efficiency any occupation
other than that of a clerk or an office assistant whose work is unskilled?
His manual training has been with wood as the only material and with
no machines. Her sewing has been by hand or on a foot-driven
sewing-machine. Entering any shop or factory, such a graduate is
no better, save in general intelligence, than an absolutely untrained
beginner. The seventh and eighth years of the course have given
no preparation that would serve as a recompense for the extra
time spent in the school. Why, then, should a pupil stay? The lure
of the diploma, as a cachet of culture, is not strong enough to hold
one-third of the pupils. That fact is attested by the figures in our
possession. And as an offset to the diploma, there is the larger pay
envelope of the pupil who left in the seventh year and in a year or so
has become economically more valuable to his employer than is the
inexperienced graduate.
Even this, however, serious as it is, does not give us a true
picture of the gravity of the situation. The inflexibility of the course,
essentially academic?a book-course?would seem to imply a homo-
geneity of interests in the pupils. There is no material offered on
which a variety of tastes can be tested. We have no way of discover-
ing aptitudes of pupils. Excellence in history and geography may
be discovered. But what assurance have we that we are not neglect-
208 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ing some extraordinary power in another direction? Eventually,
such power must find expression. But the waste of tentative effort
before a final form for activity is discovered is bound to be tremen-
dous. Nor is it with extraordinary ability alone that we are con-
cerned. How about the pupil who may be just a little above the
average in some trade, who would find happiness in self-expression,
but who is doomed to discontent because he was never given a chance
to discover himself until it was too late?
Opinions may differ as to whether we can develop efficiency
in any trade by training pupils in the seventh and eighth years of
the course. There may be debate as to whether children of thirteen
are old enough or mature enough to select their life occupation. But
what argument can be advanced against giving them an acquaint-
ance with many different kinds of activity?commercial, industrial,
and the like?so that their choice of a vocation shall be made not
in spite of their ignorance of all, but because of an actual, if limited,
experience of work in each of the vocations? Let them learn and know
the different trades, so that, knowing, they shall be able later to exer-
cise a free choice. Let us eliminate, as far as we can, the accidental
determination of a life pursuit.
If our seventh and eighth years were converted into an experi-
mental period, pupils would soon come to find value in these final
years of the course. And if, when the choice had been carefully made,
an added year were given to the elementary schools, so that a pupil
might receive simple training in his work, we should be producing
efficient graduates, with choices rationally made and with an equip-
ment that would increase their wage-earning power. In short, we
should be laying the foundations for happiness and competency.
Incidentally, we should be holding a greater number of pupils for a
longer period in our schools.
Is there the variety of demand that is presupposed by our
statement of the needs of the situation? Is it true that pupils in our
seventh and eighth years have decided preferences for pursuits,
for which no training whatever is given in our elementary schools?
In order to determine this, a study was made of 2552 boys and girls
in the seventh and eighth years of Public School 62, Intermediate.
This school receives pupils from the 6B classes of seven neighboring
schools. Almost all the children are Jewish. Each child was told
to write a letter to the principal of the school, covering these points :
1. What do you intend to do when you go out into life?
2. Why do you make this selection?
3. If you could begin at once to prepare for this pursuit
what would you like to take up?
ELECTIVE COURSES. 209
The idea was to secure a statement of,?
1. Choice.
2. Reasons.
3. Pupils' ideas of content of courses.
Before any attempt is made to present the results of this study,
one fact must be made clear. The mere choice of a certain vocation
on the part of the pupil should not mean that such vocation is neces-
sarily to be followed by him. Guidance is more important than
choice. The selections here indicated were made under conditions
which made it impossible for children to have discovered themselves.
They were judging relative values, as will be seen, not in terms of
their own powers but largely in terms of the degrees of desirability
of the work they intended to engage in. The point to bear in mind,
however, is that with a thorough-going academic course, wishes
at all events, have already been registered in their minds.
In order to make the choice more intelligent, the words Academic,
Industrial, and Commercial were used and carefully explained to all
the pupils.
TABLE 1.?CHOICE OF VOCATIONS.
Academic Industrial Commercial Totals
Boys  396 273 440 1109
Girls  370 320 741 1443
772 599 1181 2552
Assuming that we had a perfect academic course, we should
then be supplying the needs of 772 out of 2552 pupils, 30 per cent.
In this particular section of the city there are many " business schools"
which turn out as from a hopper, stenographers and bookkeepers
often with one year's training or less. Such schools meet the needs
of 46 per cent of the pupils. The remaining 24 per cent of the pupils
wish industrial work, and the only agency in the seventh and eighth
years, outside of the Vocational Schools for Boys and for Girls
(where car fare is a deterrent factor), is the course in woodwork and
hand-sewing, with a little training in sewing on a foot-driven machine.
What are the considerations that influence pupils in their choice
of a vocation? What is the occupation they wish to follow, prepara-
tion for which involves study in the courses indicated?
The second of these investigations is extremely interesting as
affording an insight into the definiteness of the selection made by
pupils.
210 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
TABLE 2.
Among the 396 boys selecting an academic course, these
ambitions are to be noted,?
Architect  4
Astronomer  2
Artist  2
Chemist  3
Civil Engineer  19
Civil Service  16
Doctor  65
Electrical Engineer  2
Forester  1
Lawyer  76
Literary Man  4
Musician  4
Optometrist  1
Orator  1
Pharmacist  19
Philosopher  1
Rabbi  1
Surgeon  2
Teacher  45
Veterinary Surgeon  1
Total  269
The remaining 127 will be accounted for in another way.
TABLE 3.
Among the 376 girls selecting an academic course these am-
bitions are to be noted,?
Teacher  220
Physician  12
Nurse  10
Dentist  2
Music Teacher  6
Librarian   17
Teacher of Athletics  2
Lawyer  16
Author  5
Artist  3
Teacher of Drawing  2
Pharmacist  2
Musician  2
Total  300
The remaining 76 will be accounted for in another way.
ELECTIVE COURSES. 211
TABLE 4.
Among the 273 boys selecting an industrial course these ambi-
tions are to be noted,?
Carpenter  23
Electrician  20
Civil Engineer  64
Machinist  10
Plumber  8
Printer   12
Telegrapher  5
Designer  6
Surveyor  4
Diamond Setter  1
Farmer  4
Mechanician  4
Letter Carrier  1
Post Office Clerk  1
Artist  11
Builder  4
Machine Designer  1
Factory Owner  1
Furniture Maker  1
Inventor  1
Tailor  1
Teacher of Manual Training  2
Wool Manufacturer  1
Engineer  6
Automobile Industry  1
Pattern making  2
Cloak and Suit Cutter  2
Mechanical Engineer...   1
Electrical Engineer  5
Jeweler  1
Chauffeur  2
Forester  2
Bookbinder  3
Cabinetmaker  10
Motion Picture Operator   1
Mining Engineer  1
Ironworker  1
Total  232
The remaining 41 will be accounted for in another way.
212 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
TABLE 5.
Among the 326 girls selecting an industrial course the following
ambitions are to be noted,?
Dressmaker   143
Milliner  75
Milliner and Dressmaker  22
Designer '  34
Teacher of Cooking  2
Photographer  1
Nurse  3
Artist  4
Embroiderer  9
Embroidery Designer  1
Librarian  6
Total   280
The remaining 46 will be accounted for in another way.
TABLE 6.
Among the 440 boys selecting a commercial course, the follow-
ing ambitions are to be noted,?
Grocer  1
Florist  1
Jeweler  1
Salesman  81
Traveling Salesman  82
Bookkeeper  186
Stenographer  69
Office Clerk  6
Bartender  1
Reporter  1
Public Accountant  2
Banker  3
Typewriter  4
Letter Carrier  2
Post Office Clerk  2
Bank Clerk  7
Shipping Clerk  3
Foreman
Wholesale Dry Goods
Jewelry Business
Commissioner of Deeds
Telegrapher
Stenographer, Typewriter and Bookkeeper
Broker
To know how to pay workmen
Total  440
ELECTIVE COURSES. 213
TABLE 7.
Among the 741 girls selecting a commercial course the following
ambitions are to be noted,?
Bookkeeper  262
Saleswoman  25
Typewriter  30
Stenographer  39
Bookkeeper, Typewriter, and Stenographer  51
Cashier  2
Office Assistant  6
Bank Clerk  1
Bookkeeper and Typewriter  22
Bookkeeper and Stenographer  4
Stenographer and Typewriter  97
Buyer  7
Clerk  1
Composer  1
Traveling saleswoman  1?
Total  559
The remaining 182 will be accounted for in another way.
Were the courses of various kinds given to the children of the
seventh and eighth years it is probable that choices would be
entirely different. Moreover, were the teachers afforded an oppor-
tunity to observe children at work in the various courses they would
be able to add to their original judgment of aptitude the results of
their observation, and so might make intelligent suggestions to
influence choice. For it is to be noted that with a definite aim in
view, children have selected the wrong course.
In some instances, the choice indicated clearly that the child
had made a selection and still was entirely wrong in conception as to
the nature of the course.
This was true in the following cases:
Academic Industrial Commercial
Boys  4 3 6
Girls  0 0 0
In some cases the choice was made and no aim at all was stated:
Academic Industrial Commercial
Bovs  0 0 0
Girls  4 0 14
214 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The mere fact of personal preference sufficed as a reason in
many cases:
Academic Industrial Commercial
Boys  1 1 0
Girls  46 20 128
The wish of parents was frequently cited as the only reason for
the choice. The numbers are:
Academic Industrial Commercial
Boys  11 11 21
Girls  9 6 22
A general liking for the content of the course was occasionally
cited as a reason:
Academic Industrial Commercial
Boys  30 14 0
Girls  19 7 0
In some cases the selection was based on the child's aptitude for
such phases of the work as had already been taken up in the regular
course:
Academic Industrial Commercial
Boys  0 0 2
Girls  0 6 3
The desire to help parents in their work was cited as a reason:
Academic Industrial Commercial
Boys  0 I 1
Girls  0 0 2
Miscellaneous reasons were given as follows:
Academic i Industrial
To lead a useful life I 1
Course is short j
Desire to be happy \
Because of health j
Work is easy j .. j .. 1
Salary is good j 2 j .. I 9
Course is practical I .. j .. I 2
Step to higher work j
Postpones need of final choice.... j 1
Commercial
18
1
3
1
ELECTIVE COURSES. 215
An interesting study was made of what the pupils should like
to have the various courses include:
Academic Course
Boys Girls
Mathematics  102 240
Grammar  2
Spelling  9
Latin  50 89
Music  3 15
Current Events  1
How to overcome obstacles in life  1
How to use surgical instruments  1
Drawing  14
French    179 1
Chemistry  19
German  45 1
Modern Languages  43 63
English      72 254
Spanish    18
History  32 56
Geography  33 1
Reading  2 1
Medicine  25
Biology    7
Civics  5
Law    31
Hygiene  16 2
Physiology  1
Penmanship  6
Contracts  2
Botany  5
Greek  15
Astronomy  1
Art  1
Italian ,  5
Russian '   1
Debating  2
Science  2
Industrial Course
Boys
Surveying  2
Plumbing  2
Languages  5
Arithmetic  113
Grammar    1
Agriculture  1
Botany   2
Penmanship  8
Latin  5
German  17
216 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Boys
French  19
Geography  23
History  6
Spanish  7
English  56
Salesmanship  3
Art  2
Electricity  13
Carpentry  11
Machine Work  10
Mechanical Drawing  22
Free Hand Drawing  15
Woodwork  24
Science    22
Designing  5
Printing  3
Astronomy  1
Architecture   2
Bookbinding  1
Foundry Work  2
Metal Work  1
Tailoring  1
Woodturning  3
Geometry  4
Engineering  2
Algebra  1
Painting  1
Greek  1
Polish  1
Russian  1
Turkish  1
Spelling  5
Reading  1
Commercial Course
English  137
Mathematics  172
Penmanship  81
Geography  38
Commercial Law  2
History  12
Science  2
Drawing  3
German  16
Letter Writing ?  10
Geometry  1
Designing  1
French  33
Spanish  20
Buying    5
Salesmanship  31
Physics  1
ELECTIVE COURSES. 217
Botany  1
Italian  2
Dutch  1
Languages  12
Bookkeeping  59
Typewriting  35
Stenography  65
Algebra  1
Designing  2
Spelling  13
A similar study of the content of commercial and industrial
courses as judged by girls has not been tabulated, owing to circum-
stances which lead us to question the value of the data.
It is interesting to note how definite is the demand. There is
little or no suggestion of basic preparation, of a training larger than
the need of the occupation itself. An ordinary trade school or a
private business school will give the narrow work desired by these
pupils. It requires a larger view of social and economic needs to
build upon these desires of the children, a broad, fundamental
preparedness making for greater efficiency in any particular vocation.
How can this be done in a school of the type of Public School 62,
Manhattan?
It may be well to make clear at the outset that an intermediate
school offers many opportunities for organization which do not
exist in the regular grades of an elementary school. The num-
ber of pupils in the seventh and eighth years is much larger; in
this school almost 3000 pupils are enrolled in the last two years of
the course. There are three shops, three kitchens, two sewing rooms,
a typewriting room, two science rooms, and one laboratory. There
is space for the equipment of special rooms for the various industries
as they are taught.
The following plan of organization is suggested:
1. Secure from the principals of 6B schools a detailed statement
of the special aptitudes and weaknesses of pupils entering the inter-
mediate school. Classify new admissions on the basis of these
reports so as to secure a certain degree of homogeneity in the com-
position of each class.
2. Institute tests of a general nature in the 7A grade, to deter-
mine general intelligence, manual skill, power of judgment in practical
situations, etc. Tabulate all such findings for future reference.
Miinsterberg tests or others of a similar nature may be used to
furnish a basis for teachers' judgments.
3. Beginning with the 7A grade and extending through the
8A grade, courses should be established in electric-wiring, sheet
metal work, wood-turning, leather work, etc., for boys, and in
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
dressmaking, millinery, embroidering, machine work, etc., for girls.
Each course should extend over a period of nine weeks, thus affording
a series of six courses. All pupils should be required to take each
course in turn. Time schedules should be so arranged that at least
eight hours a week may be devoted to the special courses. No
attempt should be made to do more than acquaint the pupil with
the fundamental simple processes underlying the various occupations.
4. Every pupil should be carefully observed while at work and
a detailed record kept of his or her proficiency in the course. The
work should be so planned as to make data available with regard to
general adaptability, rather than to give skill in the occupation as
such.
5. During the 8A grades, conferences should be held between
parent, pupil and teacher, the results of the tests and the records of
the course should be carefully examined, and the pupil should be
directed into the course for which he appears to be suited and in
which all conditions combine to make it probable that he will become
efficient.
It is in the 8B grades that the special training should begin.
Small groups should be formed for each course. Intricate processes
cannot be taught nor can work of a heavy nature be undertaken.
One of the objects sought in the studies of the Vocation Bureau of
Boston is stated thus, "To analyze the relation of aptitudes, interests,
and habits to modern industrial demands, and thus lay an adequate
foundation for a system of training regardful of social as well as
economic needs." Whatever training is given should be along
lines determined by some such study as this. The courses should
be checked up constantly by the results of occupational investigations
and must be organized with an ever-present ideal of sympathetic
vocational guidance.
Pupils who wish to enter a classical high school with the idea of
graduating should be enrolled at the "beginning of the 8B grade in
classes organized for such pupils. Special attention should be given
to technical grammar, to the fundamental principles underlying
arithmetical operations, to oral English with particular reference
to the technique of correct speech, to penmanship, to the mechanics
of written language, spelling, punctuation, etc., and to teaching
pupils how to study.
Pupils who intend to complete the full course in a commercial
high school should be enrolled at the beginning of the 8B grade in
classes organized for such pupils. Special attention should be given
to correct oral English, as regards both the technique of speech and
freedom from foreign idioms; to letter writing; to study of business
forms; to an explanation of the principles underlying the various
ELECTIVE COURSES. 219
kinds of business to which arithmetic applications are made, such as
commission, discount, insurance, etc.; to commercial geography, and
to modes of manufacture.
Pupils who intend to complete the full course in a manual
training trade high school should be enrolled at the beginning of
the 8A grade in classes organized for such pupils. Special attention
should be given to correct oral English, as regards both the technique
of speech and freedom from foreign idioms; to mechanical and free-
hand drawing, to the fundamental arithmetical operations; to simple
constructional geometry; to elementary algebra; to science; to
modes of manufacture in the various industries; to shop-work.
Girls who intend to complete the full course in a technical
high school should be enrolled at the beginning of the 8B grade in
classes organized for such pupils. Special attention should be
given to sewing (hand and machine), embroidering, with applications
to dressmaking and millinery; to cooking and a study of food-values;
to home-making in general. For the last named work, use should be
made of the model flat built for this specific purpose.
This will leave a large number of pupils who, under ordinary
circumstances, would leave school at the end of the eighth year,
or when they had attended a half year or more at a high school.
During the year and a half, from the beginning of the 7B grade, the
aptitudes of these pupils have been tested at the different occupational
activities carried on; their general intelligence and their special
powers have been carefully noted. A study should also have been
made of their home conditions, the needs of the family, etc. The
principal or competent teachers should have held interviews with
the parents with a view to arriving at some knowledge of the pupils'
aims and those of his family. The "vocational guide" should pro-
ceed to suggest what line of work the pupil should take up.
If there is still uncertainty as to what the ultimate choice
is to be, the academic course should be recommended. For those
intending to enter business, the commercial course should be urged,
while the industrial course should be recommended to those who wish
to enter one of the trades.
The term in these courses should be one and a half years. In
this way, for pupils who ordinarily would leave school at the end
of the eighth year, we shall be adding a year to their school career,
giving them a quality and a degree of preparation which will soon
convince parents that the extra time spent in school is more than
compensated for by the increased efficiency,?yes, and the increased
earning power of the child who has this more extended preparation.
It may be urged that parents will not be able to afford to keep their
children at school for the longer period. This may very well be true.
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Still it must be borne in mind that where legislation has prolonged
the compulsory school attendance period, parents have found the
means to support their children at school. When the grade at which
pupils may apply for employment certificates was made 7 A instead
of 5B, parents resigned themselves to the inevitable and adapted
themselves to the situation as best they could. Under the plan set
forth, however, the force which compels the longer stay in school is
not exercised by a law but by the self-interest of pupil and parent.
Is it not reasonable to expect that once the work has justified itself,
parents will be more than willing to have their children remain in
school for the extra year?
Many graduates from our elementary schools enter a business
school for a training of a half year. The commercial course which is
here suggested, will keep many pupils in the school and the city will
for the first time be meeting a need which has for many years been
clearly expressed by the people of the community.
The records show that large numbers of the pupils who enter our
high schools from the elementary school, stay in the secondary
institutions for a year or so and then drop out. A certain percentage
of this "mortality" has been rightly attributed to the inflexible
course of study, to poor teaching, to the unpreparedness of the pupil
for independent study. But all the discharges cannot be traced
to any one of these causes or to any combination of them. In many
cases parents are so situated that they can afford to keep the boy or
girl at school for one year, but no longer. Under the present system
the only place for such pupils to go to is the high school. They are
not really a part of the student body, they cause an unhealthy
condition as regards size of classes in the first two terms, they call
for large and expensive buildings, they create problems of manage-
ment, of organization, of discipline, of supervision, which inevitably
reduce the efficiency of the school. The pupils who have come to
the high school for the purpose of completing the entire course are
to a certain extent neglected, because of the great number of tran-
sients on the register.
If the ninth year which is here recommended were adopted,
such pupils would not clog and clutter up the administrative and
supervisory channels of our high schools. They would not be sent
out into the world with such inadequate equipment as must neces-
sarily result from a truncated course. For they all have had one-
fourth of some subjects, one-third of others, one-half of still others.
Their work ends nowhere. They have no general culture, they have
no special training. In the ninth year, however, they will receive
a complete course. True, they cannot get as much training as would
be theirs were they to complete the entire course in an academic, a
ELECTIVE COURSES. 221
manual training, or a commercial high school. But they will be far
more efficient than the derelict high school student who leaves at
the end of one year; who does not know what he wants to do, or
who, if he does know, cannot do it because he has had no training
for it.
The planning of the work for such courses calls for much careful
thought and systematic preparation. A body of opinion should
first be gathered from men of affairs representing different outlooks,
different occupations, etc. This may be considered the norm by
which to test any course that may be evolved by educators. In
every case, the course should be adapted to the community, and due
regard should be had for the kind of pupils the course is intended
to serve.
There may be some doubt whether a purely academic course
should find a place in a ninth-year school, the aim of which is to
increase vocational efficiency. As a matter of fact, this course is
intended merely to relieve the situation as it exists in our classical
high schools today. Arrangements should be made whereby pupils
may be transferred from the academic course to either the industrial
or the commercial, as soon as the more special demand makes itself
felt.
The academic course should include literature, current history,
business conditions, business arithmetic, science, civics, music, and
physical training. If possible there should be work in ethics through
organized activities involving personal, civic, and social service.
The commercial course should include business English, office
practice, business arithmetic, commercial geography and bookkeeping.
The industrial course should cover for boys and for girls a
complete course in the occupation, the training to extend over
the full year and a half. In no course should work in English,
oral and written, and in civics, be omitted.
The details of these courses must be worked out with the greatest
care. Much preparatory work has already been done. Analyses
have been made of some of the industries, and the processes have
been reduced to their simplest elements. We are coming to under-
stand better the principles that must govern the elimination of
non-essentials from the traditional academic and commercial courses.
All this, however, is a matter of time. The experiments will be ten-
tative, and there must always be the frankest kind of self-criticism.
But in work of this kind lies what seems to be a constructive
attempt to meet one phase of the problem of elementary school
education in its relation to the efficiency of the individual and the
progress of the state.
