First National Conference on Race Betterment
=============================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.
Four hundred men and women, comprising the first representative group
of scientific experts ever gathered in America for that purpose, met in Battle
Creek, Michigan, January 8-12, 1914, to assemble evidence of race deterioration
and to consider methods of checking the downward trend of mankind. The
meeting was known as the First National Conference on Race Betterment.
Through the co-operation of the press, the objects and aims of the Conference
have been very widely disseminated and a resultant influence for better race
ideals is anticipated.
Already the effect of the Conference is apparent in Battle Creek where
popular interest in mental and physical efficiency was awakened by a series of
public school tests which showed a high percentage of defective children in all
The Conference had its inception in the efforts of four men, particularly
interested in race betterment, Rev. Newell Dwight Hillis, pastor of Plymouth
Church, Brooklyn, N. Y., Dr. J. H. Kellogg of the Battle Creek Sanitarium,
Sir Horace Plunkett, former minister of agriculture for Ireland, and Prof. Irving
Fisher of Yale University. At the invitation of a central committee chosen
largely by these men, fifty men and women of national prominence in the fields
of science and education consented to share in the program. Their addresses
together with open discussion of many of the points considered, represented
a very wide study of all phases of race degeneracy and the advocacy of many
ideas of reform. Some of the suggested methods of race improvement include
frequent medical examination of the well, outdoor life, temperance in diet,
biologic habits of living, open air schools and playgrounds, the encouragement
of rural life, the segregation or sterilization of defectives, the encouragement of
eugenic marriages by requiring medical certificates before granting licenses,
and the establishing of a eugenics registry for the development of a race of
human thoroughbreds.
NEWS AND COMMENT. 263
Among those having a share in the program were:?Rev. Newell Dwight
Hillis, Jacob Riis, Judge Ben B. Lindsey, Booker T. Washington, Dr. Victor
C. Vaughan, Dr. S. Adolplius Knopf, Dr. C. B. Davenport, Dr. J. N. Hurty,
the Very Reverend (Dean) Walter Taylor Sumner and many others of equal
prominence.
Some of the interesting statements of the Conference were as follows:?
"In order that the race may survive it will apparently be necessary to make
a eugenic selection of healthy mothers and to provide that the cost of bearing
and rearing children shall be equally shared by all."?Prof. J. McKeen Cattell,
editor Popular Science Monthly.
"It will be no easy task to improve the race to the point where there will
be no dependent children, but the elimination of the dependent child will be one
of the best indices of the superiority of otir national stock."?Dr. Gertrude E.
Hall, New York State Board of Charities.
Malta Fever Transmitted in Goats' Milk.
Scientists of the Bureau of Animal Industry have compiled a bulletin
is of practical interest to physicians, to farmers who raise goats, and to invalids
who have been prescribed goats' milk as a diet. Proofs have conclusively
established that the transmission of a fever known variously as "Malta," "mountain," "slow typhoid," or by certain other designations, to man is accomplished
by the milk of infected goats.
Careful observations in Texas and New Mexico show that the disease has
always made its appearance among people connected with goat raising. Entire
families have been taken sick with it on goat ranches. The sickness appears
usually after the kidding season, during the months of April, May, and June,
when the people are in closer contact with the animal. Observations have also
shown that just over the border in Mexico goat herders are not nearly so liable
to the disease. Conclusions have been drawn that this is not due to any natural
immunity but to the fact that the Mexicans always boil the milk before drinking it, while the Americans use it raw.
The general opinion has prevailed that the United States is free from Malta
fever and that the disease has only occurred through importations. However,
it now seems evident that Malta fever has existed in Texas and New Mexico
for at least twenty-five years. The fever takes its name from Great Britain's
island in the Mediterranean where the disease has been exceedingly prevalent
among British soldiers and sailors. Its occurrence in tropical and subtropical
localities has been noted in almost every country. A number of cases have been
reported among our soldiers who had just returned from the Philippine Islands.
Pasteurization of infected milk for twenty minutes at 145? F. is sufficient
to destroy the organism which transmits the disease. Therefore, milk pasteurized
for the destruction of typhoid and tuberculosis germs will also be free from the
Malta fever germ.
The symptoms in human beings are usually pronounced and give rise to a
more or less severe affection. The most striking symptom is an attack of fever
with periods of normal temperature. The duration of these periods varies considerably during the disease. The course of the disease may extend for from
six weeks up to a year and cases have even been observed in which relapses have
occurred for three years. In human beings the mortality is estimated at 3 per cent.
264 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Cases have been noted in goats that extended over a period of more than a year.
Although the disease has no active effect on the animals, its eradication must
be considered for public health and it is particularly important since there
has been a tendency recently among physicians to advise the drinking of goats'
milk for children and invalids.
Annual Convention of Religious Education Association.
The eleventh annual Convention of the Religious Education Association,
March 5-8, 1914, is to be given to the single topic of the Relation of Higher
Education to the Social Order. Educational experts and well known leaders in
the universities and colleges will present the reports on which they have been
working for the past year on the efficiency of the colleges in preparing young
people for the more exacting demands of modern social living. The interest of
the convention centers in the question whether the colleges are consciously training for the more complex civilization in which their graduates must live and
serve and especially whether these institutions succeed in developing moral
competency and leading to a religious interpretation of life. Four days will be
devoted to this study and one and a half days to the problems of instruction in
religion in the churches and Sunday Schools. The meetings will be held in New
Haven where the convention will be the guest of Yale University.
An especially notable array of speakers will address the evening meetings
in Woolsey Hall. Among the speakers are, John R. Mott; President A. Gandier,
of Knox College, Toronto; Charles S. Whitman, District Attorney of New
York; Governor Simeon Baldwin, of Connecticut; President William De
Witt Hyde; President Samuel A. Eliot; Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, of New York, and
Ex-president Taft. Programs may be obtained from the Religious Education
Association, Chicago, and all persons interested are invited to attend the convention.
Dr. Edmund B. Huey died December 30, 1913.
We learn with deep regret of the death at Connell, Washington, on December
30, 1913, of Dr. Edmund Burke Huey. Born December 1, 1870, Dr. Huey took
his A.B. degree at Lafayette in 1895 and his Ph.D. degree at Clark University in
1899. During the academic year 1901-02 he studied at Berlin and Paris. He
was professor of psychology and education in the University of Pittsburgh from
1904 to 1908. After spending the years 1909-11 as resident psychologist in the
Lincoln State School and Colony, Lincoln, 111., he engaged in psychoclinical
investigation at the Johns Hopkins Dispensary as Fellow by Courtesy in psychology and education, 1910-11, and assistant in psychiatry and lecturer on
mental development, 1911-12. In 1912 his failing health led him to the Pacific
Coast.
Dr. Huey's early death is the more to be regretted because he had already
accomplished valuable scientific work of a pioneer character, and it was to be
expected that his continued labors would have added measurably to our knowledge in the field of applied psychology. He was the author of several books,
among them being "The Psychology and Pedagogy of Reading" (1909), and
"Backward and Feebleminded Children" (1912). The latter book, which is
reviewed on page 261 of this issue, is one of the most important of the current
contributions to clinical psychology.
