The Hygiene of the School Child
=================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

By Lewis M. Terman, Ph.D., Associate Pro-
fessor of Education in Leland Stanford Junior University. New York:
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1913. Pp. xvii+417.
It is Professor Terman's opinion that the school is now aware of its re-
sponsibility for the conservation of the child. According to him, "The most
characteristic tendency of present-day education is its progressive socializa-
tion, the increasing extent to which society is utilizing the school as an instru-
ment for the accomplishment of its ends." His aim in this book is not to
present a program for the schools or to attempt to foist upon them a system of
hygiene and preventive treatment which he himself has applied. Rather it is
the much more reasonable aim of presenting to the reader a summary and
interpretation of literature relating to various phases of the question. The
success of his attempt will be appreciated by any one familiar with the material.
Commencing with the fundamental concept of growth, the author, by reviewing
the work and presenting the conclusions of experts in the field, shows how growth
proceeds,?how at certain stages it is accelerated and at others retarded and
how, because of these facts, methods of training should be modified. With a
physical organism poorly developed one would expect an unsatisfactory mental
condition, and one finds that "The conclusion, justified by the data, that physical
superiority usually accompanies mental superiority, is of the greatest practical
importance for education."
The chapter on physiological age is certainly not the least important section.
There is no doubt in the author's mind about the difficulty of the problem pre-
sented by the discrepancy between physiological and chronological age. Our
treatment of the child has usually been accorded on the basis of the latter but
now, "Closer investigations of the relations existing between the anatomical,
physiological, and mental ages is one of the urgent problems of educational
hygiene." In the light of the difference even now discovered we are compelled
to review the entire problem of the identical coeducation of the sexes and "In
deciding the boy's fitness for a given athletic sport, or for a certificate permitting
him to leave school to work in a mill, or even for instruction in a given grade,
the crucial question is not how long he has lived, but how far he has proceeded
toward maturity." In reference to this last statement the remark might be
made that if we consider physiological rather than chronological age we will
have eliminated the difficulty of determining the reliability of a parent's word
when he says his child has reached working age.
The disorders of growth, in the more or less artificial environment of our
schools, must receive more attention, not only from the parent and family
physician but also from the teacher; and every teacher should be trained to
observe the signs of the common dangers and to advise remedial treatment for
them. Gross deformities are easily recognized, but the effects of malnutrition,
aenemia, adenoids, enlarged tonsils or bad teeth as well as the handicap of
defective vision or hearing can less easily be noted. In their more serious forms,
(149)
150 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
however, they may be recognized by the teacher who has not been specially
trained. For the detection of the less serious forms we will have to make other
provision, and the day is not far distant when "a knowledge of the elements
of child hygiene will be regarded as of fundamental importance in the training
of every teacher."
To some who have pet theories the book may bring a shock, since the
author is not inclined to be excessively lenient when there is such an important
problem to handle. Several current opinions are dealt their death blow. Venti-
lation, that panacea for all the ills of the school, according to some of its most
enthusiastic advocates, is shown to be a vastly different problem from* what it
has usually been considered. It is no longer a question of the elimination of
carbon-dioxide or organic poisons, but one of "perflation" or the "movement
of air over the body." Curvature of the spine, the war-cry of those insisting
on the installation of new and various types of school furniture, is now found
due to abnormal or diseased conditions of the bones and only in a very secondary
degree, if at all, to the position assumed by the child during school work. Of
the theories overthrown the last to need mention is that of parental responsi-
bility,?"The first duty of the school is to feed its hungry pupils. The oft-
heard argument that the school has no concern with the child, except to educate
him, is now an anachronism. In its vocational instruction, play supervision,
moral education, health examinations, and medical clinics the school has once
for all cut loose from its moorings to the 'Three R's.' "
Despite the fact that the author presents his conclusions forcefully he is
decidedly sane and moderate, being fully aware of the difficulties. Hygiene is
not the only consideration; other conditioning factors of the mental make-up
are important. The organism in its inception must be healthy, or hygiene is
greatly handicapped. According to Professor Terman, eugenics as well as hygiene
is essential. Not only are the factors above mentioned to be considered, but
also "Many of the questions relating to this problem can never be settled until
they have been attacked on a broad scale by systematic and scientific methods
of research." With such an array of fact as is presented here and yet such
moderation in forming conclusions, the careful perusal of this book can be
strongly recommended to every teacher and administrative officer in public
school work
David Mitchell.
