The Hygiene of Eugenic Generation.1
=====================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1914, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VIII, No. 5. October 15, 1914
- !  /
By J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D.,
Director Psycho-educational Clinic, St. Louis Public Schools.
Eugenic or generative hygiene is preventive individual and race
hygiene raised to the nth. power. No measures for individual or
collective betterment are more fundamental than the hygiene of
generation. To be well born is the fundamental prerequisite of being
well bred. Generative hygiene contemplates not only the regulation
of the function of mating, but also the establishment of those condi-
tions which will insure normal healthy generative processes in the
father and mother. In addition to the requirement of eugenic
marriages, it is also necessary to safeguard the health and develop-
ment of the foetus. Moreover, since the prenatal and postnatal
child are one and the same indivisible person, we should not draw
the line of cleavage too sharply between the eugenical and euthenical
factors of development. An attempt to draw a sharp eugenic
line between, on the one hand, the hereditary prenatal factors, and on
the other hand, the environmental prenatal (congenital) and post-
natal factors of normal development is indefensible and pernicious.
In practice generative hygiene cannot be narrowly circumscribed
by academic distinctions, but must comprise all the orthogenic factors
which condition normal development prior to and during concep-
tion, during the period of gestation, (and possibly during the first
postnatal period of life, at least so far as concerns the item of
breast feeding). In this paper time limitation compels me to
restrict my remarks to the consideration of those hygienic measures,
the application of which will make for the improvement of the in-
born qualities of men, certainly as affects congenital fcraits, if not
the hereditary, in the narrow Galtonian sense of the latter term.
I shall state and attempt briefly to support four fundamental
theses.
1 An address delivered, in part, befor# the Eugenics Section of tha Pittsburgh Academy of
Arts and Sciences, May 15, 1914.
(121)
122 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
1. Society should prevent degenerate or anti-eugenical matings.
It is alleged that about 15 per cent of the present generation produces
50 per cent of the next generation, and that this producing minority
represents the poorer, lower or eugenically inferior elements of the
population. Without conceding that this estimate is strictly correct,
it is within the bounds of truth to say that all enlightened students
of race betterment are agreed that palpable degenerates should not
be permitted to marry. But we are not all agreed that the eugenically
unfit can be diagnosed infallibly, or even to a measurably satisfac-
tory extent. So far as relates to mental degenerates there are now
in general use two methods of study by which it is hoped to make
eugenic diagnoses:?first, the hereditary study of ancestral strains
by the methods of heredity research; and secondly, the psychological
observation or testing or study of the level of intelligence and of
mental deviation.
Present day heredity studies are usually conducted with either
a distinct Galtonian or Mendelian bias. In the United States the
Mendelian bias is unmistakable. Judging by the recent publications
of various American Mendelians, feeblemindedness, insanity, epilepsy
and other anti-eugenic mental conditions can now be subsumed under
the Mendelian formula, and almost unerringly explained by it. Some
American Mendelians indeed go as far as to assert that, given cer-
tain conditions of ancestral strains, they can now forecast with almost
mathematical precision the relative incidence in future generations
of normality, feeblemindedness, insanity, or epilepsy. To these and
other claims of the American school of Mendelian enthusiasts, I am
still compelled to maintain the attitude of the discreet Missourian.
I shall in no way here concern myself with pointing out the confusing,
blundering, slipshod, inaccurate, unscientific ways in which many?
fortunately not all?of the published heredity charts have been
worked up and interpreted. I need merely refer to the recent
exhaustive analysis and annihilating criticism of Heron2 which,
unless refuted by other means than innuendo, rhetoric or mere denial,
invalidate the results of many of the American investigations of
feeblemindedness, epilepsy, and insanity. While I cannot quite
subscribe to all of Heron's conclusions, my observations of the work
of heredity field-workers and my own study of the heredity of the
mentally abnormal cases coming to my clinic, have convinced me
that the prevailing methods of gathering heredity data have been no
less unscientific than Heron has found to be the methods of tabulating
the data and interpreting the charts. It should be emphasized that
* David Heron. Mendelism and the Problem of Mental Defect. I. A Criticism of Recent
American Work. Eugenics Laboratory Publications, London, 1913.
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 123
the accurate scientific determination of the etiological heredity factors
of mental abnormalities is frequently just as difficult, abstruse, and
technical as the scientific differential diagnosis of bodily diseases
or mental deviations. The one essential preliminary to making
reliable hereditary, no less than medical or psychological, diagnoses
is prolonged training in the scientific methods of collecting, examining,
analyzing, and interpreting facts?in other words, a thorough ground-
ing in the canons of scientific induction. Many heredity charts are
based on the sheerest guess work, on data gathered by persons quite
lacking in scientific discrimination and quite unskilled in the art of
hereditary, psychological, or medical diagnosis. It is one thing to
send out field workers, usually teachers, nurses, and social workers
who are novices in the methodology of scientific research, to interview
parents, relatives, friends, enemies, clergymen, physicians, and court
officers with regard to the mental condition of the contemporary or
ancestral relatives of the cases under investigation; and then on the
basis of the field-workers' reports, have someone else who has probably
never seen or examined a single relative, construct awe-inspiring
heredity charts, with a multitude of squares and circles, definitely
and most minutely labeled and evaluated. But it is quite a different
matter to assume that because certain symbols have been stamped
on a piece of cloth, the correctness of the marking or the accuracy
of the hearsay or snapshot estimations and diagnoses has thereby
been conclusively established. Once the accuracy of the heredity
diagnosis has been established, it is quite a different thing to assume
that the condition of feeblemindedness or insanity found in a given
forebear is the all-sufficient or determining cause of the feebleminded-
ness or insanity found in the "tainted'' offspring. Unfortunately this
assumption is usually made by the average field-worker without
further ado. The presence of feeblemindedness in the direct or indirect
ancestral lines is regarded as the sufficient explanation of the feeble-
mindedness found in the descendants. This reasoning is based on
the fallacious assumption that what goes before must necessarily
be the cause of that which follows, that when an antecedent resembles
a consequent it must be the producing agent of the consequent,
although, as is well known, there may be no causal relation whatever
between sequential events. The fact is, there is frequently a plurality
of causes responsible for any case of biologic variation, and no one
but an experienced expert?and quite frequently not even the expert?
will be able to determine indubitably which is cause or which is
accidental antecedent or accompaniment. The apparent accuracy
of many heredity charts is wholly deceptive and misleading. In my
own clinic, I am constantly confronted with such cases as this: a
124 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
feebleminded child with diphtheria or typhoid at, say, three, and with
a grandfather or uncle or cousin who was alleged to be "feebleminded,"
"queer" or "peculiar". What is the prime etiological factor here?
How should such a case be charted? As inherited, or acquired
feeblemindedness? There is no unequivocal reply. Let us disabuse
ourselves of the smug belief that heredity diagnoses are so easy that
they can be made by anyone, or that we have located the causative
agent when we have put a certain square or circle upon a chart.
There are hundreds of thousands of mentally abnormal individuals
in whom the etiological factors lie concealed in deepest obscurity.
It is the duty of every sincere eugenist relentlessly to combat careless
or unscientific heredity work wherever found?while it is also his
duty to commend the really good work done?because it is being
accepted at its face value by the uncritical, and because it is therefore
leading to the enactment of precipitate legislation which in the end
must bring discredit upon the science of eugenics.
The absurd belief that any so-called heredity field worker is
competent to make scientific diagnoses after taking short courses on
heredity field work, is akin to the dogma which has been promulgated
in certain quarters, namely, that Binet testers are thoroughly qualified
to make reliable psychological diagnoses of cases after taking a summer
course on subnormal children and mental tests. This doctrine is
responsible for the claims, made on the alleged basis of scientific
tests (Binet tests by amateurs),3 that over 2 per cent of all elementary
school children, that from 50 to 100 per cent (and nearer 100 per cent
than 50 per cent) of voluntary prostitutes and juvenile delinquents
and rather more than less than 50 per cent of adult criminals, are
feebleminded. As a matter of fact, there is no psychic measuring
rod in existence by which we can automatically or mechanically
identify accurately high grade mental degenerates or defectives, by
which we can unerringly distinguish between high grade feeble-
minded and backward cases, and by which we can determine whether
the abnormality in high grade defectives is or is not anti-eugenic in
character.4 But it is precisely the eugenically unfit persons who
grade nearest the standard of mental normality whom it is most
necessary to identify, because these individuals are the most numer-
ous, they are the most prolific breeders and constitute the gravest
social and moral offenders. It is quite easy to identify the lowest
' For a discussion of what is meant by amateurs in this field of work, see "The Mental Health
of the School Child." New Haven, Yale University Press, 1914.
* In spite of the fact that this statement has been made on the best evidence a number of times
during the last few years we still (December, 1913) read pronouncements by reputable physicians
and psychologists like the following: "We recognize as feebleminded anyone who doesn't pass the
twelve-year Binet test." Think of the army of high school and even college students who would
be condemned to feeblemindedness on the basis of this arbitrary dictum!
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 125
grades of defectives by existing methods, but they are usually sterile
and hence set no eugenic problem. Not only so; it is quite probable
that many normal persons are carriers of transmissible degenerate
strains, but there is at present no infallible method, whether psy-
chological, hereditary, or medical, by which these individuals can be
identified. Moreover, germ plasm which originally was eugenically
fit probably may become impaired by external causes, so that domi-
nants may be transformed into recessives, thus inverting the Mende-
lian laws. Even if Mendelism can be shown to apply, so complex is
the mechanism of heredity on Mendelian principles that with only
ten pairs of characteristics it is possible to form upward of 1000
kinds of germinal cells in one million different combinations. There-
fore, while we all believe in the dominant force of heredity and in the
teachings of negative eugenics so far as concerns the prevention of
palpably degenerate matings, the ordinary field worker and the
ordinary mental tester are frequently utterly unable reliably to
differentiate between the eugenically fit and unfit, and even the
scientific experts in heredo-biology and heredo-psychology are quite
unable infallibly to identify all the high grade cases of eugenic unfit-
ness or all cases of pure simplex or duplex normal stock. Nor do I
know that there is any experimental or scientific warrant for the
dictum that "weakness should marry strength." In the first place,
I do not know that there is any authority who can make out an infal-
lible chart of the eugenically weak or the eugenically strong traits
which exist in the parties of a given marriage union, whether normal
or high grade defective. In the second place, I know of no one who
can guarantee that when weakness marries strength, the progeny
will all be normal or that the weak traits will not eventually crop out
as recessives in later generations.
The cautions which I have sounded against slipshod hereditary
and psychological diagnoses may be reinforced by reference to a
recent clinic case:
A young man of Russian-German descent, 21 years 1 month old
at the time of the examination in January, 1914, the fourth of six
children, born in Pennsylvania, removed to Germany at the age of
six, remained there eleven years, returning to America four years
ago.
The history of the case indicates that he was born on time, but
the birth conditions were difficult, requiring an instrumental delivery
after 48 hours of labor; that animation had to be established by
slapping; that the mother was very nervous during gestation; that
the child was very puny for some time after birth; that he was bottle-
fed; that he was unable for some time to assimilate various artificial
126 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
foods, but finally began to grow rapidly on Mellin's Food and Swiss
condensed milk.
At four he had whooping-cough, and hurt his head severely by
running against a hinge on a door, which rendered him unconscious
for a while, but he apparently recovered. At five he fell into a lime
kiln, but only his hands were slightly burned before he was rescued.
Somewhat later, after his removal to Germany, his caretaker reported
that he had had a strange spell: crying out in his sleep, kicking, and
jumping out of bed in a frenzy of excitement, although apparently
unconscious throughout the entire performance. Spells of crying
and kicking, without any attempt to wander about in the room,
recurred several times during the following two weeks. (The boy
reported that he had had an epileptic seizure at a much later date.)
A short time after these occurrences he was vaccinated. After the
operation his arm swelled greatly, and became discolored with dark
blue spots. He was obliged to have it bandaged and supported on a
table for a week. At seven he had measles; and at fourteen it was
believed that he practiced self-abuse for a time.
As a child and a youth he was more or less queer: he never took
any interest in games or sports, and never had any intimate boyhood
friendships. He had a continuous record of outbursts, beating and
slapping his sisters, engaging in fights and brawls with comrades and
teachers, of lying and stealing, and of bragging and boasting.
His relations with his mother were almost always strained.
His school history is one record of incompatibility and maladjust-
ment. He entered a kindergarten in America at about six; the next
year (in 1898) he removed to Germany and entered a second kinder-
garten, from which he was dismissed because of unruly conduct.
In 1899 he had a private tutor for about a year. In 1900 he was
placed^in a boarding school, but was removed because he "could not
fit in with the other pupils," and was kept at home for a while. In
1902, in a boys' boarding school, he proved to be stubborn, wilful,
cowardly, morally obtuse, disobedient and disrespectful to teachers
and elders. In 1903 he was permitted to remain less than a year in a
higher school for a small group of select boys because of his thieving
habits. He explained that he " stole because the others stole from
me." In 1903 and 1904 he was placed in another private school.
Here he did his best work because he became attached to one of the
instructors, apparently because the latter gave him money, bought
him toys and candy, and aided him unfairly in his lessons. At this
time he manifested a desire to become a chauffeur, and rebelled
against the scholastic and religious training. His parents suspected
that there were secret understandings or clandestine relations between
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 127
the instructor and the boy, and therefore removed him to a private
school of the aristocracy, where most of the teachers were young
students. Here he was always getting into trouble and indulging
in fist fights. He knocked a young teacher flat, because he claimed
he did him an injustice. The director then dismissed him on the
ground that he was not normal. He was returned home, and
spent the summer of the same year (1906) in an informal vacation
school. Here he led a free, natural life, without espionage, studying
nature. Here he also had his first romance. The young girl proposed
that he kiss her, but he did not do so because, as he alleged, he "did
not know just how." This youthful romance upset the routine of
his life for some time: he could neither study nor work, for "he was
always thinking of her."
While staying at home he was constantly clashing with his
mother. She punished him severely (he was "beaten until black and
blue"), taunted him for his failures, nagged at him and forced him
to apply himself to intellectual pursuits. He was so nervous and
irritable that he could not endure his sister's piano practice, and
accordingly started to demolish the instrument with a hammer. He
would waylay the postman to see if any school circulars were sent to
his parents. He ran away, and when the police were notified he tried
to kill himself by hanging by a cord attached to a gas fixture. He was
sent to an asylum for the insane, where he remained for six weeks,
and where he was examined by three physicians, who pronounced
him "not demented" but deficient and in need of protective oversight,
and who counselled him to control his temper.
In 1909 he was sent to a preparatory day school, but was unable
to make his examinations, "because he could not concentrate." In
spite of this uninterrupted record of maladaptation in various school
environments, the mother reports that she did not see anything wrong
or abnormal with him until the age of fourteen: the father, however,
reports that he was not normal from the age of eight. He is said to
have completed higher mathematics and ancient and modern history,
and to read English, German and French, although he has "no
aptitude for languages." At this time he again expressed a desire to
become a chauffeur.
In 1910 he returned with his parents to America. His first
exploit here was to run away from a boarding-house in which he had
been placed under kindly supervision. For some time he led the life
of a vagabond, sleeping in parks and out-houses, and getting his food
no one knew where. He broke into a house in New Jersey and was
sent to jail. On his release he joined "robber bands" and came in
contact with immoral women. He was finally taken in hand by the
128 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Salvation Army, in New York City, and was sent to a half-brother,
a landscape architect, in Minneapolis, who found a place for him as a
clerk; but one day he struck his brother's wife because she would
not let him wear her husband's new coat. He was thereupon placed
in a private boarding-house, but soon enlisted in the navy. At the
Norfolk Training School he got along fairly well until he began to
steal?"but not," as he affirmed, "before the others stole from me."
Here he was court-martialed several times for insubordination. On
the battle-ship Minnesota he alleges that he was constantly teased
and bullied by the sailors. On ship he was in disgrace most of the
time. His entire income disappeared in fines. He talked freely of
his "scrapes" to the social worker, of sailors clubbing officers, of his
getting possession of money from drunken sailors, of his attempt to
desert with another man at Vera Cruz. Finally he knocked a lad
down because, as he says, "he stole from me," was court-martialed and
dishonorably discharged in July, 1913?after about two and a half
years of service. The boys on the battle-ship took up a collection and
sent him to his parents.
His record since his return home has been one of insolence,
disobedience, defiance, unemployment, and loafing. He left his first
place, where he was taking care of a garden and a horse, because he
was once asked to bring someone home at 11:00 P. M. After a week
at home loafing and job-hunting he secured a job in a club-house
which he held for three weeks. This was followed by a week's lay-
off at home. Then he worked one week each in two hotels. After
holding another job for about a week he returned home in September.
Then he disappeared for about five weeks. On his return he said he
had been taking care of chickens in a country place. Here he said
two men threatened to shoot him. He now took a correspondence
course in railroad engineering, but made no progress because he
"failed to apply himself." Then he wanted to enter an automobile
school, but clashed with his mother, became insolent, struck her in
the face (she spat on him) and knocked his father down when he
interfered. For their safety he was arrested on November 6th and
incarcerated in the city jail for three weeks. He was released on
parole for one year, with instructions to stay away from his parents.
His parents supported him in a boarding-house in another part of the
city. His mother then arranged to have him enter an automobile
school. He backed out at first, finally entered the school, but at the
end of the first day came home drunk, furiously angry because he had
been allowed only $5.00 instead of $8.00 a week for his lodging and
board, and threatened to kill his father.
At this point the aid of the psychological clinic was invoked.
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 129
The anthropometric examination showed that he was under-developed,
but only to a slight extent, in standing and sitting (particularly)
stature, weight, strength of grip, and in lung capacity. He had a
number of carious teeth. On the mental side, however, he was very
considerably retarded. His rating by the Binet tests was 10.6.
His memory span was decidedly limited. In the motor speed test
(form board) he measured twelve years. He did the simpler of the
Healy puzzle tests but failed on the more difficult one. He failed
on the clock-hand test (age XV), was unable to reproduce the central
thought of a passage read to him (adult test), but just about passed
the president-king test (age XV). To the question: If a horse
weighs 1400 lbs. when standing on four legs, how much will he weigh
when standing on three? he replied: "I cannot tell you. There is
more weight in certain parts." To the question: If three men stand-
ing on top of a high tower can see six miles, how far can each one
see? he replied: "Two miles." He said he did not smoke or drink,
but late reports indicate that he does both. His chief defects, as
observed by the examiner, were inability to concentrate or persevere,
unwillingness to make serious effort or to work at his maximal
potential, an all-too-ready tendency to be content with saying "I
don't know," or "I didn't study that up," or to view the performance
with supercilious scorn. He frequently intimated that he did not
need to attempt answers if he did not want to, and that he did not
see how the testing was going to help him get a job. He had been
induced to come to the clinic in order that he might have his voca-
tional fitness determined. His bearing throughout was more or less
arrogant, he had an exaggerated opinion of his own worth, said that
he would not under any circumstances take a position in a factory or
mill (it was beneath his dignity), and that his only interest was in
the automobile business. He seemed to feel that his parents were
wealthy, and ought to support him in luxury; he entertained a
warped attitude toward life; seemed to be lacking in feeling dynamic;
and manifested evident emotional instability and abnormality of
disposition. He complained that he had never been given a chance
to make good, and did not leave the clinic in the best spirit.
After the examination he called upon the social worker again
and again, although not always in a gentlemanly way, pleading with
her to aid him; but he made it clear that he would not take any job
that did not happen to appeal to his fancy. Finally, in order to
guarantee him a chance at his frequently expressed vocational choice,
the social worker managed to secure funds from the Association for
the Improvement of the Poor with which to provide him with a two
weeks' course in an automobile school. Money for board and lodg-
130 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ing was supplied by the parents. It was impressed upon his mind
that he would now get the chance he had been seeking, but if he
did not stick to the work and make good the clinic could do nothing
further for him. He seemed delighted over the prospect, and ex-
pressed his gratitude. But he remained in the school only one and a
half days, and during this time he learned about as much as the ordi-
nary student learns in two hours. When seen by the social worker his
feeling of gratitude had entirely evaporated. He said he had not
wanted to take the course in the first place?that the social worker
had coaxed him to take it; that he saw nothing in it for him; and
offered as a pretext for his intention to quit, the fact that his tuition
had not been paid, although he had been assured that provision had
been made to take care of his expenses. He was told that he could
expect no further financial aid from the clinic or from his home, and
that he would now have to shift for himself. After this he continued
to call on the social worker almost daily, sometimes with a rude,
surly manner, sometimes in an apologetic mood, sometimes comport-
ing himself like a well-bred gentleman, sometimes leaving the house
without bidding good-night. He made frequent appeals for another
chance in another automobile school. He likewise continued to call
at his parents' home, but was not always able to gain admittance.
February 3, 1914, he forced his entrance through a window and stole
a concert ticket, and on February 5th, on the advice of the clinic, he
was arrested on the charge of incorrigibility, with a view to having
him incarcerated in the state reformatory for industrial training under
proper restraint. But since the judge failed to commit him, he was
persuaded to spend a week in the observation ward of a hospital,
and as a result of this further study he was committed on March 3d
to an institution for the mentally disordered. On March 12th he had
a disagreement with a patient, put a towel around his neck and
attempted to choke him. Since the time he was disciplined for this
offense his conduct has been fairly satisfactory.
I have given this history in some detail because this boy is a fair
representative of a large army of abnormals who are not always
recognized as sufficiently abnormal to require special educational
care or social supervision, although they are an actual or potential
menace in one way or another to society; who are usually allowed to
drift along until they become confirmed social parasites, vagabonds or
criminals, and for whose training and restraint society has thus far
largely failed to provide the right kind of institution.
But now to the two points which I desired to illustrate by
means of this case history. In the first place, is this boy feeble-
minded? Undoubtedly so, if judged by a Binet diagnosis by a
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 131
Binet tester, for he measured only 10.6 years, thus being retarded
about 10.5 years. But equally certainly not, if judged by the entire
symptom-complex. His inferiority in the intelligence tests is not so
much due to sheer lack of intelligence as to his abnormal attitudes,
his lack of feeling dynamic or his excessive emotivity, his incapacity
or unwillingness to apply himself. He belongs to that large army of
borderland cases who are not quite feebleminded nor yet palpably
insane, but which make up the group of "unstables" who occupy the
twilight zone between the distinctly amented on the one hand, and
the mentally disordered on the other hand?a group of moral and
mental inferiors, sometimes manifesting traits of high grade moral
imbecility (or heboidophrenia), and sometimes presenting the aspects
of constitutional inferiority, or psychopathic constitution, or masked
or psychic epilepsy. These twilight states between sanity and
insanity and between subnormality {i.e. feeblemindedness) and
normality cannot be diagnosticated by mere schemes of intelligence
tests. Incidentally it may be said that these types of abnormal
individuals should be diagnosed much earlier in their careers than
is usually done. They should be picked out in the elementary and
secondary schools, and be subjected to appropriate educational and
physical treatment.
In the second place, is the boy eugenically unfit? Certainly he
ought not to marry as long as he remains industrially incompetent,
as long as his perspective of life is distorted, and as long as he mani-
fests pronounced emotional instability and violent outbursts of
temper. But is he unfit for eugenic procreation? We are in no
position to dogmatize about this. The ancestral history is largely
negative in respect to neuropathic taint. One paternal aunt died
of tuberculosis, two paternal uncles died of heart disease, and one
maternal brother died insane. The latter is said to have been
perfectly normal until he received a severe blow on the head from
a falling saddle. After recovery a second violent attack occurred
during his honeymoon voyage across the ocean and was said to
have been brought on by seasickness. Shall we say that the taint
of insanity was inherent, and that the accident merely removed the
barriers? Or shall we say that the disease was of accidental origin?
There is no conclusive evidence for either view.
Coming to the boy's immediate family, we find that the oldest
child, a sister, was prematurely born dead. The mother attributes
the fatal prematurity to a severe fright caused by a fire which broke
out in the room she was occupying. The second child died at the
age of one from sunstroke. Her head was left exposed to a hot sun
by a careless attendant. The other children are apparently normal
132 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
except a sister attending a boarding school, who is said to be
capricious, high tempered, indiscreet, and a flirt. She likes the
sensational, and has kleptomaniac tendencies. The father is a
well-educated, cultured gentleman who has held responsible govern-
ment and ecclesiastical positions here and abroad, while the mother
also possesses a good education, having at one time taught in a
high school. However, she is said to be very high spirited, and is
subject to occasional violent outbursts of temper which often cul-
minate in a fainting spell with loss of consciousness and stiffening
of the limbs instead of convulsive movements. The husband reports
that her hysterical manifestations date back at least to the time of
their marriage. On her way to America before marriage she was in
a shipwreck. From this experience she suffered a severe nervous
shock. Shall we say that the abnormal manifestations of the mother
are hereditary, or that they are due to the severe nervous shocks
caused by fright experienced in a shipwreck and in a fire? An
unequivocal answer is scarcely possible. Shall we say that the
abnormalities of the son are due to a neuropathic taint transmitted
by the mother, or that it is due to difficult birth, to the head blow
received at the age of five, to the punishment he received from his
mother, and to the influence of her abnormal behavior, or to a com-
bination of environmental and hereditary factors? Is it not clear
that when the factors are so complicated as in this case?and this
case is typical of thousands of others?we are not solving the prob-
lem by stamping an heredity symbol on a chart, and assuming the
correctness of the symbol. Who is ready to affirm that this boy,
provided he could be trained to live a normal life and to marry a
normal girl, would be unfitted for eugenic procreation? Who is
able to demonstrate that he would or would not be so fitted? The
fact is, eugenic diagnosis is not far enough advanced to permit of
unequivocal answers in thousands of cases difficult to diagnose.
While it is important, therefore, that we recognize the difficulties
involved in the correct diagnosis of anti-eugenic stocks, it must not
be forgotten that the most important factor in eugenical hygiene is
the prevention of the propagation of inherently, that is hereditarily,
weakened, defective, and degenerate strains.
2. Society should adopt measures to prevent the syphilization
of the unborn child. Numerous investigations have been made to
determine the influence of parental syphilis upon the foetal and
post-foetal child, but the results have often led to disagreement
and controversy. That parental syphilis is at least one of the causes
of the abortion, miscarriage, or early mortality of many both eugeni-
cally fit and unfit infants seems to me to be strongly indicated by
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 133
the available evidence. The importance of this conclusion, if true,
may be judged from the following figures:?
According to the best estimates, from one-fifth to one-fourth of
all the children born die before the age of one year, and one-third
before the age of five years. At least one-third of infant mortality
is due to prenatal causes, to prematurity and still-births. If the
prematures (all infants weighing less than five pounds) weigh only
four pounds or less, 98 per cent of them die, unless they are properly
cared for in incubator hospitals (in such hospitals in France the
mortality rate has been reduced to from 15 to 25 per cent), while if
they weigh somewhat over four pounds the mortality varies from
15 per cent for breast fed to 41 per cent for bottle fed infants.
Fully one-half of the deaths within the first month of life in New
York City in 1911 to 1912 were due to prematurity or congenital
weakness (Henry Koplik), while 80 per cent of the deaths in the
first week in the state of Michigan from 1910 to 1912 were due to
prematurity, deficient vitality, and congenital malformations. The
percentage of still-born in Germany in 1906 amounted to 3 per cent
of all births, and in New York City in 1911 and 1912, 5 per cent
(Henry Koplik). The proportion of prematures, still-births and
births which barely escape these conditions, varies greatly in dif-
ferent localities but it is thought to be increasing in all civilized
countries (Kaye). In certain districts in England the number of
still-births increased from 47.3 per 1000 in 1901 to 56.3 per 1000
in 1905.
Now, since prenatal syphilis may be transmitted with full viru-
lence to the offspring and since it is almost certainly transmitted
when the mother suffers from the secondary symptoms, it would
be strange if it did not somehow affect the causation of prematurity,
still-birth at term, congenital debility and early infant mortality.
Positive studies indicate that it exerts a very perceptible influence.
One authority finds that when the father is infected, nearly
40 per cent of the babies perish, while the mortality when the
mother is also infected, ranges between 60 and 80 per cent. One-
third die within the first six months, while the chance of dying under
fifteen is seven times greater for the syphilitic than for the non-
syphilitic (Prince Morrow). Of 206 syphilitic pregnancies in
France, abortions occurred in 36, still-births in 8, and deaths soon
after birth in 69, giving a mortality of 55 per cent. Fifty of the
living children were syphilitic, while only 43 were in good health
(Jullien). In another group of 154 syphilitic pregnancies, there
were 120 abortions or still-births, 26 deaths soon after birth and
only 8 survivals (Le Pileur). In the Foundling Asylum in Moscow,
134 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the mortality among 2038 syphilitic infants amounted to 70 per
cent. One authority maintains that the number of still-births
among illegitimate children amounts to 50 per cent more than
among those born in wedlock, but another writer (Weinberg) states
that the difference amounts to only one per cent. The latter investi-
gator, however, admits that the illegitimates suffer from congenital
debility?undoubtedly due in part to syphilis infection?and are
thus more predisposed to morbidity, inanition, atrophy, and gastro-
intestinal disorders which lead to death later. Moreover, it is to
be remembered that there are thousands of abortions of illegitimates
that never become a matter of record. It is probably true that most
congenitally syphilitic children are healthy at birth and do not
show the symptoms until between the first and sixth week. Never-
theless, it is more difficult to cure infantile than adult syphilis and
more difficult to cure the congenital than the acquired type.
Indeed, debilitated children, whatever the cause of the debility,
offer little hope for progressive amelioration. Thus the death
reductions in New York City during the last thirty years amounted
to 70 per cent for contagious diseases, 38 per cent for respiratory
diseases, 37 per cent for diarrhea cases, but only 4 per cent for
congenital debility cases. The susceptibility of syphilitic children
to the following diseases is said to be greater than for non-syphilitic
children by the ratios indicated:?
Typhoid   . nearly 2| times
Scarlet Fever  " 3 "
Measles  " 3| "
Diphtheria  " 7 "
Thirty per cent of the cases with tubercular hip disease; 40 per
cent of the cases with gastroenteritis, and 60 per cent of the cases
with tubercular meningitis, are congenital syphilitics (Prince
Morrow). Congenital syphilis lessens both the constitutional and
local resistance and leaves many, if not most, of the surviving chil-
dren delicate, thin, poorly nourished, suffering from bone disorders
and malformations, and with delayed development of dentition,
speech, walking, physical growth, and puberty. The arrest at times
amounts to actual infantilism. At three or four the child may be
without teeth, and at ten or eleven he may have the physical growth
of the six year old. In intelligence or morality he sometimes
becomes imbecilic or insane, or a moral degenerate or pervert.
Although the evidence is not conclusive, congenital syphilis is
probably one of the causes of insanity (of 25 per cent of inherited
insanity, say some) and feeblemindedness. One authority found
a syphilitic family history in 80 per cent of 40 carefully investigated
cases of juvenile dementia ("juvenile general paralysis"?F. W.
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 135
Mott). A careful study of the family histories of 90 feebleminded
patients over sixteen years of age showed that one or the other of
the parents were syphilitic in 14.4 per cent of the cases (E. B. Sher-
lock). Likewise a positive Wasserman was secured in 15.4 per cent
of 330 idiots, although only 3 per cent could be classed as syphilitic
suspects (H. R. Dean). On the other hand, in an investigation of
2400 pauper idiots in London, clear evidences of congenital syphilis
were found in only 1.17 per cent of the cases, although it was
suspected in a larger number (G. E. Shuttleworth and F. Beach).
Other investigators give the percentage as 2 (Langdon Down, Ker-
lin) and 2.5 (A. F. Tredgold). There are, of course, many cases of
congenital syphilis which can be recognized only with difficulty,
even with the aid of refined laboratory technique. Were these cases
added the percentage would be somewhat increased. Nevertheless,
parental syphilis is, I believe, only a minor cause of actual feeble-
mindedness; but this question cannot be satisfactorily settled until
we have gathered extensive parallel data for normal cases.
On the other hand, gonococcus infection is probably the chief
cause of sterility, and of 75 per cent of infant blindness. The
sterility and the blindness probably affect the fit as well as the
unfit stock in equal measure.
Venereal diseases thus constitute one of the arch destroyers of
human stock which may be inherently noble and in every way
eugenically fit. The racial injury is just as positive even if the
hereditary qualities are but slightly affected. One of the important
eugenic measures, therefore, is the desyphilization of the human
race. The campaign against the black plague would be easy if
human beings could be persuaded to live virtuous lives. But many
persons cannot be persuaded thus to live by the logic of fact or by
appeal to conscience and must therefore be brought to bay, so
far as possible, through the instrumentality of prohibitive legisla-
tion. The fight must go on until laws have been placed on the
statute books everywhere requiring the registration of infected
persons, together with the prohibition of marriage or intercourse
between such persons until they are cured. If this does not prove
effective, we may, for the sake of the preservation of racial purity,
be forced to follow the example of the army surgeons in various
civilized countries who compel soldiers who will not live within the
moral law to use prophylactics. This practice may not conform to
our traditional principles of morality, but it seems to me that human-
ity is in the process of evolving a new ethical code based upon
eugenical imperatives. Any measure will merit the eugenical
sanction if the ultimate result is the permanent improvement or
preservation of the human stock. Is not the enforced use of
136 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
venereal prophylactics better than the wholesale slaughter of poten-
tially robust innocents and the possible pollution of the race
stream?
3. The procreation of mentally and physically robust offspring
is endangered by the alcoholization of the parents and of the embry-
onic and foetal life. Here again the evidence is not conclusive.
The investigators of the Francis Galton Laboratory for National
Eugenics have come to two important conclusions: first, that
parental alcoholism is almost a negligible factor in eugenic pro-
creation; and, secondly, that practically all of the investigations save
their own are irrelevant or worthless. While admitting that the
investigations of human alcoholism rather suggest than indubitably
demonstrate that alcohol is a race poison, it seems to me that many
of the conclusions based on animal experimentation amount to
positive demonstration, and that the results thus reached can be
applied analogically to the question of human heredity.
Most suggestive, as indicating the possibility of injuring the
reproductive and somatic cells of the offspring by parental indul-
gence in alcohol are certain experiments on normal guinea-pigs
which were obliged to inhale controlled quantities of the fumes of
alcohol or ether for six days weekly during extensive periods of
time, amounting to three years in some cases. In order to secure
normal stock for this experiment pigs were first tested by normal
matings. The treatment did not affect the health or development
of the pigs. The alcoholized males and females, as well as the
unalcoholized descendants of alcoholized parentage, were mated
with both normal and alcoholized stock.
The results showed that "an alcoholized male guinea-pig almost
invariably begets defective offspring even when mated with a
vigorous normal female," and that the effects were nearly as bad
on the second generation (Stockard). Of 103 full term matings
42 per cent gave negative results or early abortions, 13.5 per cent
gave still-born litters, 45 per cent resulted in living litters, con-
taining 89 young of whom only 58 per cent survived. On the other
hand, the 35 control normal matings gave 94 per cent of full term
litters, about | per cent of still-born litters, 91.5 per cent of living
litters, containing 60 young of whom 93 per cent survived. The
proportion of alcohol in the testes and in the ovary compared with
the proportion in the blood has been found to be as 2 to 3 and 3
to 5, respectively (Nicloux and Renauet). Alcohol, therefore,
apparently can act deleteriously directly on the spermatozoa and
eggs before or during the period of impregnation.
Studies of human alcoholism indicate that alcohol produces
almost instantaneous changes in the constituents of the blood
THE HYGIENE OF EUGENIC GENERATION. 137
(Richardson), lessening the normal resistance of the red corpuscles
(Laitenen) and producing temporary paralysis of the phagocytes
(Metchnikoff), while in women it may also temporarily paralyze
the ovum and produce ovarian degeneration (Lancereaux). In the
male alcohol has similar effects on the blood and the spermatozoa,
and leads to testicular degeneration or atrophy. In 39 chronic
alcoholics atrophy of the testicular tissue was found in 37 cases
(Weichselbaum), while azoospermia was found in 60 per cent of
autopsied alcoholics (Simonds).
If the above conclusions are correct, alcoholic indulgence before
and during conception and maternal indulgence during pregnancy
should be especially sinister for the offspring. The embryo of a
drunken mother is like another drunkard, for both are nourished
by the same blood stream. When the mother's blood is saturated
with alcoholic poison it is improbable that the embryo will be
normally nourished. So well known is the fact of alcoholic arrest,
that some expectant mothers in Switzerland deliberately use alcohol
in order to lessen the pains of childbirth. Although alcoholized
infants may be bom healthy looking, they tend to manifest dimin-
ished power of growth. The difference between the weights of
babies of drinkers and abstainers has amounted to 3.6 per cent
and 4.4 per cent for boys and girls, respectively, while at 7 and 8
months the corresponding figures amounted to 2.2 per cent and
7.2 per cent.
That there is a causal relation between alcoholism and sterility,
abortion, prematurity, still-birth, inability to lactate, infant mortal-
ity and degeneracy is indicated by numerous studies. Of 107 Eng-
lish women investigated who died of alcoholism before the age of
29, 8 bore no children, while 99 bore only 6 delicate and deformed
children. But twenty-nine vigorous children were born to these
mothers before they became alcoholic (Lonnet). A similar inquiry
based on thirteen inebriate women showed that the children born
before the onset of the inebriety were normal, while those born
after its onset were 'weak-minded' (R. J. Paris). Of the 600 infants
born of 120 female inebriates in whom the factors making for
degeneracy (such as tuberculosis, nervousness, syphilis) were elimi-
nated except alcoholism, 55.8 per cent were still-born or died before
the age of two, mostly of convulsions, and the mortality was 2\
times greater for these infants than for infants of sober mothers
(W. C. Sullivan). During the period from 1874 to 1904 the still-
births from each 1000 conceptions in France amounted to 5.36
for certain absinthe districts (southern part), 4.48 for certain
alcoholic districts, but only 3.62 for certain non-alcoholic districts
(Henri Schmidt). oontobi)
