Meeting of Experimental Psychologists
======================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.
The Experimental Psychologists will meet this year at Columbia Univer-
sity on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, April 9-11. The scientific sessions
will be preceded by a dinner on Wednesday evening, April 8th, in honor of
Professor James McKeen Cattell.
Dr. George W. Twitmyer Died February 21, 191
Dr. Twitmyer was born on a farm in Center County, Pa., June 9, 1849,
and received his elementary education in the country schools. He secured his
first certificate to teach in 1863, when only fourteen years old, but did not begin
teaching until after his graduation from Rebersburg normal school, a private
school which is no longer in existence. From the time of his graduation until
his death he was continuously in public school work, excepting for a period of
two years when he was headmaster of the McEwensville Academy, Pa.
His first principalship of schools was at Watsontown, Pa. He was prin-
cipal of the Honesdale, Pa., schools for sixteen years, superintendent of schools
NEWS AND COMMENT. 27
of Bethlehem, Pa., for four years, and superintendent of schools of Wilmington,
Del., for the fourteen years immediately preceding his death. He held the
honorary degree of M.A. from Franklin and Marshall College, and M.S. from
Mansfield State Normal School. At the latter institution the degree was
awarded on the basis of an examination, without residence. In 1903 Lafayette
College conferred upon him the degree of Ph.D., his thesis being entitled,
"Treatment and Training of Backward Children in the Public Schools."
Three years ago Dr. Twitmyer was appointed by the Governor of Dela-
ware as a member of the State Board of Education, and upon the organization
of this board he was made chairman for a period of seven years. He was largely
instrumental in putting through a revision of the school laws of Delaware,
which completely changed the method of administration in the public schools
and provided also for the reorganization and expansion of Delaware College.
About a year after his appointment to the State Board of Education, he was
made a trustee of Delaware College. Two years ago he was appointed by the
Governor on a commission to formulate plans for the organization of a woman's
college to be affiliated with Delaware College. At the time of his death the
work had reached the stage of erection of buildings, the selection of a faculty,
and the draughting of a curriculum. The Woman's College will be opened
formally in the fall of 1914.
Dr. Twitmyer was the author of numerous magazine articles, including one
in The Psychological Clinic for June, 1907, to which reference will be made
later. He was much interested in the pedagogy of Sunday school instruction,
and took an active part in the movement for the grading of Sunday school
lessons and the better training of Sunday school teachers. As an institute
lecturer he was well known for many years throughout the states of Pennsyl-
vania, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, and Ohio. He was a director (by
election) of the National Education Association. At the summer school of
the University of Pennsylvania in 1907, Dr. Twitmyer took part with several
other educators in a general course on Educational Psychology, giving one
week's lectures on the special topic, "Diagnosis and Treatment of Backward
Children in Public Schools.?The application and personal working out of the
clinical method in the solution of the problem by the superintendent of a school
system.?Results of the method in the Wilmington schools."
The distinction of having been a pioneer in this field is only one, although
an important one, of the many laurel wreaths which will be placed upon Dr.
Twitmyer's grave by those who hold him in honor and affection. I shall always
remember the vigor and vitality with which Superintendent Twitmyer attacked
any problem, whether it were one of study or administration. The common
schools of Pennsylvania and Delaware may look with pride upon the record of
this educator, whose career was rounded in their service. A school man through
and through, Dr. Twitmyer could scarcely be matched in this country for
initiative, intellectual grasp, and a willingness to learn and apply whatever
science afforded. As late as last summer he went to New York to study
administrative statistics under Dr. Ayres, and this fall entered for work along
the same line at the University of Pennsylvania under Professor Updegraff,
28 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Those who attended the recent Richmond meeting of superintendents must
have been struck by the predominance of the scientific note to be heard in the
educational discussions. Clearly the profession of education has passed over
into the scientific stage. Superintendent Twitmyer was a leader in this pro-
gress, for since the year 1895 he was definitely committed to the scientific study
of educational problems.
While principal of the Honesdale, Pa., schools, Dr. Twitmyer gave me the
first encouragement in the work in clinical psychology, just initiated at the
University of Pennsylvania, which I received from a public school man in
active service. In 1895 I was conducting courses in child psychology and
making a few tentative efforts toward the clinical study of individual children.
Dr. Twitmyer was not only the most active and appreciative student of that
year's summer school, but he seized upon the clinical method and applied it
himself subsequently in the schools of Bethlehem and Wilmington. He put
together the clinical records of 1487 cases of retardation, and induced his teach-
ers and principals to assist in examination and corrective training. The brief
summary entitled "Clinical Studies of Backward Children," published in The
Psychological Clinic for June, 1907, is the first report of a clinical investigation
of the pupils of a city school system.
