Speech Defects in Young Children
=================================

By Carolyn E. Morrison,
Hibbing, Minn.
If the worth of an ounce of prevention is to be realized in our
public schools, the time must surely come soon when as careful
examinations will be accorded every child as are now advocated for
those who are "suspected" of social unfitness.
In a study of some of the causes of retardation in the first
grade, the attention of the writer was called to the presence of many
speech defects among the children. Speech defects rarely receive
much attention from either parents or teachers until the habits are
so firmly fixed that' a long period of training is necessary for their
correction. For this reason there was undertaken a careful examination of the speech habits of each of the two hundred eighteen children in four kindergarten and four first primary classes. The first
tests were made in October, 1913. At that time in the primary
classes there were but eight children who were over seven years of
age and the majority of them were a little over six. In the kindergarten there were only a very few over six and none under five
years of age. The majority had just passed their fifth birthday.
As most authorities agree that speech habits become fairly well
fixed at the age of four years, it seemed reasonable to suppose that
incorrect habits persisting at five and six years of age might in
many cases remain uncorrected if the child were given no assistance
in' forming correct habits.
The method employed in the analysis of the speech habits was
that used in the Psychological Clinic at the University of Pennsylvania. A list of nearly one hundred words was chosen, containing
all the common combinations of the consonant sounds both as initial
and final elements in syllabic formations. The words were such as
could be illustrated by pictures which were pasted upon cards.
Pictures of interest to small children were selected and arranged in
such a way that either the picture itself or a question in regard to it
would call forth from the child a response using the sound or combination of sounds to be tested. In this way any imitation was
avoided and the child's habitual forms of articulation were secured.
The following questions and responses were typical: "What is that?"
"A squirrel." "What color is that?" "Blue," or "Red". "What
is the little girl doing?" "Smelling the flowers."
The tests were given by two of the kindergarten assistants,
(138)
SPEECH DEFECTS IN YOUNG CHILDREN. 139
Miss Olive Paine and Miss Grace McGee, and the writer, all of
whom were known to the children. There was therefore no element of strangeness for the children and the pictures were greatly
enjoyed. Each child was removed from the class and tested alone.
In recording results the word given incorrectly was written down,
but minor defects, such as the weakened aspirate in "wheel", the
clipping of the final g in "ing", and others of a similar nature were
not considered. Only those sounds that by omission or by substitution tended to mark the child by what is commonly known as
"crooked" talking were recorded. "Dis" for "this", "gled" for
"red", "poon" for "spoon", "fowers" for "flowers", and "tat" for
"cat" were the type of errors recorded.
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
ch g 1 r s sh th
r s sh th
ch f k 1 r s th
r s th
sh th
ch f k 1 r s sh th
ch f s th
1 s sh th
1 s
s sh th
ch
s th
s th
1
ch k 1 r s sh th y
ch k 1 r s th w y
1
ch r s th
s
ch f k 1 r s th
ch
f g k r s sh th
ch r s sh th
r s
s
1
1 s th
11 5 2 6 12 13 23 9 18
No. of
Errors
7
4
7
3
3
1
10
4
4
2
3
1
3
2
1
140 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The results when tabulated showed that of the 218 children
tested, 107, or 49 per cent, did not give the th sounds correctly.
As this is one of the latest sounds to be correctly learned by young
children and as about one-third of the children were from homes
were languages that do not contain the sound were spoken, no
further study of those children was undertaken, except that which
will be mentioned under treatment.
When the children failing only in the th sound were eliminated,
there were left 28 children, or 12.8 per cent of all tested who showed
marked defects of articulation. The errors and their frequency are
shown in the accompanying table.
This table shows that aside from the th incorrect habits were
shown most often in the use of ch as in "chair", h or hard c, I, r,
s and sh, all of which are among the more difficult sounds. The
incorrect sounds used by any one child ranged from one to ten.
Some of the worst talkers, however, were deficient in but a few
sounds as in the case of No. 27. This boy gave "dink" for "drink",
"gled" for "red", "olange" for "orange", "bubbun" for "bubble",
"bottun" for "bottle", and "Chlistmas" for "Christmas" which
together with nasalizing and lack of force in pronouncing the throat
sounds made his speech so defective that it was difficult to understand much of his ordinary conversation.
A second test was made with these twenty-eight children by
pronouncing for them the words that each had missed and having
each repeat the word as best he could after having heard its correct
form. Practically none of the sounds were corrected from simply
hearing the correct forms.
Many of the children of the group appeared below the normal in
physical vigor and there were many evidences of imperfect air
channels of the mouth, nose, and pharynx which would be likely to
initiate the improper use of the vocal organs. Each child, therefore,
was given a physical examination. The table following shows the
results:
Children examined  28
Adenoids  25
Enlarged tonsils  21
Enlarged glands  15
Tongue-tied    3
Thickened tongue  2
Very narrow and ill-formed throat  1
Broadly separated and ill-formed teeth  1
Clean bill of health  1
SPEECH DEFECTS IN YOUNG CHILDREN. 141
Five months later when the membership of these eight classes
had been slightly changed by the dropping out of some pupils and
the entrance of others, the teachers of the classes were asked to
rank their pupils as nearly as they could according to general intelligence. Rank 1 indicated children of exceptional ability, rank 2
bright children, rank 3 children of average ability, rank 4 dull or
slow children, and rank 5 borderline children, or mental defectives.
The following is the distribution:
Rank.
1  6 per cent
2  22
3  38
4   31
5  3
This ranking was made by the teachers for other purposes and
with no reference at this time to the children with speech defects.
From the list of rankings the rankings of the 25 of the 28 children who then remained in the classes were taken. None were
found in the group ranked highest, two were in the second group,
six were in the third group, fifteen were in the fourth group and two
in the group ranked as lowest. As the whole group used in the
ranking test was not precisely the same group as that used in the
first speech test it is not fair to state the per cent of speech defectives in each of the groups of the ranking. There was, however but
slight change in the group and there is no reason to suppose that
the general character of the group was changed. It is, therefore,
safe to say that approximately the 6 per cent of exceptional children showed no speech defects, the 22 per cent of those called bright
furnished only 8 per cent of those with speech defects; the 38 per
cent of average children, 24 per cent; the 31 per cent of dull or slow
children, 60 per cent; and the 3 per cent of the lowest class, 8 per
cent of those having speech defects. The ratios are as follows:
Exceptional. Bright. Average. Dull. Defective.
0 .36 .63 1.93 2.66
The results of the examination of these 218 children showed
that there were a considerable number who needed more or less
attention to insure correct habits of speech and that there was a
close correlation between speech defectiveness and physical defects
and general mental ability.
142 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Treatment.
As soon as the speech tests and the physical examination had
been given, training was begun. A list of familiar words involving
the uses of th was selected and given to each of the eight teachers
with the names of the children defective in those sounds alone.
Instruction was given to these children as groups and the difficulties
were quickly remedied. The remaining twenty-eight children were
given individual instruction by the writer, each child receiving an
average of ten lessons of about three minutes each, extending over a
period of about three weeks. At the end of that time all but four of
the children were able to place the vocal organs in correct position
and to give the sounds correctly, but most of them were not yet
able to refrain from falling into incorrect habits when away from
the instructor. Of the four remaining children two were absent
because of illness. No. 27 had not yet learned to give I and r
correctly in words, and No. 26 was still using sh for s because of the
position of the teeth. At this time it was necessary to hand the
work over to the classroom teachers. Each teacher was given the
names of the three or four of these children in her room with a list
of words for each child containing the sounds in the use of which he
was deficient. Where possible the teachers also secured the
co-operation of the parents, which in many cases was hearty. Each
teacher devoted but a very few moments per day to each child
either within or outside of regular class periods. The time spent
was relatively small but the work was directed toward the individual child needing it and not given in the form of the usual enunciation drill which includes both the children who do and the children
who do not need it.
At the end of four months, twenty-one of these children were
re-examined. Nine were practically cured, nine showed marked
improvement, and three showed little or no improvement. None
appeared unimprovable. There is no evidence to indicate how much
these children would in time have corrected their own speech, but
there is every reason to believe that many of them would have continued in the faulty habits long enough to have seriously interfered
with both the oral and written language work of the early grades.
