The Artistic Value of the Montessori Geometrical Insets
========================================================

By Harriet Sayre,
Philadelphia, Pa.
Investigators of the Montessori method may be interested to
know what has been accomplished in drawing by a class of eighteen
children between the age of five and eight years. During a school
term of eight months, these children by the use of the geometrical
insets, have conceived a series of over five hundred drawings without
the aid or suggestion of the teacher. The material held the interest
and attention of the children from the beginning, and even the older
ones preferred it to any other busy work. There was no regular
period for the drawing; it was done by the older ones in short intervals
betw een the regular school lessons, and by the younger ones whenever
they desired to select the insets.
The purpose of the material was to train the powers of observation of form and color and to develop muscular control preparatory
to writing. The children exceeded this purpose by discovering the
artistic value of the forms. It is doubtful if the younger ones, those
five and six years of age, could have accomplished such results except
through the spirit of emulation. Each child, however, maintained
is own individuality of expression and perfected his work independently.
Upon first presentation the child used the insets as outlined for
t is material in " The Montessori Method." That is, lie traced around
t e frames and their corresponding forms and filled in the enclosed
space with colored crayon. After a few days of tracing and coloring,
a c ild discarded the frames and used only the insets. He selected
e triangle, quatrefoil and small circle and drew a pattern of unique
esign. The child had previously made clear his conception by
o ing up the insets as if against a background, and the drawing
was rue to the description. It was not a rare thing for a child to see
a esign synthetically and describe his impression of the whole.
h1ln+v.C rdren ^eSS raP^ perception designed as they worked,
1 1 Gf e ^era^? unimaginative child heaped inset upon inset regardless of balance or form.
mpTit c*es'^ns were cru(le in color and chaotic in arrange' u t ey gradually became more symmetrical. In a short
(6)
MONTESSORI GEOMETRICAL INSETS. 7
time the children began to eliminate parts of the insets and to introduce free hand lines. A little boy six years of age drew a design with
the oval and the tip of the large triangle. The oval was colored
yellow and the remaining part red. "It's the sun," he explained,
"and these tips are the sun's rays." A little girl repeated the small
circle four times in the form of a square and added free hand lines to
complete the design.
There had been no attempt to teach the names of the more
complex forms, but the demand for the name arose with the use of
the object, and the child added the new words to his vocabulary
with unusual rapidity, even the smaller children soon learning to
recognize the names of the various insets.
It was interesting to note their choice of material and their
method of work. Some children preferred the wooden insets, some
the metal, while others would select the frames and trace the enclosed
outline of the geometrical figure. Some designed on the blackboard
and then reproduced the drawing on paper, while others used paper
exclusively.
The youngest children, those who had never been in school
before, early evinced a tendency toward ambidexterity. Their
fingers were unaccustomed to the use of the pencil. They were
unrestricted in their use of the insets, and to trace the form in the
easiest manner they changed the pencil from one hand to the other.
In the filling-in process, when the fingers became cramped by continued movement, they again changed the pencil to relieve the
cramped position. They were thus learning to control the muscles
of both hands. In the act of writing which followed these preliminary
exercises, four of the children could use either hand with equal
facility without making any variation in the form or size of the letter.
A little boy not five years of age found that he could make the figure
one simultaneously with both hands. He then tried to make the
figure four. This required a greater mental effort to prevent the
lines from diverging to right and left instead of moving in one direction, but after a moment's hesitation he wrote the figure slowly and
accurately. In a short time he could make other figures in the same
manner, and also a number of the letters. This ambidexterity existed
only during the formative period. When the act of writing became
an established habit, those who had been using both hands gradually
learned to use the one to which they were more accustomed. Through
this formal sense training the child's power of observation, comparison, and judgment grew wonderfully keen. The sense exercises had
attracted his attention to form and color in his environment, and he
was learning to apply his ideas.
8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
A child, while in church, had observed a brown hat trimmed
with a bow of orange ribbon and blue flowers, and she selected those
colors to complete her design. Another child had studied the tints
of a stained glass window, another, those of a carpet, while a fourth
had seen the green and brown grasses in a field, and showed dissatisfaction because she could not find a crayon the exact shading of the
brown grass. This freedom of expression developed not only habits
of attention and perseverance, but also diversity of design. The first
border was made by a little boy six years of age. He repeated the
quatrefoil eight times and colored the drawing with red and black
crayon. Another child drew a border with quatrefoil and circle,
then cut it out and mounted it on paper of another color. From
these first conceptions arose others of varied combinations. Some
were conceived by the imagination, some were the result of
observation.
Embroidered design was suggested by a child eight years old.
She traced a doily on linen with the quatrefoil and outlined it with
yellow silk. She then cut the linen in the form of a square, turned
the edges under and backstitched them with silk of different color.
Soon a number of the girls began to embroider original patterns,
while the youngest children of the class expressed a desire to sew.
They often gathered in groups helping each other, discussing the size
and shape of doily or center piece, or matching different colored silks
for harmonious combinations. A child of seven was so pleased with
her new accomplishment that she immediately made further use of it.
She selected a dress from her doll's wardrobe, traced it on tissue
paper, transferred the pattern twice on thin linen, cut out the two
parts and sewed them together. The doll was then arrayed in its
new attire and presented for inspection. This ability to enlarge
upon suggestion was a source of spiritual as well as intellectual
education. The children were happy and industrious and a superior
moral tone pervaded the school room.
The next step in development was made by a child seven years
of age, a little girl of imperious nature whose attention was easily
distracted and who showed but little interest in her surroundings.
She gradually became attracted to the insets, and one day while
designing on the board with the oval she suddenly cried " I've drawn
a tulip!" She had repeated the inset three times to form the petals
and had drawn an irregular free hand line to represent the stem. She
gazed at the flower delightedly, then drew the leaf. Her conception
of its size and shape was imperfect, and discovering her error she drew
another leaf of larger size but did not alter its form. A little boy
called her attention to this, but she refused to change the design.
MONTESSORI GEOMETRICAL INSETS. 9
The little boy whose suggestion had been rejected, also drew a tulip
and added the leaves correctly. They were neither stiff nor conventional but were drawn according to nature, one leaf bent slightly
to the right. He explained this by saying he had seen leaves bend
that way when the wind or rain beat against them. A great interest
was now manifested in the portrayal of various flowers by means of
the insets. It was imagination that supplemented the material,
for the children had not thought of using a real flower as a model.
A child drew a daisy with the oval and small circle, adding the leaves
free hand. A large crysanthemum was drawn with one side of the
quatrefoil repeated many times to form the shape of the flower.
It was colored a delicate pink. A wild rose was drawn with the
spherical triangle, also a pond lily. A child of six years drew a "star
of Bethlehem" by repeating the spherical triangle five times in the
form of a circle. She then erased all the parts save those that produced the petals. Another child drew a violet with the oval and small
circle and colored the petals a light purple. She could not recall the
color of the stamen so put aside her drawing until she could observe
the center of the real flower. Dandelions, sun-flowers, pansies,
buttercups, clovers, and other flowers were drawn from the imagination, the choice of insets being the circle, oval, ellipse, quatrefoil,
and spherical triangle. This step in development was followed by
mechanical drawing. Coloring was discarded for a time and accuracy
of form and position was observed. Visual perception had grown
so keen that often the slightest discrepancy in line or angle could be
detected. Many of the designs were complex in form, but the child
with deft fingers could trace his work from the beginning. Designs
for wall paper, oil-cloth, and carpet were next conceived. A child
of seven filled an entire sheet of drawing paper by alternating the
medium and small circles. The design was finished in light and dark
brown on a background of green.
Inspired by this conception, the other children reproduced
patterns they had observed on the walls or floors of their homes or
supplemented the material by the imagination. The first attempt
to use other material than the insets was made by a child whose
brother had taught her to use a compass. She drew a design of
concentric circles, coloring them alternately yellow and light blue.
Within a short time ten other children had learned to use the instrument, and were also observing circular forms in their surroundings
and applying their ideas. One child drew the face of a clock, another
a circular picture frame, while a third reproduced a drawing from the
panel of a door. The ease and accuracy with which these small
children manipulated the compass was astonishing, as were also the
designs they conceived.
10 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The work of the first few months had been mechanical, the various drawings being accomplished with the insets or compass. The
children, however, had gained a practical knowledge of form, size,
and dimension and had also developed their powers of observation
to such extent that free hand drawing when first attempted was as
successful as their previous work. The first drawing of this kind
was made in the early spring upon observation of flowers from a
large magnolia tree. A child brought a bunch of these flowers and
several children expressed a desire to draw them. One studied the
shape of the petals and selected the ellipse; another the oval, while
a third child used the spherical triangle, and being dissatisfied with
the result erased the flower and drew it free hand. There was no
disparity in the size, the child represented truly what she had seen,
and when the drawing was reproduced on paper the proportion was
again correct. As the children realized their ability thus to give
expression to the beauties of nature, their interest in free hand
drawing became unbounded. They began to gather different kinds
of flowers and to study their forms and colors, also to express a desire
for information upon plant life. The school room became fragrant
with the scent of jonquils, pansies, narcissus, cherry blossoms, violets,
and other flowers gathered by the children, from which they selected
models according to individual taste.
The natural position of the flowers and their comparative size
were a notable feature of the drawings as was also the reproduction
of the coloring. The children had never been formally taught the
blending of two colors to form a third, but they discovered the
possibility themselves in the attempt to reproduce the colors of nature.
Two weeks before the close of school, a child who had brought
a box of paints finished an iris in water color. This soon aroused
the emulation of the others. The knowledge they had gained of
color combination by the use of the crayons was now applied in the
mixing of the paints. A child who had painted a shrub was asked
what combination she used. "Oh," she replied, "I used crimson
and purple and orange and added a touch of brown." One day at
recess period a group of four children stretched themselves upon the
grass in front of a flower bed. Each child selected a flower, drew it
and then colored it. Thus the first out-of-door nature class was
formed by the children unaided by any suggestion from the teacher.
The importance of the drawings lies in the fact that they were
developed without instruction. The spirit of emulation which
aroused the inventive nature of the child also indicated his power
for observation. As he was unrestricted in the application of his
ideas, he made wonderful progress. The question arises, is there a
MONTESSORI GEOMETRICAL INSETS. 11
possibility of a new era in artistic development as well as in general
education through the application of the Montessori principles?
Signora Montessori believes in the development of the child through
liberty and activity by placing within his environment such material
as may promote his welfare and advancement, and it is undoubtedly
through the application of these principles that the children spoken
of in this article have developed their drawings with the geometrical
insets.
