A Study of Defective Pupils in the Public Schools of Tacoma, Wash
===================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1914, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VIII, No. 6.
November 15, 1914

By Robert A. Cummins,
University of Washington.
The material herein set forth does not pretend to represent a
particular study of any kind, therefore the reader need not expect to
find a solution of any specific problem, much less a determination of
any set of norms, nor yet a revision of any that have heretofore been
published. While the writer is in hearty sympathy with the trend
of modern scientific investigation in which, as a rule, some definite
problem is mapped out and undertaken, it is also believed that some
value might accrue from a study which starts out with no particular
object in view, but simply to study the situation and record observations.
Consequently, during the winter of 1910-11, it was arranged
through the cooperation of the superintendent's office1 to undertake
such a study of the ten pupils then in the special room of the Tacoma
city schools, also the thirty boys then in the parental school, together
with such others as might be brought to the psychological laboratory
of the University of Puget Sound, where an Educational Clinic was
established and a course offered for those who were preparing to
teach. The period of the study continued throughout the balance
of that school year and until the end of the following year.2
The writer was assisted in the work by five college students,3
who elected the course in Educational Clinic, the method of procedure used in the study being somewhat as follows:4
1 Tlie author desires to express his thanks and appreciation to Supt. J. C. Collicott and to
Supt. William F. Geiger, for permission to carry on these investigations in the public schools of
Tacoma.
2 Beginning with January, 1912, three free public lectures were given at the city Y. M. C. A.
on "The Educational Clinic and Problems pertaining to the Abnormal Pupil in the Public Schools."
Also, at the request of the Teachers' Council of the city schools, an article was prepared on "Special
Rooms in the Public Schools," and published in one of the city papers and also in the Northwest
Journal of Education, the official organ of the teachers of the State of Washington.
3 Acknowledgment is due to C. W. Jones, William Olson, Marie Conney, Berna Miller and
Helen Vent, all of whom rendered extra service in tabulating data, especial mention being due
Misses Miller and Vent.
* A brief description of tests used and apparatus employed is given in the appendix a, b, etc.
(153)
154 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Together with an assistant we visited the special room and
there examined all the pupils with the Binet scale of mental measurement, taking no less than thirty minutes for each pupil, carefully
working up and down the scale and supplementing each test with
incidental conversation designed to draw out the subject and secure
the very best expression possible of mental intelligence. A number
of subsequent visits were made in which the pupils were observed
at their work and further personal acquaintance was gained with
each subject. During these visits numerous informal tests (see a
in appendix) of memory, imagination, judgment, emotion, etc.,
were given as well as some tests of attention and interest.
After the lapse of about a year complete anthropological measurements were taken and the Binet tests were again given, this time
being supplemented in the case of certain individuals with the form
board, needle-threading, and deSanctis tests (see b in appendix).
This was followed up by further testing done in the laboratory,
where apparatus for making records, such as the kymograph, was
available (see c in appendix).
The personal and family history of the subjects was obtained
through the cooperation of the teacher and through direct interviews
with some of the parents or guardians. This completed the data
from which the graphic charts given below were compiled. If any
merit attaches to the method used, it lies in its freedom from personal
bias or preconceived pedagogical theories with reference to this class
of pupils.
Chart No. 1 represents a comparison, in respect to vital capacity
and strength of grip, of the ten pupils in the special room with the
norms for the same age and sex, the number of pupils of each age and
sex as actually found in the room being paralleled by an equal number
J-rSTR.WP.
f /o //? n W
CHART I. PROGRESSIVE COMPARISON OF 10 FEEBLEMINDED
PUPILS WITH NORMS.
A STUDY OF DEFECTIVE PUPILS. 155
of each age and sex taken from the table of norms. This study
incidentally confirms the statement made by Dr Henry H. Goddard,
of Vineland, N. J., to the effect that, when measured on the basis
of vital capacity and strength of grip, feebleminded children show a
characteristic curve. By reference to the chart the curves are seen to
be characteristic in that there is a sharp declivity beginning at the
age of ten, then a level beginning at about the age of puberty.
While the account of the study made of the thirty parental
school boys is not included in this report, we desire to introduce here
one of the charts from that study in order to point out one or two
rather significant comparisons. Chart No. 2 shows a comparison of
the thirty parental school boys with norms for the same ages for the
traits, vital capacity and strength of grip. By reference to this chart
it will be seen that the declivity does not occur until about one year
later and it does not appear quite so sharp. Furthermore, at the
beginning of puberty the curve does not strike a level as in the case
of the feebleminded. Upon the whole the curve for the feebleminded is sharply irregular and always below the normal, while the
curve for the parental school boys is only moderately irregular and
varies above and below the normal.
Charts Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 represent comparisons of individual
pupils of the special room with norms for the same age and sex.
The scheme of charting used was devised as a convenient form for
representing in a graphical way the comparative status of the subject,
when considered upon the basis of twenty-five traits, as follows:?
age, weight, vital capacity, vital index, height standing, height
sitting, correlation of sitting with standing height, head girth, head
9-? /o // n. /3''' n? /ft '7%. Avt
CHART n. PROGRESSIVE COMPARISON OF 30 PARENTAL SCHOOL BOYS
WITH NORMS.
156 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
3
CHART III PUPIL IN SPECIAL ROOM.?NORMS FOR SAME AGE.
CHART III PUPIL IN SPECIAL ROOM.?NORMS FOR SAME AGE.
83 15 ^ o -i ^ ; J J ^ * h i ? ^ ? ?i'
CHART IV PUPIL IN SPECIAL ROOM.?NORMS FOR SAME AGE.
CHART IV PUPIL IN SPECIAL ROOM.?NORMS FOR SAME AGE.
^ ^ O O o S $5
CEKWS "V.
^SSHgp|}i
PUPIL in SPECIAL room
WORMS FOR SAKE AGE,
s =? c c 3 = ?5 xoou3qE<i:KTg2w&js:
CHART VI.
A STUDY OF DEFECTIVE PUPILS. 157
length, head width, cephalic index, grip right hand, grip left hand,
correlation of grip for right with left hand, steadiness of nerves, rate
of movement, attention, memory, train of thought, judgment,
capacity for mental work, volition, emotions, school age, and mental
development (see d in appendix).
In the more particular studies, as those given below, further
analysis was made of some of the traits; for example, steadiness of
nerves was tested for holding, aiming, and tracing; attention was
analyzed into three forms, voluntary, nonvoluntary, and involuntary; memory was studied as impression, retention, and recall;
judgment was tested as sesthetic and rational; capacity for mental
work included capacity for physical work as tested by the dynamometer in the case of muscle fatigue.
It is interesting to note that, while pupils of this type as a rule
always fall below the normal in respect to vital capacity and strength
of grip as well as in most of the other physical measurements, when it
comes to the mental traits they appear to fall into two rather well
defined groups or types, which might be conveniently termed the
"suppressed" type and the "excitable" type. Chart No. 5 represents
one of the "suppressed" type, while charts Nos. 3 and 6 represent
the "excitable" type. The further fact was noted in the study, viz:?
that the transition, due to the growth of the subject, from the "suppressed" to the "excitable" state is usually effected through the
change of the traits attention, emotion, and train of thought in the order
named, while on the other hand, if the transition is from the "excitable" to the "suppressed" it is usually manifested by the failing of
the powers of attention first, which is followed by a breaking up of the
0 TWO PUPILS in SPECIAL ROOM
NORMS TOR SAME AGE.
, . . w . X , ?T
CHART VII.
158 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
train of thought and lastly a condition in which it is difficult to arouse
emotion of any kind. Chart No. 4 represents a transition from the
"excitable" to the "suppressed" state, in which attention and train
of thought are already suppressed below the normal, while in respect
to emotion the subject is still somewhat more excitable than the
ordinary pupil. During the time of our observation, which extended
over a period of about one and a half years, the change in this subject
was quite marked, as was also the change, but in a reverse order, in
the case of subject No. 3. Subject No. 3 was observed to be growing
more and more excitable. She gave strict attention to whatever was
directed to her. Not only this, but any conversation in the room
immediately aroused her curiosity and drew her attention away from
whatever else she might be doing. In the case of the subject represented by Chart No. 6 not only were her attention and emotion
easily aroused, but she persisted in talking glibly all the time.
This was literally true, as she would not wait for any one to give
attention, but even when we were engaged in conversation with the
teacher this pupil would come up near by and begin to tell something
which she had seen or heard.
Chart No. 4 represents a fairly typical case of which many
are to be found scattered throughout our public schools, and the
following brief account of the treatment of the case is offered as
representing something of the kind of service that is destined to be
rendered in a constantly increasing measure by the Educational
Clinic:
The subject was first brought to the laboratory by the parents
at the suggestion of the superintendent's office. About two hours
were spent in the preliminary examination, after which the subject,
together with the parents, was ushered out without our giving any
statement of the findings whatever, notwithstanding that the parents
evidently had expected to hear a full and final report on the case
forthwith! A few days later a visit was made to the school where
the subject was in attendance and there he was observed at work
among the thirty odd other pupils in the room, all of whom were
from four to six years his junior in age. This was the regular 2-B
grade, ages from seven to ten years, the subject at this time being
thirteen and a half years of age. Next the family history was obtained
from a sister of the mother of the subject, then the family physician
was consulted, and after several weeks had passed by, the subject
was again called to the laboratory, this time alone, when a more thorough examination was made, a number of records, such as voluntary
and involuntary reaction, fatigue, steadiness of nerves, etc., were
taken and the Binet tests were again given, supplemented by the
form board and the needle-threading tests. A complete history of
A STUDY OF DEFECTIVE PUPILS. 159
the case was then obtained from the mother and finally, after a
period of some six weeks altogether had elapsed, an appointment was
made with the parents to talk over the matter in the home. It
perhaps should be stated here that the subject was an only child, who
had inherited a neurosis through the mother's side of the house, and
the mother had allowed herself to grow up, so to speak, with the
child, gradually becoming set in the belief that he was not abnormal
to any extent beyond what might ordinarily be termed "dull," and
consequently the parents had held the teachers chiefly responsible
for the retardation of the boy. Then too, as was pointed out, they
had moved about from place to place quite a good deal, and in the
estimation of the mother this was a contributing cause to the retarded
condition of the subject. Our problem as we had mapped it out was
two-fold,?first, to break through this shell of false belief with referenec
to the real condition of the boy, and in the second place to overcome,
if possible, a strong prejudice against the proposal to send her boy
to a special room.
On the evening of the appointment the mother desiring that the
boy appear at his best, had kept him in after dinner instead of
allowing him to go out to play as was his custom. Anticipating
some such action on the part of the parents we purposely delayed
our going for more than an hour beyond the time appointed, hence,
instead of being at his best, the subject was wrought up into a high
state of nervous tension, augmented all the more by the fact that he
had not been told just why he was being kept indoors. This state
of affairs upon our arrival furnished the opening wedge for breaking
through the shell of false belief referred to above.
In the course of our conversation we endeavored to enforce three
points, the first two being with reference to the diagnosis of the case
and the third with reference to the treatment of the case. In the first
place we endeavored to impress upon the parents the status prcesens
of the boy, together with the improbability of his ever growing out
of it, or being any better. In the second place we pointed out the
absolute inconsistency of spending another seven years in the vain
hope of seeing him advanced possibly another grade or so in the
regular classes. (The teacher, according to her own testimony, had
advanced the boy into the 2-B grade chiefly in order to keep peace in
the family.) And lastly, we endeavored to prevail upon the parents
to send their boy to the special room. This last appeal was made not
alone from the standpoint of the good of the subject himself, but
also and perhaps in a larger sense more so, from the standpoint of
the welfare of the thirty odd other pupils, who were in the same room
with him.
Having delivered our message we took our leave with a feeling
160 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that little or nothing had been accomplished. On the following
Monday we happened to be at the superintendent's office talking
over the possible attitude of the administration upon such cases in
the event that the parents persisted in keeping the boy in the
regular room, when a message came over the telephone from the
special room stating that a certain pupil was there, coming from a
school in the north end of the city, and that he desired to enter the
special room. The transfer was promptly given by the superintendent, and our subject, for it was he who was sent to the special room,
was thus assured the very best care and opportunity for future
development that the system of public instruction affords, and at
the same time a rather perplexing problem was solved for the teacher
of the room from which he came.
The Ticket Punch Observation.
In addition to the study made of the special and parental school
classes mentioned above, a number of other pupils of varying ages
and degrees of mentality were brought to the laboratory for examination and treatment. During the course of these interviews and
examinations a number of rather interesting and, as the writer
believes, significant discoveries were made, some of which we beg
to present for the consideration of others who may have occasion to
engage in similar work.
Having previously procured a number of ordinary ticket punches
to be used for another purpose, it occurred to the writer that such an
article would be a splendid thing to use in connection with these
examinations in order to work up the curiosity of the subject and thus
to overcome timidity, which is very marked in the case of many of
these feebleminded and retarded pupils. Accordingly two of the
ticket punches were selected, one heart-shaped and the other diamondshaped. These punches, together with as much of the Binet apparatus as was practical, were carried in the pocket and were usually
introduced incidentally soon after the subject entered the room and
if possible while in general conversation with the parent or other
person who had accompanied the subject. In case the examination
was to take place at the public school, as frequently happened, we
usually introduced the ticket punch while in conversation with the
teacher in the presence of the subject. A real explanation of the
use of the punch interested the teacher and almost invariably aroused
the curiosity and interest of the subject. By a skilful punching of
heart-shaped holes in an ordinary visiting card, either by a very rapid
movement, or by the making of some familiar design as an animal or
even a shoe, the interest and curiosity of the subject was still further
A STUDY OF DEFECTIVE PUPILS. 161
aroused, whereupon a finished card was handed to the subject and
presently the punch was handed to him with the simple words, "Can
you do that?" This attention to the subject is only incidental and
he is allowed to follow his pleasure for a few minutes while the
examiner continues conversation with the other person. After a
little while the examiner asks the subject how he is getting along,
whereupon the average subject of this kind will initiate a conversation. From such a beginning it is comparatively easy to pass to
some other of the regular tests given by Binet.
It is claimed that by means of the ticket punch, when properly
used, one may determine to no small extent such traits as constructive ability, symmetry, completeness, motor coordination of eye
and hand, capacity for mental work, and visual memory. The
following cases are offered as being typical in representing the use
of the ticket punch in clinical examinations of subjects who are older:
A sixteen year old boy, designated as G. H., was given a ticket
punch together with a card. After some little practice he was handed
another card and was asked to make some design, anything he
wanted to, to make it just as complete as possible, just as good as he
could, in other words, to finish the job. Below (No. 1-G. H.) is an
exact copy of the card.
The subject's capacity for mental work was shown to be subnormal by the fact that it was found necessary to prod him continually in order to keep him at the task after the first three or four
minutes of work. This lack of capacity for mental work did not
appear to bear any direct relation to the subject's idea of completeness, however, as he could not be induced to say that the job was
CARD MO. I. G H. CARD MO I. ?.H. CARD M0.2-S.H.
a
3 O 0 A
? o 0 ?
?c " ? D
5 ?
c " D &
* O O
O O <5
<j rj* S>
Q & C>
t? *" O
Q ^7 ^ ?> O
c ??> 0 ?>
Q & 0 % c? ?
& Q Q P
,?.' O
c
T>
o
& <J
O ^ /
_ * ?
162 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
done until after it had been shaped according to his notion of completeness. It will be seen by comparison that this card is very much
more complete as well as more symmetrical than is card No. 1-S. H.
The hole marked with a " represents an error in coordination
as the subject was observed to try to erase it and was heard to remark
to himself "pshaw".
Another fifteen and a half year old boy designated as S. H., was
given a ticket punch, together with a card, and after some little
practice was also given another card and asked to make something,
anything he could make the easiest, to make it as complete as possible,
to finish the job. The subject worked faithfully at the task for a
period of ten minutes during which time the following conversation
took place. Examiner.?"What are you going to make?" S.?
"You don't need to know." E. (Always after a long pause).?
"What are you making?" S.?"You'll see when I get through."
E.?"What are you making, a house?" S.?"You'll see when I am
through." E. (Purposely repeating the same question).?"What
are you making, a house? " S.?" You'll find out when I get through."
E. (After longer pause).?"Are you through?" S.?"You'll see
when I am through." E.?"What are you making, a ticket?"
S. (Rather sharply).?"You'll know, I told you, when I'm through."
E. (When S. had ceased to work).?"Are you through?" S.?"Yes,
I'm through." E. (Taking the card).?"What is it?" S. (After
short pause, smiling).?"Why that's a ticket." (Note that the examiner made two suggestions, the latter being effective.)
Above (No. 1-S. H.) is an exact copy of the card as finished by the
subject. The examiner then proceeded to punch the design of a shoe
sole, or track, and after some comments upon it the subject was asked
to make one like it. He was given another card, but incidentally the
one which the examiner had prepared was hidden from view so that
the subject was thrown upon his visual memory. No. 2-S. H. is an exact copy of the second card as finished by the subject. From these
three examples it may be seen that subject S. H. possesses a greater
capacity for mental work, but at the same time is much less highly
developed in point of symmetry and the sense of completeness than is
subject G. H.
We append also the complete charts for these two subjects,
together with a copy of the preliminary report which was given in the
case of S. H. Similar charts and reports were made out for all those
brought to the laboratory, a copy of each being sent to the parents
or guardian, to the superintendent's office, and to the teacher in
case the child was in attendance at the public schools.
A STUDY OF DEFECTIVE PTJPlLS 163
Appendix.
Report of preliminary examination of subject, S. H., aged fifteen
and one-half years, of the city of Tacoma, Washington, examined at
the laboratory of the Educational Clinic, of the University of
Puget Sound, on October 28, 1912.
Physiological age.?Fifteen and one-half years.
Pedagogical age.?One year.
Degree of mental development.?That of an eight and one-half
year old child.
Anamnesis of family. On the father's side, the father was
killed in the army, the mother died at about 76. One brother and
one sister. On the mother's side, both parents died at about 69.
Three brothers and one sister living, one sister having died at
the age of 35. Subject has one sister living, aged ten years, and one
sister who died at the age of four years with spinal meningitis, probably caused from measles and and lack of nourishment.
Personal history.?Subject is the eldest of three children (see
above), was of normal size at birth. Conditions at time of parturition
were normal excepting that delivery was unusually laborious. No
irregularities were observed until at the age of about six weeks when
the subject suffered from a fall which affected his head causing considerable swelling. Subject has never attended school very much,
hence has not attained much in the way of pedagogical learning.
Has always manifested a halting nervous tendency in his effort to
talk, being delayed more than three years beyond the normal time
when a child should ordinarily learn to talk.
Anamnesis of the case.?From the time intelligence began to
manifest itself marked tendencies of inability have been observed,
chiefly with reference to learning to talk, which no doubt caused a
delay of all the mental processes. In general the case appears to be
one of gradual lagging behind in point of mental development, while
in point of physiological development the subject has gone beyond
the normal person of the same age.
Status prcesens.?The examination shows the subject to be
above the normal for one of his age in respect to weight and vital
capacity, height both standing and sitting, with the greatest irregularity in the case of sitting height. In point of head measurement, the
girth is super, while the length and width are both subnormal. As
tested by the Binet scale of measurement the subject has the mental
development of an eight and one-half year old child, which would
put him in the class commonly designated as morons. In respect to
164 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
SUBJECT EXAMINED AT UNIVERSITY CLINIC JANUARY 26, 1912. G. H.
SUBJECT EXAMINED AT UNIVERSITY CLINIC JANUARY 26, 1912. G. H.
A STUDY OF DEFECTIVE PUPILS. 165
ft A. WT. M.C. Vh UST. KSf. ? COR. US. HI. Htf. CI. CS. ct. cort. m s.h. sjf. a k. tx j. cm* Ml.
/7 / 1 /I CHART cr COMPARATIVE HEASURENENU
,^''V
K
9
J
7
6
sT
J
Z
/
COftTlNUOUS HUE EQUALS SUBJECT.
BROKEff lIKt FflOAlS tlQRHAl FERStJtt 5AHE AGE tDO SEX
i r
%' ?* 4 I i ? "f" ^ ^ ^ ? 10 ON Stmt ?{ML5 m?AL
SUBJECT EXAMINED AT UNIVERSITY CLINIC OCTOBER 28, 1912.?S. H.
SUBJECT EXAMINED AT UNIVERSITY CLINIC OCTOBER 28, 1912.?S. H.
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
steadiness of nerves, the subject appears to be above the normal.
In respect to attention, the large majority of his actions fall under
the head of non-voluntary attention. As is usually found to be the
case with subjects of this class the aesthetic judgment is much more
highly developed than is the rational judgment. The subject is
designated as one of the ''suppressed" type, requiring in practice
that all his activities be constantly prodded in order to keep him at
his work.
(a) Informal tests employed. For memory.?Examiner exhibits
some piece of apparatus, as for example, set of wooden cubes, and
asks subject whether or not he has seen them before. E. asks S.
when he last visited the room. E. exhibits pictures or photographs
and asks S. whether he recognizes them. E. exhibits piece of gum
or candy and offers to give it to S. if he will say from memory a certain sentence. (E. makes up sentence, concerning the candy, very
much longer than test sentences for one of S.'s age).
For imagination.?E. makes up imaginative story of what he
saw on the way and asks S. to do likewise. (S. No. 3 would invariably
make up fanciful stories.) E. exhibits some of the standard ink
blots and asks S. what they look like. E. asks two of the subjects
to dramatize "The Hare and the Tortoise," or "Jack and Jill." E.
tests for various kinds of imagery, as visual, auditory, gustatory,
motor, tactile, etc.
For judgment.?E. says to S., "Suppose the house should get on
fire what could we do?" E. exhibits some article, say a book, and
asks S. to tear off from a large sheet a piece of wrapping paper big
enough to wrap the book. E. places a thin board on two supports
and asks S. whether he thinks the board strong enough to hold up
E. E. exhibits a Chinese doll and an American doll and asks S.
which is the prettier. (In our experience we have found that the
average feebleminded child is more or less confused by the use of
the comparatives).
For emotions.?E. relates pathetic story to teacher in presence of
S. E. displays American flag and relates war stories. E. sharply
reproves S. without cause. E. reflects upon the honesty of some
relative of S.
For attention.?E. introduces the game of "Simon says thumbs
up." E. displays picture card with pasteboard form pictures of
various things, as bird, dog, doll, gun, watch, boy, pony, automobile,
etc.
For interest.?The last-named test was also used as a means of
determining the native interest of the" subject.
A STUDY OF DEFECTIVE PUPILS. 167
(b) The form board, needle-threading, and deSanctis tests.?The
form board used was the one designed and used by Dr Henry H.
Goddard. In our work in Tacoma we found this an excellent means
of determining the general state of nervous control, the sense of
completeness (see in this connection our description of the ticket
punch observation), capacity for mental work, and other like traits.
The needle-threading test was also devised by Goddard and was
used by the writer to test capacity for mental work, steadiness of
nerves, as well as degree of attention.
The deSanctis test is described in Whipple's "Manual of Physical
and Mental Tests." The large card containing geometrical figures
was used alone to test degree of attention, being similar in principle
to the "cancellation tests."
(c) The kymograph was used for making records of tapping;
steadiness of nerves, holding; muscle fatigue, gripping; reaction time,
sight and sound; attention, shifting.
(d) Complete chart.?Age?taken in years and half years.
Weight?taken in kilograms. Vital capacity?taken in cubic
centimeters, wet spirometer being used. Vital index?ratio of
weight in kg. to vital capacity in cc. Height standing and sitting
measured in centimeters. Correlation?taken in percentiles. Head
girth, length and width taken in metric measurements with anthropometric tape and head calipers. Cephalic index?the percentage
of the length which the width represents. Grip right and left hand?
taken with Smedley dynamometer. Correlation?the percentage of the
right hand strength which the left represents. Steadiness of nerves?
measured with steadiness tester, and sometimes, in case of older
subjects, by aiming. Rate of movement?measured by tapping.
Attention?in case of younger and all badly defective subjects, determined by use of deSanctis geometrical chart. In case of older
and less badly defective subjects, determined by cancellation tests.
Memory?rote memory and logical memory were tested by use of
digits and sentences, and meaningful prose selections. Impressibility
was tested by giving subject a piece of memory stuff to learn. Retention was tested by reference to previous experiences of subject.
Recall was tested by requiring subject to reproduce previously learned
material. Train of thought?tested by number of words subject
could say in given time, say five minutes. Also as to regularity by a
study of the list of words given by subject in free association. Whether
based upon ideation or sensation, by observing subject when producing list of words and comparing list with objects in room, Judg168 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ment?tested by Binet's set of pictures for aesthetic judgment, and
for rational judgment, by problems of situation requiring "what to
do" solutions (see under a above). Capacity for mental work?
in case of younger and badly defective subjects the form board and
the de Sanctis geometrical chart were used, while in the case of older
and less defective subjects, the juxtaposed triangle test and the ticket
punch test were used. A very simple yet rather effective test was to
require subjects to cut all the leaves in a new book. (This has the
advantage of being a real problem, and when introduced incidentally,
has been found a splendid test of capacity for mental work even for
normal adults.) Volition?for this determination we depended
chiefly upon the information received from the teacher and from the
parents. (For example in the case of a certain subject the mother
stated, "Ever since he was old enough to walk and talk it seemed to
upset his temper every time I asked him to do anything, especially
if he happened to be occupied at something else at the time." This
would seem to be pretty conclusive proof of a case of precipitate will.
Again, in the case of another subject we found it impossible, even
after repeated visits to the room, to induce her to blow in the wet
spirometer. As a last resort all the pupils in the room were lined
up, with the above-mentioned subject last in the line, and required
to pass by the "machine" and to "give it a big blow." Our subject
would not even then. Finally the subject was placed in the middle
of the line and in that way was half induced, half coerced, to consent
to the treatment This would seem to indicate rather clearly a case
of obstructed will, and especially since the same was found to be true
with reference to practically all of her work.) Emotions?in the
case of younger and badly defective subjects, the tests described
under a above were used, while in the case of older and less defective
subjects measurements were taken by means of a galvanometer
connected in a circuit of two dry batteries with the subject. Considerable experimenting was done with this test in order to reduce
to a minimum the irregular physical contact with the electrodes.
A form of brass electrode was devised which came in contact with
the hand diagonally across the palm, the shape of the electrode
being almost round with rather deep grooves cut crosswise on the top
side. It was observed with the use of this form of electrode that,
when on account of emotion the subject would move different parts
of the body, the contact with the electrodes remained so nearly
uniform as not seriously to affect the current by increased or decreased
pressure area as was the case with the flat electrodes. The subject
being thus placed in the circuit a series of varying stimulations were
applied, such as the recitation of poetry of different sentiments, as
A STUDY OF DEFECTIVE PUPILS. 169
Dickens' "Christmas Carol," the selection entitled "Rienzi to the
Romans," "An Order for my Mother's Picture," or one of Riley's
poems; arousing the emotion of apprehension or fear by the skilful
relating of exciting adventures; the singing of college songs accompanied by piano in an adjoining room without announcement; sharp
rebuke in presence of others (this usually aroused the emotion of
anger). A strange unexpected noise in the room, as a shrill whistle,
the dropping of a heavy weight, or the sudden rushing of some one
into the room usually affected the most composed subjects, immediately after which the needle on the galvanometer would show a
deflection of from two to four degrees above the "rest" reading.
School age?computed on the basis of the findings of Ayres, i.e.
that the average pupil completes the eight grades in about ten years.
For example, a normal or average pupil at the age of seven would have
a school age of one minus, a pupil at the age of eleven would have
a school age of just four, etc., whereas some subjects at the age of
eleven were found to have a school age of only two, and two of the
subjects in the special room at the age of sixteen were found to have
a school age of less than two years. Mental development?this
trait was determined by the application of the Binet scale of measurement for mental intelligence.1
1 The original charts representing these and other studies of individual differences are now
in the exhibition room of the School of Education of the University of Washington. They were
made on a good grade of window shade material 30 by 40 inches, with three heavy leather eyelets placed on the top edge of each chart. Open and shut metal rings about 2 inches in diameter
were placed in these eyelets, thus holding together as many charts as might be desired for any
particular occasion. In using the charts for illustrating the lectures which were given, they could
be conveniently turned back over an easel, or by dispensing with the rings and providing three
metal pins about 4 inches long placed at the proper distance apart on the wall or on a cross piece
fastened to the top of the easel, the charts could be all hung on the pins and removed one at a
time during the course of the lecture. There are more than twenty of the charts altogether,
including the author's illustration of Professor Thorndike's statement?"If the scale of measurement is made fine enough no two persons are alike in any trait." There is also in the collection
a complete compilation, in so far as data were obtainable at the time, of all the norms for physical
traits of boys and girls.
This compilation included the harmonizing of the tables by figuring them all out in terms
of the metric system, and calculating the half years in cases where this had not been done by
the author from whom the norms were taken. These norms were thus compiled, harmonized,
and filled in for both boys and girls from the age of six to eighteen years. This piece of work
was done by Miss Vent in connection with a second course in Educational Clinical Work, and
was found most convenient as a working tool in the making of comparative charts.
