A New Research Fellowship at Stanford University
==================================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.

Through the co-operation of the estate of the late Dr C. Annette Buckel,
of Oakland, a research fellowship for the study of feebleminded children has
been established at Stanford University. The department of education, under
the direction of its head, Professor E. P. Cubberly, will have the appointment
of the fellow, who will work in co-operation with Professor Lewis M. Terman.
The first appointment will be for the academic year 1914-15. This is the first
foundation for this sort of work in any California university.
Dr Buckel was an Oakland physician and was widely known for her charitable work in Oakland and for her interest in feebleminded, backward and delinquent children. On her death her estate was left in trust to Miss Charlotte S.
Playter, of Piedmont,^ and the money was to be used to advance the condition
of backward and feebleminded children. Miss Playter has turned the money
over to Stanford University. The income amounts to about $500 a year, and
the board of trustees of the university have added an additional $500 to the
fellowship. It is hoped to increase this sum so as to make possible a thorough
and constructive study of the whole problem of mental deficiency.
Clinical Psychology at University of Pittsburgh Summer School.
The School of Education of the University of Pittsburgh this summer
offers superior opportunities to teachers, psychologists, nurses, and physicians
for the study of feebleminded, backward and other types of mentally deviating
children. The courses will begin June 29 and continue to August 22. Classes
for exceptional children will be started July 6, and continue for five weeks in
charge of three special teachers. The teaching of music, domestic science, and
gardening will receive supervisory attention from regular specialists on the School
of Education faculty. The work includes the academic branches, gardening,
wood, raffia, clay and reed work, pottery, cooking, sewing, sensori-motor exercises,
games, plays, calisthenics, and music. The children selected will represent a
greater range of cases than can be found in colonies or institutions, and will grade
nearer the type of cases which, in future, will be found in the special classes of the
public schools. Under the immediate supervision of Dr J. E. Wallace Wallin,
students may take the special class work, together with the following courses:
NEWS AND COMMENT. 55
clinical psychology and the study and care of feebleminded and backward children;
psycho-educational pathology and educational therapeutics; the psycho-educational clinic; social investigation; manu-mental and industrial work for the
feebleminded and backward. One of the local medical inspectors, Dr J. M.
Fetterman, will assist in the clinical course.
Summer Courses in Systematic and Applied Psychology at University of Pa.
The University of Pennsylvania has announced training courses in experimental, educational, and social psychology for expert special teachers, social
workers, educational experts, and clinical psychologists. During the six weeks,
July 6 to August 14, 1914, the following courses will be given:?
Practical Courses.
5 S. Abnormal Psychology.?Dr S. D. Ludlum.
11S. Child Psychology A, Infancy and Childhood. Half Course.
First three weeks.?Assistant Prof. E. B. Twitmyer.
12 S. Child Psychology B, Adolescence. Half Course. Second
three weeks.?Assistant Prof. Twitmyer.
30 S. The Psychological Clinic A. One hour daily demonstration of
the mental characteristics of exceptional children.?Dr F. N.
Maxfield.
31 S. The Psychological Clinic B.?Dr Maxfield.
32 S. Orthogenic Methods A. One hour directed observation of work
with the restoration and observation class and with a Montessori
class, including demonstrations of articulation training and
corrective and hygienic gymnastics.?Prof. Lightner Witmer
and Assistant Prof. Twitmyer.
33 S. Orthogenic Methods B.?Prof. Witmer and Assistant Prof.
Twitmyer.
35 S. Orthogenics.?Assistant Prof. Twitmyer.
36 S. Social Factors of Juvenile Efficiency.?Dr Maxfield.
45 S. Clinical Tests and Measurements. Including the BinetSimon and other tests of mental age.?Dr David Mitchell.
46 S. Clinical Field Work. Four hours daily investigation of cases
from the Psychological Clinic and University Hospital dispensaries, including moral cases, such as truants, incorrigibles
and other delinquents.?Prof. Witmer, Dr.Maxfield, Mrs. Bryant,
and Miss Glenn.
Systematic Courses.
1S a. General Psychology. Lectures. Half Course. First three
weeks.?Dr Mitchell.
2 S a. Mind and Body. Lectures. Half Course. Second three weeks.?
Dr Mitchell.
1S b. General Psychology. Laboratory. Half Course. First three
weeks.?Dr S. L. Reed.
2 S b. Mind and Body. Laboratory. Half Course. Second three
weeks.?Dr Reed.
56 NEWS AND COMMENT.
3 S a. Genetic Psychology. Lectures. Half Course. First three
weeks.?Dr S. W. Fernberger.
4 S a. Behavior. Lectures. Half Course. Second three weeks.?Dr.
Fernberger.
3 S b. Genetic Psychology. Laboratory. Half Course. First three
weeks.?Dr Fernberger.
4 S b. Behavior. Laboratory. Half Course. Second three weeks.?
Dr Fernberger.
Advanced Courses.
61 S. Qualitative Analysis A. First three weeks.?Assistant Prof.
Twitmyer and Dr Reed.
62 S. Qualitative Analysis B. Second three weeks.?Assistant Prof.
Twitmyer and Dr Reed.
67 S. Clinical Methods.?Dr Maxfield.
99 S. Individual Laboratory.?Assistant Prof. Twitmyer.
In addition to the regular staff of the Psychological Laboratory and Clinic,
the following clinical and special class teachers will conduct observation classes
and give demonstrations:?
Mary E. Marvin, Principal Mary E. Marvin Home, Secane, Pa.; Betty
B. Spencer, teacher in Milwaukee School for Deaf Children; Kathryn Crain,
teacher in speech class of Psychological Clinic; Oscar E. Gerney, Assistant
Instructor in Gymnastics, Department of Physical Education; Emily Slugg,
teacher Special Class, Harriet Beecher Stowe School, Philadelphia; Belle
Thomson, Kindergartner, Public School No. 10, Manhattan, New York City.
An illustrated circular describing these courses may be had by addressing
a postcard to the Laboratory of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa.
