Materialism
=============

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Art. I.?
BY J. M. WINN, M.D.
Formerly Resident Physician of Sussex House Lunatic Asylum.
Now that the storm of indignation which was excited by Dr.
Tyndall's Address, delivered before the British Association at
Belfast in August last, has somewhat subsided, the proper time
has arrived for taking a calm and dispassionate view of the
materialistic doctrines, which the Professor so loudly though
eloquently espoused; and for testing their value with regard to
biological and mental science. Had it not been for the bright
glitter of the Professor's eloquence, it is questionable whether
his vehement advocacy of Materialism wt?uld have attracted so
much attention. His remarks are not original, and he must
only be considered, if we rightly apprehend his meaning, as
the supporter of the views of Democritus, Lucretius, Darwin,
Huxley, Herbert Spencer, et hoc genus omne; nevertheless,
as six thousand copies of his printed Address were published in
less than two months after its delivery, it shows how attractive
the style of the Doctor's writing must be; and it is but just
that his arguments, which may be considered those of scientific
materialists in general, should receive a careful and candid
criticism.
In my remarks I shall chiefly follow the text of the Pro-
fessor's Address as it was delivered and reported in the Times;
for the reprint which was subsequently published, in which
there are both omissions and additions, greatly qualify the
original meaning.
It is no excuse for the imperfections of the Address that it
was written, as he states, in Switzerland, under some disad-
KO. I.?NEW SERIES. B
2 MATERIALISM.
vantages. The President of the British Association is placed
in a most responsible position, and is looked up to as a high
authority on scientific questions. He should adhere strictly to
facts, and not indulge in wild speculations on the origin of life
and mind.
Professor Tyndall opens his Address with a sketch of the
atomic philosophy, as propounded by Democritus and his suc-
cessors. Their speculations, though extremely interesting, are
so well known as to require little comment, except in so far
as they prove that the atomic theory, which he preaches as
zealously as if it were a new religion, is more than two thou-
sand years old. His admiration for, and faith in, Lucretius are
unbounded. He remarks, with evident satisfaction, Lucretius
notions that the mechanical shock of atoms is the all-suffi-
cient cause of things, and that the constitution of nature has
not been " in any way determined by intelligent design ; and
he quotes the following atheistical passage from the poets
writings: " If you will apprehend and keep in mind these
things, nature, free at once, and rid of her haughty lords, is
seen to do all things spontaneously of herself, without the
meddling of the gods." After this, no wonder that Plato an
Aristotle are dismissed with scant praise.
In enquiring into the causes which checked the advance o
science during the many centuries that passed unmarked by
any philosophic discovery, after the days of Pythagoras, Hip-
parchus, and Ptolemy, the Professor mentions the various
causes assigned by other writers, and then proceeds to spea~
with very bad taste of the introduction of Christianity as one
of the stumbling-blocks in the path of progress, though he pays
a great and glowing tribute to the heroic fortitude and pure
lives of the early Christians. How could he do otherwise .
He evidently considers that the benefits conferred by Chris-
tianity are to be reckoned as of small importance it science be
at stake. I cannot be surprised at this, when I see by a ^ote
in the reprint that one of his great authorities is the infidel
Renan.
It is painful to notice throughout the Address the tendency
to place religion in antagonism to science, as if we were living
in the days of the Inquisition, and it was necessary for I)r.
Tyndall to come forward as the champion of free-thought.
Never has there been a time of such entire civil and religious
liberty as now, when even the atheist Bradlaugh can spout his
blasphemy in Hyde Park or Trafalgar Square without the
slightest hindrance; surely this ought to satisfy the Professor.
In the present century some of our best scientific workers have
been members of the clerical profession. Few names among
geologists are more distinguished than that of the Rev. \V.
MATERIALISM. 3
D. Conybeare, the discoverer of the Plesiosaurus, or that
of the Rev. Mr. White, of Selborne, as a naturalist; and
it happens somewhat curiously at this present time, as if to
refute Dr. Tyndall, that two of the observers appointed to
watch the transit of Venus were the Rev. Father Perry,
Astronomer of Stonyhurst College, and the Rev.. W. Sid-
greaves, also of Stonyhurst, both members of the Roman
Catholic Church, which has been generally looked, upon as the
most intolerant of religions. Carried away by this hostile spirit,
he seems determined to deprive the poor disbeliever in the
almighty atom, of every crumb of comfort, for,, when speaking
of Newton, he says: " When the human mind has achieved
greatness, and given evidence of extraordinary power in any
domain, there is a tendency to credit it with< similar power in
all other domains. Thus theologians have found comfort in the
thought that Newton dealt with the question of revelation for-
getful of the fact that the very devotion of his powers through
all the best years of his life to' a, totally different class of ideas,
not to speak of any natural disqualification,.tended to render
him less, instead of more, competent to deal with theological
and historical questions." I do not agree in this estimate of
Newton. He was endowed with such high reasoning powers,
to which his imagination was always under subjection, that he
could hardly fail to make a sound deduction from any descrip-
tion of facts that were fairly set before him. He was not only
well able from his intellectual capacity to comprehend religious
truth, but was especially so, from the fact of his having devoted
much time and attention to theological subjects, as is proved
by his work on the Prophecies, and his letters on the existence
of a Deity, written at the request of Dr.. Bentley. A man is
disqualified for giving a correct opinion on any particular sub-
ject by one or other of two causes, either by natural inaptitude,
or from his mind being warped by too exclusive attention to
some special study. Now we think that both these causes
apply with especial force to the Professor himself. In him the
imagination prevails over the reasoning power, and he is more
given to flights of fancy than to patient and calm reflection;
and, moreover, his mind is evidently biased by the fact that
his studies have been chiefly directed to the elucidation of the
phenomena of heat, light, radiation, and magnetism. It would
have been more prudent if he had adhered to those subjects of
which he had been so distinguished an expositor, and refrained
from trespassing on the fields of psychology and medicine.
When he attempted to write on fever germs, he forgot the old
adage, Ne sutor ultra crepidam. But there was a moral
grandeur about Newton which peculiarly fitted him for the per-
is 2
4 MATERIALISM.
ception and reception of ethical and religious truth. Although
he was the greatest natural philosopher that ever lived, there
was in him none of that conceit or intellectual pride so con-
spicuous in the writings of many of the physiologists and
philosophers of the present day. To him the proverbial saying,
" Science puffeth up," does not apply; for his modesty was so
great that it has been reported of him that he compared
himself to a child gathering pebbles on the sea-shore, and
occasionally picking up one brighter than those found by his
companions.
The arrogance of some of these modern philosophers is
glaringly displayed in an anonymous article which appeared
in a leading periodical, from which the following extract is
taken :?" Among the legitimate solaces of the toils of the modern
biologist, there should certainly be reckoned the grim delight,
which he were less than human if he did not feel, in terrifying
Mrs. Grundy. Merely to hear a Huxley or a Spencer shout
' Boh ' to a flock of the terrified orthodox is amusing; but to
the man himself who makes it, the fun must be even perilously
fascinating." If the writer of this article, so conspicuous for
its choice English and gentlemanly tone, has seen Dr. Tyndall's
Address, the Professor's attack on religion must have caused
him " grim delight" indeed. In reply to the covert insult, we
have only to observe, that although the Archbishop of Canter-
bury and other timid divines have admitted the possibility that
the evolution theory may be true, there is a host of muscular
Christians and red-cross knights, both in and out of the Estab-
lished Church, ready to do battle with Huxley or Spencer or
any other champion of the evolution cause. Dr. Watts, of
Belfast, has recently given their advocate, Dr. Tyndall, some
staggering blows, in his able and eloquent pamphlet on
" Atomism." Dr. Ellicott, Bishop of Bristol and Gloucester,
a man whose zeal, learning, and calm defence of religious truth
has won the respect of all parties, has boldly come forward to
meet the attack. In an article on Christian Evidences, in the
last January number of the Sunday at Home, he makes the
following valuable remarks:?"We have neglected and even
discouraged the study of evidences; we have trusted entirely
to the inward testimony, and to subjective persuasions, and we
now find ourselves face to face with ably urged arguments and
startling facts, and a conflict forced upon us which it is worse
than disloyal to decline. Before us, able and confident oppo-
nents, calmly watching each hurried surrender of some hitherto
assumed truth; around us and behind us, either a cold orthodoxy
that declines to enter into controversy with sceptics, or a timid
and conventional religion, that has not the faith or the courage
to examine its true position, to test the real nature of its
MATERIALISM. 5
defences, and to prepare firmly and charitably to take part in
the inevitable encounter."
In referring to the scientific discoveries and remarked intel-
lectual activity of the Arabs during the Middle Ages, and the
intrusion of the Moors into Spain, the Professor seizes the
opportunity, as is his wont, in the opening part of his Address,
to sneer at Christianity; and remarking on the superstition of
the Spanish peasantry, he forgets that in the most civilised
countries of the nineteenth century there are still ignorant
classes of the community who think it an interference with
Providence to make use of vaccination, or to call in the aid of
a medical man during illness. He observes: " When smitten
with disease, the Christian peasant resorted to a shrine, the
Moorish one to an instructed physician." Be this as it ma}',
the Moors, with all their science, were not an unmixed benefit
to Spain, and their expulsion in the fifteenth century, and the
advantages which accrued therefrom, are thus spoken of by
Hume, an author for whom Dr. Tyndall professes great admira-
tion, and who has no Christian proclivities: " Spain, which
had hitherto been almost entirely occupied within herself, now
became formidable by the union of Arragon and Castile, in the
persons of Ferdinand and Isabella, who, being princes of great
capacity, employed their force in enterprises the most advan-
tageous to their combined monarchy. The conquest of Gra-
nada from the Moors was then undertaken and brought near
to a happy conclusion. And in that expedition the military
genius of Spain was revived: honour and security were attained,
and her princes, no longer kept in awe by a domestic enemy so
dangerous, began to enter into all the transactions of Europe,
and make a great figure in every war and negotiation." * It
was at this time, too, and under the generous patronage of
Isabella, that Columbus discovered a New World. If the power
of the Moors had continued triumphant in Spain, would it have
done more for civilisation and scientific progress than Christi-
anity did, even overrun as it was at that time by error and
superstition ?
I would not for a moment underrate the benefit that science
has conferred on mankind. By her mastery over the powers of
nature she has established the means of communication be-
tween the most distant regions of the earth ; has brought the
productions of other countries to enrich our own, and carried
the light of Christianity nearly over the whole world. Never-
theless, it is questionable whether science has ever done as
much to ennoble mankind as art and literature, in both of
which pursuits Spain shone conspicuously in her palmy days.
After a short sketch of the well-known discoveries of Coper-
* Hume's History of England, chap. xxv.
MATERIALISM.
nicus and Giordano Bruno, Dr. Tyndall refers with great
admiration to the materialistic views of the latter philosopher,
who, he says, " Struck with the problem of the generation and
maintenance of organisms, and duly pondering it, came to the
conclusion that nature in her productions does not imitate the
technic of man. Her process is one of unravelling and unfold-
ing." ..." Matter is not the mere naked empty capacity
which philosophers have pictured her to be, but the universal
mother who brings forth all things as the fruit of her own
womb.'' These theories unmistakably exclude the idea of a
Creator and superintending Providence, and differ little, if at
all, from downright atheism. It is therefore unfair for Dar-
win and Dr. Tyndall, when they find that they have shocked the
public feeling, to say that they do believe in a God (after their
own fashion). It is by the help of such an empty protest that
many of their admirers, who have not time or opportunity to
examine their arguments closely, are led to adopt and believe
in doctrines which cannot be proved by the inductive process of
reasoning. It is curious and lamentable to see how Dr. Tyndall,
with this bigoted belief in molecular power, seizes with avidity
on any speculative remark which may have fallen from the pen
of some eminent man that may confirm his own opinion, whether
in accordance or not with the general teaching of the writer.
In this way he lays hold of some remarks of Descartes on the
phenomena of life, as if a consummate mathematician must
necessarily be an authority on physiology. He speaks of him
" as the first to reduce, in a manner eminently capable of bearing
the test of mental presentation, vital phenomena to purely
mechanical principles." In the same admiring spirit he men-
tions Gassendi, who was both a divine and a natural philo-
sopher, a strong supporter of the molecular hypothesis, and one
who Dr. Tyndall says contrived to outstrip Darwin. It seems,
after a careful comparison of the doctrines of the atomic
philosophers, that they may be divided into two classes?
those who believe that the magic atoms were created, and
those who must necessarily be driven to believe that they created
themselves.
The Professor, in referring to various eminent writers who
have held the atomic doctrine, in whole or part, mentions the
names of Newton and Dalton as if they had embraced the same
extravagant theory, whereas Newton's grand mathematical
law simply implied " that every particle of matter is attracted
by, or gravitates to, every other particle of matter, with a force
inversely proportionate to the square of the distanceand
Dalton's atomic theory was also of a totally different character,
and had reference to the chemical law of multiple proportions.
But even this ingenious hypothesis, which has been so valuable
MATERIALISM. I
to the science of chemistry, has, nevertheless, its discrepancies;
for, as the late Professor Fownes remarks* : " It is indispens-
able to draw the broadest possible line of distinction between
this, which is at the best but a graceful, ingenious, and, in its
place, useful hypothesis, and those great general laws of
chemical action which are the pure and unmixed result of
inductive research."
Unfortunately for the Professor, he has placed the argu-
ments of his great teacher, the atheist Lucretius, in juxta-
position with those of the giant Bishop Butler. The reasonings
of Lucretius, which he puts in the mouth of a supposed disciple,
are the well-known arguments of the materialistic school, viz.
that a mental picture of " living powers," " percipients or
perceiving powers" of " ourselves," cannot be formed " apart
from the organisms through which it is supposed to act"; that
consciousness is not a necessary element of the true self, because
the body may be deprived of consciousness during life by any
accident affecting the brain; and, in that case, " Where is the
man himself during the period of insensibility ?" that brain
disease will produce a thorough change of character, converting
a moral man into a debauchee, thereby showing that the so-called
immortal reason is nothing more than a healthy condition of
the brain.
In reply, Dr. Tyndall gives what he imagines would be the
bishop's answers, which I will abbreviate. The bishop is sup-
posed to say: " I do not profess to prove anything absolutely,
and I have over and over again insisted on the smallness of our
knowledge, or rather on the depth of our ignorance, as regards
the whole system of the universe." . . . " I admit that you
can build crystalline forms out of the play of molecular force."
. " I will go further, and acknowledge that even a tree or
flower might in this way be organised."*!- ..." Your atoms
are individually without sensation, much more are they without
intelligence. May I ask you, then, to try your hand upon this
problem ? Take your dead hydrogen atoms, your dead oxygen
atoms, your dead carbon atoms, your dead phosphorous atoms,
and all the other atoms, dead as grains of shot, of which the
brain is formed. Imagine them separate and sensationless;
observe them running together and forming all imaginable
combinations. This is a pure mechanical process, is seeable by
the mind. But, can you see or dream, or in any way imagine
how, out of that mechanical act, and from these individually
dead atoms, sensation, thought, or emotion are to arise ? I can
* A Manual of Chemistry. Fifth Edition. Revised by H. Bence Jones and
A. W. Hofman.
t We cannot believe that the bishop would ever have acknowledged that
inorganic matter could of itself make a living plant.
8 MATERIALISM.
visualise the waves of ether as they cross the eye and hit the
retina?and pursue to the central organ the motion thus
imparted at the periphery, and see in idea the molecules of the
brain thrown into tremors, but the notion baffles me that from
these physical tremors things so utterly incongruous with them
as sensation, thought, and emotion, can be derived." ....
" You cannot satisfy the human understanding in its demand
for logical continuity between molecular processes and the
phenomena of consciousness." This fanciful sketch of what Dr.
Tyndall believes to be Bishop Butler's opinions on the question
of materialism, is concluded (in the reprint of his Address, not
as it was delivered) by the following remarkable and inconsistent
admission: "7 hold the bishop's views to be unanswerable/"
Far better would it have been for the Professor's reputation if
he had calmly reflected on the above arguments before he
appeared on the platform of the British Association at Belfast,
and if he had then confessed the belief which he has put into
the mouth of Bishop Butler, and which has been held by some
of our profoundest thinkers?that it is inconceivable that
matter should think.
After enumerating all the writers whom he considers
favourable to his theory, from the earliest period downwards, he
comes to what he looks upon as the crowning-point of all
philosophy and knowledge, Mr. Darwin's hypothesis of evolution,
which he seems to regard as the greatest discovery ever made by
man, forgetting that it is not an immutable law, but only an
unverified theory. It is amusing to find him speaking of it as
coming slowly to birth, like the law of gravitation which Newton
pondered over for twenty years. In like manner, he says,
Darwin reflected on his idea for twenty-two years. He admits
that Lamarck had previously shadowed it forth, and that his
views on " the development of species out of changes of habit
and external condition" were fully set before the public by the
author of "Vestiges of Creation." I can remember when that
book appeared, and the furor it occasioned, an excitement equal
to that caused by Darwin's "Descent of Man." But it was a nine
days' wonder, and would have sunk into utter oblivion had it not
been revived by the publication of Darwin's work. The sharpest
criticism on the "Vestiges of Creation" was one I heard shortly
after the time of its appearance. A well-known geologist,
speaking of the book to a distinguished astronomer, said,
" That's a very clever book, but the author knows very little
about geology." The other replied, "I, too, thought it very
clever, but the author is ignorant of astronomy."
Neither Tyndall nor any other enthusiastic supporter of
Darwinism can believe that it is capable of being proved by
induction. The difficulties to be contended with in its present
MATERIALISM.
9
phase are, in truth, insurmountable. The chief argument in
its favour, that on which so much stress is laid, is nothing more
than a common fact, well known to all breeders of animals and
to every common gardener?that an endless variety of animals
and plants can be produced by careful selection, crossing, &c.
No one, however, has succeeded in producing a new genus,
or a decidedly new species. Can Darwin give a wiser reason for
the barrenness of mules than the one commonly received, that
the Deity has willed that there should be no confusion of species?
If the facts are pressed on the evolutionist, that the forms and
features of men and animals are the same now as they were
thousands of years ago, as depicted on the Egyptian monuments,
or as still traceable in the mummies of the pyramids, and that
the intellect of man has never been developed in a higher degree
than it was in the days of the Hebrew prophets and Greek poets,
the stereotyped answer is, that evolution requires not only
thousands, but billions upon billions of years for the development
of a new species. This is dreaming, not sober reasoning, and
is best suited for a poem, or a novel like Bulwer Lytton's clever
" Coming Race." The palaeontologist can read the records of the
past stamped on the crust of the earth, but who can read the
future of a million years to come? The mind of man has not
only a limited field of observation, but has also limits to its own
power, and it is not a healthy exercise for the mind to indulge
over much in the pleasures of the imagination. So far, however,
as we can judge from observation of the past, we see but little
prospect of ever bridging over the gulf which separates man
from the brute creation.
No one can refrain from admiring the genuine and hearty
enthusiasm with which Dr. Tyndall regards Darwin, in whom
he sees nothing but perfection, and of whom he speaks as if he
were the greatest philosopher that ever lived; but there are
many as delighted as he is with Darwin's fascinating descriptions
of animal and vegetable life, yet not so blinded by their zeal
as to believe in the unlimited application of the law of natural
selection. Dr. Tyndall quotes the habits of different species of
bees as proofs of the truth of this law, and as showing that the
skill of the hive-bee has been developed by evolution step by
step through inferior classes of bees. There are high autho-
rities, however, who think that the marvellous ingenuity of the
hive-bee was conferred directly, not indirectly, by the hand of
the Creator.
It would be an endless task to discuss all the difficulties
that beset the theory of evolution. It is impossible for Darwin
to answer the questions that are incessantly cropping up,
such as?Through what channel does the nightingale derive her
-song ? Are the wings of birds derived from the quills of the
10 MATERIALISM.
porcupine? Whence did the beaver gain his constructive
power ? How did the spider learn to spin her geometric web ? or
the carrier pigeon acquire her wonderful instinct ? Is the beauty
of flowers,which are the grace and ornament of the earth, due to
natural selection ? Questions like these might be asked ad infi-
nitum, and in vain. All naturalists have observed the gradation
of organisms, from the lowest forms of being up to that of man,
on which Darwin and the materialistic physiologists lay so
much stress, as well as the similarity of their bodily functions
and conformations, showing the archetypal unity which is
found throughout all nature ; but this fact does not exclude the
probability of each species or genus being a separate act of
creation, which is the only solution of the difficulty.
One reason for Dr. Tyndall's sympathy with Darwin may
possibly be (if the Professor is not mistaken in his opinion)
that he does not believe in a Final Cause. These are Dr. Tyn-
dall's words in reference to him: " It is the mind, thus stored
with the choicest materials of the teleologist, that rejects teleo-
logy," seeking to refer the wonders of the animal and vegetable
kingdom to natural causes. He styles this " the method of nature,
not the ' technic ' of a human artificer." Some evolutionists,
who have a sort of belief in a First Cause, are perpetually
accusing their opponents of anthropomorphism, exulting in the
conviction that their own idea is more consistent with reason
than the old-world belief in a Creator of all things. No one can
seriously believe that the word Creator is intended to convey
the notion of the " technic of man " ; but it is our only mode of
expressing our conception of the might and mystery of the
Author of all things. How can man, with his finite faculties
and limited language, speak of Infinite Power in other than
finite words ?
After discussing the evolution hypothesis, Professor Tyn-
dall's materialistic views are given still more strongly when he
comes to speak of the conservation of energy. He asserts that
" vital as well as physical phenomena " are brought " under the
dominion of the law of causal connection " ; in other words, that
vital and physical forces are identical. This is an assumption
opposed to reason and experience. There is strong ground for
believing that G rove's doctrine of the correlation of force applies
to heat, electricity, chemical affinity, and motion; but there is
no proof that it can be extended to vital phenomena. " Corre-
lation of force" is a clear idea (and, as the late Professor
Whewell taught, all discoveries are owing to sound metaphy-
sical conceptions); not so clear the term " conservation of energy,"
which is not so explicit, but is now so frequently substituted for
it. Grove's doctrine has been very loosely applied by many
writers of the day in their endeavours to reconcile phenomena
MATERIALISM. 11
which have nothing in common. Before a correlation of forces
can be admitted, it is necessary, according to Mr. Justice Grove's
explanation, to prove a mutual convertibility?a see-saw sort of
action. Thus heat may mediately or immediately produce
electricity, electricity may produce heat. With a total disregard
of this clear statement, modern writers speak of the correlation
(forgetting to add the word " force") of leaves and roots, of mental
and nerve force, of vital and physical force, &c. If we apply
the test of Grove's theory to the consideration of vital phe-
nomena, we shall not find that a single instance has been
recorded in which vital and physical force have been found
interchangeable. No physicist has yet been found able to pro-
duce bioplasm* out of inorganic matter; no physiologist has
succeeded in discovering a positive proof of spontaneous genera-
tion ; nor has any experimental philosopher resuscitated a corpse
by means of galvanism. Until these improbable results have
been obtained, we must withhold our belief in the molecular doc-
trines of the present day, however eloquently and ably they may
be advocated. I confess that we can no more explain the nature
of vital than of any other force ; we know of its existence only
by seeing its marvellous effects in the growth and reproduction
of animal and vegetable organisms, and its power to resist those
terribly destructive physical forces which come into play as soon
as this mysterious power is withdrawn. This simple, common-
sense notion of vitality is more intelligible than any of the mole-
cular theories. If life is only the result of physical force, why
is it that a man, cceteris paribus, does not live for ever, and why
is the span of his existence limited to threescore years and ten?
To say the least of it, the term vital force, which so many of
the modern school of physiologists condemn, looking at it
merely in a scientific point of view, serves conveniently to group
together and generalise a large number of facts, which in our
present state of knowledge cannot be explained by physical
force.
Mr. Herbert Spencer, according to Dr. Tyndall, asserts that
vital actions are almost as physical as those that lead to the
coalescence of two globules of oil suspended in a mixture of
alcohol and water, which do not unite until the pellicles that have
formed around them burst. From similar combinations (he gives
them the misnomer of organisms), mounting up, step by step,
from one to another, he imagines that a living body is con-
structed. Had Dr. Tyndall and Mr. Herbert Spencer recog-
* I think Dr. Lionel Beale, in his work on Disease Germs, has given strong and
convincing reasons for substituting the term bioplasm for protoplasm, to signify
germinal or living matter, as the latter word has recently been used with such a
wide significance as to call forth the sarcasm?attributed to Max Miiller?" that
protoplasm, after creating everything in the universe, finished by creating itself!"
12 MATERIALISM.
nised the wonderful facts revealed by the microscope, which
some physicists are apt to despise, they would have perceived
that the oil globules, with their pellicles, are totally different
from the germinating cells of which a living body is built up.
These minute specks, as shown by the microscope, have the
powers of absorption, motion, and proliferation, and are, in fact,
true living germs. It is apparent that Dr. Tyndall and Mr.
Herbert Spencer are unacquainted with the first elements of
physiology.
The Professor calls Mr. Herbert Spencer " The Apostle of
the Understanding." Does he think that what he says of life,
which he defines as " a continuous adjustment of internal re-
lations to external relations," has won for him that title ? Can
anything be more indefinite than such a definition ?
Another theory of life is, that the vital structures are formed
by a sort of crystallisation. A crystal as much resembles a life
cell as an icicle does a warm, palpitating, living animal.
As regards the subject of instinct, the evolutionist believes
that it is to be accounted for by hereditary transmission; that
each animal is " not individually taught; its personal experience
is nil, but has the benefit of ancestral experience. In that
inherited organisation are registered all the powers which it
displays at birth." In this manner the chick learns " the very
complex co-ordination of eye, muscles, and beak," which enable
it, on " coming out of the egg, to balance itself correctly, run
about, pick up its food," &c. In all cases of this kind, the
evolutionist holds that the instinctive powers displayed by
animals are nothing more than the results of organic memory.
The law of hereditary transmission cannot be disputed, but the
evolutionist carries it to a fabulous length, and in the case of man
he asserts that the human brain is a register of "infinitely
numerous experiences received during the evolution of that
series of organisms through which the human organism
has been reached." If this be true, how is it that man, the last
evolved of all creatures, who must therefore have the largest
share of ancestral experience, falls so far short of many of the
lower animals ih co-ordinating power soon after birth ? How
is it that genius is so seldom inherited and still more rarely
transmitted ? A writer in the Quarterly Review for July 1874,
in an article on " Primitive Man," forcibly observes that " the
intellect of Aristotle and Newton, the art of Raphael and Shak-
speare and Mozart, have their claims to be no bestial develop-
ments," and that " their faculties are plainly seen to be different
in kind from the complex entanglements of many animal
instincts."
On the subject of time and space, Dr. Tyndall adopts Mr.
Herbert Spencer's views, and in not very clear language
MATERIALISM.
IB
attempts to prove that time and space are not forms of intuition
as Kant taught. His reasoning appears to amount to little more
than that contained in his vague definition of life, to which re-
ference has already been made; and is to the effect that " the
constant external relations experienced by all organisms will
have answering internal relations, and that we have such re-
lations in those of space and time; and being the constant
elements of thought, they become the automatic elements of
thought." The late Professor Whewell, one of the profoundest
thinkers of this century, makes the following remarks in his
" Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences," which are opposed to
Mr. Spencer's views: " Space and time are forms of per-
ception and intuition, not abstract general conceptions derived
from particular cases, but ideas to which we confine the impres-
sions of sense; particular times and spaces are facts of infinite
time and space."
In the face of such inconclusive arguments as Mr. Spencer's,
it cannot but excite surprise that Dr. Tyndall should look on
him with a sort of reverence, as if he were the impersonation of
pure reason. Not satisfied, however, with according him this
high honour, he is so strongly influenced by his own enthu-
siasm, that he cannot help, moreover, endowing him with a
small amount of poetical feeling, and believes it possible that
even in the serene atmosphere of his elevated position he may
occasionally be overcome by the same weakness as ordinary
mortals, and that his " ganglia are sometimes the seat of a
nascent poetic thrill"!
Towards the close of the Address, the Professor becomes
more decidedly materialistic, although in his reprint, and in
his preface, he intersperses statements contradicting himself,
from which it would seem that on subsequent reflection he
was startled at the terribly dangerous lengths to which his
visionary doctrines were leading him.
As to Mr. Darwin's " primordial form," he does not appear
to have any clearer ideas on the point than Mr. Darwin himself.
But Dr. Tyndall carries his views further back than to the
starting-point of a " primordial form." He says: " Can we
pause here ? We break a magnet, and find the poles in each
of its fragments. "We continue the process of breaking, but,
however small the parts, each carries with it, though en-
feebled, the polarity of the whole; and when we can break no
longer, we prolong the intellectual vision to the polar mole-
cules. Are we not urged to do something similar in the case
of life ?to cross the boundary of experimental evidence, and
discover in that matter which we, in our ignorance, . . . have
hitherto covered with opprobrium the promise and potency of
all terrestrial life ? " Is this wild flight of fancy a specimen of
14 MATERIALISM.
" the scientific use of the imagination " ? We really know nothing
about atoms, and the strangest notions have been entertained
concerning them ever since the days of Democritus; he
supposed them to be of various sizes ; one philosopher thought
they were invisible, and another that they had neither tops
nor bottoms. This latter hypothesis is very unfavourable to Dr.
Tyndall's theory of molecular polarity.
After the numerous instances adduced of the Professor's
belief in the power of molecular force to produce all the
phenomena of life, we unexpectedly find that he begins to
discover, just as he is about to wind up his discourse, that " there
are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in his
philosophy," and he confesses that he cannot explain the con-
nection between the nervous system and thought. He says, " We
soar into a vacuum when we seek to comprehend the connection
between them." Not even Mr. Herbert Spencer can throw
any light on this great mystery, and it baffles them both to
account for the innate feelings of awe, wonder, and reverence,
or for that religious sentiment, which Dr. Tyndall looks upon
as a " form of force " which is dangerous if not limited to its
proper sphere of emotion! The strongest contrast, however,
to the materialistic opinions so conspicuously brought forward
in the Address, as well as in Dr. Tyndall's other published
works, is exhibited in the following extract from the preface
to the reprint of the Address, which appeared about a month
after its delivery. " I have noticed during years of self-observa-
tion that it is not in hours of clearness and vigour that this
doctrine [material atheism] commends itself to my mind;
that in the presence of stronger and healthier thought it ever
dissolves and disappears, as offering no solution of the mystery
in which we dwell, and of which we form a part." It is deeply
to be deplored that Dr. Tyndall did not mention this fact
when he delivered his address at Belfast, and promulgated
doctrines which are calculated to undermine the faith of
thousands, and which, if true, would shake the very foundations
of all morality and religion.
I think I have now carefully examined all the arguments
which Dr. Tyndall has brought forward in favour of materialism,
and it must be admitted that he signally fails to verify his
theory. By his own confession, he but half believes in it
himself. The vagueness of his statement and his self-contra-
diction called forth a leading article in the Times of Saturday,
the 24th of October 1874; and on the following Saturday
Dr. Lionel Beale published a letter in the same journal, to
press upon Dr. Tyndall that " his position as a public teacher,
and the authority he wields as President of the British Asso-
MATERIALISM. 15
ciation, render it imperative, not only that he should at once
more accurately define the views he does entertain upon the
momentous and far-reaching scientific question he has de-
liberately, so many times and in so many ways, forced into
public notice, but that it is a duty he owes to science to state
more clearly than he has yet done the inferences in favour of
his doctrine." I believe that up to the present time Dr.
Tyndall has not answered the questions, which Dr. Lionel
Beale, from his position as a public teacher of physiology, and
as one of the highest living authorities on histology, had a
right to ask, and to which he might reasonably expect a reply.
The natural inference to be drawn from his silence is, that
Dr. Tyndall considers a prudent reticence to be the wisest
course.
And now I will take my leave of Dr. Tyndall; but before
concluding, it is desirable to make a few remarks on the
dogmas and scientific jargon of the new materialistic school of
physiology. The doctrines of this school have been gradually
gaining ground, and are most conspicuous in the writings of
the younger members of the medical profession. Slowly but
surely they are spreading through all classes of the community,
and especially exerting their baneful influence over the minds
of the rising generation of medical students. Hardly a month
passes but some young aspirant for fame contributes to the
pages of the medical journals a rechauffe of the materialistic
theories of life and mind which he has learnt at second hand,
and thinks to gain thereby a little ephemeral notoriety.
The modern materialistic school has done incalculable
mischief, morally as well as scientifically, not only by spreading
widely the flimsiest hypotheses, as if they were established
truths, but even the English language itself is getting corrupted
by the new philosophical nomenclature that has been adopted
in the endeavour to make the new theories intelligible. They
will soon require to publish a glossary of the new terms which
are accumulating fast. For instance, they call poetic emotion
the thrill of a ganglion; thought, cerebration; life, molecular
force ; creation, evolution ; the Deity, a primordial germ ; crime,
cerebral disease; &c.
The chief dogma of the new school is that mind and all its
faculties?perception, memory, will, reason, imagination, as
well as all moral attributes?are the result of bodily functions,
as if they were secretions from the brain, like those of the liver
or kidneys. They have various unintelligible modes of describ-
ing the phenomena of the mind. Its operations are spoken of
by some as the product of the caudate cells of the brain?by
others as a disturbance of the equilibrium of the nervous power?
16 MATERIALISM.
as expressions of material changes in the brain?as an emanation
from the body, &c. It seems strange that anyone can believe,
or expect others to believe, that assertions like these, unverified
by careful scientific inductions, can be substituted for what is
commonly understood by the word " mind." Mind is a fact,
although it cannot be demonstrated mathematically; its existence
is proved by our own consciousness, and its operations are
indelibly inscribed on the literature and art of ages. We know
its existence by its effects, and it would be as absurd to doubt
it as to doubt that of a God, although we cannot explain the
nature of either. That it is connected in a mysterious manner
with our organisation no one can disbelieve, but we defy any
modern physiologist to explain the connection. Even the
materialistic Dr. Tyndall, as we remarked before, says " we soar
into a vacuum " if we attempt to do so. The new school speaks
confidently of their ingenious speculations as if they were facts,
and as if recent researches had thrown a flood of light on the
functions of the brain and spinal cord ; but we should like to
ask whether any one really great fact has been elicited since
the discoveries of Sir Charles Bell and Marshall Hall. The
nervous fibres of sensation and motion have been traced a little
further towards the periphery of the brain, but we are as ignorant
as ever of the precise functions of the caudate nerve cells of the
cerebral convolutions; we can only surmise that it is through
them that sensations are perceived and volition exercised.
Many of the so-called discoveries of the most painstaking
cerebral physiologists are at variance with each other. Some
assert positively that memory is intimately connected with the
left frontal convolution of the brain; others as positively deny
it. It had been for a long time believed that the optic thalami
were closely connected with the upper extremities, as motor
centres; I find, however, by an article in the Lancet (Jan. 23,
1875) that recent experiments on rabbits, by Nothangel,
completely dislocate our ideas on the point, for he found that,
after destroying the whole of the optic thalami, the rabbits
were able to leap about. These facts show that physiologists
should pause before asserting that the highest mental manifes-
tations are only emanations from particular portions of the
brain, when they have not yet been able to determine the
centres of motion and sensation?questions which lie, as it were,
on the threshold of the enquiry. Speculations on the modes in
which the marvellous functions of the brain and nervous system
are carried on are very valuable in their way, and the hypo-
theses of men of genius have sometimes led to important dis-
coveries ; but speculative reasoning should be confined to essays
of a strictly suggestive character, not interspersed in a text-book
MATERIALISM. 17
such as Dr. Carpenter's "Mental Physiology," which, as he states,
has been written expressly for the " training and discipline of
the mind." It is to be regretted that he has entitled his work
"Mental Physiology," as it involves a contradiction; he might as
well have called it" Metaphysics of the Body." But, at the same
time that we allude to these defects, we bow with deference to
his opinion on all matters connected with questions of pure
physiology; it is only when he attempts to graft psychology on
physiology that we are at issue with him. For" instance, in his
explanation of the manner in which vision is produced, he speaks
of a correlation of mind force with nerve force, and of nerve
force with the chemical change which produces light. If by
correlation he means " correlation of force," which, as we have
already observed, necessitates mutual convertibility, he must
give an instance in which nerve force produces light; but this
he has not done. We are, however, gratified to find that Dr.
Carpenter does not believe that mind is altogether the result
of physical forces, as is shown in the following extract from
his recent writings. " In reducing the thinking man to
the level of ' a puppet that moves according as his
strings are pulled,' the materialistic philosopher places
himself in complete antagonism to the positive conviction
which, like that of the existence of an external world,
is felt by every right-minded man who does not trouble him-
self by speculating upon the matter, that he really does possess
a self-cletermining power, which can rise above all the prompt-
ings of suggestion, and can ruithin certain limits mould external
circumstances to its own requirements, instead of being com-
pletely subjugated by them." This and other admissions have
roused the indignation of the biologists, and physiological psy-
chologists, as they illogically call themselves. If they desire to
be thought consistent, they should openly declare themselves
materialistic physiologists. They differ from Dr. Carpenter in
asserting that every faculty of the mind is the result of molecular
force, to which they say the nerve cells are indebted for their
existence. Since the publication of Professor Tyndall's Address,
the materialistic physiologists have come out stronger than
ever, as if his rhetoric had stimulated them to greater exertions.
One writer lays it down, as if it were a geometrical axiom, that
" thought is the product of the cells of the grey matter of the
brain," and regards all who differ from him as the victims of a
" domineering prejudice " !
The materialistic physiologists express their belief that the
facts presented by the phenomena of insanity afford irrefrag-
able proof of the correctness of their theory, that the mind is
only a bodily organ. They point with an air of triumph to the.
NO. I.?NEW SEMES. C
18 MATERIALISM.
delirium and delusions of those cases of insanity in which brain
disease has been discovered after death. They also refer to the
benefits which often accrue from purely medical treatment.
This beneficial effect they look on as the clearest evidence of the
truth of their hypothesis, that mental affections are only diseases
of the body. They speak of this as a modern discovery, whereas
it was mentioned by Grassendi more than two hundred years
ago. That the mind may be perturbed during insanity, as in
the delirium of fever, from some bodily derangement, is un-
doubted ; but it is questionable whether there is positive evi-
dence of brain disease in all cases of acute mania, although
degeneration of the brain tissue is sure to be the effect of
insanity in chronic cases. It is a well-known fact that in un-
complicated cases of acute mania, where death ensues rapidly
from exhaustion, a post-mortem examination detects little more
than congestion of the bloodvessels of the brain and its mem-
branes, some subarachnoid effusion, and sometimes opalescence
of the arachnoid membrane, but this last appearance is not
peculiar to insane cases; the substance of the brain, however,
remains intact. Is it not to some kind of morbific force
we must look for the cause of a sudden outburst of acute
mania, rather than to mere congestion of the brain, which,
if to any considerable amount, would be more likely to
produce coma than frantic violence ? Be this as it may, and
even if it be admitted that insanity is one of the instances
in which the body acts on the mind, cannot the psychologist
point to innumerable examples of the mind acting on the
body ? How often in cases of nervous depression from mental
anxiety has the bright influence of hope restored health, when
all the drugs in the pharmacopoeia had failed ? And, again, on
the other hand, will not a moral shock suddenly convert a
healthy man into a raving lunatic ? Of what use would medicine
alone be in the treatment of the majority of cases of insanity,
if it were unaccompanied by moral restraint? A favourite
saying with the materialists is, that a man's happiness de-
pends on a healthy state of his digestive organs; yet the con-
verse is equally true, that a mental shock will immediately
arrest the functions of the stomach. Shakspeare, who was no
materialist, puts this well in Henry VIII.:
Read o'er this;
And after, this; and then to breakfast, with
What appetite you have.
It is to be regretted that Dr. Wilks, another zealous sup-
porter of the materialistic physiology, in an article in the
Journal of Mental Science for January 1875, gives his coun-
MATERIALISM.
tenance to all the extravagancies of the physical theory of life
and mind. This is the more to be deprecated because his
position as a teacher of medicine in one of our largest metro-
politan schools gives weight to his opinion on mental disease,
whilst it is evident from his own observations that his experi-
ence in this branch of medical science is limited indeed. Be-
fore noticing his remarks which have especial reference to
insanity, a few words must be said on some of the other points
which he has treated of in his paper on " The Theory of the
Mind from a Physiological Point ofView." Itis wearisome to hear
the disciples of this school perpetually talking of this method
of study, as if it were a novum organum, a new principle which
is to clear up all difficulties relative to the working of the
human mind. The same result was confidently anticipated from
craniology, when Grail and Spurzlieim first propounded that
pseudo-science. How many believers are there in it now ?
As a matter of course, like all this school, Dr. Wilks derives
his inspirations chiefly from the theories of Darwin and Huxley,
but he states that in the doctrine of unconscious cerebration
" lies the very pith of his paper." He thinks this doctrine,
which is still a vexed question among metaphysicians, will solve
many mental and moral problems.
It may be incidentally mentioned that Dr. Wilks has some
very singular notions on the subject of insanity; as he could
not have derived them from a practical acquaintance with the
subject, I can only conclude that he obtained them through the
medium of unconscious cerebration, which is supposed to do a
great deal of our thinking, without any trouble to ourselves,
like the working of a steam-engine. He suggests " that it is
the insane element which imparts what we call genius to the
human race "; and as great wits to madness often are allied, I
presume it is on that ground ?that he believes that it might
be advantageous for a man to marry into a family predisposed
to insanity, on the chance that one of his progeny might turn
out a genius; but he might beget an idiot instead; for
all medical men who have made careful enquiries into the
family history of their insane patients must have found,
even if they had not discovered the existence of insanity, that
but few ot the blood relations had escaped some hereditary
taint. Strongly impressed with this fact, I published six years
since a treatise " On the Nature and Treatment of Hereditary
Disease," in which I offered a theory that has never been con-
futed, that all hereditary diseases are interchangeable.
The impressions which Dr. Wilks receives from a visit to
an asylum are very peculiar, and different from those which are
generally experienced. He says: " In going into an asylum "
C 3
20 MATERIALISM.
..." I gaze on my fellow-creatures with awe, and not un-
frequently with admiration. My feeling' has sometimes been
rather that of envy than pity, and I should have had no hesita-
tion . in parting, had it been possible, with part of one's own
slow and prosaic nature for a portion of their confiding ecstasy."
Dr. Wilks would have told a different tale had he resided
for many years among the insane, and witnessed the misery of
the poor lunatics who imagined their souls were lost; heard
the blasphemy and obscenity of others; the distressing delu-
sions of those who fancy that their best friends and nearest rela-
tives are conspiring to ruin them; and learnt that the " confiding
ecstasy" which so charmed him was probably the delirious
exaltation of general paralysis. Had he observed this, and
much more that it is needless to detail, his beautiful vision of
insanity would soon have faded away. Dr. Wilks concludes his
paper by expressing a conviction that what he calls the scientific
mode of studying the mind?and this he confines to " the
teachings of the material world "?will tend to make men more
charitable and less self-seeking, and will promote " the leading
Christian virtue of loving one another."
It is idle for writers of the above class to talk of any-
thing approaching to religious tendency in their doctrine. If
the views of the materialists be true, the inevitable result must
be the destruction of all religious belief. If they do not abso-
lutely ignore a Deity, the only conception they have of a
Creator is, of a Power whose work was completed countless ages
ago, and who has ceased to preside over His handiwork. This
removes the Creator so far from us and our sympathies that
He becomes a mere vanishing point in the dim vista of
infinity.
Materialism cannot lead to the amelioration of mankind;
the ideas of a ruling Providence and a future state being aban-
doned, brute strength, lying, cunning, and selfishness would be
in the ascendant, patriotism would be a thing of the past, and
all the horrors of communism would follow. Fortunately, from
the constitution of human nature, it never has been nor can be
generally believed, for it is not from the ranks of the materialist
that we get a Philip Sidney, a Chevalier Bayard, a Lawrence,
or a Havelock.
