On The Treatment of Melancholia, or Lypemania
==============================================

21 Art. II.?.
BY A. BRIEBBE DE BOISMONT, tie la Faculte de Paris, late President de la Societe
Jlcdico-Psychologique, &c.
The description I have given of tlie symptoms of tlie species
of insanity called Melancholia, in another work, would lead to
the belief that this form of disease is not very amenable to
cure. That is, however, the opinion of the general public, of
many physicians, and even of those who are devoted to the
treatment of the insane, as to all forms of insanity. Looking
at the power of hereditary predisposition, its transmission from
generation to generation, the degenerative processes it induces,
and the numerous relapses it exhibits, one might almost be
inclined to admit the truth of this painful prognosis. But
when any one has treated a great number of insane cases for a
long series of years, he has the certainty impressed on his mind
that many of these cases return to society, very often exhibiting,
indeed, traces of their malady, but still capable of fulfilling
the duties of their professions, and even of leaving their families
in a good position.
As for myself, I find that in respect to mania, melancholia,
and partial insanity, I have noticed numerous cures, or, at least,
long remissions which are exceedingly like them. I met lately,
after an interval of more than forty years, a former inmate of
an asylum, whom I considered likely to remain there all his
life. He had, however, quitted it for many years, and had
married; he had also acquired an honourable competency, and
reasoned very sensibly in reference to his malady. Again, I
had been very intimate with a poet, whose connection with all
the celebrities of the day rendered his friendship very valuable,
and who furnished me with some important hints for acquiring
a knowledge of the human heart. He had been treated in a
private asylum, at a period still more distant than in the last
case, for a hypochondriacal affection, which made him think
he was every instant at the point of death. I had never lost
sight of him until his death, which recently occurred. His
reason was completely restored; and to hear him conversing
with that variety of tone, that brilliant display of imagery,
that delicate irony, and that charm of speech, which are found
only in Frenchmen who are true Parisians, no one would have
believed that he had been confined as a lunatic. Being aware
of his former malady, he had determined to remain in the
asylum.
22 THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA.
Many classes of insane patients may then recover, but in
order to avoid exaggeration, it is necessary to study carefully
the different elements of this fortunate result.
A certain number of melancholic cases recover once, twice,
and thrice, some without having recourse to medical aid, and
others by availing themselves of such assistance. Those who
recover at home are especially those who preserve their senti-
ments of affection, and do not feel any estrangement from their
family, and do not manifest any dangerous tendency. I
attended a young lady who fell from time to time into a state of
extreme despondency, used to burst into tears, deplored her des-
tiny, and said that death was a hundred times preferable to such
a fate as hers. She shut herself up in her room, was always
silent, scarcely ate anything, and slept very little; but in spite
of this array of symptoms she never wished, under any pretext,
to leave the asylum, where she at last ended her days.
In most instances these patients, after several attacks which
date from more or less distant periods, find their symptoms
aggravated. The affections are perverted, and their relations
and their homes inspire them with profound dislike. They are
haunted by the most painful and terrifying insane ideas ; they
have hallucinations and illusions of the same kind ; they have
no desire for food, and they endeavour to destroy themselves.
When they are taken in hand with these antecedents, some of
them may still be cured. Most of them have long attacks, their
faculties become altered more and more, and at last they
become incurable.
At the commencement of the malady, when the family is
in easy circumstances, and the patients are still able to under-
stand their condition, recourse may be had to travelling, or to
some intellectual, artistic, or physical employment; and not
unfrequently success is achieved by the employment of these
means, which are equally useful in the period of convalescence.
But in the great majority of cases the serious nature of the
symptoms necessitates the removal of the patients, afflicted with
melancholia, to the asylums. I cannot overlook the facts that,
out of 417 patients received in the space of 20 years?a period
during which the observations were all made by myself, then
intending to write a treatise the difficulties of which I fully
recognised?80 of them refused their food, several of them died
of exhaustion at the time of their arrival, 120 had continual
apprehensions of death, 122 had made one or several attempts
at self-destruction, and 7 succeeded in doing so in my establish-
ment. It is truly necessary to have good sense and judgment
to require, under such circumstances, before placing the patients
in the asylum, a double or even triple medical certificate, an
THE TREATMENT OP MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA. 23
examination before a magistrate or a member of the Committee
of Inspection, or even an enquiry by a jury, especially when,
after having been present at numerous sittings of the Committees
of Inquisitorial Examination of the law of the 30th of June 1838,
I have heard the members of the magistracy who were present
declare that they had never known, in the exercise of their
functions, of any case of arbitrary detention of a patient. Only
one of these gentlemen had entertained some doubts in reference
to a patient whom he had examined ; but information, gained
at the fountain head, enlightened him as well as myself as to the
real nature of the mental disturbance and its cause. At the
end of a terrible scene, the wife had revealed to the patient
that she was the daughter of a convict, who had been exhibited
and marked in a public square.
I shall now enter on the question of the treatment of melan
cholic lunatics, and shall prefer to rely on facts observed by
myself, without making them subservient to any preconceived
idea.
Among the therapeutic agents which I have employed it-
melancholia, prolonged baths, with or without irrigations, last-
ing from one to two, three, four, or five hours, have proved
beneficial in my hands when the malady was recent, with
agitation, want of sleep, heat of skin, and refusal of food. If
the patients are apathetic, motionless, silent, dumb, presenting
symptoms of stupidity, unwilling to take any food, attempting
suicide, passing their motions under them?then the half-warm
bath, with cold affusions by sprinkling (en arrosoir), or in the
form of the shower or the douche, is often beneficial. A lady,
who had been always of a serious turn of mind, having been
exposed to some insulting proposals, was so strongly affected by
the circumstance that a marked change was effected in her
whole deportment. She remained motionless and as if terrified.
Being placed in a half-warm bath, she had several affusions of
cold water in the form of shower (en jpluie), and on the
eighteenth day she was cured.
Of the 198 patients who went out cured, namely, 163 com-
pletely restored to reason, and 35 with all the indications of
recovery, the greater part received great benefit from the baths,
the duration of which was in proportion to the effects produced.
I took notes of seventeen cases cured by this mode of treatment.
One of them recovered his reason the third day, having had no
previous attack. Nine others, similarly circumstanced, were
convalescent at the end of a fortnight. The seven others who
also went out cured in the first month presented peculiarities
which, at their admission, might have justified a certain amount
of reserve, or even a doubtful prognosis on the part of the
24 THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA.
physician. Thus, one presented symptoms of a melancholic
affection which threatened a long duration; a second had
alternations of improvement and relapse; a third, in progress
of cure at the second bath, had heen afflicted for years; a fourth,
threatening to kill others and himself, afterwards admitted
that he had been ill, but declared that he was so no longer. The
behaviour of this last caused the most serious apprehensions of
suicide, but after fourteen days' treatment a great improvement
became apparent, and a visit from his relations materially accel-
erated his convalescence. A fifth patient, who had already been
afflicted for five years, had relapsed, and had serious paroxysms
which inspired fears for his life: he refused to take any food.
The sixth, whose relatives evinced a predisposition to insanity,
had suffered, a year before, from typhoid fever, followed by
mental derangement; he threatened to kill his mother, was
dissatisfied with everything, and excited apprehensions for his
life. To my astonishment, after a very brief delay, a change
for the better took place. Lastly, the seventh, born of a
maniacal mother, was a sufferer from nostalgia, and had become
profoundly indifferent and apathetic; her appearance was, from
time to time, that of a person in ecstasy ; her words were strange
and her monologues interminable ; she heard none of the words
which were addressed to her; but all of a sudden she appeared
to wake, as if from a dream, and became convalescent.
Facts such as these were alluded to by Dr. Brown at the
annual meeting of American alienist physicians, held in 1870,
at Hartford; and our lamented colleague Bell, being asked as
to the question of prognosis in insanity, replied: " After having
attended lunatic patients five years I thought I knew a great
deal, but now that I have practised twenty years, I can affirm
nothing certain scientifically." There is, undoubtedly, some
truth in this observation, but without asserting anything too
boldly, we may approach very closely to the truth by founding
our opinions on the results of experience.
It is often indispensable to use purgatives in addition to
the baths, but the drugs must be disguised, because melancholic
patients imagine that they are being poisoned. Tonics, chaly-
beates, and quinine, are also of great service.
A powerful auxiliary in the treatment is family life (vie de
famille). Ofuislain recommended melancholic patients to be
isolated, and to rest in bed. The very frequent tendency to
suicide by these patients in our country, and the turbulent
character of the race, led me to adopt this plan more than thirty
years ago, and I communicated it in 1866 to the French Insti-
tute. M. Lentz, the medical Director of the Asylum of
Froidmond, in Belgium, has pronounced a warm approval of
THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA. 25
my plan in his pamphlet, Des Causes de Vencombrement
toujours croissant des Asiles d'alienes et des remedes a, y
apporter (1871). He agrees with myself in thinking that it is
woman who takes the most important part in the management
of this system, in which the influence of the affections is a posi-
tive good. A man's character cannot bend itself to this kind of
slavery. The trial is, in fact, one of the most painful character,
since it is necessary to hear continually the same complaints,
the same sorrows, and often the same reproaches and even insults.
To the qualities of her mind and heart, woman joins the natural
control which she exercises over man. The following were the
terms in which I expressed my views to the Academie des
Sciences: "The advantages of the family life, especially for
melancholic patients, are too evident to require me to insist
upon them at any length. Patients are brought to us who are
indocile, dissatisfied with everything, agitated or apathetic,
believing themselves to be surrounded by enemies, refusing to
do anything that is asked of them, irrational in their acts,
incessantly complaining, difficult to please, and even insupport-
able to those around them, &c. A short time has scarcely
elapsed since their admission before the social life in which they
have entered softens their tempers, and they soon become
friendly with their fellow-inmates. This is not indeed a cure,
but it is already an improvement in their condition. Compare
the spectacle you behold with that in which the compartments
are separated, and where the sub-divisions are multiplied, I do
not fear to say where the insane are penned (parques), and it is
impossible for the most superficial observer not to notice imme-
diately the difference of the two proceedings. The deduction
is quite natural. Do you wish to restore to society patients
whose isolation necessity has compelled? Show them, then,
the favourable side of that society by fulfilling towards them
the functions of consoler and friend, of physician both of mind
and body."
I related some striking examples in the memoir published
in 1866, in the Annales Medico-Psychologiques, and since that
time cases have been multiplied. I shall relate only one. An
ecclesiastic had been confined five years in a very large asylum.
Being transferred to us, he soon testified his satisfaction at the
change. " I was completely isolated," he said, " in my sub-
division, and no friendly voice sounded in my ears. Since I
came here, these ladies have addressed to me only words of con-
solation, and I am most favourably impressed by them. I live
in a totally different world." In a short time he was cured.
He left us at the end of the month, and was able to resume his
duties, which he had never performed since his first confinement
20 THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA.
in the asylum. I have had news from him for several years, and
he continues quite well.
The family life, the advantages of which are proved to me
by long experience, is no more a panacea than the employment
of prolonged baths and continued irrigations in the treatment of
acute mania, but I consider this assemblage of patients under
the intelligent direction of a woman as being far superior to
the classification of the insane in compartments. Everything
that resembles ordinary life in the management of mental
diseases is preferable to any systems, however apparently well
designed; and I have had sufficient proofs that the more the
patients live in society the less unhappy they feel. Such is the
remark made by Shakspeare in " King Lear." The family life,
however, admits the painful measure of isolation in cases where
such a step is necessary. This auxiliary to the general treat-
ment is not only favourable to the cure of mental diseases, but
it often retards, even for years, the progress towards the chronic
stage. Lastly, its prompt application succeeds in several cases
in weakening insensibly the insane ideas of the patients, and in
developing among them some favourable manifestations which
prove its influence.
The change of place, and the impression made by the
asylum, must also be taken into account in reference to the cure.
I have collected twelve cases in which some favourable results,
due to these causes, have been immediately appreciable.
Three of these patients, belonging to the female sex, were the
victims of attacks of melancholia, and had been habitually
depressed for one, two, and five years. In the first, whose attack
of melancholia had been aggravated by the design of killing a
person whom she named, the improvement was manifested on
the very day of her admission, and it was well known to all of
us what was the cause of her improvement. The second, who
rapidly improved, began to be convalescent towards the fifteenth
day. The third patient was the sister of a lunatic who had
been placed in the house forty years before; she herself, who
was always of a singular temper, would not see her daughter,
who had been married five years, giving as her reason that she
knew she was happy and that was enough for her. She had
scarcely been admitted before the improvement appeared, and
she became as kind to her daughter as she had formerly been.
A patient who had been apathetic for two years used to
lose every two days his freedom of mind. He answered hastily,
and even sent away his clients. The two following days he
experienced some difficulty at first in co-ordinating his ideas,
but he soon resumed the direction of his business; an analogous
condition to that which exists in persons in their senses, who
.THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA. 27
have moments of disgust and apathy and cannot settle to any-
thing. Being uneasy about his condition, he came to Paris of
his own accord to place himself in my asylum. A favourable
change was soon apparent, and he returned to his own home
convalescent the second month after he came to live with me.
These facts, and many others, prove to me the favourable
effects of change of place, and of the influence of the asylum.
The different methods I have described may each separately
effect the cure, but their combination contributes more efficiently
to that end. In addition to the physical and moral agents
already indicated, which belong to general practice, there are
others which are unforeseen and instantaneous, such as accident,
or some word or idea or repartee, or some other circumstance,
may bring into play, and which may produce the happiest
effect.
A melancholic patient, tormented by hallucinations of hear-
ing, which repeated to him incessantly what he ought to do,
and at the same time prevented him from deciding upon it, was
strongly urged by a person who had read my book on Hallucina-
tions to confide himself to my care, assuring him (according
to his opinion) that I should explain to him this morbid pheno-
menon, and enable him to get rid of it. After having listened
to him with great and profound attention, I looked at him with
an appearance of satisfaction, and taking my cue from the
feeling of certainty that his cure had been accomplished, I
spoke to him with the air of a person who was so sure of having
hit his mark, that I saw the appearance of hope in his coun-
tenance. From the time of his interview there was a marked
improvement, and he made such rapid progress that he left the
establishment convalescent on the eighteenth day.
A suitable observation or a ready reply is equally efficacious,
at an opportune moment, in arresting the attention and chang-
ing the course of the ideas. A lady complained of being-
placed under restraint, declaring that oddities of character,
however morbid they might be, are not a sufficient justification
for such a step. In the bath she made an attempt at suicide,
by endeavouring to drown herself. Being called immediately,
I said to her, " You asked me why you had been placed in con-
finement ? It is acts such as these which explain the tendencv
of the mind.'' " That is true," she replied. The remark had
gained its object. Reflection came to her aid, and the lady,
having never thenceforth attempted any irrational act, went
away convalescent in the course of the month. It remains to
consider, however, the when and the how. Sometimes instinct is
the best guide. We must, too, however much we mav be
tempted, never allow ourselves to be carried away by the usage
28 THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA.
of the profession, but listen to the voice of pity up to the last
moment.
Another melancholic patient, suffering from hernia, being-
dismissed from all the establishments in consequence of his
continual complaints, which were often unfounded, began the
same course of conduct in my house. His arguments being of
a nature to cause some trouble, I said to him, " You may go
away," and I showed him the door; " but yet," said I, " I should
recommend you, in consequence of your hernia, to select an
establishment where there is a skilful surgeon, for you are liable
to serious risks." I had at that time as assistant a retired
surgeon-major, who was a very skilful operator. My advice
excited the patient's attention, and he determined to remain,
and no longer once asked leave to depart.
This case recalls to my mind another, which is a striking-
example of the value of a word spoken at the suitable moment.
In the first establishment which I conducted there was a furious
maniac, whom we could approach only when we were acccom-
panied by a number of attendants. He thought that he was
the great Napoleon, and was constantly irritated because he was
not treated with the respect due to his rank. One day, when
he was exceedingly violent, and wished to execute everybody
because they did not prostrate themselves before such an illus-
trious personage, my predecessor took it into his head to reply
to him, "You are, it is true, Napoleon, but Napoleon is
at St. Helena." At that moment this furious madman
ceased to revile and to strike, and he repeated several times,
" Napoleon at St. Helena," and he afterwards became easy to
manage.
Although the asylum is of great importance on account of
the treatment and the discipline, and the society it promotes
among the residents, yet there are several cases where the
departure from it contributes to the restoration of the patients,
or to their comfort, or may be indispensable for those objects.
This plan may be limited or it may be complete, and its employ-
ment depends on the knowledge we have of the insane, and on
medical tact. I do not allude to chronic invalids, who may go
out every day with an attendant, or occasionally take walks
' with the officers of the establishment, but only to particular
cases.
Among the means of treatment which I have employed
several times with success, anticipated leave of absence, the
suitable time for which is learned by experience, ought never
to be neglected, and the following case affords a proof in point.
A music-master, after an attack of melancholia, became more
tranquil, though still retaining some extravagant notions. His
THE TREATMENT OP MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA. 29
subsistence and that of his family depended on his business;
and if his condition lasted some time longer, his position would
be lost. I allowed him to go home. He had, however, some
peculiarities. He began his lessons again, but returned to the
asylum to dine and sleep. In two months he was quite well.
I have had two officials attached to great public establish-
ments, one of whom was able definitively to resume his duties after
a year of surveillance, although still believing that he was in the
power of the devil; and the other obtained his retirement in
three years, although he had visions and insane ideas. The
principals of the establishments in question, being very intel-
ligent men, and appreciating the services rendered by their
officials, consented to the course I have described, when I
represented the case to them.
An attempt of this kind may be made under more serious
circumstances, if there are some indications either of a returning"
power of the will or of a commencing improvement. A mer-
chant placed at the head of a great undertaking persuades
himself that he has not sufficient capacity for such a position.
An extreme degree of discouragement takes possession of his
mind; he hears voices threatening him. He will not succeed,
he will ruin his associates in the undertaking, he has nothing
more to do than destroy himself. Three weeks pass without
any appreciable change. One morning I saw him come in. " I
am," he said to me, "still the same, but I cannot remain any
longer, for my retreat will be discovered and everything will be
over with me." I hesitated, but I had a kind of intuitive
notion that the patient had just taken a step towards improve-
ment. I gave him his liberty. Two months afterwards he
thanked me. No one had found out his condition; everything
was prospering; the experiment had been successful. The pro-
mised departure is sometimes a beneficial measure.
A melancholic lady was improving; she admitted that she had
been ill, but maintained that there was not sufficient reason for
shutting her up with mad people. As I was afraid that with
this frame of mind she would cause some unpleasantness with
her husband and with the establishment, I advised her family
to take her back. She was scarcely made acquainted with the
fact that she had only a limited time to remain, when a
remarkable improvement took place. She became gay, easy
in her manners, made no more complaints, appeared to be
pleased with us, and departed quite convalescent.
When the acute stage is passed and the malady remains
stationary, when there are no evil tendencies, and the patient
wishes to return to his own home, and revisit his relatives, his'
wish ought to be granted. More than one melancholic patient
30 THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA.
lias been restored on finding himself in tlie midst of his family.
I have had for a rather long time in my asylum a lady who
appeared sunk in a kind of indifference from which nothing
could divert her. I advised the husband to take her back with
him. A few months afterwards, all the morbid symptoms had
disappeared, and health was restored.
Visits of relations, which are justly regarded as dangerous
in the acute stage of the disease, when it is still at its height,
may, on the other hand, produce a marked improvement when
the patients wish for them, and even in some cases when they
occur unexpectedly. A young lady by chance caught a sight
of her mother, who had come to ask after her. This patient,
who was still in the period when her malady was increasing,
experienced so much joy that convalescence soon ensued.
A cure may take place without any treatment having been
adopted, as I have already mentioned, and may even occur
suddenly. One of our inmates, who had had an attack of melan-
cholia seven years before, had a relapse of her malady. Six
days after her admission she came to me, saying, " I am cured,
my visions are gone." I was unable to refer this instantaneous
improvement to any known cause.
The cure may also be due to unforeseen circumstances. A lady,
who had sunk into a melancholic state from sorrow caused by
losses of money, made several attempts at suicide, and obstinately
refused to eat. Being admitted into the asylum, she gained the
affection of an old patient, who succeeded in feeding her. She
gave her advice, and told her the histories of other inmates, in
order to prove to her'tliat their malady had attacked them because
they had acted as she had done. By degrees she roused her up
and made her smile. The insane ideas were removed, and the
patient of our lunatic left us, repeatedly stating that to the
latter she owed her restoration to reason.
Sometimes the passions serve as means of cure without the
intervention of the physician. A man, about thirty years old,
and rather reserved, having always lived a wandering life, was
on the point of adopting a profession. When any discussions of
importance were begun on this subject, he became irritated, ex-
perienced severe pains in his head, and believed himself in the
power of persecutors, who were laying snares for him, and accus-
ing him of wicked actions ; he persuaded himself that he was dis-
honoured, and he made attempts at suicide. The second month
of his residence in the asylum he showed some attachment for a
lady-friend of mine, and from that moment a sensible improve-
ment was perceptible in his condition; he became more and
more enamoured, and proposed marriage. The union was im-
possible, but the cure was not interrupted. This unexpected
THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA. 31
diversion of his thoughts produced the most beneficial results on
his habits and disposition. Nine years afterwards we again saw
our old patient, who had married, had had children, managed
his house well, and was not at all moved by the sight of his
former flame.
In other cases, the predominant feeling which had acted
alone is sometimes employed by the physician, and lends him
some valuable assistance. A working builder, who had received
a certain amount of education, was brought to the asylum on
account of some eccentric proceedings. He would not speak,
answered nobody, kept his head high, and his look was proud,
disdainful, and ironical. By his appearance I recognised him
to be a wrong-headed person, who supposed himself to be the
victim of the injustice of society. I addressed him as a well-
educated man; I conversed with him about his abilities, the
rank to which he had a right, and his misfortunes, and I con-
tinued talking with him in the same strain for some time. I
perceived that I had touched the right chord ; he unlocked his
teeth, spoke a few sensible words, and consented to eat, which he
had not done for several days. The improvement continued. I
often directed the conversation to the position he might occupy,
diverting his mind as little as possible from his real condition
in life, but pointing out to him what progress he might make
in it. He listened to me always with interest, saw things no
longer on the dark side, thought that he might make himself
useful, and departed at the end of two months under circum-
stances of health which led me to form a favourable opinion as
to the complete return of his reason.
Nothing is absolute in the precepts of medicine. Although
the length of time which has elapsed since the appearance of
the disease is a contra-indication of success, it is not less certain
that cures have been effected after several years of insanity. I
have remarked three examples of this nature.
A very intelligent lady, who had managed for several years
with remarkable ability a very complicated commercial under-
taking, was seized with a fresh attack of melancholia similar to
one she had suffered from thirty-six years before. She had re-
mained five years in this state, keeping her bed for several
months, when she saw a person belonging to my family going to
the midnight mass at Christmas. " Pray Grod for me," said she
to her. During her illness she had contracted the habit of
thee and thouing (tutoyer) every one. On the return of the
person alluded to from the mass, who came to ask after her
health, she replied, " I thank you " (vous, not te) " for having
prayed for me." This difference of language immediately made
me think that her condition was about to change, and, in fact,
32 THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA.
from this time lier continual complaints were no longer heard.
She left her bed and came into the drawing-room ; and in two
months more she was quite well. She has visited us for several
years without having felt any symptom of her malady.
A second case of melancholia, coming from another asylum,
where she had already passed several months, was sent to me
in an extreme degree of weakness. For more than a month
she had been fed with the tube. I ceased this plan of feeding,
and substituted for it the method I adopt in similar circum-
stances, which consists in making a disagreeable impression on
the patient, and which has almost always succeeded in my
hands. On the second attempt she consented to take her food
like the rest, and this was the only improvement I succeeded
in obtaining. For a long time she urgently requested to be
allowed to receive her husband and her son. A visit from the
former had no successful result. It was thought that the sight
of her son would be more efficacious, but I did not share this
opinion, because she had visual illusions, which, indeed, were
soon developed. She recognised neither of the two; took
them for strangers, insulted them, and even wished to strike
them, thus producing such a powerful emotion in the youth,
that he burst into tears, and uttered loud cries. The experi-
ment was not repeated. At the end of five years this lady was
placed in a government asylum, from which she went out
cured two years afterwards. It was she herself who announced
to us her return to society, and the termination of her mental
affection.
The third patient, whose attack was of ten years' duration,
had lost her reason in consequence of an indecent act on the
part of her husband, which had compelled him to resign an
important position, and to leave his native town and to come
and take a business in Paris. Since the circumstance in ques-
tion, domestic life had become a hell upon earth ; the husband
had resisted as far as he could, for, as if she wished to be
revenged on him, she related his story to every one who came.
The distant date of the commencement of the malady made
me look unfavourably on its probable termination, though
hoping the case was not desperate, inasmuch as no intellectual
weakness was discernible. In the first few months no change
was manifest, but one day she spoke, for the first time, some
kind words of her husband, and this was the announcement of
an almost unhoped-for improvement. Her progress was rapid,
and of her own accord she asked to return home to her
husband.
Insanity, when joined with other affections, and more espe-
cially those of a nervous kind, may neutralise them to its own
advantage, or even disappear with them in a general cure.
THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA. 33
A patient who had suffered from a gastralgic affection for
eight years, at last became emaciated, acquired a yellow tint,
and could scarcely eat. Whether the attack of melancholia,
which had lasted for some months, was the consequence of the
former disease, or that it had been induced by the distressing
nature of his condition, it made such progress that his friends
were obliged to send him to the asylum. A short time after
his admission he began to take food in greater quantity.
Three months had scarcely elapsed before he had become stout,
his face was of healthy colour, the jaundiced appearance was
no longer visible, and the melancholia had disappeared at the
same time. His health and his reason were restored. Another
sufferer from gastralgia, who was habitually reserved and
gloomy, exhibited a result exactly similar, thus offering a fresh
example of the close relationship existing between nervous
diseases and insanity. The affection, from which he had been
suffering for years, prevented him from taking sufficient food,
and he was visibly becoming emaciated. In consequence of
the aggravation of the melancholic symptoms he was placed in
the asylum, and he was soon observed to have an appetite,
which was not previously known to exist; he rapidly gained
flesh at the same time as the intelligence was becoming re-
established, and he left us cured of both his maladies.
Among the plans of treatment I have indicated, there are
two which have not been mentioned. They have a relation to
two classes of symptoms of extreme gravity, namely, the
refusal of food and the tendency to suicide, both of which
require special remedies.
The motives which induce melancholic patients to refuse
food are very various. Ideas are detected which have no
reference to such refusal; irresistible impulses; a feebleness of
resolution ; and a complete forgetfulness of past events; but
most generally there are hallucinations, illusions, gloomy ideas,
an extreme disgust of life, and, above all, a feeling of despair in
regard to their dreadful condition. It is inexpedient to be too
hasty in having recourse to forcible alimentation, for some of
these patients, after fasting several days, take their food; but
others are satisfied, for a month or more, with a cup or two of
broth or other liquid, even when they are robust and are great
eaters. If the refusal of food is obstinate, and founded on an
insane notion or hallucination, if the breath is fetid, if there is
no febrile disturbance, then forcible alimentation is indispensable,
and it must also be resorted to, even though the patient should
consent to take food from time to time, but in small quantity;
because very often, at the end of this prolonged insufficiency of
food for several months, the patients have died and have wished
to die.
No. I.?NEW SEKIES. D
34 THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA.
The instrument most generally employed is the oesophageal
tube, either simple or modified, of MM. Baillarger and Blanche.
It is not uncommonly the case to be obliged to use it for rather
a long time, as the patients become accustomed to the proceed-
ing. Dr. Zelarchi has related a curious case in which this plan
was adopted during two years and fifty days. The silver
mouth-piece of M. Billod is also useful.
Tbe facility with which a good number of insane patients
allow themselves to be fed by these plans, the long continuance
of the malady which. results from their adoption, and the
chronic state which has seemed to me to follow their use, have
induced me to practise, for more than thirty years, a method of
treatment which is painful, indeed, but which, in my hands,
has a different kind of efficiency from the oesophageal tube.
The following is the plan I adopt. When the patients are
brought in who have eaten nothing for several days, and are
sometimes even exhausted by fasting, I warn them that I shall
be under the painful necessity of subjecting them to a painful
mode of treatment which will do them much harm. "My
conscience," I add, " does not permit me to be present, as a
mere witness, at the loss of a man who might be saved in spite
of himself." Some are intimidated, and yield for a time. The
greater number resist, and we then put a strait-jacket on the
patient, and fix him in an arm-chair, from which he cannot
move, called a fauteuil de force, or lay him on his bed. We
then introduce into one of the nasal fossae a tube armed with
an iron rod, slightly curved at the lower end, and pass it as far
as the back of the mouth, when the rod is withdrawn. I do
not endeavour to pass the tube into the oesophagus, because
that is not the object in view. An assistant closes the mouth
with his hand or a napkin several times folded, another assistant
applies his fingers on the nostril which is free, and we pour in
the broth, tapioca, chocolate, &c. with the aid of a funnel, the
end of which is introduced into the tube. An injecting syringe
may also be used, the end of which is placed in the tube. The
patient makes the greatest efforts not to swallow, but, in order
to breathe, be is obliged to perform the act of deglutition.
As soon as the syringe or the funnel is empty, we allow the
patient to take breath for a few seconds, and then we begin
again to pour in fluids. There is undoubtedly great struggling
and embarrassment of breathing, but seldom any symptoms of
commencing asphyxia. There is also almost always a certainty
of speedy success, for the greater part of these patients yield at
the first trial, and will seldom brave the second, especially if
the physician has shown determination and refused to allow
delay. Besides, the terror of the tube sometimes acts like a
THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA. 35
true moral revulsion, and the patients are not only cured of
their instinctive perversion, but also of their insanity.
A young girl refused to take any food because everything
offered to her appeared in her eyes to be covered with sperm.
Reasoning and other means employed had been unsuccessful.
Forcible feeding cured her in two days. A young woman and
an aged lady were brought to me this year (1872), who for
several days had obstinately refused food. Their weakness was
extreme, and there was even an apprehension that they would
die. The aged lady was a fresh victim of the attacks of the
newspapers, for, the family to which she belonged having divided
interests, it had been necessary to hold a family council in order
to come to a decision about sending her away, and to obviate
unjust accusations as to shutting her up. After a few days'
residence in the asylum the cure was effected. Neither of them
resisted more than twice the treatment just referred to, and the
young lady went out cured in the second month. One of the
most decisive examples was that of a paralytic lunatic, who
kept his teeth so firmly clenched that it seemed easier to
break them than to open his mouth. This patient thought
that the devil had got possession of him. On the second
introduction of the instrument, he took his food easily. His
abstinence, which had lasted from five to six days, had given
him the appearance of a person with organic disease; he
exhaled a fetid odour, his lips and tongue were black ; but all
these signs disappeared in three days, and from that time he
again took his food. It was only necessary to show him the
tube to make him obedient. This plan fails in a few rare
instances, and requires great prudence, but, on the whole, it has
been attended in my hands with beneficial and rapid results.
Forcible alimentation is almost always unsuccessful in the febrile
state.
The refusal of food may, sometimes, depend upon separation
from the domestic circle. In two cases, in which this cause
was clearly proved to me to exist, I sent away the patients to
their homes, and this course was attended with success. In
another case, after improvement for a few days, death supervened.
It happens, on the other hand, that melancholic patients who
would not take any food from the hands of their relatives, take
it when they are sent to an asylum, and the apprehensions they
have entertained then disappear. A young man from the
provinces, who had abstained from every kind of food for five
days, sat down to table as soon as he came to the asylum, and
at the end of ten days he completely recovered.
A happy thought, as I have already observed, may be
sufficient to overcome this obstinate refusal of food. A patient
D 2
36 THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OE LYPEMANIA
presenting symptoms of imbecility, and who had not spoken for
three or four months, suddenly ceased to eat, and this abstinence
was prolonged for six days. This case occurred at the beginning
of my career, and the family, being alarmed, requested me to
call in Esquirol in consultation. This distinguished physician
prescribed some medicine, but especially recommended that the
patient should be immediately taken into the country, in order
to divert his ideas. It was six o'clock, and I had a few friends
to dinner. We sat down at table, and I took it into my
head to have the patient brought in. At the sight of more
numerous dishes, and food more delicately prepared than usual,
he smiled, took what was offered him, and ate with a good
appetite. The crisis was over and did not re-appear. What is
most surprising is, that this patient, whom we had believed to
be imbecile, was restored to reason several years afterwards.
The second very serious symptom of melancholic insanity is
the tendency to suicide, with attempts to effect that object,
and sometimes even with fatal results. It often manifests
itself, for out of my 417 cases of melancholia, deducting 122
persons who had only gloomy thoughts of death, without
attempting to meet it, I have noted 120 cases with attempts,
and 7 with actual suicide.
The rather large proportion of those whom I have known
to attempt self-destruction by plunging their heads into their
baths; throwing themselves from the top of a tree or from a roof;
stabbed in a few moments ; dashing themselves against a wall
or against a pane of glass in their rooms ; succeeding in killing
themselves even before our eyes, as happened to Guislain,
or in the presence of a servant, and sometimes while the
servant was asleep; and the rapidity with which these fatal
intentions are carried into execution by the French?all
these circumstances have made me resolve to employ coercive
measures with patients whose suicidal tendency is obstinate,
and accompanied with attempts in spite of our precautions.
W'hen the idea of suicide is not stereotyped on the countenance,
when the acts are not repeated, and when the patients pay some
attention to what is passing around them, then, before employ-
ing precautionary measures, we keep them under our own
eyes, and this watchfulness on the part of the principals of the
asylum, continued for a long time, often arrests in a remarkable
degree their desire of death.
The strait-jacket and cuffs are the measures of repression
which I most commonly employ. The language we adopt
with the patients under these circumstances expresses the
regret we feel at being driven to this sad extremity. We
represent to them, in a tone of kindness, that the confidence
THE TREATMENT OF MELANCHOLIA, OR LYPEMANIA. 37
reposed in us by the relatives, the distress caused by suicide,
and the account we have to render to the authorities, compel us
to act in this manner. When the eye of the patient has
returned to its natural state, or has lost its fixed appearance
and its sinister expression, and when the predominant idea has
been weakened and no longer reveals itself, except at distant
intervals, then we relax our precautions.
Some years ago I wrote to the effect that, in cases of this
kind, the important point was to gain time and to make sure of
the expression of the face. When the physician has devoted
himself constantly to this study, he can read the mental
condition of the insane patient as well as he can that of a man
in his senses. A guide which singularly assists in this study is
a knowledge of the previous life. In the employment of
the measures alluded to, much tact is necessary as well as
firmness and gentleness, and it is necessary also to discriminate
the cases, and always to speak to the patients, according to the
excellent advice of Daguin, in the language of reason, even
when they do not appear to understand it.
It will be observed that I have but little increased the
catalogue of medicines adapted to melancholia, although I have
known relief afforded by the bromide of potassium and chloral
(especially the latter), in procuring sleep, and such is the general
result of experience. My opinion has been formed for a long
time as to the preference which ought to be shown to simple
modes of treatment. Baths, purgatives, hygienic measures,
and moral treatment, especially the living in society (vie d&
famille), constitute the methods I have adopted during a career
of fifty years, and they are the means which have succeeded best
in the treatment of melancholia.
As a general conclusion regarding the treatment of this
mental malady, I may say that I have known it to be successful
in a good proportion of cases. Although some patients recover
in their own homes under medical treatment, or by unforeseen
circumstances, the greater part of them owe their restoration to
reason to the care bestowed upon them in the asylum; and what
deserves notice is that the most numerous cures take place from
the first to the third month, when the patients have been
received in time.
