3. Fragmentary Papers on Science and other Subjects
=====================================================

By the late Sir
Henri Holland, Bart. Jiidited by his Son, the Rev. Francis J
Holland. (Reviewed by Henry Sutherland, M.D., M.A. Oxon '
M.R.C.P. Lond.) ' ' '
Why should we not all lead an ideal life, as did Sir Henry Holland ?
Why should we all plod wearily on, year after year, in the same dull
groove of daily labour ? How is it that we neglect to see the capitals,
manners, and customs of other nations; the wonders of nature,
science, and art, now so easily reached in distant foreign countries ?
Is it that we have not the opportunity, or is it that we have not the
FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY TIIE LATE SIR H. HOLLAND. 141
will ? Is competition now so keen that we cannot afford to take even
our necessary recreation ? Or do the very facilities of modern travel
prove an obstacle to our setting forth and shaking off the dull routine
of our daily business ?
In truth, there is no little danger in the present age of our becoming
mere working machines, if we do not make some real efforts to eman-
cipate ourselves from the monotonous round of the professional tread-
mill. Surely if one of the busiest men in London was able to take
his yearly holiday, and delight us with a record of its results, we
might at least imitate, if only in an humble degree, this sensible
example; and we may be assured that during the rest of the year our
work would not suffer for it.
It is impossible to read an essay of Sir Henry Holland's, upon
whatever subject, without perceiving that his general education derived
from these travels abroad peeps out at every chink and loophole in his
writings.
It is not intended here to describe the life of this distinguished
physician, but the fact is worth recording, that many of the Fragmen-
tary Papers, now for the first time brought together, were written
during his autumnal holidays; proving that he indeed acted up to
some of his favourite maxims?"Le temps c'est la vie and "Levat
lassitudinam laboris mutatio."
It is impossible to resist quoting here a passage from Sir Henry
Holland's " Recollections of Past Life," which, although somewhat
foreign to our present purpose, may yet give the key-note to the means
by which these essays were so happily constructed, and may also serve
to incite those amongst us who are disposed to improve ourselves to go
and do likewise.
Writing of the companionship of literary pursuits, he says: ?
" Often it has happened to me to he alone in places where solitude was
rendered somewhat severe by the hardships or hazards of the road, and by
the absence of all aid, were this required. At such times, and even in the
more common case of long evenings at European city hotels, I have ever
found great advantage in some occupation, embracing subjects and scenes
wholly alien to those around me. The articles, chiefly scientific in kind,
which during many successive years I contributed to the Edinburgh and
Quarterly Reviews?one in the autumn of each year?served me here in
admirable stead. I chose my subject before departure (generally one
familiar from previous study), read the work or works to be reviewed,
methodised fairly the matter in hand, and wrote the articles at such times
and occasions of my journey as accident or mood of mind might suggest;
using the sea voyage, which often came at the end of my yearly travel, to
put together the several scraps written on the road, and filling up after
my return any gaps left by this desultory method of composition. Such
breach of continuity in Avriting is not without its advantages. Separate
parts are often better moulded together after an interval of time than can
be done by continuous composition. And in revision the wise maxim of
Boileau, 1 Ajoutez quelquefois et souvent effacez,' applies to prose as well as to
poetrv, even in those matters of pure science where human thought and
speculation are dealing with the great mysteries of the universe."*
* Recollections of Past Life. By Sir Henry Holland, Bart. Page 36.
142 FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY THE LATE SIR H. HOLLAND.
The " Recollections of Past Life " were published when their illus-
trious author was already advanced in his eighty-fourth year, and we
learn from his son,* that in 1873, being then eighty-five, " My father,
perceiving in himself no intellectual decline, made up his mind to
bestow upon the papers this 4 laborious revision,' " which is mentioned
in the concluding chapters of his Recollections. This object Sir Henry
Holland did not live to accomplish, but the Essays have been collected
by his son, and published in the book which is the subject of this
notice.
When it is stated that amongst the contents of this volume are
found essays upon twenty-six different scientific subjects, all more or
less abstruse, and all worthy of the deepest consideration, it may easily
be understood that we have here neither time nor space to do more
than glance at a few selected chapters. The essays which will prob-
ably be most interesting to the psychologist are the following:
" Mental Operations in Relation to Time; " " Materialism as a Question
of Science and Philosophy; " " Insanity; " and " Maury on Sleep and
Dreams."
The first and last of these four are distinguished by the attempt to
place clearly before us those obscure metaphysical phenomena which
have hitherto been shrouded in the mysterious and uncertain verbiage
of philosophy. This attempt is most successful. It shows us to what
extent we can be positively certain of the nature of thought, of will, of
sleep, and of dreams. It demonstrates conclusively at what point we
must draw the line of our investigation, and tells us in unmistakable
language that in our pursuit of unknown truths we may advance thus
far and no farther.
Nobody can doubt, after the perusal of these essays, that Sir Henry
Holland was a philosopher in the truest sense of the term, and that he
was, moreover, possessed of a vast fund of deep original thought.
Nevertheless, his researches into intellectual phenomena were moderated
by that good sense and self-restraint which he recommends us to
adopt in all our studies, which prevented his being carried away by
pursuits which he believed to be positively dangerous to mental health,
when indulged in to an excessive extent. In his numerous writings
he has accomplished some useful feats in mental gymnastics, which to
his mind, braced up as it was by a variety of accomplishments and
occupations, were but mere child's play. Of these we shall speak in
detail later on, in the hope that those who have not time to study these
essays in full may be induced to carry out those experiments which
are here described and recommended, and from which we may in
future anticipate the most novel and interesting results.
Mental Operations in Relation to Time.
The point upon which Sir Henry Holland insists in this chapter is
that one thought and one only can be entertained at the same moment
of time. That contrary opinions have been held on this subject
throughout all ages it needs no great effort of memory to demonstrate.
Many familiar sayings would seem to imply that if man has not two
* Preface to the Fragmentary Papers, p. 6.
FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY THE LATE SIR H. HOLLAND. 143
brains, he has at least two natures. " The spirit indeed is willing, but
the flesh is weak;" "The good that I would, I do not: but the
evil which I would not that I do ;" " Our good and our bad
angel;" and other similar expressions, seem to predicate that two
opposite trains of thought can be carried on in our minds at one and
the same time, and that such a condition as " association " of ideas
really exists. This chapter entirely opposes such a theory. Succession,
in however rapid intervals of time?but still succession, and not
association?is the on]y explanation of certain intellectual phenomena
that can be admitted. Where apparently two lines of thought are
being pursued at the same time, this is explained by the fact that certain
actions, although complicated, may be carried on automatically, when
they become habitual to us; as when a person plays a difficult piece
of music on the piano, and at the same time carries on a conversation
with a friend. One thought must follow another. Two thoughts
cannot be originated at the same moment, nor can they advance pari
passu. All states of being, physical and intellectual, are sequent to
one another. All fluxions of thought and of organic life are not only
sequent but infinitesimal in degree, and are, moreover, subject to the
laws of an exact periodicity in their modes of action. Sir Henry
Holland believed that more may be done analytically, by taking time as a
basis, than in any other way.
The connection of will with the theory of the necessity of time for
the production of thought and action is next explained.
The will is defined to be " that faculty through which the mind
acts upon matter without, and especially upon that body with which it
individually co-exists?a co-existence so mysterious that language
applied to it is but a shelter to our ignorance."
" Actions produced at first by express volition gradually assume
from repetition much of the character and force of instincts." "We
will to walk, to talk, to read, to write. In the child each particular
part of these acts requires a special direction of mind, an effort of will.
As life goes on, and they become habitual from repetition, the mind
may be said to relegate a part of its power to the bodily organs. It
puts them into action, stops or controls them, but has no separate
consciousness of these multitudinous motions, rapid almost to con-
tinuity, methodised automatically, and synchronous for different organs."
" It is on these automatic acts that I [Sir Henry Holland] believe mainly
to depend the theory of a possible absolute synchronism of separate
states or acts of mind."
" Is it not a more exact as well as simpler conception of mental
phenomena to regard their connection as one of series and succession
rather than of synchronous or co-existing functions ? '
Next, in regard to the influence of the will upon the functions of
mind, it is asked, " How far by effort of mind can we govern the
sequences of thought and those great functions of memory and associa-
tion through which these sequences are especially manifested ? " The
answer to this question is involved in much obscurity. Even the
question as to whether or no we think in ivords is as yet undecided.
" It is hard indeed to find any simple term wherewith to express the
potentiality of the mind over its own operations." "Here, again, the
144 FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY THE LATE SIR H. HOLLAND
method of enquiry, by succession in time, seems to me [Sir Henry
Holland] to go farthest in explanation of the phenomena."
The amount of power possessed by the mind in determining these
successions is next discussed. And here a practical hint may be
obtained by those who have the interests of insane patients at heart,
although familiar enough to most psychologists.
Unbidden thoughts and emotions are to be displaced by mental
effort or by external causes. These suggestions may surely be applied
as a method of treating curable or alleviating incurable cases of mental
disease. The physician should ascertain what bodily and intellectual
exercises have been pursued by his patient in early life, and should
endeavour, by proper appliances, to bring these external courses to
bear appropriately upon each particular case. Attempts might also
be made to restore the healthy function of mind by recommending
such literary studies and accomplishments as have been known to
previously interest and amuse the patient.
The power of the mind, however, in determining these mental
conditions, is evidently a limited and fluctuating one.
There is great difference of different minds as regards the power
of governing these sequences of state.
This faculty expresses in its degree the superiority of one man
over another.
Thus it is seen that " we are speaking at once of mental operations
and of the power of the mind to change and control them."
" But here, again, we are met and entangled by the new doctrine of
unconscious cerebration"that succession of mental states, partly
governed by the will, partly automatic from habit, or the influence of
the external senses." " This hypothesis, of ' unconscious cerebration,'
supposes intellectual operations in which consciousness has no part,
but which, nevertheless, evolve true logical results. Here we are called
on to recognise an exclusion of mind from the highest function of
mind."
Reverting now to the especial enquiry concerning mental opera-
tions in relation to time, it is found that it is an undoubted fact, that
the operations of some men's minds are more rapid in logical sequences
than those of others ; that such an inequality has been shown to exist in
the time required for transmission to the sensorium of actions on the
organs of sense, and of volitions conveyed to the motor organs. We
go but little beyond this material evidence in asserting that one mind
is more rapid than another in the pure operations of thought, whether
governed by the will or not.
Differences on these points occur not only in the minds of others,
but in our own minds at different times. An interesting paragraph
follows, showing how the operations of the intellect may be influenced
by a series of mental gymnastics.
" I [Sir Henry Holland] have^ already spoken of the difficulty of thus
turning the mind inwards upon its own acts and states. A yet greater
difficulty is that of self-experiment upon the conditions?to try, for instance,
what can be done by pure effort of will in determining the objects and
sequences of thought which, in their common course, are so largely
governed by automatic associations of former images and memories. An
FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY THE LATE SIR H. HOLLAND. 145
act of recollection may in some sort be called an exercise of the mind upon
itself. But I liave sometimes in my own case made more explicit trial of
this kind, making time a part and test of the experiment. Within a
minute I have been able to coerce the mind, so to speak, into more than a
dozen acts or states of thought, so incongruous that no natural association
could possibly bring them into succession. In illustration I note here
certain objects which, with a watch before me, I have just succeeded in
compressing distinctly and successively within thirty seconds of time?the
Pyramids of Ghizeh, the Ornithorhynchus, Julius Ctesar, the Ottawa Falls,
the Rings of Saturn, the Apollo Belvedere. This is an experiment I have
often made on myself, and with the same general result. I call it an effort,
because it is felt as such, and cannot be long continued without fatigue."
The observation of the acts of the adult and cultivated intellect
needs to be supplemented by a knowledge of the conditions of un-
educated infancy and childhood ; of the intellectual imbecilities of old
age; of the deficiencies and aberrations of the idiot and lunatic; of
the mind of the rustic, or of the factory operative, his life a machine
of manual labour. Admitting exceptions for certain forms of lunacy,
we may presume the succession of mental states of perceptions, acts of
reason and volitions, to be generally less rapid and their changes less
various in these instances ; and what tells more in the intellectual com-
parison, the power of the mind over its own sequent operations is feebler
and less coercive. The differences may be of degree only, but they
graduate between the intellect of an infant or idiot and that of a
Newton or Shakspeare.
Materialism as a Question of Science and Philosophy.
This chapter commences with an explanation of the term
" Materialism."
" The materialist argues that no material change can occur in the
nervous organisation without some corresponding change in the mental
functions. By no effort or artifice of thought can we dissociate these
portions of our common nature so as to feel and conceive what we call
Mind singly in itself."
" The materialist finds a certain aid to his argument in the strange
differences of individual minds."
The question, however, remains unanswered: Are these differences
due to different cerebral organisation? Or is this organisation but
the instrument to express and put into action the diversities in a part
of our being to which no material epithet or description can apply ?
Is the brain, which is in man more developed than in any other
animal, in itself capable of generating those wonderful functions of
perception, thought, feeling, and volition, which in their totality con-
stitute the mind of man ? The answer to this question, Sir Henry
Holland thinks to be that no such proof is possible, and that presump-
tion is wholly against it. That we cannot give other explanation of
the phenomena is no argument in a case where reason and conscious-
ness are equally unable to lend any aid. Nothing that the most minute
anatomy or physiology have taught us can bridge over that chasm?'
hiatus infranchissable, Cuvier wells calls it?which separates what alone
NO. I.?NEW SERIES. L
146 FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY THE LATE SIR H. HOLLAND.
we know of the properties of matter from the functions we individually
know and feel of the qualities of mind.
The view of the incommensurability, as it has been called, of matter
and mind, of body and soul, has been held by the philosophers of every
age; always embarrassed, indeed, by terms vaguely defined, such as
the vovg, \pvx>), and -rryev/ia of the Greek schools, and the equivalent
ambiguities of our own and other languages.
But the questions in hand are mainly the same, and the difference
in dealing with them is chiefly that created by the severer methods of
inductive enquiry. Abstract definitions of the soul and of matter are
now submitted to tests which go far to exclude them from the pale of
science.
Sir Henry Holland has concluded this essay as follows :
" I have spoken of the little that has been done by scientific discovery to
furnish links between mind and matter. In one sense, indeed, they may
seem to be further dissociated by those attainments of physical science
which especially mark the mental capacity of man. The genius and
intellectual power which have penetrated so deeply into the secrets of
nature?measuring the distance of the stars and the velocity of light?
predicting from the minute perturbations of one planet the existence and
place of another yet unknown?detecting the presence of known terrestrial
elements in the photosphere of the sun and even of the fixed stars?making
electric wires, with a speed that mocks calculation, the medium of human
intercourse across the widest oceans?these capacities, thus developed and
exalted in their objects, point at some spirituality of nature which mere
matter, in our understanding of it, can never reach. That we are unable to
comprehend tbis nature and its complex relations to the material world is
but one of the many similar confessions we are compelled to make when
seeking to interpret the mysteries around us."
Insanity.
The remarks upon insanity are very practical and appropriate.
" The many definitions of insanity are the best proof of the little of
practical value which has been gained from the attempt. If broad in
principle, they are lost in particular applications. If resting on individuali-
ties, these are so numerous that definitions can neither compass nor connect
them. There are as many varieties of insanity as of human character, as
many forms and degrees of disordered mind as of the intellectual and moral
qualities in their sane state. The transitions from sanity to insanity, and
the changes incident to the latter, are endlessly varied, yet even here we
can generally recognise that law of continuity which so largely prevails in
the world around us."
" A recent classification of the forms of insanity, by Luderdorf, of Vienna,
into aberrations by exaltation, by depression, and from weakness, may be
considered among the best, simply because the least definite in details."
"The subject is one so beset with metaphysical and verbal subtleties that
it is hard to find firm ground to stand upon; and the only suggestion which
can be offered is that of eschewing all formal definitions, and connecting the
question of sanity or insanity in each particular case, as far as possible, with
some specific practical test."
" One of the best as well as simplest tests of insanity is the inversion of
some distinct habit of feeling or action, strikingly marked in the previous
FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY THE LATE SIR II. HOLLAXD. 147
character of the individual; the more sudden and complete this inversion,
the stronger the_ evident of unsound mind. Such proof can only occa-
sionally be had, since insanity shows itself more frequently as an ?P
haWt?r Mns-
The question of the material or spiritual origin of insanity and the
differences between dreaming and madness are next touched upon
and, finally, civilisation is said to aggravate this condition of human
suffering.
Maury ok Sleep and Dreams.
No outline of this chapter can give any idea of its extreme scientific
beauty. ^ It should be read in full by all who are interested in this
most thrilling subject.
Sir Henry Holland's reason for taking Maury as a text was that he
had zealously devoted himself to the subject for a long series of years
having systematically made experiments upon himself. One of these
was as follows:
To record a dream the moment a friend awaked him from sleep.
A coadjutor was necessary, not only to awaken him, but to record the
utterances of sleep, and such attitudes and movements of the body to be
afterwards recorded in relation to the dreams.
Sir Henry Holland suggests, as the chances of error are great and
the variations of temperament might affect results, that others should
make similar experiments.
With regard to sleep and ^ dreams, they cannot be treated of
separately. Still there are certain considerations which must be ad-
mitted as possible grounds of distinction. We cannot prove that the
conjunction of sleep and dreams is absolute and universal. There may
be times and conditions of sleep in which there is a total inactivity of
brain?a complete absence of those images and trains of thought which
form the dream.
Another distinction, moreover, exists, for although sleep is a necessity
of our nature, the same cannot be said of dreams.
The repose and restoration obtained from sleep would seem to be
in an inverse ratio to the intensity of the dreams attending it. Frequent
experience teaches us that what we call "unrefreshing nights" are
attended by troublous dreams.
Is there, then, any condition or moment of sleep absolutely devoid
of dreaming ? Positive proof of such a fact is wholly wanting, and the
only evidence attainable is that derived from the memory of the
dreamer, or the observations of those who watch him during those
hours of which he has no remembrance. Aristotle puts the question
why some sleep occurs with dreams, other sleep without; or if
always dreaming, why some dreams are remembered, others not. '
In the memory or oblivion of dreams Ave trace their connection,
with our physical organisation, and thus gain a step, though a slight
one, to the better understanding of their nature.
L 2
148 FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY THE LATE SIR H. HOLLAND.
Lord Brougham considers dreams an incidental, not a constant
part of sleep?a sort of fringe edging its borders. Sir W. Hamilton,
on the contrary, believes that no condition of sleep exists without
dreaming. The question remains in abeyance for future research or
hypothesis to work on.
Even in a fainting fit, it may be that the memory only is anni-
hilated, and that the mind never actually ceases in its workings.
Cases of unconscious cerebration, in which verses are said to have
been made in the night, with no consciousness of the fact till they
came to the morning memory, are not proved by evidence sufficiently
conclusive. This question admits neither of proof nor disproof.
The practical investigation of the subject is also liable to error,
which is due to the many varieties of age and of temperament. One
thing, however, is certain, and that is, that sleep undoubtedly restores
the vital powers. The relation of nerve force to sleep is next con-
sidered.
The velocity of the transmission of nerve force has been accurately
ascertained; and this discovery warrants the hope that further research
may enable us to estimate the amount or quantity of the nerve force
existing at any given time.
Mr. Herbert Spencer tells us that, although the rate of repair may
be as great by day as by night, the rate of loss is greater. Between
this state (o? sleep) and the waking state, the essential distinction is a
great result of waste. We have, therefore, a right to conclude that in
what is called sleep we have present a force, an agent, generated
within the body, exhausted in maintaining the functions of the bodyr
and requiring periods of rest for its reproduction in adequate amount.
A sleepless night proves the great function which sleep fulfils in
the economy of life.
And, again, sleep protracted beyond the need of repair impairs the
functions of the brain, and with them the vital powers.
Sleep is also not necessary to men alone, but to the lowest animals
in the scale of creation. Even plants sleep. The lower animals also
probably, dream, and notably the dog.
The complicated nature of sleep is next discussed.
Sleep is not one state merely, but a multiplicity and a continuous
succession of states, graduating from the first yawn of drowsiness to
the most profound sleep.
Such a mode of regarding^ sleep brings its phenomena into closer
relation with those of our waking existence.
It is impossible, indeed, for anyone at all observant of the facts
to regard sleep as a single or simple function. We know that all parts
of the body, and more especially the organs of sense, are affected and
altered by it. Every organ may be said to have a sleep of its own.
These are not merely affected in different degrees, at different times,
but are differently affected in degree at the same time.
Bichat thus tersely expresses these facts: "Le sommeil general
est l'ensemble des sommeils particuliers."
The law o? continuity may possibly interpret some of these unex-
plained phenomena. Interruptions affect the current of our thoughts,
when awake, and why not also when we are asleep ?
FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY THE LATE SIR H. HOLLAND. 149
Next, as to the influences of sleep on the human economy. The
refreshing effects of sleep are not to be exactly estimated. One hour
in one case may comprise as much of what is true sleep as two hours
?or many hours in another.
The natural and simple conditions of sleep may be studied by
watching the moments of passage into sleep and the passage out of it.
The most interesting part of such inspection is what may be termed
the disseverment of the will from the organs habitually acted on by it.
At the moment of waking volition is more awake than the instruments
through which it acts.
In dropping off to sleep, Sir Henry Holland says that three or four
?alternations of sleep and waking may and do occur in a single minute
?of time; and again, the clironometry of sleep, that is, the power of
awaking invariably at some one determinate hour, can be only explained
by the admission of the facts of clironometry of life.
With regard to the other varieties of sleep, it is considered that
somnambulism, in common with talking in sleep, is only a gradation of
state, the retention of a certain voluntary power, and not a detached
phenomenon.
We may further presume that somnambulism chiefly occurs during
the time when the cerebral functions are already partially awake.
The effects of opium, morphia, and other similar drugs are pro-
duced by physical causes, but no known physical law can explain
them.
Trance, catalepsy, and mesmeric sleep only differ in degree from
reverie and absence of mind.
They all furnish examples of that disseverment, so to express it, of the
sensorial functions, which leave a portion of them awake, while others
lie in a state of slumber more or less profound.
" As regards mesmeric sleep, is there, we may ask, any such special form
or mode of sleep as that denoted under this name produced by a certain
subtle influence emanating from one person, and affecting, even without
actual contact, the body of another ? We may say at once that neither in
the sleep so produced, nor in the collateral effects assigned to it, do we find
anything that has not kindred with the natural phenomena of sleep and
dreams. AVe believe we might as well speak of sermon sleep, of rocking
cradle sleep, of the sleep of an easy arm-chair, or of a dull book, as of
mesmeric sleep." .... " And with regard to the power of the operator,
we may at once state our belief that no such peculiar power exists."
Sir Henry Holland condemns spiritualism as a " gross pretension,"
and recommends as a useful substitute, that we should all keep an
honest diary of our dreams.
Dreams leave traces on the brain, the same in kind, though perhaps
less forcibly marked than those impressed by the sensations, emotions,
and volitions of the waking state.
A multitude of sequent states may be, and actually are, crowded
into short spaces of time, and dreams, like waking thoughts, must of
course be different in different minds.
150 FRAGMENTARY PAPERS BY THE LATE SIR H. HOLLAND.
Sometimes we think more rapidly as well as more vividly than at
others. If this be so, we may fairly presume the same as to the
conditions of dreaming in different minds.
"What are the materials out of which dreams are formed? The
obvious and sole answer is, from the sensations, ideas, emotions, acts7
and events of antecedent life. Nevertheless, " the complete dream
disregards all realities." Regarding, then, the images of dreams, how-
ever perturbed in order, as derived from those of daily life, we still
have to ask the question whether this mimic imagery ever goes beyond,
with inventions new to the senses. We think not. We may dream
of the centaurs or the winged Assyrian bulls, as we have seen them in
the British Museum, but Ave do not in our sleep create monstrosities of
this kind.
All is disorder in the illusions of the night, but as the time of
awakening approaches the sensorial powers are partly revived, and the
dreams are more consecutive and consistent in the events they include.
We may repeat our belief, that to this fact Ave must look for explana-
tion of those singular stories of problems solved, verses composed, and
arguments logically pursued during the hours of sleep.
Analogy is found in the Avandering of the thoughts Avhen aAvake,
and the difficulty of remembering Avhat Ave have been thinking about
during the last half-hour, or during even shorter spaces of time.
It has been a question hoAV far the course and object of dreams
can be changed by external stimuli applied to the several senses of
the dreamer.
That they do have some effect there can be no doubt. We have
more certainty as to the influence of the internal organs on the
course and character of dreams. The digestive organs more espe-
cially?disordered, it may be, by the dinner of the preceding day?
betoken the hesterna vitia by troublous sensations and troubled dreams.
Even posture, temperature, a hard or soft bed, have effect in modifying
dreams. Such influences cannot be doubted, difficult though it is to
bring the facts into strict evidence. Dreamland is not the land of logic
or close scientific induction.
The effect of particular traits of character, of emotions and passions
upon the dream, is obvious to the most careless observer. It is a
saying of Sir Thomas BroAvn, " Virtuous thoughts of the day lay up
good treasures for the night." Men act in sleep in some conformity to
their Avakened senses. Dreams intimately tell us of ourselves. We
remember to have read a sermon?and a very able one?inculcating
the examination of dreams as a means of recognising and rebuking our
faults. They do, in truth, often denote not merely the grave, but also
those lighter shades of character Avhich are lost to our consciousness
in the current and familiar events of the day.
Remote events, Avhich are forgotten Avhen aAvake, furnish the
subjects of our dreams, as Avell as more recent ones, and all must have
noticed that certain dreams recur to us frequently.
With regard to the relation betAveen dreams and insanity, the
folloAving distinctions are laid down.
The one condition is normal, and periodical only; the other is
abnormal, and more or less permanent.
THE BUILDING OF A BRAIN. 151
As to the causation of sleep, it may depend upon either a congestion
of the venous blood, causing pressure on the brain; or upon a lessened
quantity or force of the blood, especially of the arterial blood in the
vessels. It may be safely assumed that we shall never discover by
what alterations in the cerebral substance dreams are originated and
composed.
Actions, analogous in kind, though variously altered in operation,
occur alike in the sleeping and waking brain.
The many cases where sleep, or states closely akin to it, can be
produced by causes in which the circulation is little, if indeed at all,
concerned, but where the nervous system is directly and powerfully
acted upon, suffice to show how important is the influence of the latter
in connection with these complex and ever-changing phenomena.
It has been thought advisable in the preceding remarks to endeavour
to bring before the reader the chief points of psychological interest in
these chapters. Space does not permit us to give a fuller or more
detailed analysis. Enough has been said, it is hoped, to entice the
philosopher and the alienist to seek for more connected information at
the fountain-head itself.
The moderation and gentleness of spirit displayed by their distin-
guished author in this and in all his previous writings, completely
disarm criticism. Where every sentence, paragraph, and chapter are
so ably and lucidly handled, it is impossible to find fault. We can
only indicate by this notice that there are certain parts of these essays
which interest and amuse us more than others, and which fully justify
our opinion that their author has in them maintained his well-earned
reputation as a man of science, a philosopher, and a physician.
