The Binet-Simon Measuring Scale for Intelligence: Some Criticisms and Suggestions
==================================================================================

Leonard P. Ayees, Ph.D.,
Russell Sage Foundation.

In 1908, the French psychologists Binet and Simon published their second and most famous series of tests for the diagnosis
of the grade of intelligence of children. This series, translated
and adapted for American use by Goddard and Whipple, has won
for itself widespread acceptance and increasing application by
those interested in the education of exceptional children.
This widespread practical application has demonstrated that
in various minor respects the tests, originally developed for use
with French children, are ill adapted to the needs of Americans,
and, as a result, many workers are at present engaged in trying
out minor variations in the hope of improving the series. In
other words, there is general agreement that the measuring instrument is based on correct principles, and constructed on the right
plan, but that it needs minor adjustments to make it work smoothly
under new conditions.

The object of this article is to present considerations which
lead the writer to believe that what we must have is a new instrument rather than the readjustment of the old; a new instrument
utilizing what is good in the old, but largely planned on different
principles and constructed along new lines.

The Binet-Simon tests consist of a series of fifty-six tasks
and questions adapted to the capabilities of normal children of
from three to thirteen years of age, and their purpose is to provide a measuring scale whereby the intellectual performance of
the child tested may be compared with that of the average normal
child of the same age.

This arrangement of the tests on an age scale constitutes the
feature of greatest value in the Binet-Simon series, and accounts
for the enthusiastic reception accorded them immediately upon
their publication. It enables the examiner to test a seven-yearold child, for example, and to discover that his mental development
is two years in arrears if he is able to pass successfully only the
tests assigned for children five years of age and younger. This
method provides for the first time a definite and universally intelligible scale by which to measure the performance of the subject.
A general idea of the character of the tests for each year may
be gained from the following table, which only roughly indicates
the nature of the tasks and questions:

Three Years. 32. Counting backwards.
1. Where is your nose, eyes, 33. Writing from dictation.
mouth? 34. Comparing objects from
2. Repetition of sentences. memory.
3. Repetition of numbers. Nine Years.
4. Describing pictures. 35. Knowing the date, day,
5. Name of family. month, day of month,
Four Years. and year.
6. Sex of child. 36. Reciting days of week.
7. Naming familiar objects. 37. Making change.
8. Repetition of figures. 38. Definition of familiar ob9. Comparison of lines. jects.
Five Years. 39. Reading and report.
10. Comparison of weights. 40. Arrangement of weights.
11. Copying square. Ten Years.
12. Making rectangle with di- 41. Reciting months of year.
vided card. 42. Naming nine pieces of
13. Counting four cents. money.
Six Years. 43. Sentence building.
14. Indicating right hand, left 44. Problem questions.
ear. Eleven Years.
15. Repetition of sentence. 45. Detecting absurd state16. Esthetic comparison. ments.
17. Definition of objects. 46. Sentence building.
18. Execution of triple order. 47. Naming sixty words in
19. Own age. three minutes.
20. Knowing morning and 48. Defining abstract terms.
afternoon. 49. Sentence building.
Seven Years. Tiuelve Years.
21. Unfinished picture. 50. Repetition of figures.
22. Number of fingers. 51. Rhymes.
23. Writing from copy. 52. Repetition of sentence.
24. Copying a diamond. 53. Problem questions.
25. Repetition of figures. Thirteen Years.
26. Description of pictures. 54. Drawing from design cut, in
27. Counting thirteen cents. paper.
28. Naming four common coins. 55. Describing figure made
Eight Years. from reversed triangle.
29. Reading and report. 56. Differences between ab30. Counting money. stract terms.
31. Naming four colors.

These tests are designed to measure native ability, not
scholastic attainment. They aim to provide the investigator with
an instrument which will enable him to form a trustworthy estimate of the child's capacity for adapting himself to his social
environment, and so are designed with special reference to evaluating his judgment, good sense, initiative, and adaptability.
Their value as a measure of this kind of intellectual capacity
depends on whether or not they really test the qualities they aim
to test and with what degree of accuracy. It is the opinion of
the writer that they may be greatly improved in both respects.
His criticisms fall under six general heads:

I. The tests predominantly reflect the child's ability to use
words fluently, and only in small measure his ability to do acts.
II. Five of them depend on the child's recent environmental
experience.

III. Seven depend on his ability to read or write.
IV. Too great weight is given to tests of ability to repeat
words and numbers.
V. Too great weight is given to "puzzle tests."
VI. Unreasonable emphasis is given to tests of ability to
define abstract terms.

I. Talking vs. Doing.
The first and most serious criticism is that the ability predominantly measured by these tests is the child's ability to use
words fluently, and that this gives a warped and partial measure
of his real degree of intelligence. The keynote of this criticism
is founded in the tests themselves, among the questions assigned
for ten-year-old children, where the child is asked, "Why should
you judge a person by what he does rather than by what he says?"
A correct answer to this question would be that we should
judge a person by his acts rather than by his words, because his
acts are accurate indicators of what he really is, whereas his words
may have only the slightest relation to his real self. This principle
is reflected in the proverbs and literature of every age, and of all
peoples. It is so axiomatic that Binet and Simon have rightly
assumed that it forms a part of the knowledge of every normal
ten-year-old child. Nevertheless, by careful count, two-thirds of
their tests are tests of the child's ability to use words, and only
one-third indicate his ability to act. The assumption seems to
be that native ability to do can be tested by testing the ability to
use words about doing.

The fallacy of this assumption is acutely appreciated by the
school superintendent who is forced to select principals and
teachers on the basis of examinations, and then sadly observes the
striking contrast between the way in which the candidates describe
how they would teach and administer, and the way in which they
actually succeed in teaching and administering. Federal, state
and municipal officials, whose field and office forces are selected
on the basis of examinations, are equally alive to similar common
discrepancies between words and deeds.

The root of the fallacy is the fundamental fact that the
motivating stimuli which shape one's actions in coping with a
real problem in life are invariably multiple and complex, whereas
those which determine his answer to a hypothetical question are
simple, few, and different in quality.

An illustration of this may be secured by putting to a number
of intelligent adults of demonstrated practical ability the questions assigned to ten-year-old children in the tests under consideration. One of these reads, "What ought one to do before taking
part in an important affair ?" The writer's experience in putting
this question to business men is not encouraging. A few answers
have been received ranging from "Take a bath," and, "Put on
your best clothes," to "Take some money from the bank" and
"Transfer your property to your wife"; but in general those
questioned reply with energetic expressions of short and ugly words
and emphatic protestations that the question is unanswerable.
Again, these problem-questions overlook the importance of
habit and of the emotions in influencing action. The ten-year-old
child or the adult of indifferent mental ability may have a ready
answer to the questions "What is the thing to do if you find out
that your house is on fire ?" "What ought one to do when he has
been struck by a playmate who did not do it on purpose ?" and,
"What would you do if you were punished when you did not
deserve it?" But the child or adult who does just the right thing
when he has been struck by another, discovers that his house is
on fire, or suffers undeserved punishment, thereby demonstrates
a quality and degree of native ability to which few indeed among
us may hope to attain.

A still further objection is that the tests assume an agreement
between verbal equality and real equality which seldom exists.
The blood-curdling series of tests put to eleven-year-old children
to discover their ability to detect absurdities well illustrates this
defect. The statement:

"There was found in the park to-day the body of an unBINET-SIMON SCALE FOR INTELLIGENCE. 191
fortunate young girl, frightfully mutilated, and chopped into
eighteen pieces. It is thought that she committed suicide."
may well be a pleasant and entertaining narrative to a normal and
somewhat phlegmatic child, but constitutes a serious nervous shock
to his more sensitive companion. In the same statement read
to both children there is verbal equality; in their psychical import
there may be the most serious inequality.

II. Recent Environmental Experience.

Five tests depend in high degree on the child's recent environmental experiences. These are the tests relating to time and to
money. Some of them are "doing" tests, and some of them "saying" ones. The assumption with regard to the "time" questions
is that intelligent children, irrespective of school training, should
be able to name the day of the week, the month, the day of the
month, the year, etc. Experiment among business and professional men shows that they are frequently unable to supply these
data off-hand unless the nature of their business requires constant reference to them. Probably every reader will recall that
it requires only three or four days of a camping trip or an ocean
voyage to lose track of the days of the week and the days of the
month, and that a distinct shock is experienced when someone
mentions the fact that "to-day is Sunday."

The writer recalls serving as a member of a Federal jury in
the West Indies trying smuggling cases, in which the members of
ocean-going trading sloops were the accused. In these cases it
was proved beyond any question that these sloop captains were
not only illiterate, but that they were absolutely ignorant of the
names of the months, and did not keep track of the days of the
week, with the exception of the Sundays. Nevertheless, these
men were distinctly able and intelligent, spoke several languages,
navigated dangerous waters, and carried cargoes of considerable
value. In the writer's opinion, the ability to name off-hand the
day of the week and of the month is governed almost entirely by
daily work and very little by native ability.

A similar objection, but one probably less serious, arises in
connection with those questions having to do with money and
making change. These again are abilities largely governed by
environment. The ability of a child of ten years to recognize and
name at sight a quarter, fifty-cent piece, a five-dollar bill and a
ten-dollar bill, depends not on native ability but rather on whether
or not lie is accustomed to see, have, handle or spend these pieces
of money.

III. Ability to Bead and Write.
Seven tests depend on the subject's ability to read and write,
which commonly depends on the amount and kind of school experience he has had, and may be only slightly related to his native
ability.

IV. Repetition of Words and Numbers.
The repetition of words and numbers has an even more remote
relation to the ability to cope with the problems of life, and yet
one-seventh of the tests are of this sort. The simpler of them can
be successfully passed by a gifted parrot; the more difficult ones
recently proved beyond the ability of a university professor tested
by the writer.

V. Puzzle Tests.

Several of the tests seem best designated as "puzzle tests,"
and appear to have strikingly little relation to anything the normal person has to do in the ordinary day's work. Such a one
is the demand that the eight-year-old child count backwards from
twenty. Counting backwards is one of the rarest things most
people are called to do, and yet the proposal has recently been
seriously made that these present tests be "improved" by requiring
the subject to recite the names of the months from December back
to January instead of forward from January to December. To
teach children to recite backwards lists of words that have a normal
fixed order is educationally vicious. To include such a requirement in tests of intellectual ability is at least questionable.
Another "puzzle test" for thirteen-year-old children seems as
foreign to everyday experience as the foregoing. It uses for
material a visiting card cut along the diagonal and asks the child
to describe the resulting shape if one of the triangles were turned
about and placed so that its short leg was on the other hypotenuse
and its right angle at the smaller of the two acute angles. So
far the writer has failed to find any one able to describe the
resulting shape.

VI. Abstract Terms.

Definitions of abstract terms and expressions of the difference
between abstract words of similar sound but different meaning constitute the last class of tests to be here considered. The first
objection to these is that philosophers are almost the only people
who think in abstractions and the second objection is that words
of peculiarly difficult character have been chosen. Let the reader
himself try the eleven-year-old test which demands definitions of
Charity, Justice, and Goodness. To pass he must give two good
definitions. Then let him try the thirteen-year-old tests and tell
the difference between
Pleasure and Honor
Evolution and Revolution
Event and Advent
Poverty and Misery
Pride and Pretension.

The third of these pairs is a good one to try on your friends.
If not satisfied with their explanations recourse may be had to
the Standard Dictionary where one will be rewarded by finding that
an advent is the coming of an event, but just what the difference
between them is remains undiscovered.

To sum up the case to this point: two-thirds of the BinetSimon tests are tests of the child's ability to use words, and only
one-third tests of his ability to do acts. Among the reasons why
certain of the tests fall short of providing satisfactory criteria for
the judging of native ability are the following:?

1. They overlook the fundamental difference between the
multiple and complex stimuli which contribute to the motivating
impulse in coping with real problems and the few simple ones
entering as factors in answering questions or obeying commands.
2. The importance of the emotions and habit in influencing
action is disregarded.

3. Peal equality is attributed to verbal equality.
4. Ability to answer many of the questions depends on the
child's daily environmental experiences which differ radically
among different children.

5. Ability to meet the requirements of several of the tests
depends directly on the excellence of the child's schooling.
6. Several tests depend on the mere ability to repeat words
and numbers.

7. Counting backwards and solving puzzles constitute several
tests.

8. Several tests turn on the ability to express in words comprehension of difficult, abstract terms.
There are two important sets of evidence in favor of the tests
and they are both good in the sense that they constitute "pragmatic" arguments showing that the tests "work" successfully when
applied. In the first place these tests have won rapid and widespread use and endorsement among hundreds of practical teachers
and workers with children, whereas all previous tests of intelligence have been practically restricted in use to workers in psychological laboratories.
In the writer's opinion the reason for this has been pointed
out by Professor Terman, of Stanford University, who calls attention to the fact that here for the first time we have a set of tests
arranged with reference to steps on a scale which is constant and
universally understood. Everyone has a fairly accurate conception
of what is meant when one says that a given child shows intelligence equal to that of a ten-year-old normal child. We have had
graded tests before but no one knew what the steps on the scale
meant in terms of anything else, or where the lower end began or
how far the upper end reached. This application of tests to a
definite, universally understood scale constitutes the great contribution of Binet and Simon and it is so important a contribution
that its excellence outweighs the shortcomings of the tests themselves.

The second set of evidence consists of the records of applying the tests to large numbers of normal school children with the
result that the distribution of the children into retarded, normal,
and advanced groups corresponds fairly well with what is termed
in statistics the normal frequency distribution. Such studies have
been made by Binet and Simon in France with 203 normal children and by Goddard in this country with 1547 children. In
both cases the results showed about such a distribution of retarded,
normal and advanced children as the theory of normal frequency
distribution tells us that we should find, and in both cases the
results have been widely cited as constituting a scientific demonstration of the correctness of the tests in so far as their degree of
difficulty is concerned.

Unfortunately this conclusion is hardly justified by the
results of the investigations as made public, for the reason that
we have only the mass figures for the entire group tested and
not the figures showing the results for children of each age. This
process hides the details from view and if, as many workers
report, the tests for the youngest children are too easy and those
for the oldest ones too hard, these important facts are concealed
by putting all the results for all the ages together.
How this works is illustrated by comparing the results obtained
by Goddard in his application of the Binet-Simon tests to 1547
normal school children with data recently gathered by the writer
showing the progress of children in the public elementary schools
of twenty-eight cities. In the accompanying diagram the solid
line represents the distribution for the children tested by Goddard
according as the tests showed them to be normal, one year behind,
one year ahead, two years behind, two years ahead, etc. The
dotted line is based on data showing how long it has taken 14,762
children in twenty-eight American cities to complete the work of
seven grades. Those who have done so in seven years are rated
as normal; those who have taken six years, as one year ahead in
progress; those taking eight years, as one year behind, etc. To
secure a proper basis of comparison both the Goddard data and
the writer's have been reduced to relative figures and are presented on the basis of 1000 cases:?
The significant feature of the diagram is that the curves
are closely similar. If the solid curve constitutes a scientific demonstration of the correctness of the Binet tests, then it may fairly
be argued that the dotted one constitutes a scientific demonstration
that the public school systems and courses of study of these cities
are correctly adjusted to the abilities of their pupils; neither too
hard nor too easy, but almost exactly right. If this were true there
-7 -6 -5 -3 -2 -1 K 1 2 3 ^

Distribution curves showing variations from normal of 1547 children
tested by Binet-Simon scale (solid line) and 14,762 children in 28 cities
rzted by their progress through seven grades (dotted line). Curves based
on relative figures showing distribution of 1000 cases of each kind.
would be far less need for securing a measuring scale of intelligence tlum there undoubtedly is, for in our public school system
we should have just such a scale, scientifically correct and already
at hand.

The fact is, however, that the progress figures from the twentyeight cities referred to show great variations as between different
grades and localities, and it is only by combining the figures for all
the cities that the nearly normal curve shown is secured. A similar
comparison could easily be made with the figures showing the
results of the tests made by Binet and Simon in France. Indeed,
it so happens that this curve almost exactly coincides with that
showing the progress of the children in the eight grades of Bayonne, New Jersey, and here again the almost normal curve disappears when the data are presented by separate grades.
i.

In presenting the foregoing considerations the writer does
not wish to appear as an antagonist of the Binet-Simon Measuring
Scale for Intelligence, for he is not. He does wish to sound a note
of warning against accepting them in their present form as final
and satisfactory. What is here set down is the result of his own
attempts to discover ways in which they may be improved, together
with ideas secured through lengthy discussions of their application
with Mrs. Louise Stevens Bryant, of the Psychological Clinic of
the University of Pennsylvania.

Binet and Simon have done a great and lasting service for
the cause of childhood in basing their tests on a definite scale.
The present situation offers a splendid opportunity to psychologists, teachers, and mothers to observe, discover, and record things
which normal children do and know at each age. Work of this
sort conducted by a large number of observers and co-ordinated
by some central agency or agencies would soon give us a series of
tests retaining all of the good of the present series and replacing
present tests wherever experiment and observation show better
ones can be found.

Above all let us steadfastly bear in mind that all measuring
instruments must be judged for two qualities; first, what they
measure, and, secondly, how accurately they measure it. The
fact that the Binet-Simon tests are more or less accurately adjusted
to the normal capabilities of the children of each age is only one,
and the less important, criterion. The problem of paramount
importance is whether or not they really measure native ability,
and if they fall short, how we may develop a series of tests that will
measure it
