Social Forces
==============

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

By Edward T. Devine editor of The Survey. New York:
Charities Publication Committee, 1910. lJp. 220.
This is an attractive little volume of two hundred and twenty-six
pages, neatly bound and printed upon excellent paper with wide margins and clear type. It is a literary mosaic made up of twenty-five
editorials appearing in The Survey in 1907 and 1908. These more or
less disconnected bits of expression upon social phenomena in general are
put together with so much skill and delicacy of workmanship that they
present a symmetrical and well-balanced whole. That which gives them
unity and continuity is the large sociological experience and economic
grasp of the writer. This appears, for example, in the constantly reiterated principles, that charities should deal primarily with social causes,
and that relief should not only be preventive of pauperism but should
not even prolong dependency beyond an irreducible minimum of time.
Such fundamental views constantly lead Dr Devine to utter suggestive remarks upon problems of social, economic, and industrial life. lie
dwells upon the contrast between the old or "naive" view of relief, and
the new view. lie states definitely that charity should be self-annihilative
and that all charitable organizations should be temporary and transient.
The editorial on "The Bread Line" treats that institution without sentimentality, and considers it purely in its broad social aspect and its
effect upon dependents. The outcome is the conclusion, "The very
beginning of wisdom in dealing with the bread line is to stop the bread."
That will stop the bread-line and some of the evils it breeds and fosters.
The perpetuating of such an institution by endowment, therefore,
receives no enthusiastic praise, though it is admitted that other viewpoints may be taken and we may look upon it as "a symptom , of our
civilization, a stimulus to our pity or a warning to our intelligence,
according as we severally interpret its meaning." The article on "The
Pittsburg Survey" is a well epitomized and weighty indictment of the
industrial system that brings about the wretched conditions in that city.
No community before, says Dr Devine, "in America or in Europe has
ever had such a surplus, and never before has a great community
applied what it had so meagerly to the rational purposes of human life."
Other editorials are just as striking and just as significant. Toward
the end of the book are several thoughtful considerations of charities
and churches under the captions, "The Need of a Religious Awakening,"
"Religion and Progress," and "What We Believe." Like all suggestive
works, the book is as broad and as deep as the mind of the reader.
Attention is particularly drawn to the admirable way in which comparatively disconnected matter has been woven together to produce a cumulative effect.
A. II.
(54)
