The Binet-Simon Scale for Measuring Intelligence
=================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1911, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. V, No. 7. December 15, 1911.

Impressions Gained by its Application upon Four Hundred
Non-selected Children.
By Lewis M. Terman, Ph.D. |/
Stanford University, California.
Through the assistance of Mr. H. G. Childs, a graduate
student in the Department of Education, Stanford University,
the Binet-Simon scale was tried last year upon about four hundred children in the vicinity of Stanford University. The complete account of this work will not appear until a little later (a
series of articles by Terman and Childs) but on invitation of the
editor of The Clinic I am glad to contribute to this symposium
a few impressions gained from the work, and to add some criticisms
of the scale.
For the authors of the study by far the most important result
was a decided conviction that measuring scales of this general
type are feasible, and that when corrected, extended and multiplied, they will prove of great practical and theoretical value.
This outcome was not fully anticipated. I had myself previously
spent nearly two years in the use of various "tests of intelligence,"
from which work, in spite of many items of interest, I could
hardly count value received. My present belief is that the field
is one that will richly repay any careful and well-directed effort.
It is something of a mystery why the scale method in the
application of mental tests should not have come into general use
long ago. For twenty years numerous experimenters applied
tests covering almost every type of mental function. Certain
correlations were crudely attempted. Interesting suggestions were
made. A few age and grade tendencies were roughly ascertained.
But all will admit that, for the most part, the tests were fruitless.
ififee also Avres Leonard P. The Blnet-Slmon Measuring Seale fQr lntelllgcHC0;
Some Criticisms and Suggestions. The Psychological Clinic, Oct. 15, 1911.
(199 )
200 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
They were either too limited in scope, or failed to utilize nonselected subjects, or else were made under conditions impossible to
duplicate. Most fatal of all, the experimentation, instead of being
guided by some directing idea like that of definitely establishing
age or grade standards, was usually of haphazard nature. Then
came Binet with his simple device of arranging the tests in
a series of groups, according to their difficulty as determined by
age differences in performance. His data were of very limited
extent, and rather carelessly elaborated, but the advantages of this
procedure are every day becoming more apparent, and are rapidly
making possible a clinical child psychology. At the same time
it must be admitted that the scale is far too limited in extent, that
it is very far from accurate* (at least for average American children), and that it is improvable at many points.
The children tested in our experiment ranged from four to
thirteen years of age. The tests were uniformly given, and with
careful attention to thoroughness. Without entering here into
details, it may be said that the results warrant a far more radical
revision of the scale than any one else has hitherto recommended.
The scale originally offered by Binet is in general far too easy at
the lower end, while in the upper range it is too difficult. In fact,
the range of nine years in the actual ages of our subjects was condensed into a range of only five years of test ages. Besides the
frequent displacement up or down the scale, some of the tests
are objectionable or unsatisfactory for other reasons. This is particularly true of the thirteen-year group. On the other hand,
such tests as the "description of pictures," "omissions from pictures," "aesthetic judgment," drawing, "questions of comprehension," memory, reasoning ability, vocabulary and association gave
specially satisfactory results.
In addition to the trial given to Binet's tests, an attempt was
made to extend the scale by securing age standards of performance in four other lines. The latter included, first, a "generalization test" (interpretation of fables) ; second, a graded "completion test"; third, a vocabulary test of 100 words; and fourth, a
tost of "practical judgment" (involving the hunting of a lost ball
in a circular field). The authors devised new methods of grading
performance for the fable and completion tests which they
believe will add much to the serviceableness of both. The vocabulary test is based upon Laird and Lee's "Vest Pocket Dictionary,"
and is, therefore, designed to test the child's acquaintance with
the most common concepts of everyday usage, and thus to display
THE BINET-SIMON SCALE. 201
grade of intelligence rather than accidents of technical education.
It is believed that all of the above four tests will prove usable
additions to the scale.
The authors have also devised a method for calculating
"test age" which they believe is a decided improvement over that
used by Binet, a method which gives exactly equal value to all the
tests of any year group. The tests of a year group are given a
combined value of 1, and the "unit value" of each question in a
group is determined by dividing 1 by the number of tests in that
group. It is thus possible to retain an unequal number of tests
in the different groups without giving undue weight to any one
test in the estimation of test age.
The following arrangement of the tests shows the main
features of the revision which we have tentatively made, and indicates the basis upon which the present year's work is being conducted. Besides the four additional tests above mentioned we
have added to the scale also a test of arithmetical reasoning, a
test of "wit," and Goddard's "code" test. It is expected that the
work of the present year will make possible some further improvements.1 Space is lacking to present in this discussion the rather
elaborate directions which we are carefully following in the application of the scale.
Name of Pupil
-Name of School
Name of Examiner
Age of Pupil (years and months)  Grade
Date of this examination: year   month
time of day
Comments:
N.B. Examiner should check all items separately.
Yeae III (unit value .1G66). 1. a. "What's the thing to
do when you feel sleepy?" b. "What's the thing to do when you
feel cold?" 2. Weights:?3-12 6-15 3-12. 3. Naming objects: key  closed knife  penny  4. Knows
sex. 5. Repeats three digits: 641  352  783
6. Pictures (enumerates) 1 2 3
Year IV (unit value .2). 1. Copies square. 2. Counts
four pennies. 3. Divided rectangle. 4. Chooses prettier.
1 However, any reader who would like to try this edition of the scale on as
many as fifty children may secure a complete set of directions and the necessary
record booklets by addressing a letter to me. There will be no expense attached to
the same; the only condition Is that I be permitted to use the summaries of such
returns (giving credit, of course, to those who wish to collaborate in this way).
Correspondence with this end In view is solicited from persons who are equipped
to give such testa.
-20-2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
1 2 3  5. Defines (use) : a table
a chair a liorse a mamma
Year V (unit value .2). 1. Morning or afternoon. 2.
Names colors: red yellow blue green
3. Puts key on chair, brings box, shuts, door. 4. Vocabulary
index (?). 5. Memory for sentences of 12 to 14 syllables.
Year VI (unit value .16GG). 1. Eight hand, left ear. 2.
Number of fingers. 3. Counts thirteen pennies. 4. Repeats:
4379  2854  7261  5. a. "What's the thing
to do if it's raining when you start to school ?" b. "What's the
thing to do if you have missed a train ?" c. "What's the thing to do
if you find that your house is on fire?" G. Vocabulary index 12
per cent (2160).
Year VII (unit value .1666). 1. Copies diamond. 2.
Omissions from pictures: 1  2  3  4
3. Names: penny nickel dime quarter
4. Pictures (describes). 1 2 3  5. Vocabulary index 14 per cent (2520). 6. Repeats sentences 14 to 16
syllables.
Year VIII (unit value .1666). 1. Writes from dictation:
"The pretty little girl." 2. Compares: butterfly - fly; wood - glass;
paper-cloth. 3. Counts 20 to 0. 4. Ball and field (score 2). 5.
Repeats: 31759  42385  98176  6. Vocabulary index 18 per cent. (3240).
Year IX (unit value .125). 1. Value of stamps; 111222.
2. Names date. 3. Reading for four memories. Time
4. Weights, 3-6-9-12-15. Trial 1  2  3  5.
Fifty words in two minutes. 6. a. "What's the thing to do when
you've been struck by a playmate who did not do it purposely?"
b. "What's the thing to do when you have broken something which
does not belong to you?" c. "What's the thing to do when you
have been detained so that you are in danger of being late for
school?" 7. Vocabulary index 23 per cent (4140). 8. Completion test (score ).
Year X (unit value .125). 1. Copies designs: 1 2
2. Three words in one sentence. 3. Six digits: 374859
825746  762953  4. Ball and field (score
3). 5. Vocabulary index 26 per cent (4680). 6. Fables
1 2 3 4  7. Completion test (score
20). 8. Making change, 25 cts., 4 cts.
Year XI (unit value .2). 1. Arithmetical reasoning (score
). 2 .a. "What ought one to do before taking part in an
THE BINET-SIMON SCALE. 203
important affair?" b. "What ought you to say if someone asks
your opinion about a person you know only a little?" c. "Why
ought we to judge a person more by his acts than by his words?"
d. "Why do we excuse a wrong act committed in anger more readily
than a wrong act committed without anger?" 3. Vocabulary
index 30 per cent (5400). 4. Fables: 1 2 3
4  5. Completion test (score 25). 6. Wit: 1  2
3 4  5
Year XII (unit value .1666). 1. Absurdities: 1
2 3 4 5  2. Disarranged sentences:
1 2 3  3. Reading for seven memories
(Time ). 4. Suggestion (Binet's 1911 test). 5. Vocabulary index 36 per cent (6480). 6. Repeats 26 syllables (one out
of three correct).
Yeak XIII (unit value .1666). 1. Seven digits: 2183439
9728475  3247196  2. Problems of fact:
1  2  3  3. Vocabulary index 42 per cent
(7560). 4. Fables: 1  2  3  4  5.
Arithmetical reasoning (score ). 6. Completion test
(score 36).
Yeak XV (unit value .1666). 1. Fables (score ).
2. Changes of clock (4 minutes to 3 o'clock) (20 minutes
after 6)  3. Picture (interprets) 1  2
3  4. Vocabulary index (score ). 5. Completion
test (score ). 6. Uses code (Goddard's).
Adult (unit value ). 1. Reversed triangle. 2.
President and king. 3. Ball and field (score 4, with special conditions). 4. Completion test (score ). 5. Gives sense of
selection.
I believe that tests of intelligence stand in serious need of
further attention before we undertake to determine standards of
performance in the different branches of the curriculum. Everything else is relative to intelligence. For clinical purposes, at
least, it will be of relatively little value to ascertain where a
pupil stands in geography or history or arithmetic in comparison with other children, unless we also know such pupil's intellectual status. All the numerous previously made correlations
which have been based upon estimates of intelligence made by the
teacher or inferred from school progress are unreliable. Lacking
suitable scales for measuring intelligence (and there should be
at least three or four such scales instead of one), we shall never
be able to determine satisfactorily any of the following matters:
204 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
1. The effects of adenoids, bad teeth, malnutrition, partial
deafness, nervous inco-ordination, or any other physical defect,
alone or in combination with others, upon mental progress.
2. The relation between mental progress and physiological age
(An important matter sadly in need of investigation.)
3. The relation between intellectual growth and pedagogical
progress.
4. The relation between incorrigibility and intellectual
retardation. The degree to which morality depends upon the
powers of abstraction, or generalization. (Thought to be important according to some data now in press.)
5. Hereditary influences in the field of intelligence.
6. The influences of prolonged unfavorable social conditions,
chronic insufficiency of food, sleep, etc.
The reader can extend this list indefinitely. It is readily
seen how fundamentally important it is to have some means available for measuring the intelligence of school children. Intellectual
status is concerned in almost every problem of pedagogy or of child
hygiene. Without a scale to measure mentality we are almost
blocked in the further study of retardation and its causes, nor can
Ave successfully prosecute researches with feeble-minded or supernormal children. At the present time the scale does not seem to
be improving in proportion cither to the rapidly increasing interest
in it or to the demands upon it. An illustration is the recent ISTew
Jersey law requiring tests of intelligence to be applied in the case
of all public school children retarded three years or more.
However, in spite of the many imperfections and inadequacies of the revised scale I believe that by its use it is possible
for the psychologist to submit, after a forty-minute diagnostication,
a more reliable and more enlightening estimate of the child's intelligence than most teachers can offer after a year of daily contact
in the schoolroom. Since all human estimations are relative to
some standard, the teacher has no means of discovering whether
her class on the whole is above or below the normal for the corresponding age. Her standard may be too high or too low, too vague,
too mechanical or fragmentary. Before many years it will probably become a matter of course to apply serial mental tests in the
public schools to all pupils who are retarded or about to become
retarded, or who give indication of unusual ability. The scientific
management of special classes for atypical children in the public
schools will be impossible until similar series of tests are multiplied indefinitely.
THE BINET-SIMON SCALE. 205
To ascertain the full extent and true nature of a case of mental retardation, together with its causes, is, it must be confessed,
extremely difficult. In fact, with existent methods it is hardly
possible at all. Our treatment of such cases hardly transcends
guess-work. May we not hope that several such scales will soon
be devised, each more perfect than the revision here offered, which
collectively will enable the clinical psychologist in a few days to
lay bare the "natural history" of a child's development; tests which
will explore every line of efficiency, intellectual, volitional, motor,
personal, social, linguistic, etc., which will relate all these at every
point to individual peculiarities of instincts and interests and to
all significant accidents of experience.
In order to make the tests of the greatest practical use it will
be necessary to apply along with such measuring scales the newlydeveloped tests of 'physiological age. Unless this is done many
children are certain to be grossly misjudged as to native ability,
a mistake which in individual cases may be fraught with the
most serious consequences. In justice to the child, the normality
of whose intelligence has been questioned, tests for physiological
age should always be applied before institutional treatment is recommended, and perhaps occasionally after commitment.
Now that the individual treatment of pupils in the schools
has begun, there is no stopping short of this ideal. Tests must
be developed which will enable us to differentiate all degrees of
intellectual ability and all kinds of intellective unevenness; others
which will mark for special educational effort the pupil whose
emotional equipment and volitional tendencies threaten the onset
of criminality, insanity, hysteria, neurasthenia, or other of the
neuroses. With the accumulation of positive experimental data
on so many aspects of individual mentality John Stuart Mill's suggestion looking toward a science of human character, ethology, as
he called it, would gradually become possible. The modern studies
in the psychology of testimony, suggestibility, measurements of
mental growth, super and sub-normality, submerged complexes,
emotivity, psycho-analysis and association reactions offer a fascinating field for the genetic study of personality.
A word may be added respecting recent criticisms which have
boon offered to the effect that so-called mental tests being measures
of a product, not of a mental process, are hence valueless for psychology. This, of course, is the extreme point of view of the
uncompromising structural psychologist who limits by definition
the legitimate scope of the science to the study of the content
206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of consciousness. In the light of the recent developments in dynamic psychology mentioned in the last paragraph, all of which
(together with certain others) have emphasized anew and more
forcibly than ever before the importance for human behavior of
the subconscious, instinctive and submerged elements of mental
life, such a limitation of the scope of psychology becomes an anachronism. In so far as these structural elements shed light upon
function they are significant, but they can no more usurp the entire
domain of psychology than the chemistry of the bones and muscles
can swallow up or displace the science of physiology. As a man's
efficiency in the material sense is measured by the quantity and
quality of the work turned out in a given time, with method occupying a secondary place, so in the mental realm, the accomplishments of mental activity are the thing of most vital concern; the
structural elements are simply a means to the end. Furthermore,
in child psychology, as in animal psychology, it is impossible to get
at the structural elements. We can only measure the performance
in terms of objective results. It appears no more unreasonable to
state a child's mental ability in terms of performance than it is
for the historian to assign Napoleon his place in history from a
consideration of his life activities. It would, of course, be interesting to know Napoleon's type of imagery, the structural accompaniments of his reaction time to various kinds of sense stimuli,
even the chemical formulae for all parts of his material body,?
but it is not clear h?w much this would add to our understanding
of Napoleon as an historical figure.
