A Practical Guide for the Administration of the Binet-Simon Scale for Measuring Intelligence
==============================================================================================

By J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D.,
Stanton, Iowa.
Various considerations liave constrained me to prepare this,
guide. First, the Binet-Simon scale is coming into wider and
wider use in institutions for defectives (feebleminded, epileptic,
insane, criminal, juvenile delinquents) and in the public schools
throughout the country. Such varied application of the tests
should in time yield valuable comparative knowledge of various
classes of individuals. It is evident, however, that the results
will have no comparative, scientific value unless uniformity is
observed in the administration of the tests. Discrepancies in the
results of different experimenters are often entirely traceable to
departures or differences in the method of giving the tests. Nat-
urally some methods will be bad, some good and some indifferent;
in any case, the results will generally hinge on the particular
method used, and they will have absolutely no comparative value
unless a standardized procedure has been followed. In the simpler
tests the standardization will often not need to be elaborate, but
a minimum amount is always essential.
Secondly, it is my experience that uniformity in experimental
procedure is out of the question in any branch of psychological
research unless the conditions, method, and procedure are defi-
nitely and fully formulated. There is a peculiarly urgent need
for explicit directions in the administration of the Binet-Simon
scale, because the tests are being given by persons with little if any
scientific (and particularly any psychological) training, and who
therefore are in no position to formulate a correct procedure for
themselves, nor to foresee or circumvent the methodological pitfalls
which lurk in all kinds of scientific work. Hence to be of prac-
tical value the directions for handling the Binet-Simon scale should
be given in the form of a compact, condensed guide, instead of
being scattered throughout a bulky text; and the procedure, the
questions or directions, should be so formulated that they can be
used verbatim.
Thirdly, some of the tests have not as yet been sufficiently
detailed, conditioned or standardized, obviously because this can-
(217)
218 THE FSYCHOLOGIGAL CLINIC.
not be satisfactorily done a priori, but only after extensive testing.
Tlie scale has now been used and criticised somewhat freely, so
that we are in a position to improve the procedure at various
points and to oiler various suggestions. In doing this it is ad-
visable to proceed along conservative lines and disregard such
suggestions as have not been subjected to the test of experience.
Fourthly, a number of studies1 have demonstrated that the
scale itself, aside from the procedure, is imperfect at various
j joints. While these imperfections are not such as to render the
1908 scale worthless, there is imperative need to carry forward the
work of revision and improvement, so that we may eventually
obtain a maximally reliable scale. But this work (with normal
children, of course,) cannot be satisfactorily done unless a fairly
uniform and standardized procedure is followed; without this we
can expect nothing but conflict and discrepancy. Nor does it seem
advisable to revise the 1908 scale for American use until it has
been more extensively tried out in accordance with a standardized
procedure.
It is in the hope of aiding the work of standardizing the
experimental procedure that the following guide has been pre-
pared?not as a finality but as a practical pathfinder. The at-
tempt has been made to outline the procedure which I have found
most satisfactory, but advantage has also been taken of the sug-
gestions of other writers. To explain why one form of procedure
should be used and another avoided, or to enter upon an explana-
tion or justification of the tests themselves, would require more
space than is here available. It is intended to make this guide
supplement, rather than supplant, the statements or texts already
extant. It may reasonably be expected that anyone who intends
to use the scale should familiarize himself with at least the Eng-
lish versions.2
I have followed the 1908 series, except that the tests for
idiocy, 1 to 6, have been added from the 1905 series. Tests 17a
and 50a have also been added. The order in which the tests appear
corresponds closely with the originals.
1 For certain general criticisms, and a program of work In the psycho-clinical
field, see "The New Clinical Psychology and the Psycho-Cllnicist," Journal of Edu-
cational Psychology, March and April, 1911. "Human Efficiency," Pedagogical
Seminary,, 1911, 74 ff.
2 Cf. Blnet et Simon, Lc DGveloppment de I'lntelligence cliez les enfants. Ann6e
Psychologique Tome XIV. Otto Bobertag, Ueber Intclligenzprtlfungen (nach der
Methode von Blnet und Simon), Zcitschrift filr angexcandtc Psychologic, V, 1911.
pp. 10.)-_03. Henry II. Goddard. Blnet's Measuring Scale for Intelligence, The
Training School, VI, No. 11, 1910. E. B. Huey, The Blnet Scale for Measuring
ai? Retardation. The Journal of Educational Psychology, I, 1910,
435f. katherine L. Johnston, An English Version of M. Binct's Tests for the
Measurement of Intelligence. Training School Record, London, November, lOlOr
Uuy M. Whipple, Manual of Mental and Physical Tests. Baltimore. 19IO. Chapter 13).
GUIDE FOB BINET-SIMON SCALE. 219
The Binet-Simon Diagnostic Tests of Mental Age (Intellectual
Development).
(Abbreviations: S = subject. E = experimenter. -f- =
passed. ? = failed.)
Name Born Place of birth Nationality
Sex Health Physical defects School grade
School standing (years pedagogically retarded or acceler-
ated) Examined By Mental condition
during test General results : passed tests of mental
age Chronological (actual) age Years retarded intellectually
Degree of Mentality: Supernormal, normal, subnormal.
BACKWARD, FEEBLE-MINDED (LOW, MlDDLE OR HlGH IdIOT ; L.,
M., or H. Imbecile; L., M., or H. Moron).
Tests for Idiocy?Mental Age 1 to 2 Years.
Age 1.
1. Move lighted match slowly before S.'s eyes (or ring bell
from behind S.). Mark -f- if eyes follow or S. listens. Watch
for incordinated eye movements.
2. Place small block (cube) in palm of S.'s hand, with
statement, "Here is something for you." + if S. grasps and
handles. Prehension from tactual stimulation.
3. Move colored ball or cylinder, suspended by string, slowly
before S.'s face (eyes) or hands, without touching. + if S. grasps
?md handles.
Age 2.
4. Hold before S., or place within S.'s reach a piece each
?f candy (or cookie) and wood of equal size. Avoid favored
position for either, -f- if candy is chosen.
5. Wrap paper about candy in S.'s sight, and hand packet
toS. +ifS. removes paper before eating.
6. Imitations : E. extends hand for greeting as S. enters
room. "Do as I do"; or: "Do this way." E. claps hands; hands
111 front, on head or shoulders; rises on toes, etc.
Commands (by gestures or words) : "Sit down," "Stand
up," "Shake hands," "Pick up" (object purposely dropped by E.),
"Give me that book." + if S. imitates simple movements or exe-
cutes simple commands. Watch out for failure through nega-
tivism or stubbornness.
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Tests for Imbecility?Age 3 to 8 Years.
Age 3.
7. "Wliere are your eyes?" "Nose?" "Mouth?" "Hair?"
Or: "Open your mouth," "Close your eyes," Touch your nose."
-f- if S. correctly points to parts.
8. "Repeat" (alternative forms) : "Say after me," or: "See
if you can say just what I say without making a single mistake."
Or: "I'm going to read a sentence (or tell a little story). When
I get through I want you to say it word for word, just as I did,
without a single mistake. Now listen carefully") :?
"'It is cold and snowing.' (Say that.)" Or: 'My dog's
name is Fido.' Or: 'In summer it is warm.' E. speaks slowly
(not too slowly, or haltingly), distinctly, with expression, while
there is no noise and S. is attentive. Shield sentences from S.'s
eyes. No repetitions allowed. E. records reproduction verbatim.
Six syllables in one sentence. Use other six syllables in single
complete, easy, concrete sentences if above become familiar. + if
S. reproduces one of the three absolutely correctly.
9. Repeat ("I'm going to say some numbers. Listen care-
fully, because as soon as I get through, I want you to say them
just as I did. Now listen"): "'7 2.' ('Say that.' Or: 'What
did I say?') : Or: '9 1.'" See directions under 8. If necessary
illustrate thus: "so when I say '8 5' you must also say '8 5.' "
Pronounce digits distinctly once, as single, detached units, with-
out accent, one-half second apart. No consecutive numbers. Shield
numbers from S.'s eyes. Two digits. One out of three abso-
lutely correct, passes.
10. "What do you see in this picture ?" "What is it about ?"
Or: "Look at this picture carefully and tell me what you see, what
it is about." If necessary urge; "anything else?" Show S. only
familiar pictures in colors of people and situations, strongly sug-
gestive of action. Of the Jingleman Jack pictures (these and all
the other supplies for the Binet-Simon tests can be secured from
C. H. Stoelting Co., 121 N. Green Street, Chicago, 111.) the best
are probably the pictures of a man chasing children from the
steps, of the plumber and the defective water pipe, of carpenters
building a house, of a man mowing grass, and of a mnn cutting
hair. All these are admirable for purposes of simple enumeration
and description, but not so good for eliciting an interpretative
response. Pictures equally good for all three purposes are needed.
Simple enumeration of objects pns^es (row of substantives).
(Cf. test 32.)
GUIDE FOB BINET-SIMON SCALE. 221
11. "What is your name?" Preferably asked at beginning
of sitting. Family name required.
Age 4.
12. "Are you a boy or a girl?" (asked of boys). "Are you
a girl or a boy?" (for girls).
13. Show successively a hey, penny, Tcnife, (pencil). "You
know what that is. Well, what is it?" Correct naming or interpre-
tative actions pass.
14. "Repeat: <7 4 8.' Or: <5 9 7.' Or: <1 6 3.'" Fol-
low directions in tests 8 and 9. Three digits.
15. "Which of these two lines (pointing to them) is the
longer ?"
Do not point to longer last
if each is pointed to sepa-
rately. Cover balance of
paper when necessary.
Hesitation = ?.
Age 5.
16. "Iiere are a couple of boxes, which look alike, don't
they ?" "But they don't weigh the same. One is heavier than the
other. Now I want you to lift the one after the other, this way,
and give me the one which feels the heavier. Feel carefully."
E. takes each box successively between two fingers, or the thumb
and finger, of the right hand, and lifts it about 1 cm. Use similar
metal pill boxes of the same size. Filling must not rattle, -f- if
2 are right in 3 trials, with 3 and 12 grams (or repeat with 6
and 15 grams).
17. "Draw a figure like tms i^as
nearly like this as you can)": -f- if
figure is not round, or if right angles
are fairly well preserved, or if figure
has squared appearance, it is recognized
as an approximate square. Propor-
tions thus need not be exactly correct.
S. must use pen. Record time. E.,
non-committal, asks after S. hns fin-
ished: "Is it good?" "Is it like this?"
'I heard a bird sinking in treetops.' Or: 'we should starve
T heard a bird singing in the treetops.' Or: 'We should starve
222 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
if we had nothing to eat.' " Ten syllables. Follow directions in
test 8.
18. Place on table before S. a rectangular visiting card,
about 4.5 by 7.5 cm., and triangular pieces cut diagonally from
a similar card and placed thus:
"Put these two pieces (pointing to the triangles) together
so that the two will look like this one (pointing to the rectangle)."
If necessary: "Change them about until you get them right. Now
quickly." Repeat instructions if necessary, encourage and restore
triangles to original position if they get turned over. At close:
"Are you done ?" or: "Is it right ?" E. does not indicate approval
or disapproval by manner or word. Record time.
19. Place four bright pennies, heads up, y2 cm. apart, in
a row. "You know what these are, don't you." If not, E. informs
S. "How many pennies are there? Point to each one as you
count them aloud." Cf. test 33.
Age 6.
20. "Hold up your right hand." "Touch your left ear."
A mistake rapidly corrected = +. The slightest doubt if not
removed by a further question (left eye, right leg) = ?. E.
gives no hint by word or manner.
21. "Repeat: 'In the summer time we like to take long
morning walks in the park.' Or: 'When we get up in the morning
we dress and then we have our breakfast.' Or: 'I saw two horses
pulling a wagon on a very steep road.' " See directions in test 0.
Sixteen syllables.
22. Show the pretty and ugly faces in pairs. "Which of
these two faces is the prettier (or uglier) ?" Or: "Which is the
good looking one?" 1 2 3 All three must be correct. Both
are pretty = ?.
23. "You know what a fork is, don't you ?" ("You have
seen a fork.") "Well, tell me, what is a fork ?" If necessary
repeat and urge. Similarlv for ^iiair, table, iiorse, house.
GUIDE FOB BINET-SIMON SCALE. 223
on n o.Vr *'sl('UOLOtiU AL ^LIN,C is indebted for the loan of these cuts and those
.t,lc courtesy of Dr. Oliver P. Cornman, Associate Superintendent of
InvoJff? Philadelphia, and Chairman of Committee on Backward Children
tipatlon. See Report of Committee, Dec. 31, 1910, appendix.
224 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
mama. Record replies verbatim. Definition by stating use, or
material or parts of object passes 3 out of 5. E.g., A fork
is to eat with. A fork is made of wood and iron. A fork has
a handle and tines.) Classificatory or logical definition (class
or superordinate term) passes test 44. In case classificatory
definition has not been proffered spontaneously, say, after S. has
finished the series: "Good, so we may say that a mama is a ?"
And similarly with the other words, proceeding in reverse order
(i. e. house, horse, table, chair).
24. "Now I want you to do something for me (do me a
little favor). Take this key and place it on that chair (pointing) ;
then shut (or open) that door (pointing) ; and then bring me
that box. Remember, first the key on the chair, then shut the
door, then bring the box. Now go." Make certain that the child
perceives the objects. No aid. Triple order must be entirely
correctly executed.
25. "How old are you ?" Answer in years passes. Verify
by official record. (Supplementary: "When is your birthday?")
26. "Is this morning or afternoon"?or: "Is it the morning
or afternoon now?" Reverse order in the afternoon. Emphasize
both terms equally.
Age 7.
27. Show the unfinished pictures one at the time. "What
is lacking (or missing) in this face (in this picture, for the
standing woman) ?" "Look at it carefully." Three correct out
of 4 pass. "Eyes" instead of "eye" and "hands" instead of
"arms" = -{-. "One ear" for face without eye, and "one eye"
for face without nose = ?.
28. "How many fingers have you on your right hand ?"
"On your left?" "On both hands?" Prompt answers, without
counting, in all three cases required. Correct number of finger?,
exclusive of thumbs, passes.
20. Ask R. to write the following from copy,
("Copy these words.") Record time. + if legible to one unfa-
miliar with original.
GUIDE FOR BINET-SIMON SCALE. 225
2 <>
\
226 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
30. "Here is a figure that I want you to draw. Make it
as much like this (pointing to the diamond), as you can." Or:
"Draw one like it." Record time. Must be recognizable as a
diamond. (See test 17.) (Supplementary question: "What do
you call the drawing?")
31. "Repeat: '4 7 3 9 5.' Or: '1 0 G 2 8.' Or:
'4 5 9 3 7.'" See directions in tests 8 and 9. Five digits.
32. Same as test 10. Description of actions and scenes
passes. S. must tell what is taking place, what is being done, in
the picture. Sentences or phrases instead of disconnected words.
Correct explanation or interpretation of the pictures (S. tells why
they are doing so and so?subjective interpretation of actor's char-
acters or motives), also passes this age?and possibly entitles him
to a credit in age 12.
33. Counts aloud 13 pennies as in test 19. S. must touch
each with finger. No omissions or double countings.
34. <rVYhat is that?" Display (but not in the order of
value) successively the heads of a bright penny, quahtek, dime
and nickel. No error. Cf. test 48.
Test of Moronity?Mentality of 8 to 12 Years.
Age 8.
35. "I want you to read this piece (or story) aloud." Place
the following before S. (53 words) :
THREE HOUSES BURNED.
New York, September 5th. A fire last night burned three houses
in Water street. It took some time to put it out. The loss was
fifty thousand dollars, and seventeen families lost their homes. In
saving a girl who was asleep in a bed, a fireman was burned on the
hands.
GUIDE FOR BIN ET-&1M ON SCALE. 227
A couple of seconds after S. has finished, continue: ''Now
tell me what you read about." "What did it say ?" "Tell me
as well as you can in your own words." Later: "Anything else?''
No specific questions, 110 aid (except to pronounce difficult words),
allow time. Purpose of test unknown to S. Record time of
reading, miscalled words, and verbatim reproduction. Score as
follows:
New York,/ September 5th./ A fire/last night/burned/
three houses/in Water street./ It took some time/to put it out./
The loss/was fifty thousand dollars,/and seventeen families/lost
their homes./ In saving/a girl/who was asleep/in a bed,/a fire-
man/was burned/on the hands./ (20 memories.) One-half credit
may be scored for the following part unities: September/5th/
three/houses/Water/street/seventeen/families/thirty / thousand /
dollars. Unessential words may be omitted without loss. Two
memories or unities (simple ideas, as above) pass.
3G. Show S. 3 one-cent and 3 two-cent stamps, pasted in a
row 011 a card thus: 1 1 1 2 2 2. "You know what these are?
If S. does not know, tell him the value of the stamps. "How
much would you have to pay for all of them at the post-office?
Or: "What do they all cost?" "Point to each one, and count
them up." Time: 10 sec.
37. Place saturated (but not glossy) red, yellow, green, and
blue papers (2 by G cm.), pasted 011 a grey cardboard, before S.
points to each color in succession, beginning with red, as
rapidly as possible, saying: "What do you call this color?" (Or:
"I want you to name these colors, as I point to them, as fast
as you can.") Don't ask, "What kind of a color is that?" or:
"Which color is that?" Must name all correctly. Time: 6 sec. .
38. "I want you to count backward from 20 to 0 (or 1)
as fast as you can." If necessary: "Begin with 20, then 19, and
so on. Now quickly." No prompting. One omission or trans-
position allowed. Time: 20 sec.
39. Give S. a pen. "I want you to write a little sentence
(or story) which I shall give you. Now listen carefully: 'The
pretty little girl runs.' (Or:'Cats like to play with rats.'). Now
write that." E. may repeat sentence, but don't show copy. Record
writing time. Orthography need not be perfect. Tell S., if neces-
sary, to spell the best he can. Must be legible to one unfamiliar
with original.
40. "You know what paper is ?" "And clotii ? Are
they the same (or alike) ?" "No, why not?" "What is the dif-
228 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ference?" Same procedure for butterfly and ply, wood and
glass. For the latter two the questions may be abbreviated, if
S. has secured the idea: "What is the difference between ?"
(,Supplementary pairs: knife and forlc, sugar and salt.) The dis-
tinctions should be made from memory. Time: 2 minutes for 2
of the 3.
Age 9.
41. "What date is it to-day?" If necessary: "What day
of the week (or: which one of the week days) ?" "What month?"
"What day of the month (number of the day) ?" "What year?'
Date (day of month) may be three days wrong.
42. "Now tell me the names of all the days of the week
(week days) in the right order as fast as you can." "What do
we call the week days ? Now quickly." May start on any day.
No prompting. Time: 10 sec. {Supplementary questions: "IIow
many days in a week?" "If to-day is Monday (or Thursday, or
Saturday) what day was yesterday?")
43. "Suppose that we play store a while. You are the
storekeeper and I come to your store to buy 4 cents' worth of
candy (or gum, peanuts, etc.), and give you this quarter (or
25-cent piece). How much change (money) would you have to
give me back? There is the money, now pick out the change
and hand it to me." If S. says 21 cents, reply: "Good, now count
out the money." Place on the table, face up, without overlapping,
13 pennies, 5 nickels, and 3 dimes. S. must actually count out
the change. The test is in need of standardization. E. may try
25 cents ? G, or 25 cents ? 5, or 25 cents ? 7 (25 cents ? 9
is too hard) ; or $1.00 ? 80 cents, or two dimes ? 4 cents, or
6 cents. The latter is somewhat awkward, since we do not hand
out two dimes in a 4-cent or G-cent purchase.
44. Same as test 23. Classificatoiiy definition passes
(giving class term or superordinate concept); e.g., a table is a
piece of furniture, a chair is a movable seat, a fork is a table or
eating utensil, a horse is an animal, or a four-footed animal that
pulls, a mama is a mother, or a woman with a child.
45. Same as 35. Six memories pass.
4G. Place the boxes fairly near together but out of correct
order in a row before S. "Here we have five boxes, all looking
alike but none weighing the same. There is a small di {Terence
in the weight of all of them. I want you to lift them this way
(see test 1G), and give me the one that feels the heaviest. Feel
GUIDE FOR BIZET-SLALOM SCALE. 229
carefully." After S. has selected the heaviest: "Now give me
the heaviest one of the four." Then: "Now the heaviest of the
three," etc. E. places boxes on table in the order selected by S.,
and makes a record of each trial, (paste initials of weights on
under side: S (six), N, T, E, E). S. may be allowed to revise.
("Are you satisfied?"- "If you like, lift them rapidly again"?in
the order in which selected). Use G, 9, 12, 15 and 18 grams.
Boxes must be indistinguishable. Time: 3 minutes for two cor-
rect in three trials if necessary. (Supplementary: number of
mistakes = the number of changes needed to give the right order,
from 2 to 12.)
Age 10.
47. "Tell mo the names of all the months of the year in
the right order as fast as you can.'' "What do we call the
months?" May start with any month. No prompting. One
omission or inversion allowed. Verbatim record. Time: 15 sec.
48. "What is that ?" Or: "What do you call this coin (or
bill) ?" As in test 34. Use 1 cent, 5 cents, 10 cents, 25 cents,
50 cents, $1., $2., $5., and $10.
49. "I want you to make up a little sentence in which you
must use the words, boy, ijivek and ball (or New York, money,
river; or girl, dollar, lake). You can make the sentence long or
short and you can use any other words that you like, but you
must use the three words, boy, river and ball." Or: Tell me
something about a boy, a river and a ball, all in one sentence.
If S. stops with two of the words: "But you must also say some-
thing about ball (or whichever word is omitted) in the same
sentence. Now try again." The sentences need not be real but
should not be absurd. A compound sentence with two distinci
ideas (two co-ordinate phrases) passes: e.g., "The boy crossed the
river, and went to a ball." "New York has several rivers, and
very much money." Three sentences or three independent
clauses count failure; e.g., "the boy is strong; the river is wide;
and the ball is round." Cf. 52. Time: 1 minute.
50. Ask S. moderately, slowly and distinctly the following
questions (one repetition allowed if necessary) . W hat should you
do?" (or: "What ought you to do?"):
(1) "When you miss a train?" ^
(2) "When a friend hits you without meaning to?"
(3) "When you break something that belongs to somebody
else ?"
(4) "When you are on the way to school and find that it-
is later than usual (or notice that you'll be late for schoo ) .
230 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
(5) "Before you take part in something important (or in
some important doings) ?"
(6) "What should you answer when asked to say what you
think (or give your opinion) about someone you don't know very
well ?"
(7) "Why should we forgive a wrong done by someone
when he is angry (or when he is mad) more quickly than when
lie is not angry?"
(8) "Why should you make up your mind about (judge) a
person by his actions instead of by his words (or by what he does
instead of what he says) ?" Record answers. Five correct pass.
Time: 20 sec. each. Use judgment in marking. Illustrative
replies: (1) -f-: Wait for the next. Take another. ?: Hurry.
Go to next station. Walk. (2) -{-: Forgive. Excuse. Don't
be angry. Don't cry. Don't do anything to him. Don't tell
mother. Say nothing. Tell him to be more careful next time.
?: Hit him. Cry. Tell mother or grown ups. Get angry.
Avoid him. (3) +: Apologize. Offer to pay, or buy another.
Fix it. ?: Run away. Let it lie. Let him break something
of yours. Weep. It is a shame. (4) -f-: Hurry, run. If S.
says: "Ask pardon of or tell teacher," give chance to correct by
emphasizing: "When you are still on the way ?" ?: Go home.
Go the next session. Cry. Think over what to say. Get up
earlier. Ask what time it is. (5) -f-: Prepare. Think it over.
Get ready. Practice. Ask someone. ?: See if you have
time. Ask if you dare. Say you'll do it. (G) -j-: I don't
know. I don't know him. Say nothing. Say what I know.
?: I don't know what his name is. Ask what his name is. He
is good, or he is bad. (7) + : Because when angry we act without
thinking, can't control ourselves, not responsible. ?: Because
we ought to forgive. The Bible says so. (8) -f-: Actions speak
louder than words. Can see what he does. May not mean what
he says. ?: Because he is wrong.
Supplementary problems: the following may, after trial, be
fitted into their proper ages. Some of the above are too easy,
others too hard for age 10. "What ought you to do ?" (1) "When
you feel sleepy ?" "Cold?" "Sick?" (2) "When somebody has
stolen something (or your pencil, knife, ribbon, etc.) from you?"
(3) "When somebody has told a lie on you?" (4) "When the
house you are living in catches fire?" (5) "When somebody
says he is sorry (begs pardon) because ho has hurt (offended
.you) ?" (G) "When you have boon punished although you have
GUIDE FOR BINET-SIMON SCALE. 231
done nothing wrong?" (7) "When you want to buy something
(cap, ball, dress, doll, etc.) but don't have the money?" (8) "Why
is it easier to say that you'll do something than to do it?"] The
first sets in both series are easier than the second.
50a. "Repeat:'7 1 9 G 5 3.' Or: '4 8 7 2 5 1.'
Or:'3 7 6 9 8 2.'" See test 9. Six digits.
Age 11.
51. "I am going to read you some sentences in which there
is something silly (foolish, or absurd, or a catch). Listen care-
fully, and try to tell me what the nonsense is." If necessary:
"Can you say that?" "Why not?" If answer is unclear: "How
should it read ?"
(1) "Yesterday there was an accident on the railroad, but
it wasn't serious; there were only forty-eight killed." (2) "The
police found yesterday the body of a young girl cut into eighteen
pieces; they think that she killed herself." ("Do you think
so?") (3) "I have three brothers, Paul, Ernest and myself."
("Who were they then ?") (4) "A poor carpenter fell, broke
his head and died. They have taken him to the hospital, but
do not think that he will recover." ("What did they do that was
foolish?") (5) "Someone said: 'If I should kill myself, I
wouldn't do it on Friday, because Friday would bring me bad
luck.' " Speak clearly, slowly and with expression. Time: about
two minutes for three correct.
Illustrative marking: (1) -f-: Forty-eight are many. That
was serious. ?: It can't be serious. It might have been
worse. (2) +: Could not cut herself into eighteen pieces. ?:
Somebody may have murdered her. She wouldn t kill herself.
(3) +: You have only two brothers. You cannot be your own
brother. 'Myself' is no brother. Should not say myself. ?
Say T instead of 'myself.' Place T before the two brothers.
(4) -f: He is already dead. A dead man can't recover. Should
not have taken a dead man to the hospital. : They can cure
him if he has not hurt himself badly. He cannot live. (<>) "4" ?
you kill yourself the day doesn't matter. Friday cannot bring
bad luck to a dead man. ?: That is superstition. Friday is
no more unlucky than any other day. He wouldn't commit
suicide.
[Supplementary list. After due trial some of the following
should prove available at some level: (1) "Last night I saw a
man in the street, with his hands in his pockets and twirling a
232 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
cane." (2) "Next Christmas was a beautiful day, and we received
many presents." (3) "Last Friday two of my friends called upon
me. In the evening all four of us went to the theatre." (4) "It
would take us all day to walk from New York to Chicago." (5)
"Johnny bought a little rubber ball. He paid $1.00 for it.]
52. Same as test 49. Simple sentence (single idea), or
complex co-ordinated sentence, passes, thus: "The boy threw the
ball into the river"; "As I was walking in New York, I found
money near the river."
53. "I'm going to give you a few minutes in which I want
you to speak as many single words as you possibly can; not sen-
tences, but single words; any words at all, just as they come, like
school, or dog, or cap, or grass. Speak aloud. Now, remember:
just as fast as you can." If S. stops: "Don't stop." "More yet."
Verbatim record. Sixty words exclusive of duplicates, in three
minutes.
54. "You know what kindness means?" "What does it
mean?" "Tell what it is to show kindness." If necessary: "Give
an example." Allow time as long as S. reflects. Same for
charity and justice (jealousy). Two correct, with essential
idea (phraseology immaterial) : kindness requires notion of good-
ness, affection, sympathy, helpfulness; charity, of aid rendered
unfortunate people; justice, of law or rule or treatment according
to deserts, fairness. Justice is to be just = ?.
55. "Here is a sentence (show the first one) in which the
words are all mixed up (or are out of place). I want you to read
it through aloud, and then put the words together (orally) in
the right order, so that they make sense." Or: "Read these words
aloud." After S. is through: "Did they make any sense?" "No,
why not?" ("out of order"). "Good, now put them together in
the right order." If S. fails on first sentence, E. may arrange
it for him, but no further aid. Show sentences singly. Two
satisfactory. Time: 1 minute each.
a defends dog good to asked paper the I
his bravely master teacher correct my have
evening for we last
park started the early
Age 12.
56. "Repeat: '2 9 6 437 5.' Or: '1 6 9 5 8
4 7.' Or: '9 2 8 5 1 4 6.'" Directions in test 9. Seven
digits.
GUIDE FOB BINET-SIMON SCALE. 233
57. "Do you know what a rhyme is?" "No? It's a word
that sounds like, or ends like another word; as cat like pat, or
fat, or rat.' "Now give me three words that sound like ball (or
coy, day, mill). ' Time: 1 minute for three rhymes with one
word. Trials with two words.
58. "Repeat: 'The other day I saw in the street a pretty
dog who carried in his mouth a basket of strawberries.' Or:
Johnny likes to go on visits to his grandmother, because she
always tells him many funny stories.' Or: 'It should be the wish
of every child to grow up to become an honest and useful man
?r woman.' " See test 8. Twenty-six syllables. One out of
3 correct.
59. "Here are a couple of questions that I want you to try
to answer. Now listen. 'A girl who was walking in the woods
ln a park, saw something hanging from the branch of a tree that
Made her so much afraid that she ran to the nearest policeman,
and told him what she had seen.' What do you think she saw?
What was it ?"
" 'My neighbor has been having strange visitors. First came
a doctor, then a lawyer, and then a preacher.' Why did these
three go to his house, the one after the other? What happened
there ?" Both answers must be correct: (1) +: A body. A
corpse. A man has hanged himself. (2) Some one is dying.
Age 13.
GO. Have on hand a supply of paper sheets, about 5 or 6
inches square. "Watch what I do. Now I fold the paper once
lhis way (into halves). Now once that way (at right angles so
that the paper is quarto-folded). Now I cut off a piece here (a
triangular hole, about lxl inch, in the middle of the closed
e(%e), and now I cut off this corner (the partly closed corner on
the same edge). How would the paper look now if I should open
*t like this (demonstrate with a similarly folded but uncut paper) ?
3ry to imagine that you can see it open like this paper, and draw
Jt the way you think it will look open (or draw the holes as
they will look when the paper is open)." Cut with scissors. Do
Rot show excised triangle, nor indicate how many diamonds there
are* I have given -f- on one diamond.
As children who mingle are likely to coach one another, it
18 advisable to supplement the test, when used in the same school
0r district, by using one or the other of the following variant
forms, cut similarly in the closed edge of the twice folded paper:
234 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
61. "Suppose I should turn this lower half (pointing to
ABC) around, and place it against the upper half (pointing), so
that this corner (pointing to C) would touch that corner (B),
and so that this edge (BC) would touch this edge (BA); what
would the new card (form) look like then? Now I'll remove this
lower part (place it a short distance from the other, in the original
position), and I want you to try to imagine that you see it placed
as I have said, and draw the new form. Begin by drawing the
upper half the way it is lying." "Good, now the other half the
way I said." Speak clearly. One repetition allowed. No fur-
ther aid. -f- ^ angle at B is approximately correct and if AB
is longer than BC.
G2. "I'm going to give you pairs of words which either
mean pretty much the same thing, or which sound somewhat alike,
but have a different meaning. I want you to tell me how they
differ. What is the difference between ?" Pleasure and honor*
u
GUIDE FOR BINET-SIMON SCALE. 235
Evolution and revolution. Poverty and. misery. Event
and advent. Pride and pretension.
-{- if 3 of 5 are correctly distinguished (if some legitimate
difference is pointed out, however crude the language, or if the
difference is satisfactorily illustrated).
Suggestions and General Directions for Administering the Tests.
1. Make yourself thoroughly familiar with the tests, their
intent and technique, before attempting to administer them. Best
of all, attend a demonstration clinic by a psycho-clinicist who has
become expert in their use. The fact that the tests do not require
delicate instruments of precision, does not obviate trained skill in
their administration.
2. Attempt to win S.'s confidence and set him at ease at
the very outset. A kindly greeting, a cheerful manner, a sym-
pathetic glance, an assuring smile, a pat on the shoulder, will melt
the icy barrier with most children.
3. Encourage S., whether he does well or poorly, to do his
best, by rather fulsome praise or lavish evidences of appreciation.
Nothing equals liberal expressions of approbation for inciting a
child to put forth his best efforts. These are tests, not teaching
exercises. Do not criticise, blame, intimidate or arouse obstinacy.
Be tactful and patient, and, above all, adaptable. Dispositions
differ. There are some subjects who cannot be won by the arts
of praise or cajolery; these must be aroused out of their state
of unresponsiveness by other expedients. But it is only seldom
that any subjects need to be prodded or threatened.
4. Give no aid other than such as is permitted in the \aiious
tests.
5. Adhere unvaryingly to the conditions laid down in each
test. Eventually the conditions will be multiplied and improved.
Ihe supplementaj'y tests, which are extraneous to the Binet-Simon
scale, may be given at the discretion of E.
6. It is not necessary to follow any invariable order in
giving the different tests. But it is better to start with tests
beneath rather than above S.'s mental level. Initial impressions
count for much. Difficult tests at the outset tend to discourage S.
at the beginning, and thus affect adversely the later tests. The
following order is suggested for medium or high grade S s.. num
bers 35 (45), 10 (32), 46, 42, 41, 47, 34 (48), 43, 49 (52), 50,
51, 54, 23 (44), 55, 31, 14, 50a, or 56, 58, 21, 17a, 53, and 57.
It is inadvisable to give 57 immediately before 53, as some fall
236 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
into the error of supposing that only rhymes are wanted or group9
of words in triplets; or 10 immediately before 35 as some S's.
confuse what was read with what was seen in the pictures, (other-
wise 10 makes a good initial test) ; or 43 before 34 for obvious
reasons.
7. Test S. extensively both below and above the mental age
which he passes, particularly above. Give all the higher tests
unless it is obvious beyond question that the tests are too difficult
Do not fall into the error of taking things for granted, nor acquire
the habit of omitting difficult tests because of indolence. Only
by wide-range testing shall we be able to arrive at a satisfactory
individual diagnosis or be able satisfactorily to criticise or revise
the scale.
8. Never examine S's. in groups; the work is clinical. Or-
dinarily do not examine in the presence of spectators; S. should
be alone with the examiner, or with the examiner and his assistant.
9. The tests should be carried out in a room that is well-
lighted and free from interruptions or noise. Some tests require
absolute quiet.
10. Always record as many details of S.'s verbal or other
reactions, as time permits; they may eventually attain a signifi-
cance not contemplated in the tests themselves. Verbatim records
are the ideal to be approximated.
11. In timing measure the actual time of the act of execu-
tion. This assumes that S. begins to respond as soon as the test
has been explained, particularly in tests 36, 37, 38, 42 and 47.
But if S. reacts very slowly, it is advisable to record both the
time required to start and the time required to perform. It is
well to avoid a too pedantic insistence on the time conditions.
Some S's. are slow but thorough. With such, a slight overstepping
of the time limits is immaterial.
12. E. may read the selection in 35 at the normal rate for
such S's. who are unable to read because of defective vision, but
whose intelligence justifies the belief that they could read if they
had good eyes.
13. The attempt has been made to standardize the sen-
tences in 8, 17a, 21 and 58 by using only single, simple concrete
sentences with a familiar context.
14. The following tests are probably too nasi/ for the age
standards to which they are assigned: 25, 33, 37, 42, 47, 48, 50,
(first set), and 57. The following are probably too difficult: 18,
21, 39, 43 (as 25 cents ? 9), 44, 45, 46, 53, 54, 55, 58-62. The
GUIDE FOR BINET-SIMON SCALE. 237
need to verify these probabilities, and to fit all the tests to their
proper ages, is urgent.
15. The following test, given in connection with 33 or 43,
proved suggestive among feebleminded epileptics: "Which would
you rather have, 73 cents or 59 cents (or 62 cents or 48 cents) ?"
Possibly it is adapted to some age standard.
16. The following symbols may be used in marking the
records: plus sign ( + ), passed; minus sign (?), failed; one-
half credit (in rare instances in which the responses are not
entirely wrong) ; ?, evaluation of response uncertain; !, absurd
response; I, ignorance or inability to comprehend the question or
test; T, timidity; R, resistance; In, inattentive. Credit the
examinee (S.) with the age in which all the tests, or all but one,
are passed.
Credit one year for every (additional) five tests passed at
higher levels, or .2 year for each advance point (i.e., multiply the
advance points by two and express as a decimal. Thus 5 3-5 =
5.6). Record the chronological ages in years and months (thus
8?), and the mental ages in years and tenths (decimals). The
record should be made on a specially prepared record form.
Personal, Hereditary and Environmental Data.
It is particularly important to secure the following data in
the study of defectives.
Personal Factors (and Anamnesis).
Full name Sex Bom Birthplace
Nationality Grade Degree and char-
acter of education: schools attended months attended
^ears in each grade Years retarded Nature of reported
school capacities Incapacities
Character of school work at present Present health
Infant and childhood diseases and accidents
Vaccination Stigmata of degeneration: Anatomical
(anomalies of head, face, teeth, ears, limbs, genital organs, skin,
body in general)
Physiological (anomalies of sensory, motor, genito-urinary, speech
and instinctive functions, and pubertal retardation)
Psychic (feeblemindedness, aberrations, disequilibration, one-
sided talents, sexual perversion, moral delinquency, eccentricity,
delusions, imperative ideas, illusions, psychoses)
238 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Visual acuity Auditory acuity Manuometry Vital
capacity Height Weight Nutrition Circulation
Pulse Temperature
Reflexes Temperament and disposition Attitude
toward others Deportment Mental and
physical habits, good bad Complexion
Color of eyes of hair
Hereditary Factors.
Birthplace of father of mother Num-
ber of brothers of sisters Mental and physical con-
ditions of brothers and sisters Order of birth
Weight at birth Condition at birth Premature
delivery Condition of mother at birth Mother's
age at birth Father's age The following data regard-
ing father, mother and blood relatives: longevity, diseases, de-
formities, neuroses, psychoses, dependency, vagrancy, drug and
alcoholic habits, criminal tendencies, sex perversions, age at death,
causes of death
Environmental Factors.
Home conditions sanitary economic
moral Father's occupation Mother's occupa-
tion Character of community, hygienically, morally,
educationally Of street influences
Of amusement resorts Of play-
mates and associates
