Medical Inspection of Schools In California
============================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1911, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. V, No. 3. May 15, 1911.
:Author: Lewis M. Terman,
Asst. Prof, of Education, Leland Stanford Junior University,
Cal.

Those who are watching the development of school medical
inspection in the United States will no doubt be interested in a
brief account of the recent progress and trend of the work in
California. Hardly any kind of educational endeavor is more
beset by perplexities and problems than that relating to medical
inspection of schools, and probably few states have become more
acutely conscious of these difficulties than has California. Some
of them she is meeting in a unique way, and though what was
probably the most advanced step in this line ever proposed to a
law making body has recently suffered defeat in her legislature,
there is nevertheless hope that within a few years this or similar
legislation will be enacted.

Briefly, the situation in California is as follows: Two years
ago, in March, 1909, the state legislature passed a bill authorizing
(but not compelling) cities to make expenditures for carrying out
an elaborate system of health supervision in the schools. The text
of this bill is too long to quote here, but its main provisions have
to do, first, with the institution of annual physical examination
of pupils and a follow-up service; secondly, the requirement of
preliminary physical examinations of all candidates for teachers'
positions and further examinations from time to time to determine
fitness for continued service; thirdly, the special study of mental
retardation and deviation of pupils in the schools and the adjustment of school activities to the health and growth needs of pupils;
fourthly, the establishment of expert sanitary supervision; fifthly,
^d most far-reaching of all, the law provides for a class of
educators", experts in physiology, hygiene and practical psychol??y> who can make a skilful diagnosis of defective conditions of
growth and development. The intent of the law is that these
educational" health experts shall work side by side with skilled
physicians, the two groups dividing between them the broad field
of educational hygiene. The law provides further for the certification of each officer by the state board of education.
The law met with friendly interest in most parts of the state
and unquestionably stimulated many cities to undertake the work.
At the time the bill was passed only two or three cities in the
state had any system of medical inspection or health supervision
worthy of the name, (Los Angeles, under the direction of George
L. Leslie, and Pasadena, with Dr E. B. Iioag, leading). The
progress made in two years is revealed by the returns to a questionnaire sent by the writer to all the cities of the state, in
February, 1911.

At this time about twenty cities, almost exactly one-half of
the population of the state, are served by some system of school
medical inspection. The more important of these cities are Los
Angeles, San Francisco, Oakland, Pasadena, Berkeley, San Jose,
San Diego, Alameda, Redlands, Pomona and Santa Monica. About
twenty-two persons (excluding nurses, who in Oakland do most
of the routine of examinations) are engaged in the work. Of
these nearly three-fifths are working on a schedule of half time
or less. In Los Angeles, Alameda and Redlands the management
of the department is in the hands of non-medical men all of whom,
however, are recognized as efficient in the diagnosis of the common
physical abnormalities of children. In Los Angeles and seven
other cities the teachers help in the selection of urgent cases, Avhile
in other cities their work is confined to assisting with records and
the follow-up service. In all but two, San Francisco and Fresno,
the work is under the direct control of the board of education.
The latter city contemplates changing the control from the board
of health to the board of education. The pay of the school health
officer varies from $100 to $3600 per year. Half-time workers
(again excluding nurses) receive from $400 to $1G00 yearly, full
time workers from $1500 to $3G00. Two of the smaller cities
pay the physician a definite sum for each individual pupil examined, $0.50 in one case, $1.00 in the other. Where this is
done the preliminary survey of the pupils is made by the teachers
and only urgent cases are sent to the physician.

In answer to the question whether the results of the work had
given satisfactory assurance of its value, the superintendents
unanimously replied in the affirmative. Several sketched plans
looking toward the enlargement of its scope. One city, for example, is considering the advisability of employing enough dentists
at public expense to attend to the teeth of all its school children.
San Jose, a city of .3000, has thus far done more in proportion to
its population than any other California city in the way of free
dental work. Its free dental clinic is busy from 9 to 12 each
forenoon and is open to all children who are recommended to
attend by the teachers. The poverty line is not strictly drawn,
and about one-fifth of the entire number of pupils will receive
free dental treatment in this way. The work at present is given
gratis by the local dental association, but it is the plan of the
superintendent to employ a school dentist in the near future. Los
Angeles, under the direction of George L. Leslie, has one of the
best equipped departments of health supervision in the entire
country. Mr. Leslie himself is not a physician but five welltrained half-time physicians and specialists are on his staff. His
laboratory equipment is unusually complete.

The bill which met defeat in the legislature of 1911,?a bill
proposed and elaborated by Mr. George L. Leslie, the author of
the law of 1909?is a still more radical document. The text of
the bill contains about 3000 words and reads like the Utopian
dream of an enthusiast, but its provisions are thoroughly sound
and practicable to the last degree, once the people awake to the
tremendous import of educational hygiene. Alas, however, even
in California "the public" is liable to show itself inert, ignorant
or prejudiced on questions relating to its deepest welfare. It was
so in this case. The wide publicity and misrepresentation given
the bill by the newspapers of the state during the weeks following
its introduction, aroused such a wave of public disapproval that
the measure was killed in the assembly committee to which it had
been referred. The opposition was voiced by thousands of anxious
letters and telegrams from all parts of the state.

The bill embodied in mandatory form all the main points of
the permissive law of 1909, besides the following provisions:
First, the mandatory extension of health and development supervision to all the public schools of the state, under the direction
of either the governing bodies of school districts or the county
superintendent of schools, and further to the various state educational institutions including those for juvenile delinquents, the
blind, deaf and feeble-minded. The department of health and
development, in the city was to be administrative in function and
was designated as constituting a special field of the city superintendency. In like manner the department maintained by the
county was to be administrative and constitute a special field of
the county superintendency. The departments maintained by the
state institutions for the blind, deaf and feeble-minded, delinquent,
etc., were to carry on investigation and research in the special
fields which the essential features of their work represent.
Secondly, the state normal schools were directed to organize
their courses for the adequate training of teachers in educational
hygiene while the state university was required in addition to
give the necessary training for the development of experts.
Thirdly, it was provided that each "health and development
staff" should constitute in effect a bureau for the investigation of
such problems, as the causes of morbidity among pupils and teachers, physical and mental retardation, crime and degeneracy, the
hygiene of activity and experimental educational psychology.
Fourthly, the bill defined somewhat more explicitly than the
law of 1909, the administrative and advisory powers of the health
and development staff in relation to other school officials, providing
for the power to establish special classes with skilled instruction,
and the power to give partial or entire excuse from school
attendance.

Fifthly, it was to be the duty of the staff to instruct the
teachers in methods of carrying out the provisions of the act and
to organize all the courses of instruction in hygiene for the pupils.
Sixthly, and by far the most significant of all, a provision for
the creation of a State Bureau of Health and Development, whose
function was to be the organization and supervision of the state
work and the prosecution of state-wide investigations of the
problems of state hygiene, physical, mental and moral. The public
schools of the state were to serve as a laboratory for the study of
child hygiene and experimental pedagogy. The State Bureau was
to consist of a State Director at a salary of $4000 per year, and
associate directors at $3000 per year, to be appointed as the extension and scope of the work should necessitate. This section carried
an appropriation of $30,000 to defray the expenses of the Bureau
for two years.

It would appear that all sane people with the welfare of the
new generation at heart ought to have welcomed such a measure.
Unfortunately, on matters pertaining to health and hygiene, masses
of the people are not sane. They are still in the patent-medicine
stage of superstition. The more conservative (backward) sections
of the state raised a storm of protest; the chief arguments being
the outworn charges of "medical tyranny", "paternalism" and
"expense". Christian Scientists, of whom there are very many
in California, strenuously opposed it, as did also the so-called
"League for Medical Freedom." The latter, as far as the writer
can learn, is a vigorous organization of "sectarian" physicians,
whose main purpose seems to be to oppose all social restraints on
medical practice and to preserve the divine right of any kind of
practitioner to prey upon the gullibility of the people. Many
good and sensible persons, who believed in the principles of the
bill, opposed it because of its mandatory feature, nor did it receive
by any means unanimous endorsement from the first-class physicians and educators of the state, though certainly a large majority
favored it.

The lessons taught by California's recent experience seem to
be as follows: First, it is difficult and dangerous for legislation to
attempt to anticipate public opinion. Secondly, a proposal as sweeping and reformative in nature as this one needs to be presented to
the legislature and to the people of the state with as much authoritative backing and moral support as can possibly be concentrated
upon it, including especially the active support of state and local
associations of teachers and of physicians. The constructive
reformer must work through organizations if he would succeed.
However ideal a measure of this kind may be intrinsically, if
active support of it is confined to a small group of persons, it is
certain to be dubbed somebody's hobby.

This is so true that the writer believes the cause of child
hygiene in the schools could be given new impetus if the United
States Department of Education, the National Educational Association, the American Medical Association and the Russell Sage
Foundation Department of Child Hygiene were to formulate carefully, after mature joint consideration of the problems involved,
a system of health supervision for the public schools, or rather
several alternative systems to suit the special needs of local conditions. Not immediately perhaps, but certainly after a time, these
formulations would be considered standard requirements in this
phase of education. Certain committee reports of the National
Educational Association, possessing far less general validity and
fundamental soundness than would characterize the sort of formulation I am advocating, have had notable influence in the educational practice of the country, an influence which even bids fair
to outlast in some cases its period of usefulness. Such a formulation could not be made off-hand, but only after an extended study
of the entire field by a group of nationally recognized experts.

Two or three years might be required for its completion, but in
the writer's opinion the outcome would justify all it costs.
The point of view helping to mold the work in California is
especially significant. Some of the leaders' in the state appreciate
that medical inspection as such and the correction of existent
physical defects should not be the main purpose of educational
hygiene. The schools are causing defects faster than the doctors
can cure them. The medical equipment of the ideal educational
hygienist is one of the least of his assets. He must be schooled in
preventive measures (not merely preventive medicine, though this
is as important as it is rare) including genetic physiology, psychoprophylaxis, clinical child psychology, laboratory research in
school hygiene, and practical experimental pedagogy. We do not
have any considerable body of men liberally trained for this important field. Medical schools are finding it difficult enough to
keep above the dead line of scientific respectability.* We will
never have experts of this type in sufficient number until the
University Medical Schools, the Departments of Education, and
the Departments of Hygiene unite in an extensive scheme of cooperation. There is nothing chimerical about such a plan. As
Flexner shows, half or two-thirds of the medical schools have no
excuse for existence, even apart from the question of their scientific equipment. There are entirely too many of them. Some of
the best of those with small constituency and patronage, by uniting
with other departments in the training of educational hygienists,
could contribute more to the cause of national vitality than the
largest and best equipped medical schools in the country. At any
rate a number of farsighted individuals in California realize the
pressing need of widespread and thorough researches in the various lines of child hygiene, and are ready to encourage all efforts
looking toward the transformation of mere medical inspection into
a broadly conceived educational hygiene.

?See the remarkable exposure of the status of medical education In the United
States and Canada by Abraham Flexner, Bull. No. 4, The Carnegie Foundation.
