The Dawn of Character
======================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

By Edith E. Reade Mumford, M.A. London:
Longmans, (jreen & (Jo., 1910.
A few more books like Mrs. Mumford's "Dawn of Character," and
mothers will have no excuse for remaining amateurs in their profes-
sion! If the average mother is a trifle daunted by the psychology and
analysis contained in the earlier chapters, she has but to read a little
further to find the most valuable kind of experience and advice placed
at her disposal.
The first chapter is a plea for a closer study of child life, for a
more special training and preparation than is usually given to those who
are placed in charge of children. Mrs. Mumford believes that the suc-
cessful educator fulfils toward the child that which the skilful gardener
does toward the plant. He steadily trains, rarely prunes, and never vio-
lently disturbs it.
In her chapter on the growth of imagination, we are shown the diffi-
culties as well as the advantages which fall to the lot of the imaginative
child, and Mrs. Mumford points out not only the dangers to which this
type of child is exposed, but also the best means of avoiding or counter-
acting them. She believes, like many of us to-day, that a superabund-
ance of elaborate and costly toys weakens the imagination by giving
it nothing to feed upon.
The two chapters on the law and growth of habits are excellent.
When we realize that by the time we are five or six years old, three-
fourths of our actions are the result of habits already formed, the
formation of right habits in childhood cannot be too strongly em-
phasized. Two methods are possible in the formation of habits; by
punishing the bad actions and rewarding the good, or, wherever possible,
by utilizing the child's natural impulses in the right direction. The
latter is not always practical, but it has the great advantage of making
the child your ally rather than your opponent. Habits of concentration,
self-control, accuracy, tidiness, and good behavior at meals?all these
can be taught, but not with ease. It is a long, difficult process, and to
do nothing and blame heredity for the result will always be easier. One
phrase quoted by Mrs. Mumford should be incorporated in the creed of
parents, guardians, teachers, and nurses, should be framed and hung
upon the walls of their rooms and should be to them what "Do it now!"
is to the clerk in the office: "Your naughty child is unfinished rather
than wicked."
Mrs. Mumford has evidently met the mothers whose children cannot
eat eggs or milk, soup or vegetables, as the case may be. On this point
(277)
278 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
she says, "Without doubt, our minds have an extraordinary influence
over our bodies. Food, which cannot be swallowed in the presence of
some people, can be eaten alone, or in the presence of others of whom
we are in awe. Food disliked under one name can be eaten, slightly
disguised, under another name. Only experience of our own can prove
to us the extent to which dislikes in food can be overcome. They are
well worth overcoming, we should show no dislikes ourselves; we should
insist upon a morsel?a teaspoonful at the outside?of all ordinary
wholesome food being eaten; we should permit no expression of dislike
at the table, for children are imitative in this respect; and when the
difficulty seems insurmountable, we should try the effect of solitude."
It is pointed out that children should not be expected to obey every-
body, and a uniform standard is advised so they may know exactly what
to expect. Some children, according to Mr. Paton, who resent personal
discipline, submit willingly to a system. Spoiling one day, discipline
the next, the vague fault-finding which so many mothers consider train-
ing, these should be avoided. In the beginning children must obey with-
out question, later when they commence to understand the laws of be-
havior and conduct, mastery by others must be replaced by self-mastery,
control from without by control from within.
The ideals of childhood supply a strong stimulus toward right-doing.
To be like some one they love or some one they have read about,?this
is a powerful incentive. Mrs. Mumford touches a great truth when she
warns parents of naughty or difficult children to watch carefully the
physical side; "The love of virtue is (indeed) bound up with health!"
In her chapter on punishment, encouragement in right-doing is
given the first place, seeing clearly as she does that punishment alone
can never create a love of right. She believes punishment has failed in
its purpose if it does not get the child on the side of right. It should
help to train his judgment and increase his sense of confidence in those
in authority. Also punishments must fit the child rather than the
crime; they must be certain, speedy, and given without anger.
One of the best things in the book is the plea for freedom for the
child to develop happily on his own lines, but the freedom must be
"within the law." It can be fully granted only after habits of right-
doing have been formed by early, wise discipline. This kind of freedom
is one of the most difficult things to extract from the average parent.
As a rule parents will do anything rather than grant that independence
without which, life?either for a child or an adult?lacks all savour.
Mrs. Mumford speaks of the lust of power shown by many parents
and teachers. " 'How dare you disobey me V we say to the child, for-
getting that surely his 'daring,' his fearless attitude towards ourselves,
who are so much stronger and bigger than he, is one of the finest things
about him."
NEWS AND COMMENT. 279
Concerning curiosity, we are told that it is the stimulus which
impels the child to prepare for freedom. That this appetite for knowl-
edge can be used for the good of the child goes without saying. Natu-
rally it would be inadvisable to answer all his questions, but it is cheer-
ing to know that Mrs. Mumford believes that in the larger questions of
life, birth, death, and sex differences, the child should be told the truth
in such a way as to make the world more beautiful and desirable and to
banish forever the "cabbage-bed and stork" improvisations, which have
done yeoman service for thousands of shy or lazy parents.
In her chapter on different types of children, ]\Irs. Mumford classi-
fies them for convenience in six groups: (1) children in whom strength
of will and determination is the most marked characteristic; (2) those
whose characters are determined by the strength of their emotions; (3)
those who are marked by the keenness of their reasoning faculties; (4)
children who stand out on account of their exceptional responsiveness;
(5) average children, who do not exhibit any one quality in excess; (6)
those who are weak in some definite direction. About each group she
has something of interest to say.
The last chapter is devoted to the child's point of view. Stress is
laid on our responsibility for this point of view in the child's early
years, and on the immense influence we unconsciously exert by our ex-
ample. A strong plea is made to grown-ups to enter wherever possible
into the child's point of view. If they fail in this, then must they" take
the consequences, and see between them and theirs as wide a chasm as
that which yawned between the Olympians and the blessed children of
"The Golden Age."
E. R. W.
