Educational Aspects of Christian Science?A Reply and a Rejoinder
=================================================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.
Boston, May 15, 1911.
Editor of The Psychological Clinic,
Philadelphia, Pa.
Dear Sir:
In your issue of the 15th [of April], there appeared an article by
Charles Iveen Taylor, in which the author makes certain allegations
regarding the practice of Christian Science and describes the alleged
conduct of a certain boys' school as an example, although he prepares us
against accepting any adverse criticism by assuring us that the school was
equipped "superior to that of other schools." lie says "the dormitories
were comfortable and excellent in every way, the table was beyond re-
proach, and the school building including class rooms entirely adequate."
"The teaching no better anywhere." "The school had a fine gymnasium
and gave quite a little time to athletics." He further declares "the
faculty seemed to be an exceptionally able group of men." "They were
all fond of their work and obviously fond of boys, taking great personal
interest in their charges." He then assures us by implication that it was
within the power of the non-Christian Science portion of the faculty to
dictate the policy of the school, since there were "only three" Christian
Scientists in the number and the rest "represented a variety of religious
beliefs" and "any point concerning the boys could be discussed and
settled by faculty vote, which the head master "never" vetoed, with the
result that "everything was admirably managed and the actual work of
the teachers was most effective."
After the foregoing description, which is unusually complimentary,
Mr. Taylor contradicts himself and discredits the faculty whose voting
and ruling majority he informs us did not believe in Christian Science
by insinuating that in the school "physical deficiencies" were ignored.
He declares there was "little care of the physical life of the boys except
as regards the elemental needs of sleep, food, warmth, and to some degree
at least, bodily cleanliness." The gentleman does not say here what
"degree" of "bodily cleanliness" was maintained, but he has informed us
that the dormitories were "excellent in every way," a condition which
could not exist except when "bodily cleanliness" was observed in a high
"degree." Most people would think that with "sleep, food, warmth,
cleanliness" and "athletics" the boys had about all the "material atten-
tion" they needed, and that they could well afford to devote the rest of
their time to the mental and spiritual. It may be noted that the im
plications and insinuations of our critic as to what constitutes t e
logical outcome of Christian Science impressions are not proved by is
example. Moreover after a careful examination of the facts, I fin t at
the school referred to has met with unusual success in every line w ic
makes for the advancement of the boy. Those who have patronize it
(129)
130 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
speak in glowing terms of the excellent faculty connected therewith, of
the increased interest in educational matters inculcated in the boys, and
especially of the physical and moral advancement of the pupils. I find
that, as in all boys' schools, there have been unfortunate occurrences and
more or less necessity for discipline, but nothing at all unusual. I find
that the school has been conducted with extreme care as to the bodily as
well as the mental cleanliness of its inmates, and this is in keeping with
Christian Science, since those who have become morally elevated natur-
ally seek to improve their physical condition and environment, in accord-
ance with the old adage, "Cleanliness is next to godliness." In many
years' experience as a Christian Scientist, I have never known any indi-
vidual, however good he may have been at the outset, who has not
advanced both as to his moral and physical cleanliness through the influ-
ence of Christian Science. I have known families who have been lifted
out of filth and degradation by the high ideals which have been instilled
into them through the teaching of Christian Science. If Mr. Taylor
knows anything whatever about Christian Scientists, he knows that they
are quite as clean physically and morally as any other class.
Mr. Taylor declares that "moral perverts" were admitted to tho
school, owing to the fact that the applicants were not required to undergo
physical examinations. Surely he is sufficiently well informed to know
that physical examinations are utterly inadequate to the discovery of
moral degeneracy, if not unnecessary thereto. It is a fundamental
necessity of Christain Science practice that the lives and habits of
children as well as adults shall be in strict keeping with the absolutely
puro and good and true. Although Christian Scientists may have an
understanding differing from some others as to the primary cause of
physical disorders, they none the less recognized that it must be dis-
covered, grappled with and overcome. Every Christian Science practi-
tioner of wide experience has probably helped many a boy out of sin and
imbecility after other available means had failed.
Mr. Taylor declares that his first acquaintance in the school was with
a boy quite fifteen years old, from whom ho learned confidentially that he
was a victim of wrong doing, "probably owing to the fact that he had
received no hint or warning concerning his body." He declares that
he found other boys in the school in the same condition. Notwith-
standing that he had commenced with the school year and his discoveries
were made early in the season, according to his story, ho made no
report to the master of the school until after tho Christmas holidays,
and he declares that a "speedy examination followed," that "the entire
faculty got together, the boys were called in one at a time and put
through a grilling examination," and as soon as the bad conditions wero
known to the faculty measures were immediately taken to overcome
them, and "the remedies were successful." lie admits that he knew of
the conditions and knew that the faculty courted criticism, but, like the
boys, he kept his knowledge of existing vice a secret. It therefore appears
NEWS AND COMMENT. 131
that Mr. Taylor was the most blame-worthy person in the school, for he
was older and "educated" in "physical deficiencies."
Here it should be noted that every school, however careful, has been
caught with unworthy pupils, some of whom have required discipline,
others of whom have required expulsion. The so-called "perverts" in this
institution had been taken in under recommendation. Some of the boys
were of parents who had only just learned of Christian Science, and
whose boys had been reared, not according to the ideals of Christian
Science, but without Christian Science. Hence their condition was not
chargeable to Christian Scientists, and since such conditions are entirely
beneath the practice of Christian Science they were due, not to Chistian
Science, but to a want of it.
Mr. Taylor exonerates the school by informing us that one boy from
the school was led astray by a college freshman. Perhaps a more careful
examination would disclose the fact that others of the "perverts" had
been led astray by boys outside the school. In any event, it is proper to
state /here that Christian Science recommends the uncovering of evil
in the life and practice of the individual and a speedy elimination
thereof. It is not contrary to the teaching of Christian Science that
parents should investigate and inform themselves as to the moral and phy-
sical status of their children and give them whatever attention is required
to lift them above that which is unlike God. Carelessness among Christian
Scientists is no more duo to Christian Science than is carelessness among
other classes essentially due to their particular beliefs. It is just simply
carelessness. If "Tommy," who is mentioned in our critic's story, had
been a good consistent Christian Scientist, he would not have been a
greedy boy. His unreasonable, intemperate indulgence of the "whole
eocoanut" was not due to the fact that he made too little, but because
ho made too much of "the physical." A consistent Christian Scientist
would be temperate and Godlike in all things.
In describing the purpose of the school under discussion, its head
master writes that, "It is to develop the power to think accurately,
quickly and deeply; to concentrate the attention, and to work faithfully
and conscientiously without mental fatigue. To do this requires the
development of the whole boy, the training of his moral sense, the bring-
ing out of sound bodily vigor, and the exercise of his mental faculties.
Control of the moral impulse, control of the body, control of the attention
?these are the three desiderata that express the one purpose of education
at this institution." It is but just to state that after an investigation we
find that this school has fulfilled this mission in satisfactory measure.
When I consulted the master of this school as to what became of the
boys who were in the school at the time of Mr. Taylors sojourn t ere
four years ago, lie replied: "Regarding the first boy, who was lone y an
melancholy,' it was his first year at the school and the second ^e0' 0 ?
year, so it is not strange if the school had not yet disco\ere tie oy ?
habits. Mr. Taylor speaks of his work with this boy. The following
132 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
are the facts: As Mr. Taylor declared, the boy was of a 'melancholy tem-
perament,' he was easily discouraged and presumably morbid. Accord-
ingly, Mr. Taylor proceeds to play upon the fears of this boy until he has
him thoroughly scared. The boy sees before him the asylum, and pul-
monary consumption. Under the influence of sheer terror, he improves
his habits, takes regular physical exercises and increases his chest
expansion an inch or so. But under Mr. Taylor's influence, he had
become so morbid that the boy's father had to come East to find out the
source of trouble. It was readily located, and the boy was taken from
Mr. Taylor's influence. Morbid fear, however, continued to dominate
him, and in a few months there had developed in him all the symptoms
of serious lung trouble. At this point, Christian Science came to the
rescue, a practitioner was called, and in three weeks the boy's fears had
been overcome, and in five weeks a complete recovery had been effected, a
recovery that is said to have proved permanent."
"Of the forty-one boys who were in the school during that year when
Mr. Taylor was in the school, two were expelled as was related and a
third was later sent away?not for any moral perversion, but for
insubordination. One has proved to be in a measure mentally deficient.
One, a fine, manly fellow, has passed away. This leaves thirty-six. Of
these thirty-six, eight are now in other schools, three are still at school,
five are successful business men. The 'big boy of seventeen', whom Mr.
Taylor declares to have been 'the worst of the lot,' and concerning whom
he says 'there could not be any hope outside of an institution, and not a
great deal of hope even there,' and whose mentality 'was of such a grade
that he was classed with the eleven year old boys, and was not their equal
and was little more than an imbecile, to-day occupies a position requiring
sound judgment and mental alertness with the largest automobile concern
in the country. Another of these 'perverts' is a successful business man,
superintendent of a large manufacturing concern. The third is a suc-
cessful real estate agent, and the other two are doing well. Twenty of the
boys who were in the school at that time passed successful examinations
and were admitted to leading colleges of the land. Harvard received
seven, Massachusetts Institute of Technology two, Princeton one, Dart-
mouth one, University of Wisconsin one, Leland Stanford one, Amherst
one, University of Missouri one, University of Virginia one, Case School
of Applied Science one, L'nited States Naval Academy one, Valparaiso
one, and last, but not of least consequence here, the University of Penn-
sylvania one. Puzzle: Find the 'moral perverts and imbeciles'." It is
certain that if they ever existed they vanished in after years.
I find upon investigation that this school has in its employ a very
able field secretary whose duty is to interview the parents of boys who
seek admission to the school, to ascertain their character, and that he has
oftentimes refused admission to boys because their standard of morals
and mentality was out of keeping with the character of the school.
I find that not a single case of contagious disease of any serious
NEWS AND COMMENT. 133
nature has ever occurred in this school, that the school has never been
closed a single day because of contagion or illness of any sort, and this
speaks for the effectiveness of the particular measures adopted to safe-
guard the physical well-being of the pupils. As a matter of course, if a
sick boy was treated by Christian Science, nothing was being done for
the boy, from Mr. Taylor's point of view, since no regular physician was
sent for, but the fact that the boy in every case speedily recovered should
have some weight with him.
Mr. Taylor's story would give the impression that the assistant
head master was indifferent to the moral well-being of the boys and ignor-
ant of the conditions existing among them. But we are informed that
the investigation which was made at the time showed that the senior
master was much more closely in touch with the boy8 than any or all of
his accusers, and that the conditions were not at all as had been repre-
sented. So conclusively was this shown, that the three accusers offered
a written apology and retraction in the following words: "We are glad
to retract the charges, which were shown io be unfounded, and heartily
to apologize for having made them." I .am told that this apology is now
on file at the school. The head master declared to me: "It is but fair to
say that as a result of this episode, more system was introduced in the
method of ethical and moral instruction."
In conclusion, it may be well to call attention to the fact that Mr.
Taylor did not need to enter a Christian Science school in order to dis-
cover trouble of the kind which he mentions. The Ladies' Home Journal
of February 1, 1911, published the following statement: "Forty-one
families?'nice -families,' as we call them?were last May thrown into con-
sternation and humilation by being privately notified by the head master
of a boys' school that their boys could not be re-entered for another term
at his school. 'A fearful condition of immorality,' wrote the head
master, 'has been unearthed at the school, and in order to set an example
to the rest of the boys, every boy concerned will be denied re-entrance
to this school.' The 'fearful condition of immorality, discovered in this
school was, as the head master privately explained traceable, as it gen-
erally is, 'to one boy,' the son of a 'careful' family of unquestioned
standing in its community, and he had involved the other boys."
The school concerned in the foregoing statement was not a Christian
Science school and none of the boys connected therewith were Christian
Scientists. We call attention to the matter simply for the purpose of
showing that Mr. Taylor's especial attack on the school which was con-
ducted by a Christian Scientist is partial and unjust, wholly apart from
his erroneous presumptions.
Yours truly,
(Signed) Alfred Farlow.
(Note.?Mr. Fnrlow is chairman of Committee on Publication,
The First Church of Christ Scientist, Boston, Mass.)
134 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Philadelphia, May 20, 1911.
Editor of The Psychological Clinic.
Dear Sir:?
Mr. Farlow's letter is interesting, but not as illuminating as I should
wish. It is interesting because it attempts to disprove the criticism that
the following-out of Christian Science precepts results in a lack of practi-
cal moral training for children, and it is unilluminating because it care-
fully avoids the point at issue, spending its space instead in a rather un-
successful effort to discredit the writer of the article. However, any cri-
ticism from so high an authority as Mr. Farlow deserves careful consid-
eration, so that I will take up the points in his letter as they appear.
Mr. Farlow says of me "He then assures us by implication that it
was within the power of the non-Christian Science portion of the faculty
to dictate the policy of the school" since the head master "never" vetoed
a faculty vote. What was actually said was that I never knew the head
master to use his veto power, though there is no doubt he would have
done so in case of any action contrary to Christian Science principle, or
against his own ideas of what was vitally necessary or right.
Mr. Farlow says "Mr. Taylor contradicts himself and discredits the
faculty whose voting and ruling majority he informs us did not believe
in Christian Science by insinuating that in the school 'physical deficien-
cies' were ignored." I would dislike very much to discredit any member
of that faculty, and would be happy to have it pointed out to me wherein
I did so, but that "physical deficiencies" were ignored is made rather
stronger than an insinuation, for there were no physical examinations in
the school. If a boy had some physical infirmity, he was not likely to
mention it to anyone, because of the Christian Science opinion as to all
physical infirmities. Besides this, the faculty was largely composed of
new members, who were unacquainted with the boys and with Christian
Science ideas, and so did not come to know of the real conditions among
the boys for quite a while. Afterwards they did everything in their
power to aid in creating a new order of things.
Because the bodies of the boys were never examined, as they arc in
most private schools, I stated that only to 'some degree' bodily cleanliness
was looked after. The 'some degree' refers to such parts of the anatomy
as are easily visible. Here Mr. Farlow seems to discover another 'con-
tradiction,' for he argues that if the dormitories were "excellent in every
way" then there must have been a high degree of bodily cleanliness
among the boys. This logic is too elusive for the present writer, who
unfortunately fails to see the connection. But in all this paragraph Mr.
Farlow does not disprove the statement that physical defects among the
boys were not noted, nor does he say anywhere that there was corrective
work of any kind, nor does he deny the statement that there were no
physical examinations whatsoever. This is the logical result of Chris-
tian Science teaching, which directs that as little be said as possible con-
NEWS AND COMMENT. 135
ceming the body or its defects. That this idea has many good points
there is no doubt; the danger comes in carrying it to an extreme.
Mr. Farlow speaks of the commendations he has heard of the faculty
of the school, and of the educational, physical and moral advancement
of the boys sent there. This, of course, simply emphasizes what I said in
the first article?I had nothing but the highest praise, not only for the
faculty, but for the work accomplished by them, and indeed, after a
practical system of moral training had been instituted, the training
given in this school became one of the best in my experience. It may be
that this practical method of training was quite contrary to Christian
Science precepts, and its success among the boys is only another support
of my contention?that the strict following out of these precepts does
not make for practical moral training.
I should dislike very much to accuse Mr. Farlow of inaccuracy, but
the following statement unfortunately points that way. He says "Mr.
Taylor declares that 'moral perverts' were admitted to the school, owing
to the fact that the applicants were not required to undergo physical
examinations." What I actually said is this: that the admission of perverts
and imbeciles was in keeping with the other fact mentioned a while ago,
?the fact of there being no physical examinations." As, for the last
three years, I have been an observer in a clinic to which have been
brought great numbers of mentally defective children, I am only too well
aware how often physical defects accompany mental or moral defects,
but I would never say anything so ridiculous as what Mr. Farlow attri-
butes to me?that is, that moral degeneracy could be discovered by means
of physical examinations!
Mr. Farlow says "It is a fundamental necessity of Christian Science
practice that the lives and habits of children as well as adults shall be
in strict keeping with the absolutely pure and good and true." This
idea, to be sure, is not original with Christian Science, but is the basis of
all Christian religions, and of some not Christian. But again the great
question is?what do the 'Scientists' do in order to train the children to
acquire habits of the character mentioned? Do they, for instance, give
the children any intelligible warnings concerning physical dangers? If
so, I saw no evidence of it. When the reform came in the school, a large
group of boys was assigned to the writer to receive practical instructmn
along such lines, and every boy told the same story?ignorance of
the right kind of defensive knowledge that every child should have, and
some of these fellows were over eighteen years old.
At times I find Mr. Farlow difficult to follow. In his all too evident
anxiety to disparage me Mr. Farlow has again allowed himself to draw
erroneous conclusions from the original text. lie says that the writer
made his 'discoveries' 'early in the season,' and that until after the
Christmas holidays he 'kept his knowledge of existing vice a secret and
that 'it therefore appears that Mr. Taylor was the most blame-worthy
person in the school' etc., etc. If Mr. Farlow had read my article ?ore
attentively he would see that there were no particularly important dis-
136 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
coveries" made until after Christmas, and up to that time, 'several' boys
only had come for help. These boys, of course, came in confidence, and
as long as I thought them merely sporadic cases, exceptions and not rules,
I saw no reason for breaking these confidences. It was only when I
saw that these unfortunate conditions were generally present, and that
matters affecting the whole school needed immediate adjusting that I
co-operated with other members of the faculty in making known the state
of affairs to those in authority.
Space does not admit, unfortunately, of the continued study, state-
ment by statement, of Mr. Farlow's letter, but at least one absolute and
complete misstatement requires the most point-blank denial. The un-
reliability of the letter as a whole, cannot be better illustrated than by
showing the unreliability of this, its strongest attack upon the writer.
Mr. Farlow says, in brief, concerning the first boy mentioned, that Mr.
Taylor first frightened the boy with threats of an asylum and pulmonary
consumption, that the boy, through sheer terror, improved his habits,
and incidentally his physique, that under Mr. Taylor's influence, how-
ever, the boy became so morbid that his father came East to discover the
trouble, that the boy was then taken from Mr. Taylor's 'influence,' that
serious lung trouble developed, and that in five weeks a Christian Science
practitioner cured the boy of his serious lung trouble, and all was then
serene. This would be very deplorable, if it were true. First of all, I
did not attempt to frighten the boy. Any student of boys knows how
futile such a procedure would have been! I gave the boy all possible en-
couragement, and the boy did improve his habits, not only of body, but
also of mind, and what morbidness he had in the beginning, disappeared
very quickly. It is true that the father came East, but it was for the
express purpose of thanking me for my work in improving his son. The
lung trouble story is a new one to me. In my records of the boy I find
that his chest expansion, in the first of October, for instance, was %
of an inch, that by December it had become 2% inches; by February, 3%
inches; and by the end of May 5 inches. This record shows two things,
that the boy's lungs, at first dangerously under-developed, improved
steadily under the work I gave him, and secondly that the boy was not
removed from my influence, as the records show that he was given his
physical measurements regularly through the whole scholastic year.
No, there was no lung trouble, but there was one physical trouble out of
my power to remedy. The boy, in January, developed a painful in-
growing nail. This became worse and worse. From that time to the
closing of school he was in more or less constant pain, sometimes in
actual agony, and compelled to go slowly about with a soft moccasin on
his foot. In July I received a letter from the boy saying that, being
unable to stand it longer, he went to an expert who cured him by means
of very un-'Scientific' methods. It is odd that tuberculosis could so
easily be cured, but that the boy had to endure agony for mouths over a
simple ingrowing nail!
NEWS AND COMMENT. 137
The following quotations from two of the letters received from this
boy's father, tend to corroborate my statements.
In a letter written on November 30th, he says, "I indeed feel grateful
to you for the interest you have evinced and assure you that I fully
appreciate your efforts to show him the right way." And again:?"I
wish to thank you again for your kind and loving interest in our boy."
From a letter written 011 December 20th:?"?It is such a source
of satisfaction to know that he [the boy] is so situated and to feel per-
fectly at ease as regards his everyday life and surrounding influences."
No mention here of 'morbidness,' lung trouble, or undesirable 'influence.'
If it were sufficiently important, or even interesting, I could go on and
prove that long after these letters were written, and long after that
scholastic year was over, the big improvement was attributed to my
efforts on his behalf though it is only fair to say that the boy's extraor-
dinary development was in a very great measure due to his own remark-
able will-power and energy.
I most sincerely hope that what is said about the progress of the
mentally deficient boys is more accurate than what was said about this
boy.
Mr. Farlow also mentions three 'accusers.' There were no 'accusers,'
but there were five men in the faculty of seven who combined their
knowledge of conditions and set this combination, written out, before
the head-master. The writer retained a carbon copy of this paper. It
is also fair to mention that in the original article I neglected to say that
one of the five was also one of the three 'Scientist' members of the
faculty for he joined with the non-scientific members when he saw
what was in progress, and some of the facts brought out were offered by
him. In fact, he it was who presented the paper, as spokesman of the
five. It is odd, if the charges "were shown to be unfounded," that, "as
a result of this episode, more system was introduced in the method of
ethical and moral instruction." (Note Mr. Farlow's letter.)
Last of all, I know only too well that I do not need to enter a
Christian Science school in order to discover such conditions. If Mr.
Farlow will purchase a copy of "Education" for April of this year, he
may read an article in which I describe similar conditions in no less than
eight types of schools.
What I did attempt to show in my original article was: that
because of the neglect of the physical, with all that the word "physical
involves, boys of Christian Science training are likely to average lower
in moral standard than boys brought up under more practical systems.
It is true, most unfortunately true, that the average parent, as as
the average school, is woefully negligent in the practical moral training
of children, but it is my experience that Christian Scientists are t
worst offenders in this respect.
(Signed) Charles K. Taylor.
138 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Fatigue and School Work.
In the Zeitschrift fur Experimentelle Padagogilc, Band X, Ilefte, 1-4,
1910, Mr. Max Oker-Blom reports his investigations conducted in the
Volksschulen (public schools) of Ilelsingfors, upon fatigue during a
school day. They consisted of the addition of twelve separate columns
each containing ten single figures. Each column was to be added and the
sum placed at the bottom. At the end of three minutes each pupil, upon
the command "Halt," placed a line under the figure he was just adding.
The experiment was carried on simultaneously in several classes, six times
during each day's session. The results were as follows:
1. A time schedule which utilizes the hours from 8 to 11 and from
4 to 6 o'clock produces better results than a continuous schedule that
utilizes the time from 11 until 4 o'clock.
2. During the early morning hours (8 to 11) the mental ability is
less than later in the day (from 11 to 2). Even the late afternoon
hours (4 to 6) are better for mental work than the early morning hours,
provided a sufficiently long recreation period (five hours) intervenes.
3. There is a gradual rise in mental alertness during the morning,
the second hour shows better results than the first, as also do the third
and the fourth hours. The last (fifth) hour of an uninterrupted session
shows a decreased ability in young children (10 to 11 years). This
decrease is not shown during the fifth hour of an interrupted school day.
4. Studies demanding great mental effort should not, therefore, bo
placed in the first or in the last hour.
Investigating the effects upon mental alertness of a long walk to
school the results were as follows:
5. A walk of 4/5 to 1 1/5 miles showed beneficial results. Chil-
dren living in the immediate neighborhood of the school, and who did not,
therefore, get this daily form of exercise, were easily fatigued by any
extra exertion. It appears that a daily walk of one mile to and from
school is of benefit to all pupils. Older pupils may walk one and a half
miles without its affecting their mental alertness. Such pupils show a
slight degree of fatigue during the first school hour, and with some this
extends into the second hour. The symptoms of fatigue wear off, how-
ever, and then these pupils show an increased power of resisting mental
as well as physical fatigue (brought about, undoubtedly, by their
increased endurance and bodily vigor).
G. Marches of 1 4/5 to 2 1/5 miles to school are too severe for
pupils. The fatigue caused by such marches shows its effect during all
hours of the day.
The experiments did not offer an opportunity for rating the fatigue
caused by different studies. The effect of a stimulating presentation
of school subjects could, however, be seen; also the depressing effect of
poorly taught subjects. The effects of over stimulation in any particular
subject were clearly revealed by a slight fatigue during the next hour.
The results show clearly the necessity for teaching in a manner
demanded by the mental attitude (Gcist und Gcmut) of the child, and
for regulating not only tho quantity of work, but also the hours for
recreation, in order to secure a steadily increasing mental alertness
combined with a maximum mental efficiency.?William A. Stecher.
