The Healthful Art of Dancing
=============================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

:Author: Luther H. Gulick, M.D. New
York: Doubleday, Page and Company, 1910. Pp. xi. -f- 273.

Dancing has been cultivated by all peoples at all times and is particularly enjoyed by children. It is one of the fundamental means of
expressing emotion. Unfortunately in America dancing has deteriorated
so that it can no longer be recognized as the art which was a required
Btudy for the youth of ancient Greece. All the Old World symbolism
to which it gave expression has been lost. This has been as unnecessary
as it is deplorable in America, when we consider the inpouring streams
of the peasantry of every nation of Europe, with their traditions and
social customs.

Dr Gulick's treatment of the subject is largely from the practical
standpoint. The problem was to find suitable exercise for school girls
in the large cities. In New York City, where folk-dancing has been
taken up by the school authorities and made a part of the regular
curriculum, exercise was provided for the boys by means of the Public
Schools Athletic League. Within the last two years a Girls' Branch of
the League has been organized to promote exercise among the girls. The
problem immediately presented itself: what form of exercise should be
adopted? Gymnastics build up the muscles, improving the circulation,
respiration, and digestion as well as developing muscular control. Eolk
dancing was found to have the further advantages of being more social
in character, of requiring less space,?a very important consideration in
a large city,?and of giving more exercise in a limited space. It has
moreover the obvious advantage, that the children like it and take to it
more eagerly than to gymnastics.

Dr Gulick discusses the neuromuscular co-ordinations of dancing,
considering the physiological and psychological aspects of the question
scientifically and yet popularly.

These chapters are of peculiar interest to those who have practiced dancing as well as to those who have not. When one tries to perform some of the more complicated or even the simpler dancing movements, he will be surprised to find how extensive is his lack of muscular
control and co-ordination. The body or limbs will not do just exactly
what is desired. The advantage of concise and accurate muscular movement is evident in the resulting grace and poise. Is not grace, indeed,
the performance of a muscular act with a minimum of effort? With
grace comes a real economy of effort, and therefore of strength and
nervous energy.

That the campaign to introduce folk-dancing in the schools has been
successful is evidenced by a number of letters from superintendents,
principals, and teachers, and even statements of the children themselves,
inserted in the text. It is the consensus of opinion that the children are
healthier and better for this form of exercise and that they look forward
with pleasure to the dances.

The one great fault of the book is that it is a collection of several
articles and papers prepared at different times and for various occasions.
Dr Gulick himself calls attention to this in the preface. It is most
surprising that an author of Dr Gulick's experience and ability, as
shown in his previous books, should have allowed this one to go to press
in its present form. It is to be hoped that when a second edition is
published, the repetitions will be eliminated, thereby adding unity and
sustained interest to the many other admirable qualities of the work.
Mention must here be made also of the numerous excellent photographs with which the book is illustrated. Of the greatest practical
value to the teacher and parent is the Eeport of the Committee on Folk
Dancing for 1908-09 of the Playground Association of America, which
is given in full. This contains a complete list of desirable folk dances
suitable for girls of different ages, together with a working bibliography
of books containing the music and action of the dances.
S. W. F.
