Congenital Aphasia
===================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1911, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. V, No. 6. November 15, 1911.

By Clara Haeeison Town, Ph.D.,
Resident Psychologist, Lincoln State School and Colony, Lincoln, III.
There is probably no subject in the whole field of psychiatry
which can boast a larger literature than aphasia. To read only
the most important contributions since the publication of Broca's
theory in 18G1, would be an Herculean task. Nevertheless, one
variety of the condition, its congenital form, has, in the heat of
controversy, been much neglected. Many a man well versed in the
literature of aphasia and practically conversant with its adult
varieties is so unfamiliar with this conception of a congenital form
that its mention arouses a smile and brings forth the query?"How
can there be a loss of memory for language before language is
acquired ?" This point of view seems at first to be the logical
outcome of the familiar conception of aphasia as a partial or total
loss of memory for language in any one or all of its forms, but
this reasoning really contains a fallacy and the fallacy is a faulty
conception of the meaning and scope of memory.
The process of memory is in reality a twofold one, it implies
the ability to retain impressions and the ability to recall them.
These processes are absolutely distinct, the first may be intact while
recall is interfered with, though of course there can be no recall
without an initial impressibility. In aphasia both of these powers
are reduced within the sphere of language, there is a reduction in
the power to recall words and also in the power of acquiring new
ones. In an adult who has had much experience of language and
formed a large vocabulary, aphasia betrays itself in an inability to
understand or to recall or utter once familiar words; his daily
occupation makes a constant demand upon his stock of already
acquired verbal ideas, and little demand upon his ability to acquire
new ones, therefore his loss of power to recall is strikingly evident
and his loss of impressibility remains unnoticed. With a child,
however, the conditions are quite different. When the powers of
impressibility by language and recall of language are reduced or
(167)
168 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
absent in a child so young that no language has yet been acquired,
it is not the failure to reproduce which is most in evidence, but
the failure to retain impressions. The child's most important
concern is the acquisition of language; this is seriously interfered
with and therefore the loss of impressibility is noticed rather than
the loss of ability to recall. This condition is apt to be attributed,
not to a language defect, but to general mental deficiency or to
some sensory defect. The aphasic condition is identical in the
adult and the child, but different phases are accentuated by the
different requirements of the two stages of development. The
absence of powers which we are not called upon to use may remain
indefinitely unnoticed; a man often by a mere chance discovers
the fact that he is color-blind or amusic after living for years
in ignorance of the fact, and his friends may never be cognizant
of his condition.
Aphasia then is an inability, total or partial, to understand
or to use language in any one or all of its forms, such inability
being independent of any other mental incapacity or of any
deformity or disease affecting the organs of articulation. It is
particularly necessary to bear in mind these qualifications when
considering the aphasias of childhood, as some authors writing of
the feebleminded call all mute idiotic children, who are not deaf,
apliasics, their standpoint being the exact opposite of that of those
mentioned above who are familiar only with the aphasias of
adults. The qualifications are also theoretically important, for
without them the conception of aphasia as essentially and primarily
a disturbance of the function of language would be lost, and
aphasia would simply be a language disturbance resulting secondarily from a more fundamental and far-reaching mental
disorder. All similarity between the aphasias of childhood and
those of adults would disappear. Binet writes on this subject, "A
congenital aphasia implies a faulty development of the centers
concerned with language, an atrophy severe enough to be clearly
pathological in character and to present a contrast between the
arrested development of the language centers and the much greater
development of the other centers of the same brain. This is
positively the only reasonable way in which the term can be used."
It seems rather remarkable that all the cases of aphasia which
have been used as studies and made to serve as bases of the various
theories of aphasia have been of the adult type, with the single
exception of Broadbent's case of mixed sensory and motor type
reported in 1872. The study of adult cases is especially difficult
CONGENITAL APHASIA. 169
because aphasia in adults is the result of cerebral apoplexy, trauma,
tumor or other pathological cause the effect of which is usually
far reaching and can scarcely in any one case be proved to be
positively limited to the language zone. In children, however,
the condition exists as the result of faulty development and
occasionally a case is discovered where there is apparently no
mental deficiency apart from the language defect. Such a chance
is given of studying the phenomena in isolation, as no adult case
could ever present.
That congenital cases have not been utilized seems all the
more remarkable when we find that they were noticed and reported
as early as aphasia itself. Though the modern theories of aphasia
date only from Broca's discoveries in 1SG1, the condition was
recognized by many earlier writers. Gall, the first phrenologist,
as early as 1828, in writing of memory, differentiates the process
into distinct faculties, among them noting "word memory" and
the "sense of spoken language" and describes these functions in
diseased conditions, anticipating the "word-blindness" of Kussmaul
and the "motor aphasia" of Broca. He goes still further and
describes faulty speech memory in children, giving a clear clinical
picture of that form of congenital aphasia, though not using the
name. He notes no cases among children of defective verbal
memory (word-blindness), but speaks as follows of speech memory:
"There are many children from two to twelve and even fourteen
years of age who do not speak to the same degree as other children,
although they understand well and although they are far from
being idiotic. In these cases the trouble lies not in the vocal organs,
as the ignorant sometimes insist, and still less in the apathetic
state of the subject. Such children on the contrary even show
great physical vivacity. They not only skip about, but they pass
from one idea to another with astonishing rapidity. If one holds
them and pronounces a word in the ear they repeat it distinctly.
It is difficult to make this experiment twice in succession and it is
impossible to do so three times, which proves a general feebleness
of the organs of the intellectual faculties. Sometimes, however,
such subjects are able to express in writing their ideas and sentiments well enough to prove that theiv weakness in intellect is
particularly relative to their faculty of speech. When these children are treated by a method of curative tonic, not given tasks too
difficult or too long continued for their feeble faculties, as they
grow older their cerebral parts-acquire more consistence and their
intellectual faculties develop little by little and they end by
170 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
acquiring the faculty of speech and taking rank among reasonable
persons."
The Irish Census of 1851 reported one hundred and thirtyone cases of dumbness unassociated with deafness or paralysis.
Some of these were examined by Sir William Wild, who found no
physical cause for their dumbness and found also a fair amount
of intelligence.
Dr Wilbur reports four cases which appear to be congenital.
One, a boy of thirteen, mentally slow, spoke only a few words; he
learned to read, then to write and finally to speak. One, a boy
of eight, had no voluntary speech, but understood spoken words;
he learned first to read and then to speak. The third boy, also
eight years old, understood both spoken and written language, but
never spoke voluntarily and could only repeat single words with
difficulty. The fourth boy did not attempt to speak until nine
years of age and at thirteen spoke only a word or two. He was
taught to read, write and speak distinctly.
These earliest cases, about twenty-one in number, were all
motor in character. Word-blindness in children does not appear
to have been reported until 1872, when Broadbent described a
congenital case which combined total word-blindness with very
limited power of speech. The boy could copy print, but could not
write so much as "yes" or "no" from dictation and could understand no written words. Attempts at dictation resulted in "balive"
and "acbe" for no, "it" for is and "ke" for card. Ilis spoken
vocabulary consisted of "no," "e" for yes, "faver" for father,
"move" for mother, and "dunno" for don't know. Other efforts
at speech resulted in the one expression "keegerkruger," though
there is a record that he did on one occasion succeed in forming a
few short phrases. Broadbent writes: "The difficulty was
obviously not articulatory, on the other hand the boy was not an
idiot in any sense and was not speechless through a general
deficiency of intelligence. He understood what was said to him
and copied printed words and written characters, but had not
apparently associated the written sign with verbal sound so as to
understand written and printed words, though, curiously enough,
he did this in the case ot numbers. The failure seemed to me to
consist in an absence of the 1 acuity of mental rehearsal of phrases,
he could not formulate volition in words, or as Dr Ilughings
Jackson says, he could not propositionize." Dr Bosworth McCready, in a paper read in 1000, cites forty-one cases reported in
the literature since 180G and adds another to the list. His case
CONGENITAL APHASIA. 171
was complicated by a stutter, a fortunate stutter, for without it
the boy would not have had the good fortune to meet Dr McOready.
This boy started school at six and experienced great difficulty in
learning to read. At ten he was subjected to a severe fright which
resulted in a stutter. He drifted from school to tutor until his
twentieth year, when he consulted Dr McCready about his stuttering. During the subsequent training, it transpired that he
could not read without stuttering passages which he could repeat
clearly after the doctor; such mistakes as the following were the
rule: words called "wan," at = "an," sober = "soder," remember = "remain," because = "beauteous," town = "down," etc. He
confessed later that he frequently stuttered over a word to hide his
inability to recognize it. He wrote well from dictation, though a
short time afterward he often found it impossible to read what he
had produced.
Mr. Pringle Morgan's case published in 1896 was similar.
The trouble here, however, was word-blindness uncomplicated by
any motor speech difficulty. The boy, fourteen years of age, was
bright, quick at games and in no way inferior to others of his age,
except that he was unable to learn to -read. After several years of
schooling and special tutors, he could only with difficulty spell out
words of one syllable. The following is an example of his manner
of taking dictation: "Carefully winding the string around the peg,"
was written: "Calfuly winder the sturn rond the Pag."
Tn May, 1011, two cases were reported in the British Medical
Journal by Eva McCall, who discovered them during a medical
inspection of elementary schools. The first is a case of word-blindness. A boy of twelve has failed to learn to read in spite of individual instruction. He has quite average intelligence, talks readily, but is unable to spell or to read. He recognizes single letters
and writes well from copy but nothing from dictation but his own
name. The second is a case different in form from any so far
mentioned; it is a case of word-deafness. To this child of eight
spoken language menns nothing. He pronounces words, though
inaccurately, by watching the speaker's lips, but immediately forgets them. Voluntarily he makes no effort to speak. The child
has good hearing for noises which immediately attract his attention, but he pays no attention when spoken to. He could easily
be mistaken for a deaf child.
An interesting -point brought out by Thomas, Fisher, Stephenson, Hinshelwood, Plate and Peters, is that the condition often
occurs in several members of the same family. Thomas report^
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
six cases in one family in two generations and two cases in another
family; Fisher, two in different generations; Stephenson, a family
in which three generations were affected; Hinshelwood, four brothers and some of their descendants; Plate, four cases in three generations of one family, and Peters, two cases in one family.
A thorough study of aphasic conditions is possible only in the
course of a persistent and systematic attempt to develop the language function by instruction, in the adult a matter of re-education,
in the child, one of education. The process of re-education is perhaps simpler, as in most adult aphasics a few language symbols are
retained in some form and these serve as an opening wedge by
which old associations may be revived. There are usually some
very habitual verbal forms even in the realm most affected, which
are either not lost or easily revived; for instance, in the course of
re-educating an hemiplegic aphasic who had reached the stage when
he could repeat spoken words and read correctly certain written
ones on which he had been trained, though unable to speak voluntarily, when the word pen was presented, the man repeated "pen,
pen," and added in a quick spasmodic way, "Pennsylvania Railroad". The word good brought from the same man, "good, good,
good morning". In congenital cases no such habit combinations
exist and all associations have to be built up by the method of
instruction. Dr "Wyllie strongly recommends the oral method
used in the training of deaf mutes for the mixed cases of mind
blindness and mind deafness and inability to speak, and quite a
number of reported cases have been successfully treated by this
method. Dr ITmshelwood recommends frequent short reading
lessons for word blindness, while Dr Wilbur reports that the
majority of his dumb aphasic children learned to rend before they
learned to speak. Bastian suggests that the left hand be trained
to write, aiming in this way to bring into activity the right hemisphere and gradually to produce a substitution of function, basing
his method on the localization theory of Broca. Seguin also suggests this method. The method was used by Dr McCready in conjunction with other training aimed to present word impression
through every possible sensory approach at the same time. ITis
pupil listened to words, looked at them, pronounced and traced
them simultaneously, thus building up all possible verbal associations. Training was bejrun in "March, 1000; when the paper was
read in September, 1000, Dr McOready was able to report, "His
improvement has been most satisfactory. ITe can now read a
page of ordinary printed matter composed of the more common
CONGENITAL APHASIA. 173
words, almost as quickly as a person with normal visual memory,
and is able to read for pleasure, a tiling he was never able to do
before/' As so many methods were combined in the instruction
of this case it is difficult to tell how much effect the training of the
left hand really had. The whole question of localization is still,
after a half century of debate and investigation, a matter of heated
controversy, and Moutier's exhaustive treatise which appeared in
1908, weights the scales pretty heavily on the negative side. However, the particular value of the method of improving language
ability through a training of the left hand may not depend at all
upon any localization theories or upon functional substitution. It
might still be valuable if Marie's statement, "L'aphasie est due a
un trouble de l'intelligence generale et de l'intelligence speciale de
langage" proves to be the truth. Training of the left hand in the
finer co-ordinations used in writing, necessarily causes additional
activity in some portion of the brain and will therefore cause an
increase in the sum total of brain activity and efficiency. This
increase in activity might be correlated with a rise in "l'intelligence generale" and improvement ensue, without any functional
substitution whatever.
Summing up we find that there are three quite distinct
methods used for the education and re-education of apliasics. First,
the oral method used with deaf mutes; second, the various methods
used for impressing visual symbols and associating them with
their auditory values; this includes all phonic and pictorial methods used in teaching reading and spelling, as well as practice in
writing; third, the special training of the left hand in the finer
co-ordinations limited in most people to the right hand movements.
A combination of all these methods seems to give best and quickest
results though the process is at best a long and tedious one. Four
years were necessary to teach one of Bastian's pupils to speak.
With most of the reported cases the time is not recorded.
There are at present in the State School and Colony at Lincoln,
111., two most interesting cases of word-deafness, complicated by a
slight degree of motor aphasia, one a boy of eight years, and one a
girl of nine. The boy's condition is probably not a congenital one,
but dates as early in life as the first week, when he had a serious
illness accompanied by spasms (probably meningitis) which left
him partially paralyzed on the left side. The paralysis disappeared during infancy. At sixteen months he contracted measles,
which illness was followed by chorea, and at three years an attack
of scarlet fever left an otitis media.
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
At present the boy is plump and well nourished. He is flatfooted, habitually turns his toes in, staggers and droops his head
and right shoulder when he walks. He can, however, walk on a
strip four inches wide, and when interested and in a hurry runs
like a normal boy. There is no lack of co-ordination in either eye
or hand movements.
In spite of all these physical handicaps the boy is very active
physically and particularly alert mentally, giving no evidence of
mental abnormality other than his failure to understand and make
use of language. He substitutes for language a lively pantomime
and is quick to grasp the meaning of all gestures. He investigates
everything and is also quite inventive, using all articles which ho
can procure to carry out some ingenious scheme,?a couple of
yard sticks he at once converted into a railroad track and the
rails soon bore the burden of a train of box cars. While in the
laboratory he became much interested in a piece of apparatus
which if touched by a metal pointer, causes a bell to sound. He
was greatly pleased to find that he could produce the sound and at
once began searching for the bell which was hidden beneath
the table. He soon localized the sound and discovered the boll
and also noticed the dry cells which furnished the power. While
his back was turned, the wires were disconnected. He frowned
when he found that the sound of the boll did not follow his touch
and at once began to search for the reason. He found the disconnected wires and held them out to me to be reconnected. On the following day he again came to the laboratory. One of the cells was
then standing at the end of the long laboratory table as far as possible from the rest of the apparatus and entirely disconnected. Ho
tried the pointer, failed to ring the bell and then did all he could to
make me arrange things. I paid no attention whatever, so he
began to investigate; he found the dry cell, placed it in position,
connected the wires and then triumphantly rang the bell. Tn spite
of such intelligence he talks but little and so rarely notices what
is said by others that he is often considered deaf. That he is not
deaf to noises, the above incident proves, and that he is not deaf
to the ordinary tones of the human voice became equally evident
during a test for articulation. He repeated every word which
*vas uttered in an ordinary tone, not correctly, but in a way that
clearlv approximated the original. The letters p, b, t, d, m and n,
he uses well, both as the initial and final sounds of words. "F, th
and ng, he makes an attempt to produce. He names the following
thirty-six objects or their pictures at flight:
CONGENITAL APHASIA. 11*
girl (dirl) automobile (automo) bird (bir)
boy (baw) button shoe (hoo)
rabbit buttonhook (button) wagon
dog (dod) clock (dock) mamma
horse (hosen) bed 1 penny
w^ter duck flower (ower)
boat (bo) match (ma) seeds (teeds)
flag bush bug (bu)
spoon (poon) book dollie
(used also for knife watermelon (water) cup (water)
and fork) chicken (shicky) stocking (token)
can (ken) all kinds of food fish (fin)
monkey (monk) (dinner) table (able)
The following twenty-four words he also uses voluntarily:
look hang it
eat do
yes I won't
no that ruler ('uler)
oh open
foot I can't
lie down I tired
all gone my hand
out dropped.
This gives him a vocabulary of at least sixty words. He
showed plainly by pantomime that he recognized and knew the use
of forty-two other objects:
bird comb nail file
gloves pillow tooth brush
ring shoe cap
butterfly scissors bell
apple lawn mower nut
rocking chair glasses drum
crackers hat hammock
table pen book
hand violin pencil
knife collar dynamometer
typewriter gun necktie
collar button pipe graphophone
umbrella strawberry hatpin
whisk watch ball
176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
In a normal child or an imbecile without special language
defect, the auditory vocabulary always exceeds the spoken, but
with this boy the opposite condition exists, and he gives no sign
of understanding more than the following twelve words when
spoken:
stocking tooth nose
dog horse mouth
baby man ears
bird 2yes William
That he hears other words is proved by the fact that he repeats
them; that he does not understand them, by his utter failure to
comply with requests or point out objects. When several objects
with which he is familiar were placed before him and he was told
to hand one, he paid not the slightest attention to the request.
When the request was illustrated by gesture, he at once began to
hand things, but indiscriminately, matches for book, candle for
cup, knife for pencil, etc.
In testing his intelligence by the Binet scale, which is part
of the routine examination of all children admitted to the school,
he passed all the tests up to and including those for children of
six years which did not require the understanding of language,
failing in all those whose meaning could not be conveyed by
gesture. One six-year test is the performance of three commissions
given simultaneously. These actions he at once performed when
he had watched another do them first, proving that he could keep
the three ideas in mind long enough to comply with directions.
That he has good visual form perception he demonstrated by
his handling of the form board test. In this test ten blocks of
different shapes exactly fit into ten corresponding holes in a board;
the child is told to take all the blocks out and replace them. This
he did accurately and without hesitation, depending entirely on
recognition of similarity of form; he then took up a picture of a
star which lay on the table, and placed it on the block of similar
shape, touched two blocks which were somewhat alike in shape,
nodding meaningly to me, and then touched two more which were
also similar. After this he picked up a large letter, cut from
paper, and hunted througL a set of alphabet blocks until he found
the same letter, when he placed the paper letter upon it. His
stereognostic sense is good,?with eyes blindfolded he handled
familiar objects and showed by gestures that he knew their use.
CONGENITAL APHASIA. 177
His color discrimination is also good,?he matched without difficulty red, blue, green, yellow, purple and orange. He is right
handed and uses scissors effectively, cutting out of paper without
aid or suggestion several simple figures.
To sum up, the foregoing description portrays a boy with an
alert mind, quick to perceive visual stimuli of all kinds, quick to
interpret uses of objects, to discover causes for events and to notice
relations between objects; a boy with a retentive memory and the
concentration necessary to hold directions for three actions in mind
long enough to perform them. All these powers he has developed,
although deprived of the aid most children derive from the constant
talk of those about them. It is a truism that the brightest and
liveliest children are those who are talked to and played with the
most; but here is a boy, deaf to the meaning of practically all
words, who has developed a remarkably good intelligence. Can
one doubt that he is suffering from a mental defect limited to the
language field, from a defect independent of any other mental
deficiency whatsoever?
The little girl has a bad heredity, and her condition seems
to be congenital. Her father, grandfather and one uncle drank
heavily, and her father also uses tobacco to excess. Her parents
were first cousins, and her mother was subjected to much worry
and grief before the child's birth. She has had measles, whooping
cough, mumps, chorea and otitis media, but never the slightest
paralysis. She is a highly nervous child, unusually active and has
splendid muscular control. She runs like a deer, and her history
states that she climbs everywhere and loves to chase cattle. She
uses her hands well, cuts well, and likes to scribble, using her left
hand and producing remarkably regular lines of continuous scribble
in imitation of a letter.
Though physically so active, she is mentally lazy and will not
exert herself in the least until she finds there is no escape, when
she settles down to the business in hand. She has an accurate eye
for form, placing all the blocks in the form board without hesitancy
in the second trial; a few errors in the first trial were the result
of inattention. She matches colors perfectly. Her stereognostic
sense could not be satisfactorily tested as she becomes much frightened and greatly excited when she is blindfolded, or her hands are
hidden from her view. She is very sensitive to noises, noticing
when any one passes in the hall and calling out to them in a loud
voice sentences of which only a word or two are intelligible.
TJnlike the boy, she talks a good deal voluntarily; she uses many
17S TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
short phrases which she articulates quite plainly and names a few
objects. The phrases comprise the following:
Get up. She don't neither.
Come on. She's at the door.
Don't want to. Now wait.
No I won't. She's out back.
That's a shoe. What you did there ?
Ain't that pretty. Let me have it.
A little baby. What is that?
Let's see. Sit down.
That's mine. Get down.
She says. That's for water.
The objects or their pictures which she names are:
papa necktie
picture scissors (skikers)
baby lady (yade)
shoe bush
pocket knife trees
She also uses the words, yes and no, listen ('isten) and pretty
Altogether her intelligibly spoken vocabulary amounts to about
sixty words. Besides these she uses much language which no one has
been able to interpret. The only words which she gives evidence
of understanding when spoken are Etta (her name) and bed.
When asked to hand objects which she has named she nods her
head, smiling pleasantly, and says "yes, yes," but does nothing.
She did not understand when told to point to her eyes, nose, mouth
and ears, nor when told to stand up. She, like William, performed
the three simultaneously requested acts only when they were
rehearsed for her.
REFERENCES.
Bastian, IT. Charlton. Aphasia and Other Speech Defects, 1898. The
Lumlean Lectures on Some Problems in Connection with Aphasia,
Lancct, April 3, 10, 24, May 1, 1897.
Broaohent, W. Cerebral Mechanism of Speech and Thought, Med. Chir.
Transactions, Volume 55, p. 140, February, 1872.
Gall, F. T. Sur les fonctions de cervei. et sur celles de cbacune de ses
parties. Volume 5, pp. ^9-40; Paris, 1825.
IIinshelwood, James. Four Cases of Congenital Word-blindness in One
Family. British Medical Journal, Nov. 2, 1907.
Letter, Word, and Mind-blindness, 1900.
Congenital Hereditary Word-blindness. British Medical Journal,
March 18, 1911.
CONGENITAL APHASIA. 179
Kussmattl. Aphasia. Zlemssen's Cyclopedia, Volume 14.
McCall, Eva. Two Cases of Congenital Aphasia in Children. Brit. Med.
Jour., Mny 13. 1011.
McCready, E. Bosworth. Congenital Word-blindness as a Cause of Backwardness in School Children. Report of a Case Associated with Stuttering (Bibliography). Pennsylvania Med. Jour., January, 1910.
Morgan W. Pringi.e. A Case of Congenital Word-blindness. British
Medical Jour., 180G, p. 1378-1379.
Plate, E. Vier Fiille von kongenitaler Wortblindheit in einer Familie.
Miinch, mcd. Woch., 1909, Volume 56, p. 1793-4.
Peters. Miincli. mcd Woch., 1908, No. 2.
Seguin, E. A Statement of the Apliasic Question, together with a Report
of Fifty Cases. Quarterly Jour, of Psycho. Mcd., New York, 18GS.
Volume 2. pp. 74-179.
Wilbur, IT. B. Aphasia. American Journal of Insanity, July, 18G7,
pp. 1-28.
Wild, Sir William. Aural Surgery, 1853.
Wyllie, J. The Disorders of Speech (reviews cases recorded by Bastian.
Benedikt, I-Iaddon, Hartman, Taylor, Uebermann, Waldenberg, and
adds two new ones). Edinburgh, Oliver, 1894.
