Elimination and Retention of Pupils
=====================================

By Edwaiid P. Cummings,
Superintendent of Schools, Lansing, Mich.
Tlie study of the facts and the causes of elimination of pupils
in any single system of schools, or the comparison of elimination
of pupils in different systems of schools, is a more complicated
process than might at first appear. A common method of reaching
a conclusion in regard to the number of pupils retained in any
set of schools is to compare the enrolments in the various grades
from first to last. Take the number of pupils in the first grade
as a base; then determine what percentage of this number is
found in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth,
ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grades respectively. The result
will be the true percentage retained by that particular school.
This has often been the rule by which educational statisticians
have proceeded. At first sight it seems to be a fair one. A
moment's thought, however, shows the entire inadequacy and unreliability of such a course. Could we imagine a locality where
the school population and enrolment were absolutely unchangeable
from year to year, where the same number of children started
each year in the first grade and where these conditions continued
for a minimum period of twelve years, one year for each grade,
with no moving to or from the district, possibly true conclusions
might be reached. In no other case can this be so. A district
with a rapidly increasing school population, where the lower
grade enrolment naturally first feels this increase, suffers greatly
in conclusions drawn from such a method of deduction. A district which is dead, a district where there is even a decrease in
population, makes a splendid showing. With a constantly decreasing base (its first grade enrolment), the percentage of pupils
retained in each grade apparently increases rapidly. It is therefore apparent that when such a rule is followed, a most desirable
condition is to establish, if possible, a small enrolment in the first
grade. A vigorous growing community has a large first grade. A
community where the first grade is composed of primary and of
so-called sub-primary has a first grade of nearly twice the size
?Included also in the last annual report of the Superintendent of Schools, Lansing, Mich
ELIMINATION AND RETENTION OF PUPILS. 21
of one that gives but one year to this work. A community with
kindergarten and first primary has the same handicap in statistics compiled by the above rule, if kindergarten enrolment and
first grade enrolment are taken together for the base. In a
comparison of different school systems the resulting confusion is
often due to lack of uniformity both in statistical methods of
various systems and in rules for comparing such statistics.
Edward L. Tliorndyke, professor of educational psychology
at Columbia University, reaches conclusions in his recent study
of elimination of pupils from school which are totally at variance
with those reached by Leonard P. Ayres, secretary of the backward
children investigation on the Russell Sage Foundation. One of
the important questions now being studied by the United States
Commissioner of Education is a uniform system of statistics for the
recording of facts regarding the important questions which arise
in the extensive and intensive study of American school problems.
Mr. Ayres recently addressed the superintendents of Michigan,
assembled in annual meeting here in Lansing, upon this question
of elimination. I was unable to be present at that part of the
session, but I heard the substance of the greater portion of his
Lansing address at the national meeting of superintendents at
Indianapolis. In the Lansing address, a comparison of several
Michigan cities was made and some conclusions drawn. In a
recent letter from Mr. Ayres I have this paragraph: "Turning
now to Lansing we find a peculiar situation. According to the
figures the first grade is inexplicably large. A very good proportion of the beginners is carried through to the eighth grade and a
very good showing is made in the high school. When I spoke in
your city I explained that the Lansing diagram was quite largely
made up on guess work because of the absence of real data [that
I possessed] and so was not to be taken too seriously. Without
knowing much about local conditions, I judge that the very large
first grade is to be accounted for partly because many children are
doing the work of the first grade as a preparatory grade during
one year and as a real first grade the following year. Another
probable explanation is that Lansing is growing very rapidly
and the population is largely made up of young mechanics who
have young children in their families. Thus Lansing, at present,
has an abnormally large percentage of young children in the
population."
Mr. Ayres adds: "In the average city of this country less
than half of all the children reach the eighth grade and not over
22 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
one child in ten completes the high school course. Thus it will be
seen that the Lansing showing is very superior to that made by
the average city."
"While we all like to hear such complimentary expressions,
let us look at this important first grade enrolment of a few representative cities of the state. I can say that the figures upon which
my conclusions and the following tables are based have been secured within the past two months directly from the superintendents
of the various cities mentioned. They can therefore be relied upon
as authoritative. Mr. Ayres spoke of Lansing's first grade as
unusually large. His deductions were generally made upon these
figures as a base. The following is the population of eight Michigan cities, beginning with Lansing, and their respective first
grade enrolments.
Population.* Number in first grade.
Lansing,   35,000 7G4 (exclusive of kindergartens)
Flint,   35,000 Number not given.
Jackson,   35,000 540
Traverse City, .... 12,000 192
Saginaw, E. S.,... 30,000 482
Kalamazoo,   40,000 GOO
Bay City,  45,000 700
Grand Rapids,.... 100,000 17G5
From this it appears that there are more first grade pupils in
the Lansing schools than in any of the seven other schools mentioned above, except Grand Rapids. The reasons, as far as ascertainable, I believe to have been truly surmised by Mr. Ayres as
quoted in his letter. I have been interested in a further comparison of conditions in the above eight schools, the unit of
comparison, the base, being not the enrolment in the first grade,
nor in any other single grade, but the "average number belonging"
for the entire school. A comparison of the number of pupils in
the public schools with the total population of legal school age
in the community, five to twenty years, shows the following:
Per cent Per cent
Flint  75 Jackson   59
Traverse City  74 Saginaw, E. S.... 50
Lansing  GO Grand Rapids  49
Kalamazoo  GO Bay City  38
?This table was compiled before the results of the 1910 census were reported, but the estimates of population are not far wrong.
ELIMINATION AND RETENTION OF PUPILS. 23
The following percentages represent tlie relative numbers
that have graduated from the eighth grade this year as compared
with "average number belonging" for the entire school:
Per cent Per cent
Kalamazoo  7.6 Jackson   4.6
Saginaw  6.0 Grand Kapids.... 3.4
Bay City  5.7 Flint  3.1
Lansing  5.0
These are not percentages of those who entered school and
completed the eighth grade. Such percentages would be much
higher. These percentages mean that of the "average number
belonging" in the entire primary system, grammar and high
school, such as represented by the above figures were in the eighth
grade completing class.
The following statistics are especially significant as they
show the proportion of the schools' "average number belonging"
who are in the first high school grade. Here again warning must
be taken not to think of these percentages as representing merely
the proportion of pupils who reach the high school for it must be
remembered that up and beyond these are all the pupils of the
second, third, and fourth high school grades.
Summary by
Schools
Number
left
Removal
from
city.
Bingham ....
Central
Cedar
Cherry
East Park . ..
Kalamazoo . .
Larch
Logan
Mich. Ave. .
Moores Park
South St.. ..
Townsend .. .
Walnut
High School .
Kindergarten
Total
36
51
71
28
23
69
71
44
32
26
22
28
40
98
54
693
Causes of Leaving
29
43
54
24
19
50
50
37
30
18
14
21
29
17
33
468
Sickness
and
Death.
To
Work.
5
5
7
2
2
5
12
3
2
3
4
4
5
18
13
01
2
3
1
22
50
Lack of
Interes t.
Failure.
Other
Causes.
Reasons
Not
Known.
19
14
1
4
1
2
28
3
57
Help
Needed
in
Family.
