A Score of Difficult Boys
============================

By Ralph L. Johnson, M.A.
Girard College, Philadelphia, Pa.
During the liulf year ending January 31, 1911, there have
been two groups of boys in a special class in Girard College, one
group known as the "Retarded Class," the other as the "Delinquent
Class." There were twenty-four boys in the Retarded Class and
twenty-eight in the Delinquent Class. Retarded boys are those
who have remained unduly long in a grade without promotion, the
repeating having become quite noticeable. Delinquent boys are
those who have been troublesome in class; their repeating may
have accumulated through many grades.
To show that delinquent boys are incapacitated for work to the
same degree as retarded boys, and to show that similar treatment
will bring equally good results in both cases, I have made a study
of ten typical cases from each group. The ten delinquent boys
have repeated sixty-five half years while the retarded boys have
repeated fifty-four half years. The latter offended only in lack
of knowledge, while the former showed lack of self-control,?they
were "wicked as well as weak."
The pupils were measured and ranked according to the system
originated by Professor Frank W. Smedley,1 of Chicago, and explained by him as follows:?
"Percentiles are obtained in the following manner: The individual cards on which the measurements were recorded when the
child was tested were arranged according to the size of the pupils
in each measurement, grouped separately for each age in years.
The minimum measurement in each group gave the zero percentile for that group. To determine the ten percentile for that group,
ten per cent of the number of cards were removed, beginning at
the minimal end, and the highest measurement on the cards so
removed was recorded as the desired percentile. Similarly the
other percentiles were determined, the maximum measurement
being recorded as the one hundred percentile."
A comparison of the percentile groups to which the pupi
belongs in the different measurements will give his balances in
growth and development. To illustrate let us refer to chart o.
'Hoport of the [U. S.] Commissioner of Education for the year 190-. \ol. I,
p. 1110.
(121)
122 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ERCENTILE CURVE
PERCENTILE CURVE
Ybo.z..
AaLdLc i*An?
iXr^
PERCENTILE CURVE
^HaA. iiAiiu. ?2LJ>wv-2
7PERCENTILE CURVE
TLo> b I?SL_
UvaJL^rtdk?S2^?C/mTy>ki^j g| Spl
PERCENTILE CURVE
PERCENTILE CURVE
TruLty
?jh
'is.
UtObJL lv_ 11. S
M | |
A
i i i
ERCENTILE CURVE PERCENTILE CURVE PERCENTILE CURVE PERCEN YaE CURVE
PERCENTILE CURVE
nJ2zfc^A4-_
SLi.C**
1t^i ~~?
t
PERCENTILE CURVE
?vuo.t LMLva_
C^LAxi>-_ 53.^ Ow
lYxixf _a ui?q?L
2
A
IE
sP
r^=v-LJ,i^4_
lanJ
ru>jJ_Loj.
H3T
1A_
^SLUtjnna.
M?\
_/0*JLu l?w?AvaiaLLc
-v-\PERCENTILE CURVE
PtRCINTILE CURVI
iWAoLjdL_$
ixXnpu_
r-utLoAj q^wv^i/Lw asI
PIRCINTILt CURVI
. bJls(_Sjua SL
? Uo*^d?XtM_fi!4!nrv\t XvJjUL^.?*
PERCENTILE CURVE
*
PERCENTILE CURVI
fcoJii-L
^ioUtLt
~Y
SEkse
PERCENTILE CURVE
a"
rf AJ:"
i
y. rllft
=E
lUUlJWAoi
n4kl
PERCENTILE CURVE
Si
i PTTT
xmt
LI CURVE
Ivvki^uH?U
at
&
A SCORE OF DIFFICULT BOYS. 123
2. The retarded boy represented by this chart would stand about
ninth from the minimal end of one hundred boys of age fifteen.
His development is symmetrical. Boy No. 17 shows lack of balance. He is very tall when standing, but his trunk or soma is
rather short. He is heavy but very weak in right hand prehension, his lung capacity is small. He writes with his right hand
but uses a knife in his left
The straighter the line, crossing from left to right, the more
shapely will our student be. No. 2 is a small boy but the most uniform; while No. 11 is very weak in lung capacity. No. 17 and
No. 11 have less lung capacity than the soma would suggest.
"Lung capacity is the best criterion of the health and vigor of the
child."2 Eleven other boys have greater weight than one would
expect; ten have shorter bodies than their height would properly
need for symmetry. Eight delinquent boys and nine retarded
boys have somata shorter than the average for their respective
ages.
The small yet symmetrical boys do well as far as they go,
but do not do much; they excel in technique but have little aptitude
in applying acquired facts. The asymmetrical boys do memory
work well but have no aptitude in applying acquired facts, they
have skill in copying but have almost no skill in logical correlation. This conclusion is in general agreement with that of Dr.
Sargent3 who says, "A small man compactly built, with symmetrical proportions and a well balanced organism, can accomplish
more than a larger man less solidly made with all parts wanting
in symmetry and shapeliness. This law of adaptation and harmonious adjustment of parts prevails throughout the greater portion of the animal kingdom." According to Dr. Sargent's theory,
Nos. 5, G, 7, and 8, should bo better students than Nos. 9, 10, 11,
and 12, and this is borne out by the facts.
Dr. Wey4 of Elmira Reformatory says, "The greatest physical delinquency nnd least resistance power is found in the respiratory apparatus." It is easily seen that nine delinquent boys have
less than average lung capacity, and that seven retarded bo>s
have less than that amount. If one cannot consume oxygen, one
should not 1)0 expected to produce power. Of the delinquent oys
five (50 per cent) had greater prehension in the left han , an o
the retarded boys six (GO per cent) had greater prehension in
left hand. , , .
Since "right handedness must be a normal part of psycliologiJ.Tolin Mnnon Tylor. flrowtli and Kducatton. p. 01- _ 10
?n. A. Rnrpo-nt. ficribvcr'* Mafjazittr, Vol. XXII, 1SS7, p. i".
?rinvelock Kills, The Criminal, p. 8S.
124 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
cal development, not a phenomenon explicable by training,"5 the
above fact indicates a great misfortune. The handicap is about
equal among both groups of five to six. Inasmuch as only 5 per
cent of all persons have greater prehension in the left hand, while
50 per cent of delinquent or reform school inmates are more
powerful in the grip of the left hand, the fact of lefthandedness
becomes significant, and equally so as far as these two groups are
concerned. "At any given age of school life bright or advanced
pupils tend toward accentuated unidexterity and dull or backward
pupils toward ambidexterity. Training in ambidexterty is training
contrary to a law of child life."0
!N"o. 8, and ISTo. 26 are ambidextrous. Their prehension is
equal with right and left hands. This may, however, indicate
merely that they have not passed puberty.
The average circumference of the heads, and the average for
ages, corresponds quite well for the two groups. The delinquent
boys have an average age of 14.6 years and the retarded boys have
an average of 14.3 years. The average girth of heads of the former
is 52.9 cm. and that of the latter 52.8. The average head of nine
years has a girth of 54 cm. which means that the development of
the head is as much behind the normal as the intelligence is below
the standard; the average repetition of the delinquent amounts to
3.25 years and that of the retarded group 2.7 years.
"Experimental and clinical observation have very clearly
shown that disturbances of the encephalon are capable of causing
disturbances of intelligence."7 "It appears that those cells which
fail to Teact during the proper growing period of an animal have
lost their opportunity for ever."8 "The greater part of the growth
of the brain takes place before any of the formal educational processes have begun, for the mild schooling that occurs before the age
of seven or eight years can hardly have much influence."0 "In these
instances (microcephalics) the brain is not only of the small size
indicated by the enclosing skull, but at the same time the skull is
apt to be unusually thick, and either the brain does not fill it so
completely as normally, or the enlargement of the cerebral ventricles by fluid causes the actual weight of the nerve substance to
be smaller. . . . Furthermore the brain often contains a
large proportion of undeveloped or degenerate tissue, and the encephalon may thus be of even less functional value than its small
?Helen Thompson Woole.v, Psuchnlnnical Review. Vol. XVII., p. 37.
eFrorl W. SmertW. Report of fl*. S. 1 Commissioner of Education for the venr
1002. Vol. I., p. 1115.
TH. II. Donaldson, The Growth of the Rraln, p. 85.
*IUd, p. 37.
*IMd, p. 107.
A SCORE OF DIFFICULT BOYS. 125
size would suggest. It thus appears that the essential anatomical
feature in microcephalism is not so much the small size of the
brain as its deficient construction, of which this small size can
usually be taken as an index.10
Only two of each group have heads equal to normal nineyear heads. The average retardation for the score of boys in
head development is more than five years and the retardation in
dcholastic attainments is less than 3.25 years. Have they not done
well ? Have they not made bricks without straw ?
The usual factors of adenoids and tonsils and teeth and attendance are negligible as far as it is possible to make them in
an institution where every need of the pupil is cared for at once.
The physician, the oculist, the dentist and the surgeon, keep the
pupils at a high degree of efficiency. The hygienic routine of the
school is admirable. Regular hours of sleep, of study and of
recreation together with carefully made and thoroughly cleaned
clothing, regular baths and scientifically prepared "good but
plain" food?what child's health and instruction could be better
provided for than a Girard College boy's?
Inasmuch as the incorrigible boys seemed so much like the
dull boys, and their accumulated repetitions were more than equal
to those of the other group, it was deemed proper to treat both
grades in the same manner as regards discipline and instruction,
in material as well as method.
In the annual report of the Juvenile Court of Kansas City,
for 1908, it is stated that "fewer instances of delinquency are recorded for children who live with their father only, than those who
live with their mother." The fathers of all these boys are dead.
Again the "manifold evils of aggregation" always present in a
large institution contribute another factor to the problem of disciplining this group of recalcitrants.
It at once became evident that unless discipline were to be
the dominant feature, new ideals must be exhibited and new tasks
must be organized. Believing that Nature puts the defective child
in a class by himself and believing that education should take
Nature's hint, many "special" devices were tried.
A statement made by the venerable sage, Dr. S. Weir ^ it^
ohell, that "the working hand makes strong the working rain,
led to chair caning being done during school hours. The caning
of chairs was well liked. It was interesting, each boy e t an
ownership in his work and considered it an affront to n ano e
hoy working at "his chair." It was looked upon as a trade, an
i"76<d, p. 125.
126 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
>
\
many wished to know where the materials might be procured,
declaring that mother's chairs should be renewed during vacation.
"The attempt to acquire skill is captivating and is a wholesome activity because it trains not only the hand and eye, but the
moral nature as well."11 The monotony not merely of school
time but of after life, may be thus overcome. Jane Addams12
says, "Dexterity of hand becomes all the more necessary, if the
workman is to save his life at all." To test these opinions further
and to give the pupil a closer relation with his surroundings it is
intended to make brooms, and later perhaps rugs.
Furthermore since it is the child and not the curriculum
that must be taught, much time and patience were given to find
wherein lay the interest of the various students. A question asked
in the Pedagogical Seminary for December, 1909, (page 435)?
"Is it not time to throw the burdens we place upon young minds
more upon the tactile and kinaesthetic perceptions and mental
images which are older and more firmly established ?"?found an
affirmative answer. The statement of Kirkpatrick,13 was true
for these adolescent boys,?"It is now found that the old analytic
logical methods are not only not the best for young children, but
they are the worst possible, far worse than haphazard teaching,
which leaves the child's mind free to work and develop in its own
natural way."
For the application of these principles the subject matter
was taken from Nature study, because it calls the child's mental
powers into activity. It is also of much more value as a corrective, a recreational and an educational force than books alone. "By
nature study is not meant teaching science, but scientific teaching."
That study might be made "attractive by artifice," live animals were used. At first a field tortoise was kept in the class
room, then a hare, and aftenvard a bantam rooster. To complete
the lesson about the live tortoise, an articulated tortoise of similar
variety, having movable horny plates, was studied at the same
time. The head was especially interesting, having the upper toothplate, the lower tooth-plate and the scalp-plate each segmented. The
habits and habitat of the reptile were inquired into. Not a single
technical name was spoken by any one. Each pupil had the privilege of handling and examining both specimens, the living and
the articulated.
Some of the simpler experiments of physics and chemistry
were demonstrated, all with good effect. A sand pendulum, used
"Oeorne Manjrold.?Child Problems, p. 288.
"Democracy and Social Ethics, p. 21."?.
liJ'opular Scicncc Monthly, Vol. 77, p. 485.
A SCORE OF DIFFICULT BOYS. 127
to describe Lissajou's figures, excited admiration for form and
symmetry. Its marvelous habit of repeating the complex curves
was not explained, and its relation to music only hinted at.
A live rabbit was kept in the room for several weeks. The
boys showed the greatest delight in feeding it. "First they loved it
and then they fed it," as Reeder said about the children of Hastings and the chickens. The expected disorder was averted by
their fear of the removal of the bunnie.
A final experiment was made with a bantam rooster, "Jerry."
On the day of his arrival, a cage was constructed as if by magic,
one boy knew where wire was to be found below a closed window
grating, another had hinges and nails in his pocket, and in a few
minutes our chicken had fine quarters.
His plumage was brilliant and his spirits proud, and so he
became a favorite. He was loaned to eight other classes, but was
always carried home, cage and all, to roost. Although he crowed
from six to ten times a day, everybody seemed to be glad that he
was there. He strengthened the school's esprit du corps and
everybody felt responsible for his safety, as well as for his possible
removal.
Story work, often took the place of formal language work.
Norse legends were of greatest usefulness. The beneficial effect
came out also in the whittling work. Since every boy while orderly
might whittle, most of them made weapons, swords, pistols, and
cannons; these were generally made with left hands. How eagerly,
I had almost said how well, the work was done! "There would be
far more happiness and real success in mental hygiene, if more
people would realize that at every step every person can do something well and take satisfaction in doing it, and that this satisfaction in something done is to be valued as ten times greater than
the satisfaction taken in mere thought or imagination, however
lofty."14 What a godsend to thousands of broken and misfit lives
such a message would have been if heard in time!
The results obtained by treating tho delinquent boys in the
same manner as the retarded boys warranted the assumption that
they were nearly alike, moreover they supported the teaching o
Seguin, who said, "The physiological education of the senses is
tho royal road to the education of tho intellect; experience, t e
mother of ideas/' "Education of the senses must precede the education of the mind." Finally, a very practical advantage of tins
method is that it makes discipline easier.
"Adolf Mover. Whnt (lo Histories of Cnses of "?hj>"y c h?o logical
Preventive Mental Hyjjlene during the Years of School L.uef
Clinic, Vol. 11., No. 4. June 15, 1908.
