Speech Defect Case Treated at Columbia University
===================================================

:Author: Alice C. Hinckley.

Thomas T. is the nine-year-old son of Irish parents. Ilis
father was a confirmed alcoholic for many years before his death
from pneumonia last fall. His mother is a robust, energetic
woman of emotional temperament, who supports her family by
doing washing. During the summer she is caretaker of a residence
on East Sixty-seventh Street, where living conditions are much
more favorable than in the crowded section where the family spend
the winter. Thomas has a brother and two sisters older than
himself, all of whom speak distinctly. The younger of the girls,
however, talked "baby-talk" until she entered school, and now she
teases her brother by mimicking him.

He has attended a parochial school for three years, and was
promoted in July to a grade equivalent to 5 A. He dislikes school,
and never studies at home, but his teacher reports that he gets on
easily with his class work. He likes athletic games, especially
baseball, and his ambition is to become a professional player. He
was a mouth breather; has bad teeth, a normal palate, and his left
nostril is small. His tonsils were removed at St. Luke's Hospital
in September, 1910. He is not subject to colds or catarrhal affections. The only disease he has had is measles. He becomes dizzy
and has headache from swinging or over-exercise.

At the beginning of the course of training it was practically
impossible for anyone outside of his immediate family and playmates to understand him. His thirteen-year-old sister accompanied
him to the Clinic as interpreter. His speech was an infantile
stammer, with the following defects and substitutions: t for k or <7,
dw for gr, tw for kr, t for ih, tiv for ilir, d for th, st for sk, n for nt7;
f and v were doubtful, s uncertain with a lisp, and h totally absent.
Words like walk, walked, neck and next ended with a little spasmodic catch in the throat.
He was put through careful auditory tests with watches,
tuning forks, and the sinking of scales alone and with the teacher
for range or extent of discrimination. He was also tested for
general observation and memory of what he had seen at given
places, by visiting the school museum and garden, and so on. His
hearing was normal, but he could recall very little that he had
seen or done at school or anywhere else, and he knew practically
nothing about the animal or plant life of the world. He seemed
to possess average intelligence, but lacked training in observation,
and had probably never distinguished the points of difference
between his speech and that of others. He knew there was a
difference, and that knowledge made him sensitive, shy, and
uncommunicative. Suppressed expression had reacted on impression, with a resulting listlessness. The first change in his facial
expression occurred in our second lesson, and was induced by my
visit to his home.

The chief problem with this boy was to get him to regard me
as one of his friends and talk to me freely, so that his difficulties
might be located and furnish material for the lessons. School was
not available as a topic, since it was uninteresting to him. His
stock of ideas, so far as he disclosed them, centered around games,
and boys, and streets, and "cops". A common store of interests
and activities was necessary as a basis for conversation. We
compared notes as to our favorite fairy stories; we took walks,
visited the school museum, the school garden at intervals to watch
the growth of plants, and "Bronx Park, where we saw hay-making
as well as the animals, and where he had his first ride on a pony.
His initiative was stimulated by permission to show the garden
to a boy who had not seen it, and T arrived in time to see him
doing the honors, and to enjoy the walk with both of them.
There were two one-hour lessons each week. Each lesson was
planned with some special point in view, with the purpose of
affording him the satisfaction of making conscious improvement,
and giving him something on which he could practice at home for
the next lesson. His sister, who came with him for the first half
of the term, was of great assistance, reminding him of things
which he might have forgotten. She became, indeed, too helpful
in interpreting his language, so he was asked to come alone, as soon
as he could make himself understood. Every lesson included a
refoealizing of the correct articulation of consonants for motor
ideas, and a drill in attention through the use of this articulation
in words, sentences, conversation, or reading. His incorrect habits
were ignored as far as possible, since one sound did duty for many
consonants.

S was easily learned by explanation and demonstration of the
position of the tongue so that the breath might escape with the
sound of escaping steam, The initial 1c was worked on in the
same lesson and in the same way, the imitation in this case being
of a dog with a bone in his throat. After ten minutes' practice on
the sound, he said with effort cup, cap, cop. The words giving
more trouble were kin, come, came. Kin was the most difficult of
the words with initial k.

In the second lesson, after our introductory conversation, in
which I made no comment on his language, he reviewed the old
words, using them in sentences, and added successfully come, came,
kick, cake, coke, cook. Kin and coal still gave trouble. The
important point in this lesson was final k. There was some work
on initial cr and final cs, but they were very imperfect.
In the third lesson he succeeded in all old words, including
kin, coal, coke, and all single sounds of k and g, whether initial or
final. We worked fully ten minutes on the g, which was more
difficult than the k, and was learned by comparison with it. The
sense of touch was combined with that of sight and hearing by
having the pupil feel the articulation first in my throat and then
in his own. There was some drill on nk, ng, th, cr, gr, tlir. The r
combinations were very difficult.

The fourth lesson was the most natural response he had given.
He was pleased at his ability to say the words he had agreed to
work on. He succeeded with conscious effort on cr, gr, tlir, nk, ng,
sk. The game element was used in building up a list of words
with which to practice these sounds, and this list was added to
from time to time: cricket, cross, cry, cradle, creep, cruel, crow,
crept, crop, grow, grip, greedy, grab, ground, grub, grumble,
groom, three, throw, threw, thrice, thrill, thread, think, thank,
monkey, sulky, bulky, worthy, skin, scat, skip, scold, escape,
Scot, scum, school, sky, scowl, squeeze, scamper, scholar, skillful.
These were still so difficult that he agreed to work on them at home
for the next lesson, and we adopted them as a permanent list.
H was still unmanageable.

The fifth lesson consisted mainly of a story of his own
choosing, prepared at home, to see how well he could use the
sounds he had already learned. He was allowed to read freely,
with one or two interruptions where the words were very obscure.
A discussion of the story, rather than of his manner of reading it,
followed, then a review, and drill on the words and expressions
which had given trouble. These were marked for home practice
and preparation for the next lesson. Twelve minutes' work by
imitation was given to the elemental sounds involved in sk, squ,
nk, cr, gr, tlir, for the purpose of establishing motor images as a
A SPEECH DEFECT CASE. 183
basis for habit. The first three were reproduced fairly well, but
the r combinations presented a serious difficulty. H was still
impossible.

In the sixth lesson he was given a quick review of all old
sounds and a short drill on imperfect ones. He re-read the story
of the previous lesson, in which the difficult places had been
underscored and worked on at home. There was some improvement, but not much.
The main issue in this lesson was the letter h; and truly, "we
met the enemy and it was ours." In previous lessons such mild
means had been employed as panting, and quick breathing out.
Laughing, ha! ha! is not one of his accomplishments. Although
hard on the h, it presents an opportunity for testing the skill of
the teacher in humanizing a child. His trouble lay in the inability
to associate or unite this breath with the word. Now, a deep
breathing exercise was given with exaggerated, forcible exhalation,
further emphasized by the muscular movement of raising the
shoulders with each inhalation and dropping them suddenly with
the exhalation. Gradually these exhalations were given the sounds
of hit, ha, hi, hoe, he, ha, ho, hum, hot, hip, home, head, hat.
At the close of this exercise he was handed the following
selection, written clearly in a semi-vertical hand, to call forth his
reaction to the thought:

"Some little drops of water,
Whose home was in the sea.
To go upon a journey
Once happened to agree.
A cloud they had for a carriage,
Their horse a playful breeze;
And through the air and sunshine
They rode a while at ease.
"But, ah! there were so many
At last the carriage broke,
And to the ground came tumbling
These frightened little folk.
Then through the moss and grasses
They were compelled to roam,
Until a brooklet found them
And carried them all home."
184 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Thomas read it through silently and stolidly, with no apparent
idea of what it was all about. For lack of time to develop the idea
of the poem, he was asked to read it aloud for the purpose of
locating the difficult places, and after some explanation of the
meaning of the words, he was permitted to take it home with him
for study.

For the seventh lesson we reviewed old sounds and searched
our memories for new words in which to use them. Thomas was
drilled on h, with the use of it extended to longer words and
sentences. He did good work while the sounds were in the focus
of attention, but lapsed when he attempted to use them in conversation. We worked out the idea of the poem while standing at
the window and using as a basis a large white cloud floating in
the blue sky. His limited observation was shown in the fact that
he did not know that water flows down a slope. He enjoyed the
idea of the carriage breaking and letting the little folks fall out.
He read it aloud, and then we read it together for inflection. He
was told to memorize it.

The eighth lesson began with a test in the form of an unprepared reading exercise, in which he made fewer lapses than in any
previous lesson. This led up to a drill on walked and next, which
were exceedingly difficult combinations for him. He told the
story of the poem and then recited it. Practically every difficult
place was passed with reasonable clearness by my pantomiming the
articulation as he came to it. Then he recited it alone, carefully
and deliberately. Two additional repetitions of the same poem
were obtained easily, by asking our class instructor and a member
of the class, both of whom had heard him at his worst, and who
came into the room separately, if they would not like to hear how
much he had improved. The ruse was not even suspected by the
participants.

At the ninth lesson stress was put on remembering the right
sounds while he talked. The subiect was some of the things he
had done since I saw him last. He explained the games tip-onthe-birk, leap-frog and bnseball. Whenever he was not clear I
asked him to repeat, and if necessary holped him with the pantomime. He used no final s sounds, so I said after him the words
containing these sounds, and he repeated them correctly. Following
this conversation was a ten-minute drill on d, z, h, Tcs, q, thr.
He gave a prepared reading lesson, in which he corrected his
mistakes as I pointed to the word incorrectly pronounced. The
memory poem showed improvement by less exaggerated articulaA SPEECH DEFECT CASE. 185
tion. The h was now inclined to attach itself to initial vowels
where it was not wanted as in at, on, up. We selected and went
over another poem, "Little Brown Hands."

Material for the tenth lesson was provided by our visit to
Bronx Park the previous Saturday. The purpose of the lesson
was to let him do the talking. He told of the fun he had watching
the monkeys, why he rode the pony instead of the camel and why
he did not care to ride both, and other interesting features of the
day. He thanked me for giving him such a good time, and invited
me to visit Central Park with him some day.

From this conversation we selected these words and drilled
on them about fifteen minutes: Bronx, monkeys, neck, necks, next,
scold, scrap, screw, grew, throw, whose. The sounds underscored
were all difficult for him, and those doubly underscored he did not
get completely. II gave no trouble. He took a list of words
home with him for practice. The first memory poem was recited
clearly enough without help. The only serious lapses were on
final s and the ge in carriage. He read a prepared selection, and
talked about another excursion we expected to have when school
is out.

After some preliminary conversation in the eleventh lesson,
there was a ten-ininute drill on our list of words. Final s was
mastered, as well as the double consonants with the exception of r
combinations. The triple sounds were secured by separating them,
as nek-s-t, elec-t-ric, ek-s-cuse. He recited the memory poem with
more ease and expression; read two stanzas of the new one with
special attention to final s; read a selection which was new to him
and did it better than those he had studied.

This was our last lesson?he does not think of our excursions
as lessons?so he suggested that we visit the garden once more.
He called my attention to the things that had grown and the
changes that had taken place since our first visit. Much to his
regret, he found that the wheat bed had been cleared. His sister
Mary had thrown away his head of wheat, the first he had ever
seen, and he probably wanted another. There were no more ladybugs and white butterflies. As we left, he told me he was taking
home the faded tobacco flower and the onion seed-pod we had
examined and talked about.

In this somewhat detailed account of the case, I have endeavored to show not only the progress in speech, but the development
of observation and individuality, which, though retarded, responded
promptly to suggestion and training. From a stolid, silent, appar186 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ently stupid child, he has become bright and active in his movements; he wishes to see things that he can talk about, and he
enjoys talking about what he sees, because he no longer needs an
interpreter.

Without a single remark from me on the subject of polite
manners, he has taken on such courtesies as raising his hat, walking
on the outer side of the sidewalk, assisting me on and off cars,
buying the tickets, finding me a seat, getting information from
the conductor when necessary, saying "Excuse me" at the proper
time, and being generally considerate and thoughtful. It has come
about so naturally as to suggest intuition, but is more likely to be
the result of a quickened power of observation. The result is
parallel to that of removing a plant from a cellar to its rightful
share of sunshine.
