The Classification of Clinic Cases
===================================

By Arthur Holmes,, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa.
An important function of the Psychological Clinic is diagnosis. The word "diagnosis" in its general signification may
refer to two aspects of the same procedure. In one, it is applied
to the act or process of enumerating, examining and studying
symptoms, i. e. mental defects, to discover their cause or causes.
The method of doing this is to secure a history of the child,
together with a report and observations of the symptoms, past
and present. In another sense, "diagnosis" refers to the designation applied either to the complex of symptoms, or to their underlying cause. When a conclusion is reached as to the causes, the
condition is named, the proper treatment recommended, and a
prognosis given, based upon the probability of restoration or amelioration. In its general features a mental diagnosis is something like
a medical diagnosis. There are superficial resemblances but sharp
differences. Briefly, a mental diagnosis may mean the process of
recognizing mental defects from their manifestations; or it may
refer to the result of such a process. The process is an examination, and the result ends in a classification of the individual
according to his mental capacity.
The result or classification claims our attention in this article.
Our task is to furnish such a clear and practical scheme of classification for those varieties of mental deviation met with in the
ordinary course of practice in a psychological clinic, that children
can be quickly classified for proper remedial or ameliorative
measures. With this end in view, theoretical refinements may be
waived in favor of workable definitions and lucid classifications.
First of all, it must be noted that those who come to the
clinic are already partially classified. Something in their character to conduct has led those who have them in charge, to select
them as the objects of scientific investigation. The reasons for
their selection are manifold, but all can be summed up under two
heads of "mental deviation" and "moral deviation". We adopt
the term "deviation" because it is the broadest and most inclusive
one that can be applied to those who come to the clinic. It
denotes a great class, but connotes one attribute only, that of
(36)
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES. 37
difference or diversity. The children who are brought are not
normal, or usual, or typical. They represent those who are
advanced in any way beyond tlieir years, or those who are retarded
or defective mentally, or those who have fallen below the standard
of moral conduct; in short, all those who deviate in any way from
the normal.
Here the question arises as to what is the normal. This
question, which is the most difficult in the whole problem of
backward and mentally defective children, must be answered by
saying that each class of mental or moral deviates has its own
norm or standard by which it is measured. At this time the
statement of Tredgold might be quoted, that "Our best definition
of the 'normal' mind must be a degree of intellectual capacity
sufficient to enable its possessor to perform his duties as a member
or associate in that position of life to which he is born."
However, waiving for the time being the difficulties attached
to the definition of normal, which we can fairly do because the
mere fact that a child is brought to the clinic is presumptive
evidence that it has deviated more or less from the vague standard
of normality existing in its home community, we will turn again
to search for some practical, and as far as possible, definite, clear
and universal principle of classification of the cases.
It ought always to be kept in mind that no classifications
appear in nature, that all individuals differ from all others, and
yet each individual is like all others, that in classifying individuals
^e are dividing them into groups which represent types, and the
individuals assigned to these groups all differ more or less from
the average or typical. Classifications are, therefore, made for
convenience; for the sake of easily dealing with large numbers of
individuals by, in a sense, reducing them to a smaller number.
The class stands for the unit.
Again it must be remembered that classifications depend
upon the principle of classification selected. One may classify
by causes, by purposes or ends, by differences or similarities, or
a host of other principles. What principle is selected depends
largely upon the individual classifier; so in any classification of
the children dealt with in the psychological clinic. In the classification we offer here, it must be remembered that we are looking
at the children from the point of view of the psychological clinic
and specifically from the point of view of diagnosis.
We can best meet these demands bv answering the practical
question on the lips of every visitor to the clinic, whose first and
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
foremost thought for the child is, "Can his condition bo cured
or not ?"
This is the first question every mental diagnostician must
meet, and his answer will place the child under examination in
one great class or the other. Either it is curable or not. Curable
or incurable are all the cases of mental deviation, no matter what
their causes, nor how obscure they may be, nor into what a wilderness of complexity their symptoms may run. There are many
objections to such a classification, but the fundamental question
here proposed may still be asked and it will still have its practical
significance. At present, its insistence upon an answer, as well
as the far-reaching effects of that answer, lead us to accept it as a
principle of primary classification. Whatever may be the correlates, causes or occasions of any case of mental deviation presented, whether lodged in an ancestral taint or in an immediate
cerebral lesion, and however difficult in practice it may be to
apply this principle, in theory at least, it makes the problem of
diagnosis thoroughly definite.
When a child is brought to the clinic for diagnosis, it is
already decided that he is a mental or moral deviate. This merely
means that he is different from others, but he may be different in
many ways.
For example, a boy six years old was brought to the clinic
by his mother and an adult sister. The boy lived at home with
his sister and parents, the latter being middle-aged people. He
had been going to school for about six months. During that time
he had given no trouble as far as his conduct went. His teacher
reported, however, that mentally he had been doing practically
nothing. This was true in spite of the fact that his sister spent a
large part of every evening endeavoring to teach him his lessons
for the following day. The boy did not take kindly to this
coaching and usually the sisterly attempts to improve his scholarship ended in a domestic storm. The sister said he was stupid;
the father said he was all right; the mother simply folded her
hands in resignation and said nothing.
Outside the house the boy was counted a baby by some, and
by others said to possess a wisdom beyond his years. He would
talk very gravely on topics which are ordinarily discussed by
grown people. When, however, ho attempted to play with the
other boys and in one of the usual quarrels that arise in boyvillc,
another youngster struck him, instead of fighting back he would
immediately set up a cry for his mother and run home. He
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES. 39
attempted to play occasionally by himself with his automobile,
but if he happened to upset it and fall out the same lachrymose
result followed. This happened in spite of the fact that he was
never out of sight of his sister or mother.
In the evening he spent part of his time in the cellar working
with his father, who was interested in mechanical contrivances.
The boy could assemble the parts of electric apparatus, arranging
the cells, wire, and bells so that they would ring. He could
connect an incandescent lamp so that it could be lighted; he could
start a gas engine in the cellar all by himself and operate it. For
a six-year-old boy of rather light build, this was a good record.
In fact it presaged what was revealed by the Binet tests, namely,
that the boy was about one year beyond the mental attainment of
the average boy of his age. In school, however, he was counted
backward; at home, by his sister, he was counted stupid. The
fact is, that he was mentally advanced, and the difficulty which
he encountered arose from the fact that he was original. He
happened to have a father who had accidentally started to give
him the proper kind of education by proceeding from the concrete
to the abstract. The boy's perceptions were being trained as they
should be for his age. He was not only allowed, but encouraged;
to vent all the healthy curiosity of a six-year-old boy in seeing
things, handling things and working with things. During his
association with things, which to him were throbbing with living and vital interest, he was storing up memory images of
inestimable value to his future intellectual development. The
foundations of a true and permanent education were being laid,
and laid so deeply and solidly that they would be able to bear any
future intellectual edifice.
On the other hand, there were grave defects in his all-around
development. His adult gravity was due to his association with
grown people, and his babyishness was due to the lack of that
robust and vigorous masculine development, which could come to
him only by associating with and taking his part among boys
of his own age.
With these three characteristics, infantilism, adultism and
originality, all developing quite naturally from his environment
and from his innate impulses, the ordinary public school had no
method of dealing. Formed and fitted, as it is, for the average
child, it has no room in its system for the one who either lags
behind or pushes ahead, and is especially confused and confounded
by any pupil who is so original and self-expressive as to refuse to
Is
40 TilE PSYCHOLO GICAL CLINIC.
fit himself into its traditional molds. Hence, this boy gave trouble
in school, but the trouble that he gave was due to a very admirable
trait, which in later life may make him one of the famous men of
his time. In short, here was a mental deviate, but one who was
distinctly not retarded, unless it was in his ability to play with
boys of his own age.
Having decided upon our principle of universal classification,
we will proceed to test its utility and applicability to cases brought
to the clinic. Usually the children brought to the clinic are either
bad or backward. At the present time we will take up the problem of backwardness, and first, let us be clear about the meaning
of backwardness in order that we may escape the common fallacy
of confusing the symptoms with the disease.
Just at this point we begin to reap the advantages of our
simple classification of all mental deviation. We are not led into
confusing definitions or bewildering statements concerning this
very common and prevalent associate of mental defectiveness, out
of which, because of this very association, some writers have been
led to form a species of mental deviation absolutely distinct in
quality and expression from that of any other species. This would
be very helpful if it were only true. Unfortunately, the clinical
pictures and general reactions of those counted "simply backward"
and those adjudged mentally defective are often so much alike
that it is impossible to distinguish the two.
If clinical pictures or complexes of symptoms are adopted as
principles of classification, it would be perfectly proper to group
some curably backward children and some incurably backward
children together, for the time being at least, until a remedy was
affected. However, upon the principle that we have already laid
down, such a proceeding would not bo admissible, our chief problem being the differentiation of those retarded permanently and
those retarded temporarily.
Upon this basis, to say that a child is "backward" or "retarded" is merely to state a fact of observation. The statement,
does not allege or imply the existence of a physical or mental disease. It may, and nearly always does, imply some defect or some
lack, and carries with it a condemnation or commendation according to the kind of retardation indicated. This can readily be
seen in the pronouncement that "Mary is not forward in company," or that "Johnny is backward in swearing." Backwardness
in some kinds of sophistication, therefore, is not deemed an unmixed evil. In some physiological functions, too, like pubescence,
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES. 41
late maturity is, in the minds of many, beneficial to the individual
rather than detrimental. Even in mental development, retardation is no more of an evil than precociousness. The former may
lead to mere slowness of progress in life, while the latter may
develop into insanity or extreme dulness.
Retardation, then, is merely the name of a relation; a relation, too, having meaning only after some standard of normal progress is recognized. It means that the backward one is behind someone else; he does not go as fast as others; he does not keep up with
his companions. In every case, a standard of normal progress is
more or less clearly implied. If the ordinary observer is asked
to define the standard by which he measures retarded children, he
immediately replies, "Why, the standard is the normal child,
meaning by that the usual, average or typical child. In comparison with him all others are abnormal, unusual or atypical." Such
a classification has the merit of simplicity at least. The difficulty arises over the fact that we never have a real, live, average,
normal or typical child to set up before us for examination and
comparison. Exactly what the term means, however, is hard
to say. It does have a meaning, though an indefinite one, in the
minds of all those dealing with numbers of children. From the
quota contributed by each child, there gradually grows up in the
expert's mind a composite mental picture of the normal or typical
child. Those children diverging from this picture, in certain
characteristics, are called abnormal or atypical. But, just how to
define or accurately describe either the normal or the abnormal, is
difficult in the extreme. There are a multitude of minute and individually insignificant characteristics to be taken into consideration. In all but extreme and striking diversions from type, it
is the cumulative effect of these characteristics which determines
the experienced observer in his judgment, and gives that judgment
more the quality of an intuition than of a reasoned conclusion.
Because of this fact, in the examination of children, experience
on the part of the examiner will probably always count for more
than either the methods or the tests used.
To overcome the effects of such a vague norm, students ha%e
given much time and attention to the formulation of a standard
at once practicable, objective and precise. Many standards ha\e
been suggested, and several systems of mental measurements based
upon these have been developed. Three of them have received
sufficient endorsement to merit some notice. They may be called
for convenience the individual, the social, and the pedagogic
respectively.
42 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The first or individual standard is an imaginary norm. It is
an attempt to measure the child by himself, or by what he ought
to be; the fullest all-around development possible for each individual is accepted as the standard for that individual, and anything short of this is called retardation. Prima facie, the measure
has claims to consideration, but what one ought to be or would be
under right conditions, mentally, physically or morally, is purely
imaginary or problematical. No one, probably, feels that he has
had the fullest and fairest chance, or that with another environment and other training he would not have been far more advanced intellectually. The acceptance of such a judgment, therefore, would make us all "backward" or "retarded". Even if the
standard of fullest development is rendered more precise, and to
some extent objective, by saying it consists in the most perfect
possible development of each individual cortical cell and cerebral
tract, it comes no nearer to a feasible application. The perfection
of cerebral systems?to say nothing of reflex centers and peripheral organs?is as remotely unimaginable as the possible perfection of psychic powers.
The second or social standard develops quite naturally. It
represents the judgment of the community upon any one's mental
ability, by comparing him with others in their daily lives of work
and play. The every-dav observation that a certain child does not
learn common things like dressing, washing, eating and playing
games as rapidly as his brothers and sisters did at his age, or as
readily as his companions do, may be of value and significance
in so far as it calls attention to the need of fuller investigation, but
the social standard expressed in the opinion of parents, friends or
teachers, is altogether too biased and too crude to serve as a scientific measurement.
To invest this indeterminate standard with the necessary precision, Binet made tests upon some thousands of normal children,
and from his experiments, developed a set of questions and tasks
which he believes have the desired qualifications for accurately
and absolutely determining the degree of backwardness of any
child, independent of any pedagogical training which it may have
had. The essentials of his standard are contained in the following
quotation:
"The intellectual faculty appears to us to be independent not only
of instruction, but of that which we might call the academic faculty;
that is to say, the faculty to learn at school, the faculty of assimilating
the instructions given at school with the method used at school.
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES. 43
"In our former researches concerning the recruiting of the abnormal,
feebleness of the academic faculty was the sole criterion of abnormality
employed. We said: Every scholar is abnormal who is retarded three
years in his studies, if that retardation is not excusable on account of
insufficient time spent at school. It seems to us wise and prudent to
admit that this academic aptitude does not in all cases necessarily
accompany the intellectual faculty which we measure by our method.
From the first, theoretical reasons have induced us to avoid this confusion. It seems to us that the academic aptitude depends upon
something else than intelligence. For success in study certain qualities
are necessary which depend above all upon attention, upon the will,
upon the character, for example, a certain docility, a regularity of
habits, and above all a continuity of effort. Even an intelligent child
would learn little in class if he never listened, if he passed his time
in making notches in his desk, chuckling, and in 'cutting' as a bad
soldier. The insufficiency of attention, of character, and of will 6how
themselves not at all, or very slightly in our examination of intelligence; the test is too short and the child is not left enough to himself.
In fact, we have never encountered in our examinations any inattentive
children except among those between three and four years of age. All
of them made great effort; they were with us and our presence alone
would have sufficed to prevent inattention. There is nothing in the
conditions of the test by which one is able to measure the ordinary
distractions of attention of the child such as occur when he is left to
himself."1
The third measure of retardation is the pedagogical. It is
limited to a rather narrow field, but within that field it is perfectly
definite and objective. Since, also, a large number of the cases
coming to the psychological clinic are children whose difficulty is
backwardness in tlieir school work, it would seem justifiable to
give a somewhat lengthy consideration to this method of measurement.
Since retardation is a school phenomenon and since the first
attempts to give it anything like scientific attention originated in
tlie public schools, class-grades were turned to for aid. Assuming
that a normal pupil was promoted from one grade to another each
year, early investigators adopted for their first standard the correspondence between grade-standing and age. Thus, the children
"who began school at the legal age and were promoted every year,
were counted normal; those in the same grade, who were older by
at least one year than these normal children, were considered backI'sycholoRique, Tome XIV. 100S, I,e Pevcloppeinent de k'melllgence
p 57 190-fant8' p- 7C- Scc alflu T'es Enfants Anormaux, A. Bluet et Th. Slmou,
44 THE PSYCll OLO GICAL CLINIC.
ward or retarded. However, it was soon discovered that in the
school under investigation such a standard would throw nearly
three-quarters of the pupils into the backward class. Therefore,
the normal was changed and only those who were two years or
more behind the grade corresponding to their age were considered
retarded.
Dr Witmer writes of his first attempts to define retardation.
"I undertook," he says, "to define as pedagogical retardation the
number of years that a child was behind the grade for his age.
If we wish to ascertain the causes of retardation in school children
we must first obtain the whole number of retarded children irrespective of any preconceptions we may have as to the causes.
Pedagogical retardation follows from the supposition that a child
enters upon the first year of school work before he has passed his
seventh birthday. If he advances one grade each year, he will
complete the eight years of the elementary course before he has
passed his fifteenth birthday. This establishes a theoretical age
limit for each grade, apparently not excessive in its educational
requirements, for the child that leaves the elementary schools in
his fifteenth year cannot complete the high school before his nineteenth year, nor graduate from college before his twenty-third
year, and yet in the elementary schools in Camden, 72 per cent of
the children exceeded this theoretical age limit. It seemed absurd
to assert that 72 per cent of a city school system were retarded
and moreover the group of children obtained in this way was too
large to be studied for the purpose of discovering the causes of
their retardation. It was therefore determined to allow one or
more years in excess of this theoretic age limit. In the city of
Camden 47 per cent were found to exceed the age limit by one
year or more, 26 per cent by two years or more, 13 per cent by
three years or more, and 5 per cent by four years or more. It
was determined to call all those children pedagogically retarded
who exceeded the age limit by two years or more. This definition
of retardation has been generally accepted in subsequent investigations and retardation statistics in other cities."2
o
The latest considerations have not materially altered the
standard first suggested by Dr Witmer, as is shown in Mr. Ay res'
statement.
"The method of determining the number of retarded children
in a given school system which has received most general acceptsWhnt is meant by Retardation? Lightner Witmer, Tnc Psyciiolooicai,
Clinic, Vol. IV, No. 5, October 15, 1910, pp. 128-129.
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES. 45
ance on the part of school-men, is tlie method which enumerates
the children by ages and grades and puts all of the children who
are older than a determined age in each grade into a group
designated 'Above Normal Age'. These children who are older
than they should be for the grade they are in are considered
'retarded'. Thus used, the term designates a condition, and it is
applied with equal propriety to those children who are over age
on account of slow progress, and those who have progressed
normally but entered school late.
"The method has come into general acceptance because, all
things considered, it is the most satisfactory standard by which to
measure retardation. Statistics based on the time pupils have
spent in each grade are exceedingly rare, often unreliable, and
usually are non-cumulative. That is, they deal with each grade
as a separate unit and fail to tell us how much time the pupil has
gained or lost in the entire course.
"Statistics giving us the figures as to grade and age distribution on the other hand, are simple, certain, easy to gather, and
embody valuable information as to many conditions and results
of school work. Their application to the problem of retardation
so easy that the process may be developed by anyone, however
unversed in statistical procedure."3
Once having determined upon our standard, we may turn
again to our problem of diagnosis, for obviously, retardation as
defined above may be associated with a multitude of factors. A
late start to school, irregular attendance, poor teaching, innutritious
^iet, bad country roads, defective eyesight, dull hearing, pharyngeal obstructions, natural stupidity, mental deficiency?the list
unght be continued almost ad infinitum.
All of thein, however, can be roughly classified under those
external to the child and those within the child. If the cause of
aily particular case of retardation appears to lie in the environment, the problem is a pedagogical or sociological one; if the
cause seems to lie within the child himself, the problem is physiological or psychological. In any case the psychological clinic is
the proper place to take the child. The clinician is then confronted with this situation. Here is a backward child. With
"tthat is the backwardness associated? Is it an environmental or
a mere physical defect, amenable to reformation, to surgical or
Medical treatment ? Or is it some irremovable defect like an
I'fiKKards in Our Schools, Leonard 1'. Ayros, pp. 30, 37.
46 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
organic defect of tlie central or peripheral nervous system? If
the former is true, the child is temporarily backward and may bo
restored to his normal position in life and expected to progress
steadily. If the latter is true, the child is mentally deficient, and
can be trained only within the limits of his capacity and there
must stop in life-long imbecility or idiocy. The vital distinction,
then, between classes of retarded children, is not in the fundamental differences or causes, but in the curability or incurability
of the causes. All the correlates involved are, in a sense, physical,
whether classed as brain defects or bad neighborhood. Some are
removable; some are not. Therein lies the insurmountable difference and the basis for sharp differentiation.
A mental diagnosis is really a classification plus a pedagogical prognosis or prophecy, that is, the judgment pronounced
at the end of an examination upon a certain case does not at all
state the present intellectual attainments of the child. "What the
child now knows is an indication of its mentality, but not a final
one. What it will learn or can know under certain conditions and
with proper methods of training is the all important and decisive
question. Therefore, it may happen that of two children of the
same age, one may show marked superiority in intellectual attainments as measured by public school standards and yet be judged
an imbecile, while the other is considered normal. The first child
has had training, the latter has not. The diagnosis predicts that
the former can learn only so much, will then reach his full mental
capacity, and from that time remain stationary or recede from
his highest attainment. On the other hand, the capacity of the
normal child is an unknown quantity or quality and its progress
has no present assignable limits. Furthermore, it may even
happen that of two children, the one giving the brighter answers
and more normal reactions may be pronounced the imbecile. Tho
more stupid child may be made so temporarily by the presence of
some physical or mental defect, which when remedied, will restore
tho sufferer to normality.
All curably backward children do not by any means present
the same mental capacities, the same degree of retardation, nor
the same speed of recovery. Some may be exceedingly backward,
and yet from what is known of the recovery made by similar cases
under the best educational training, it may be predicted that they
will eventually gain all the lost ground and become normally
efficient. This does not mean, however, that they will necessarily
become bright or brilliant persons. They may always remain in
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES. 47
the class of slow, dull individuals, who are yet able to advance
indefinitely in intellectual attainments, and are capable of maintaining their position in the society to which they were born, and
of handling their personal aifairs with ordinary prudence.
For the purposes which we have in view, probably the best
principle of sub-classification for curably backward children is
the speed with which they recover their normal position in society
or in school. According to this method they may be divided into
three classes. First, those who are immediately curable, that
is to say, as soon as the physical defects within the child himself,
or in his surroundings, are corrected or removed, he immediately
takes his proper place in school and in society.
A second class is composed of those who might be called
rapidly recoverable. This includes all those who require a period
of pedagogical training after the removal of their physical defects.
During that time they make rapid progress, and in a comparatively
short time have regained the lost ground.
A third class may be called the slowly recoverable, including
all those children who require a long, careful and persistent course
of education after the removal of the physical defects, before they
are again able to take their place with other normal children. It
can be immediately seen that this last class forms a difficult group
to diagnose, because the clinical picture they present and the time
they require to show improvement seems to ally them with the
class of permanent mental defectives. Their recovery is so very
slow and tedious, and so often only possible under the best
environment and training, that judgment as to the final classification must frequently be held in suspense for a long time.
That great class of children who must be classified as irremediably backward belongs to the group technically known as
mental defectives, dements or aments. To define dementia or
amentia exactly is one of the most difficult problems. The difficulties encountered by Seguin in 18G6 are still present. He undertook to define idiocy and give the synonym named by Savage,
'Amentia"; by Segar, "Imbecilitas ingenii"; by Vogel, "Fatuitas
ingenii"; by Linnaeus, "Morosis"; by Cullon and Fodere,
Demence innee"; by Willis, "Stupiditas"; by Pinel, "Idiotism";.
by some English writers, Esquirol and the majority of encyclopaedias and dictionaries, "Tdiocy".
"Wo shall use this latter term," he continues, "to express
the physiological infirmity, and would like to see the name given
to it by Pinel, 'Idiotism,' preserved to express the specific condition of mind pertaining to idiocy.
48 THE PSYCIIOLO GICAL CLINIC.
"Its definitions have been so numerous, they are so different
one from the other, and they have so little bearing on the treatment, that their omission cannot be much felt in a practical
treatise. Our own, if objectionable, will be found at least to
correspond to a plan of treatment, both supporting each other;
and may suffice until a better definition and a better treatment
can be devised." He then offers his definition in the following
terms:
"Idiocy is a specific infirmity of the cranio-spinal axis, produced by deficiency of nutrition in utero and in neo-nati. It
incapacitates mostly the functions which give rise to the reflex,
instinctive, and conscious phenomena of life; consequently, the
idiot moves, feels, understands, wills, but imperfectly; does nothing, thinks of nothing, cares for nothing (extreme cases), he is a
minor legally irresponsible; isolated, without associations; a soul
shut up in imperfect organs, an innocent."4
However, what we practically mean by the words is clear
enough. As Dr Tredgold says, "The essence of mental defect is
that it is incurable, and by no 'special' education, however, elaborate, can a case of amentia be raised to the normal standard.
Some defect must always remain, and upon this fact all authorities agree."5
In a previous portion of the same work, between "dementia"
and "amentia" he has made a distinction, dependent upon the
previous mental development. He says, "Mental defect occurring
subsequently to mental development may be compared to a state
of bankruptcy, and is more fittingly described as dementia (de,
down, from; mens, mind) ; whilst the person whose mind has
never attained normal development may bo looked upon as never
having had a bank account, and this state is designated amentia
(a, without; mens, mind). In both of these, of course, there is
literally mental deficiency; but in view of the convenient and
growing tendency to restrict this term to the latter class, I shall
in this book use it in a specific sense as synonymous with
'amentia'."0
He then proceeds to define amentia as "a state of mental
defect from birth, or from an early age, due to incomplete cerebral
development, in consequence of which the person affected is unable
to perform his duties as a member of society in the position of life
to which he is born."
<Idlocy and its Treatment. Edward Sequin, I860.
'Mental Deficiency, A. F. Tredgold, p. 127.
'Ibid., p. 2.
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES. 49
This definition which places the essence of amentia upon its
incurability is in thorough accord with the problem of classification already laid down in this article as the particular one to
be solved by clinical diagnosis. We have said that the cases
which come to the clinic are already classified as mental or moral
deviates. Of the mental deviates, by far the largest number
manifest their deviation from the normal by their mental retardation. Concerning this, the immediate question is whether retardation is permanent or temporary. If it is permanent, by the
definition given above, the retarded mental deviate must be classed
as an ament. This step in the classification, though rough, imperfect and incomplete, from the point of view of a thoroughgoing
diagnosis, is still vital and final,?that is to say, once a child is
classified as an ament, he is shut off from the possibility of being
classified as a normal person. As to his future career, as has
been said more than once before, this step is of the most vital
significance, as upon it hinges his training, treatment and final
disposal.
To quote Dr Tredgold again,?"It is not, however, to bo
assumed that amentia is merely a subtraction in varying degree
from the normal. Although the contrary might be thought, nevertheless the two conditions do not merge into one another, and
between the lowest normal and the highest ament a great and
impassable gulf is fixed. Whilst the former is heavy, stolid, and
uniformly dull-witted, he has yet sufficient common sense to look
after his interests and hold his own in that environment in which
Mature has placed him. The mildest ament, on the other hand,
may show no apparent dulness; he may even be bright and
vivacious; and in some of his abilities immeasurably superior to
the clodhopper. But the other faculties of his mind are not
present m like proportion. Instead of harmonious working, there
is discord, and in possession of that essential to independent existence common sense?he is lacking, and the want can never be
supplied.
"The difference hns been well described by Sir J. Batty Tuke,
who says: 'Where in theory the morbid and the healthy types
might be supposed to approach each other, we find in practice
that no such debatable ground exists. The uniformity of dulness
m the former stands in marked opposition to the irregularity of
mental conformation in the latter.' "7
The next step in the classification is the assignment of the
pp. o and 3
50 THE PSYCHOLO GICAL CLINIC.
ament to that particular sub-class of imbeciles or idiots to which
he belongs by reason of his degree of mentality, for it must be
remembered that up to a certain limit all degrees of mentality are
represented amongst the mental defectives.
The most usual sub-classification divides amentia into three
divisions or degrees. Beginning with the most normal, Dr Tredgold has assigned to this class the name feeble-minded, or highgrade amentia. This, he says, "is the mildest degree of mental
defect, and the feeble-minded person is 'one who is capable of
earning a living under favorable circumstances, but is incapable
from mental defect existing from birth, or from an early age, (a)
of competing on equal terms with his normal fellows; or (6) of
managing himself and his affairs with ordinary prudence(This
and the following definitions were suggested by the Royal College
of Physicians of London, and adopted by the Royal Commission
on the Feeble-minded as the basis of classification in their
inquiries.)
"Feeble-minded persons under the age of sixteen years come
within the jurisdiction of the education authority by reason of a
Special Act of Parliament (Defective and Epileptic Children Act,
1899). On account of this act they are commonly designated
mentally defective children, and they are defined as 'those children
who, not being imbecile, and not being merely dull and backward,
are, by reason of mental defect, incapable of receiving proper
benefit from the instruction in the ordinary public elementary
schools, but are not incapable by reason of such defect of receiving
benefit in such special classes or schools as are in this Act
mentioned
"It should be remarked that in America the term 'feeblemindedness' is not thus used specifically of the mildest degree of
amentia. In that country it is applied generally to the whole
order of amentia, thus being synonymous with the English term
'mental deficiency.' There has been an attempt in this country
also to include all grades of defect in this euphemistic description,
and to call the mildest degree of all (feeble-minded) 'mental
defectives.' The attempt has not met with much success, however,
and since 'feeble-mindedness' is in itself a more specific term than
'mental defect/ I think it is decidedly better to restrict its use to
the mildest degree.
"The imbecile is defined as 'one who, by reason of mental
defect existing from birth, or from an early age, is incapable of
earning his own living, but is capable of guarding himself against
common physical dangers.'
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES. 51
"It may be remarked that these three terms are occasionally
used of varying degrees of dementia, particularly the dotage of old
age, just as 'mental deficiency' is sometimes used generally for
that condition. The practice, however, is to be deprecated as
likely to lead to considerable confusion."
Dr Tredgold's classification is to a large extent social, in
that it rests upon the ability or inability of the affected person
to take his place in society.
Another classification is that used by the New Jersey Training
School at Vineland, 1ST. J., which is similar to Dr Tredgold's
with the exception that in the place of "feeble-minded" the word
"moron" (from the Greek word meaning fool) is substituted.
The Training School Report for 1910s says:
"We presented to the American Association for the Study of the
Feeble-minded, at its meeting this year, an industrial classification,
which it has tentatively adopted. The feeble-minded are divided into
three large groups, very much as has been done in the past,?the lowest
grade is called 'idiots,' the middle grade 'imbeciles,' and the highest
grade, who were formerly called 'feeble-minded,' we now propose to call
by an entirely new term, 'moron'. This is a Greek word, and means
those who are mainly lacking in judgment and good sense. Each of
these groups may again be divided into three,?the high, middle and the
low, thus making nine degrees of defectiveness, all told, with ten in the
scale standing for the normal child, including those who are simply
backward. The low-grade idiot is the perfectly helpless child, the
middle-grade idiot, the one who is able to feed himself, but who eats
almost anything,?the high-grade idiot, the child who eats with some
discrimination, discarding that which is not food. The low-grade
imbecile, the child who plays a little and tries to help but can do
nothing alone; the middle-grade imbecile, he who can do simple tasks,
"^ery simple indeed; the high-grade imbecile, the one who can do tasks
of short duration and little errands in the house,?washing dishes,
scrubbing floors, washing and sweeping, perhaps. The low-grade morons,
the boys and girls who can run errands, do light work, make beds, etc.,
scrub, mend, care for a room, if there is no great complexity of furniture; the middle-grade morons, those who can do institution routine
work; and the high-grade morons, who can do fairly complicated work,
with only occasional supervision, or no supervision,?can run simple
Machinery, take care of animals, only are unable to plan."
Finally, we offer a third classification made by Dr Barr.9 It
sNew Jersey Training School for Feeble-minded Girls and Boys, Twenty-second
Annual Report. 1010, pp. 13G-137. ? ?
. , ? "Mental Defectives," Martin W. Barr, 1904, P. Blakiston's Sons & Co., Philadelphia, p. 00.
52 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
is called educational in that all the characteristics of its several
divisions are the degrees or limits to which the mental defectives,
included within the class, can he educated. It is therefore practical and useful for the purpose of clinical work, since the problem
of future training and education constitutes so large a part of
diagnosis.
The scheme of classification comprises three classes with five
sub-classes of sub-normals; the imbeciles with the three sub-classes
of high-grade, middle grade and low grade; the idio-imbecilea,
and the idiots sub-divided into superficial and profound. The
idiots are also classified according to their disposition into apathetic
and excitable. These various classes, together with their capacities
for training and the best ultimate disposal to be made of them are
given as follows:
Idiot.
Profound (Apathetic) Unimprovable.
(Excitable)
Superficial (Apathetic) Improvable in selfexcitable) help-only.
Asylum Care
Custodial Life and
Perpetual Guardianship
Long Apprenticeship
and Colony Life
Under Protection ..
Idio-imbecile.
Improvable in self-help and helpfulness.
Trainable in very limited degree to assist
others.
Moral Imbecile.
Mentally and morally deficient.
Low Grade: Trainable in industrial occupations; temperament bestial.
Middle Grade: Trainable in industrial and
manual occupations; a plotter of mischief.
High Grade: Trainable in manual and intellectual arts; with a genius for evil.
Imbecile.
Mentally deficient.
Low Grade: Trainable in industrial and simplest manual occupations.
Middle Grade: Trainable in manual arts and
simplest mental acquirements.
High Grade: Trainable in manual and intellectual arts.
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES. 53
r
r
[ Backward or Mentally Feeble.
Mental processes normal, but slow and requiring special training and environment to
the World   prevent deterioration; defect imminent
under slightest provocation, such as excitement, overstimulation or illness.
Trained for a Place in
What will be the final outcome of classification? Which one
will be adopted ? At the present time Dr Barr classifies according
to educational standards, Binet10 according to speech ability, Dr.
Tredgold according to ability to hold one's place in society, to
care for one's personal affairs with prudence and to escape common
dangers; while the Vineland Training School classifies according
to industrial capabilities. In general, however, it would seem
that all sub-classifications may be made according to pedagogical
and sociological principles. The work to be done, therefore, in
order to decide finally 011 some one classification and make it as
widely acceptable as possible is, first, to find by investigation and
experimentation the pedagogical possiblities of each sub-grade
of the mental defective and then by the same method to find the
industrial or sociological capabilities of each sub-division. These
two could then be amalgamated and any individual could be classified and sub-classified according to his intellectual and social
possibilities. Such a task calls for greater unity and co-operation
among the many workers in this field, who are now proceeding
each in his own way according to his own plan, without much
regard to what is being done by others.
l0Les Anormnux, pp. 111-113.
