Boyes' Backs
=============

By Charles Keen Taylor.
Philadelphia, Pa.
Until the child goes to school regularly, which he generally
does when he is about seven years old, his spine is nearly always
straight. For the first year or two, the pupil spends practically
an unimportant amount of time bending over his desk, so that bad
positions have not the opportunity of making more or less "staying" faults. But at this time a beginning may be made, either for
good or bad. The boy may. be trained to sit correctly at his seat,
especially when writing or drawing. lie may be trained to read
with his book held before his eyes, not with the book flat upon the
desk. And here it might appropriately be remarked that a
simple, inexpensive contrivance could easily be furnished with each
desk, which would hold books in a proper position while being
studied. Then the boy may be trained to take a correct position
when standing, with his weight balanced evenly upon both feet,
and not upon one foot, with the other either crossed over, or moved
to one side. A boy may be trained to do these things, but the fact
is that he almost invariably is not so trained, and so comes the
harvest of spinal curvatures, of all degrees and sizes, nearly, all
eradicable, if taken in time, and a constant source of discomfort
and even shame if allowed to develop to their full extent.
The fault?and the vast number of such cases, reported when
the pupils of a school are examined, shows plainly that there is
a serious fault?the fault, I say, lies first with the schools, and
secondly with the parents.
The majority of schools do not have seats and desks, which
may be regulated according to the size of the occupant. Even
where such furniture is possessed, it is not customary to
have an experienced official go from desk to desk and see that each
one is properly adjusted. This should be done twice a year,
for children may grow as much as three or four inches in that time.
I have seen, in more than one school, a large class of boys seated on
seats and before desks which were exactly alike as to size, and how
the boys in a class may vary as to size every, teacher knows only
too well. In the same class one may have a little chap, whose
feet dangle above the floor, and another long-limbed youngster,
who must, perforce, have his legs sprawling out into the aisles,
(274)
BOYS' BACKS. 275
it being absurdly impossible for him to get liis knees under his
desk. This is a common state of affairs. The results are plain
to see. If these boys were stripped to the waist, one could see
how their spines were almost continually bent from their normal curves, some on account of low seats and high desks, and
some 011 account of tlie reverse conditions. Day after day you
would see those spines bent into the same positions. As the boy
is bent, so is the man inclined. These daily curves become permanent, and no one is the wiser, until it becomes only too clear that
Tom, or James, or Bill has one shoulder visibly higher than the
other, and that he does not stand erect.
I'
A SCHOOL CURVATURE,
A SCHOOL CURVATURE.
27G THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
At first may come tlie usual nagging, in the endeavor to make
the boy "hold himself right," and all to no effect, for he not only
will not hold himself right, but he becomes worse rather than
better. And finally comes the family physician, or physical culture expert, who reports "spinal curvature". Then follows a long
process of training that curvature out, when it should never have
been allowed to come in, and would not have come in if the schools
did their duty, in the first place, and the parents did their duty,
in the second, for it is the business of the parents to have the growing bodies of their children under constant observation, and so
detect any mal-adjustment. in the beginning, and prevent its
development. Indeed, to be on the safe side, a child should be
examined all over at least twice a year by a capable physician.
If this were done, or, better still, if in the first place the beginners
at school were trained to take naturally, the correct positions for
rending, writing, drawing, standing, and the like, then the unsightly and often dangerous curvature would practically vanish
from the schools, instead of seizing, as it does, upon a large percentage of the children of each class. And what is said here concerning boys, can be said with even greater emphasis concerning
girls, for with the latter the percentage of curvatures is considerably higher.
