Backward Children
====================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

By Arthur Holmes. Childhood and Youth Series.
Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1915. Pp. x-{-247.
Dr. Holmes' contribution to the series edited by Professor O'Shea is "an
inductive study of backward children. It presents in a series of concrete illus-
trations," says Dr. Holmes, "studies of cases to exemplify the principles and
methods underlying the diagnosis, treatment and training of backward children."
His aim has been to describe the cases "simply, non-technically, and humanly."
His success was to be foreseen by his friends who know of his rich experience
in Y. M. C. A. and college work, and in the Psychological Clinic at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, as well as by the multitude of readers of his earlier
volumes. Truly he has the gift for making his books, "as popular in vein as
possible without offending scientific principles or sacrificing scientific exactness
in essentials."
The ten chapter headings give a comprehensive idea of the scope of the
present volume, and indicate its quality:
I. Measuring rods for children; II. Varieties of backward children; III.
Typical retardation due to physical defects; IV. Minds in straight jackets;
V. Bad and backward; VI. Retardation due to environment; VII. The Back-
ward child in the home; VIII. The clinical diagnosis of backward children;
IX. The teacher's diagnosis; X. The teacher and equipment for a special class.
While every page will yield something of interest to all teachers and
parents, the first and last chapters are probably the ones most valuable to the
inexperienced teacher of backward children. At the end of chapter one Dr.
Holmes gives an admirable brief summary of standards for estimating back-
wardness:
I. Individual standards.?A backward child is one who is not so far advanced
as he ought to be, when his birth and opportunities are considered.
II. Social standards.
A. Popular standards.
1. In the home.?A backward child in the home is one who learns
at a later age than that of his brothers and sisters how to walk,
talk, eat, dress himself, etc. His parents' judgment is the
measure.
2. In the neighborhood.?A backward child is one who, in the judg-
ment of the neighbors, is behind the other children in their
activities. Neighbors usually judge less mercifully than parents
and the backwardness is more pronounced if it is noticed by
the neighbors.
3. On the playground.?A backward child is one who can not play
the games children of his age can play, and who therefore plays
with younger children.
B. Scientific standards.
1. Among nations.?A child is backward only when he falls behind
the average for his own race or nation. This is the anthropo-
logical standard.
2. In school.
a. The age standard.?A backward child is one who, from any
cause whatsoever, is two years or more behind the grade
(218)
NEWS AND COMMENT. 219
he ought, to be in for his age. The pedagogical standard is
a child who begins school at the legal age and is promoted
regularly with his class. Pedagogical retardation is a fact and
has nothing to do with causes, is not always a detriment,
and should not be condemned until the causes are known,
b. The progress standard.?According to this standard a back-
ward child is one who takes longer than the regularly sched-
uled time to complete one grade, no matter how old he is.
In the long run, with many pupils, these two standards give
about the same results.
3. In general intelligence.?According to several systems like the
Binet-Simon, De Sanctis, and others, a backward child is one
who cannot answer certain sets of prescribed questions and do
certain tasks presumably fitted to his years. The standard
child is one who can do these tasks and give these answers.
In chapter ten Dr. Holmes discusses the qualifications and training of the
teacher; the location, number, and furnishing of rooms for a special class; the
equipment for elementary manual training; an ideal daily program, and lastly
a syllabus of the manual work suitable for children of various ages.
A. T.
