A Group of Children as Clinical Problems
=========================================

By Gertha Williams,
Graduate Student, University of Pennsylvania.
Most of the cases received at the Psychological Clinic of the
University of Pennsylvania come as individuals, not in groups, but
nine of the cases examined during the summer of 1914 came as one
group with certain characteristics in common. They were all Jewish
and were sent to the Clinic by a Jewish charitable institution in
Philadelphia. With the exception of one child they lived at the
Home during the day, returning to their own homes at night.
The nine children are:
Albert  7 years backward
Sam  9 years backward
Bella  8 years delinquent
Jacob  7 years backward
David 12 years delinquent
Morris 11 years backward
Bessie 10 years delinquent
Celia  7 years backward
Rose 8 years backward
Albert is seven years old and an only child. He was brought
to the Clinic because of pedagogical retardation. His father is dead
and his mother is employed in a factory. She is in poor health and
is soon to undergo an operation. They live on the fourth floor of
a tenement, occupying but one room, which is fairly clean. Albert's
health is good and there are no marked physical defects. The
mental examination showed him to be of normal mentality although
his mental processes are sluggish. He has a slight speech defect.
He may require special instruction to bring him up to grade. It
was recommended that he begin again in the first grade in the fall
and if, in the teacher's judgment, he does not make satisfactory
progress that he be transferred to a special class at the end of one
month.
Jacob is seven years old. He was brought to the Clinic because
of backwardness in school. His mother died of tuberculosis; otherwise the family history is good. The father is a laborer and is
reported to possess only low-grade intelligence. But as he is able
to support his family and himself, he is probably not feebleminded.
Jacob has one sister who is backward.
While pedagogically retarded, Jacob seems to be of normal
(39)
40 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
mentality, but he is in a poor physical condition. He is anemic,
restless, and easily fatigued. His poor physical condition is the
probable explanation of his retardation, and the first consideration
should be given to proper physical care. Special instruction, preferably in a special class, may be necessary to held him overcome
the retardation his physical condition has caused and bring him up
to his grade.
Sam is nine years old. He was brought to the Clinic because
of backwardness. He has been in school three years and is now
in the upper second grade doing poor work. He does not like school
but is fond of " cleaning up," and does work of that nature well.
He does not obey readily, but this is rather because he forgets or
fails to understand. He is quarrelsome and does not get along well
with other children. His health is good but he is always in a very
unhygienic condition. His mother is employed during the day,
and as she is of low-grade intelligence, is unable to give him proper
care. The father is dead.
Sam reads with good pronunciation and articulation and with
fair expression. His arithmetic is only fair with concrete material.
In general conversation his answers are unintelligent. According
to the Binet scale his mental age is just seven; his responses are very
slow. He could not reproduce the lozenge correctly but realized
that his reproduction was poor. His auditory memory is only fair;
visual memory poor. Questions associated with his life he answered
well, but those requiring thought were more difficult for him. He
described a picture of common objects accurately and was able to
execute three commissions, but he could not compare a butterfly
and a fly, or wood and glass.
Sam is a more discouraging case than the other two boys.
His health is good but the home conditions are poor. His mentality
is doubtful, but one does not like to call him feebleminded without
further observation. He is a good example of a case in which the
special class teacher can render valuable assistance to the examiner
in making a final diagnosis. He should be placed under a teacher
capable of making intelligent observations of his reactions, and
returned to the Clinic for re-examination. Then a diagnosis can be
made, based partly upon the teacher's report of his progress and
partly upon the two examinations.
Bessie is ten years old. She was brought to the Clinic because
she is reported to be nervous, disobedient, and morally irresponsible.
Her behavior with boys is undesirable, indicating that she might
become immoral when older. She writes silly notes to the boys
and is, as the social worker who brought her expressed it, "fresh"
CHILDREN AS CLINICAL PROBLEMS. 41
with them. While not vicious she is disobedient, noisy and quarrelsome.
She is unusually well developed physically and is in good health.
Her birth was natural and she was a healthy baby and seemed like
other children. She has had no serious illnesses except diphtheria.
Her tonsils have been removed.
In school she is in the upper fourth grade. She entered school
at five and has had two long absences. Her conduct in school is
only fair. She reads with good expression, articulation, and pronunciation. In memory type she is visual. Her spelling is good in that
words recognized with difficulty or misread are spelled with some
degree of accuracy. Her written spelling is superior to the oral.
In arithmetic she is inaccurate but reasons fairly well. There is
nothing in her mental condition to account for her delinquent tendencies, as her mentality is certainly normal.
The home is crowded but fairly clean. The father and mother
are of ordinary mentality. At the time the home was investigated
the father was just recovering from the effects of an operation and
the mother was ill and expecting to have an operation in the near
future. It seems to me that right here we have the probable explanation of her delinquent tendencies. With the father and mother both
ill, there is no one to take proper care of a girl of her age. She needs
judicious discipline and a favorable environment. She is to be
returned to her grade in the fall, and if delinquent tendencies continue, is to be removed from her home for a time.
These few cases are fairly representative of the group and will
serve to illustrate the following points:
In all examinations of children at the Clinic the practical side
of the question is never lost sight of. There is always an attempt
to answer the question, "What is best to be done for this child?"
The whole examination revolves about this point. In order to answer
this question several other questions must first be answered.
The clinicist asks himself in what way the child deviates from
the normal. There are two possibilities. The child may be backward or delinquent, as in the cases cited above. This problem does
not detain the examiner long, as the reason for bringing the child to
the Clinic usually clears up this point. Then the cause of the delinquency or backwardness of the child must be determined. This is
not so easily discovered. The cause may be found in the child's
mentality, in his physical condition, or in his environment. In the
cases of Albert and Sam, for example, the cause was found in the
mentality of the children, in Jacob's case it was his physical condition, and in Bessie's an unfavorable environment.
42 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
After the child's condition is diagnosed, definite and specific
advice is given to the parent or guardian as to what is to be done for
him. This advice is of a practical nature, based upon real conditions, and is not merely an ideal prescription of what would be best
for the child under conditions which do not exist. The advice
varies with each child. It may be the suggestion of an institution,
public or private, a special class or other form of individual instruction. Or the examiner may merely suggest a different method of
dealing with the child in the home.
In the giving of advice much tact is necessary. The best of
advice must be sugar-coated. Parents are loath to believe their
children feebleminded. Also there is much ignorance and prejudice
against institutions to be overcome. If the trouble is in the home
itself, the situation is a delicate one. It is very difficult to persuade
a parent that his method of dealing with his child is wrong or that
his home is not the proper place in which to bring up his child.
The work of the social service department is of great importance
to the Clinic, for follow-up work is absolutely necessary to secure
the best results. The parents need help and encouragement in
carrying out the recommendations of the examiner. The formality of
entering a child in an institution would discourage most parents if
there were not some one to help them. It is often necessary for
the social worker to go into the home and help the parents to
readjust themselves and their home to the needs of the child. It
is also her duty to see that the child is brought to the Clinic for
re-examination on the advice of the examiner. This careful follow-up work makes it possible to keep in touch with the cases
tested at the Clinic and to learn the effect upon the child of the
treatment recommended. Thus there is a check upon one's own
work which is of great value when a similar case comes up.
It is not always possible to give a final judgment of the child's
mentality at the time of the first examination. The diagnosis is
essentially a prognosis and for this reason it is often necessary to
keep the child under observation for a time or to try the effect of a
given course of treatment or special instruction upon him. Then
when the child is brought for re-examination a truer judgment of his
mentality can be made, based upon the progress he has been able
to make under proper conditions.
It will be seen that the clinicist cannot rely on any set of mental
tests alone to give him a complete picture of any given case. No
source of information is to be disregarded. The answer may be
given by the mental tests or the solution may lie in the environment of the child or in his physical condition. Each child is treated
CHILDREN AS CLINICAL PROBLEMS. 43
as an individual and no general rule can be framed to apply to all
cases. The examiner must be ready to follow any "lead" given him,
whether it be found in the mental examination or in some apparently
insignificant bit of information brought to light in the preliminary
examination. Every action of the child is significant from the time
he enters the room until he leaves it.
It is here that the experience of the examiner is important.
He must have the tact to get the needed information about the
child from a sometimes reluctant parent and the ability properly
to interpret the child's behavior during the examination. Dr Knox
of Ellis Island has very aptly named this ability of the clinicist to
"size up" a given case from his experience with other similar cases
the "human test".
