The Psychological Methods of Testing Intelligence
====================================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By William Stern. Tr. by
Guy Montrose Whipple. Baltimore: Warwick and York, 1914. Pp. x + 160.
(Edu. Psych. Monographs No. 13.)
The work of which this is the English translation, was completed in German
in October, 1912. Therefore it necessarily fails to cover the very extensive discussion of tests, which has been carried on the past two and a half years.
Professor Whipple remarks that this "book affords what is, so far as I know,
the best, and in fact almost the only authoritative, critical, and compact general
survey of the literature of intelligence testing, which is adapted for lay readers as
well as for professional psychologists." It will be observed that Dr. Stern's
critical faculty expends much of its force upon the literature of testing, and does
not go far enough in questioning the validity of the concept of 'intelligence' as
used by the testers. After saying, "We not only limit intelligence by setting it
over against the emotive and volitional nature of an individual, but also ascribe
to it a definitely restricted place within the mental functions," he proceeds to
formulate his own definition as follows: "Intelligence is a general capacity of an
individual consciously to adjust his thinking to new problems and conditions of life,"
and adds, "If talent be a material efficiency, intelligence is a formal efficiency.''
Dr. Stern trusts "that distinctions may serve to lessen the confusion that has been
current," but confusion certainly reigns in his definition until we recall the
Platonic distinction between matter and form, and understand the peculiar sense
in which he is using 'material' and 'formal.' This may be partly due to the
translator. Dr. Stern is none too clear, again, when he says, "The fact that
intelligence can be more easily treated quantitatively than can other individual
capacities, must not lead us to overestimate its import. Nevertheless the fact
that we can deal with intelligence by itself, does serve to disclose the structure of
the personality. We can determine whether a performance of greater or lesser
degree depends on talent or on intelligence; we can investigate what degree of
correspondence exists between the experimental results and the teachers' judgments of the intelligence of pupils."
Three main lines of activity furnish Dr. Stern with the principle of division
of his treatment: (1) single tests; (2) the Binet-Simon scale; (3) the correlation
methods of Pearson, Spearman, and others. With regard to the slow growth
of method he comments, "It will be long, very long, before we realize the optimistic
hope that Spearman attaches to the correlation method of testing intelligence,
when he says, 'Indeed, it seems possible to foresee the day when there will be
an annual official determination of the intellectual index of every child in the
[British] empire.'" Dr. Stern emphasizes the fact "that tests of intelligence are
not easy to conduct. Their administration demands extended practice, psychological training, and a critical mind," and he cites as an example of the commonly
prevailing mistaken ideas upon this matter, Captain Meyer's [of the German
army] declaration that "in military enlistment tests of intelligence could some
day be carried on quite mechanically by subalterns."
(56)
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 57
In the beginning, "For a long time," says Dr. Stern, "we started from the
erroneous presupposition that any psychological method of experimentation
would be really usable as a test," and he considers, "A significant advance was
made when it was recognized that tests of intelligence must be definitely selected
on the basis of certain presuppositions that were to be made concerning the nature
of intelligence."
"Various psychologists," Dr. Stern remarks, have considered various "mental functions to be the touchstone of intelligence." He mentions the "combination" or "completion" method of Ebbinghaus; Ries' word-association test;
"the combination test of Masselon in which a meaningful sentence is to be made
from three given words," and Meumann's elaboration of this test to require a
logical or moral connection between the words combined; Heilbronner's picturetest; and Bernstein and Rossolimo's use of cut-up pictures which are to be fitted
together. "In an earlier stage of his work," says Dr. Stern, "Binet believed
that the essence of intelligence was capacity to adjust attention. ... In the
work of Meumann we note at times the laying of a certain one-sided emphasis
on the understanding of the abstract as being the root of intelligence. . . . Quite
a number of investigators have directed their attention particularly to capacity
to apprehend, as the index of intelligence."
A third main class of tests includes "those patterned after familiar pedagogical tasks," and here we are surprised to find no mention of Mr. Courtis' work, the
first reports of which appeared as early as September and November of 1911.
Not being aware of the Courtis tests, Dr. Stern is to be pardoned for his comment,
"The intelligence of individuals that are working or that have worked, under
different school conditions cannot be subjected to comparative tests by means of
these activities."
In his fourth main class Dr. Stern places those tests which "aim to secure
records of such evidences of intelligence as are accepted in ordinary life as special
evidence of it. These direct tests of intelligence have been specially developed
by the psychiatrists; they comprise such things as defining, comparing, differentiating, the understanding of proverbs, grasping the point of a joke, seeing absurdities in verbal or pictorial presentations."
"No single lest, no matter how good it may be," says Dr. Stern, "should ever be
made the instrument for testing the intelligence of an individual." He seems to have
no appreciation of the formboard as a testing device?indeed, he fails even to
mention such a thing. Had he studied the operation of the formboard test with
normal and subnormal children, it is almost certain that he would have wished to
retract this sweeping opinion.
From a study of separate tests, "three things are evident: first, series of
tests must be arranged that will set in play the various constituent functions of
intelligence; secondly, for this purpose there must be a wise selection of tests, . . .
thirdly, there must be created a system by means of which the several particular
results of the testing can be united into one resultant value, i. e. a value that shows
the grade of intelligence of the subject objectively in an inclusive formula in which
performances of different degrees of value shall in some way be compensated."
"Numerous test series," Dr. Stern explains, "have been used by the psychiatrists for testing intelligence," and among them he mentions the classifications
58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of Sommer and of Ziehen. A highly interesting method of testing and recording
mental ability is that of the Russian alienist, G. Rossolimo, and we could wish
that Dr. Stern had given us more information about it. "Rossolimo," he says,
"has contrived ten tests for each of ten different mental functions. The results
obtained from the single subject are set out graphically by erecting ordinates
corresponding to the number of the tests achieved for each of the functions under
test. The ends of these ordinates are then joined to make a curve that Rossolimo calls the 'individual profile'."
Part II, which comprises the middle two-thirds of the book, is concerned
with the method of age-gradation (Binet-Simon method). The discussion here
will be largely an old story to Americans who have followed the work of Goddard,
Wallin, Johnstone, Terman and Childs, Pintner, Town, and others in this country.
Dr. Stern deals all too briefly with a phenomenon which has drawn the attention
of many clinical psychologists who have applied the Binet tests, i. e. the range
of irregularity (Streuungsbreite). "A child whose successes and failures are strewn
irregularly over test-levels from six to ten years has the same mental age, to be
sure, but a very different range of irregularity, when compared with another
whose mixture of successes and failures lies in the seventh to the ninth years
only. Bobertag, who first gave attention to the importance of differences in
ranges of irregularity, has devised a way of computing this factor; I have myself
suggested another way, but neither has been published as yet." Further on he
says "The area of irregular distribution is very much wider with the feebleminded
than with the normal child."
Part III deals with estimation and testing of finer gradations of intelligence.
Dr. Stern decides that neither the Binet test nor the ordinary school ranking is
adequate to show the degree of intelligence of the pupil. He asks, "Is it possible,
on the basis of a short examination with a series of tests to arrive at a gradation of
pupils that corresponds with their actual differences of intelligence and such that the
rank that each gains is sufficiently characteristic of his grade of intelligence within
the group?" He finds of dubious value Spearman's method of testing and correlating, because "The mere comparison of tests with one another affords us neither
a clear insight into the necessary compensations, nor a decision as to the symptomatic value of the testing; rather must we seek the means of gauging the tests in
some criterion that lies outside of experiment. Such a criterion is supplied by the
estimation of the pupils made by the teacher." He approves Binet's suggestion
that this task of estimating intelligence be assigned to "teachers specially trained
and specially gifted in psychology," and he adds with emphasis, "Only those
pupils should be located in a given rank-order of intelligence that are sufficiently
like one another in other respects."
In this connection Dr. Stern contributes some original investigations of his
own, in which he had three different teachers estimate the intelligence of an
Untertertia grade in a Gymnasium (equivalent approximately to our first high
school year). He comments upon the result, "This decided correspondence of
the judgments of the teachers on their pupils' intelligence, taken in conjunction
with the fair degree of independence of their judgment from the class-place, seems
to me to be a forcible argument for the scientific usefulness of the method of
intelligence estimation." In conclusion he sums up the points to be observed in
NEWS AND COMMENT. 59
working at the problem of ranking by tests, as (a) measurability; (b) reliability;
(c) fairly high correlation; (d) comprehensiveness; (e) estimation of intelligence;
(/) construction of an amalgamated rank-order.
The book has a complete bibliography of material published from the summer
of 1911 until September, 1912, which is intended to supplement the bibliography
contained in Dr. Stern's earlier work, Die differentielle Psychologie. Professor
Whipple has done a real service in making this discussion of intelligence testing
available for English readers.
A T.
