The Social Treatment of Unmarried Mothers 
===========================================

By Francis N. Maxfield, Ph.D.
University of Pennsylvania.
Twenty-five years ago a bricklayer fell from a scaffolding and
was killed. His wife was left penniless, with ten little children to
support. For a while she made a futile struggle against poverty
until she too died, broken by over-work and worry. As there were
no relatives to help, the children were scattered in homes and orphan
asylums.
Jennie, the youngest, was hardly more than a baby, so little
that she cannot remember the names of her brothers and sisters.
For seven years she lived behind high walls in an institution where
one of the methods of discipline was to whip a child for complaining
of sickness before inquiring whether there was any ground for the
complaint.
When Jennie was nine she was placed at housework in the
country. After months of frequent beatings and hard work, even
life in an asylum seemed preferable and Jennie begged to go back. . . .
In five years she was again placed out with a family who " needed
a girl." She was now about fifteen. The man of the family made
improper advances to her and at her terrified entreaty she was again
returned to an institution, this time for older girls.
After another year the institution authorities once more decided
Jennie was "old enough to be earning her living," and the inevitable
position at housework was found. With no education or training
even in normal home life, her work was mediocre and ill-paid. Her
little knowledge of housework was her one asset. She had been
institutionalized to such an extent that she had no "property
sense," no foresight for the future, and was so obedient and willing
that anyone could exploit her.
In her loneliness she welcomed the friendship of Louis C., who
worked in a "movie" in the neighborhood in which she lived. He
was attractive, selfish, thoroughly cynical?the only man Jennie
had ever known. They "kept company" for three years and she
gladly promised to marry him. Under this promise he seduced her,
only to leave town when she became pregnant.
* A report made to the Social Service Committee of the University Hospital, September,
1915.
(210)
SOCIAL TREATMENT OF UNMARRIED MOTHERS. 211
After Jennie's child was born it was found necessary to perform
two major operations. She left the hospital broken in health, utterly
disheartened and miserable.
We have given this story at length because it is in a sense a
typical one. As we study the life histories of these girls we are
realizing more and more clearly that most of them under a different
environment might have developed "like other girls". Lack of
home training, loneliness and misunderstanding, an undisciplined
will and inadequate education, all tend to thwart a normal selfdevelopment.
It is encouraging, in looking back over a period as brief as
twenty-five years, to realize that Jennie's life story might have
been different if it were begun now. There was then no Workmen's
Compensation Act, no Mothers' Assistance Fund, no Compulsory
Education Law. Institutions then kept no accurate records, so
many helpful ties were broken and all chance of re-establishing
families was lost. When Jennie was placed out there was no supervision from a disinterested children's agency, no provision for recreation or pleasure. In a word, there were no social props of any
sort to hold Jennie up, and the affair with Louis C. was the natural,
logical outcome of her planless, lonely life.
Only eleven hundred so-called "illegitimate" children are born
yearly in Philadelphia and several millions of dollars are spent in
caring for the mothers and babies. A committee has been organized
recently to study this whole problem of illegitimacy?its legal
aspects, its medical-social aspects, and the question of social
treatment. It is not my purpose to try to anticipate the work of this
committee. I wish simply to discuss in this paper some of the working
principles that have been used in the Social Service Department of
the University Hospital, on the chance that they may be suggestive
to others.
During the period from January, 1912, to August, 1915, ninety
unmarried mothers and women illegitimately pregnant have been
referred from the Woman's and Obstetrical Dispensaries to one
worker in the Social Service Department.
Of these ninety women studied, one-half (45) are white, of
American parentage, one-quarter (24) are negroes, and the remaining
quarter (21) are either foreign born or of foreign parentage. Seventynine live in Philadelphia or its immediate suburbs.
Nearly half (35) of the women studied were in domestic service,
6 were at domestic service in institutions, 12 were living at home and
212 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
not otherwise employed, 4 were still in school, 13 were employed in
factories or mills, 10 as saleswomen, and 3 as waitresses. One is a
prostitute; the occupation of one is unknown. Only 5 belonged to
the "skilled labor group,"?a kindergartner, an engraver, a practical
nurse, a milliner, and a stenographer.
As may be seen from the social records of these women and from
the analysis of occupations, most of them are industrially untrained
and inefficient. Leaving school as early as the regulations of compulsory school education would allow, often before completing the work
of the fifth or sixth grade, they have entered occupations which offer
little in the way of promotion or of educational value. Most of them
have come nominally under religious influence and have been confirmed in church or synagogue, but home conditions have been adverse
to the development of high ideals or incentives of conduct. Intellectually, industrially and socially inefficient, they have been drifters,
with under-developed powers of resistance in the face of environmental conditions tending to social mal-adjustment.
The main principles which seem to have been used in the casework with these ninety women are as follows:
I. Cases of illegitimate pregnancy should receive attention before confinement and should continue under the care of the Social Service
Department after the birth of the child.
Medical care and advice are important during the pre-natal
period. The mental state of the expectant mother at this time makes
her particularly susceptible to influence by those who are interested
in her. This is the best time for adjusting strained home relations
and for making a careful survey of the whole situation.
Knowledge of the previous history of the woman and of present
home conditions are most important in dealing with her particular
problem as well as in studying the social questions involved. The
questions of the paternity of the child, the desirability of marriage
or of legal process, all have to receive careful attention. No matter
how little care and training a girl may have previously received, the
home situation at such times is usually one of strain and anxiety
if only from selfish ideas of avoiding publicity and disgrace when
a daughter or sister "gets into trouble."
The worker gives instruction in regard to pre-natal hygiene
and assists in making arrangements for confinement.
Practical advice as to the care of the child is given and directly
and through other agencies the women are assisted in finding employment and in caring for their children.
SOCIAL TREATMENT OF UNMARRIED MOTHERS. 213
The majority of the women come to the worker's attention
before the birth of their children and a large percentage are still in
touch with this department. The helpful understanding of the
worker is a safeguard to the mother and a steadying influence in
her new associations.
II. Mental examinations by a psychologist are desirable.
Not in cases of suspected feeblemindedness alone should they
be made. Knowledge of mental ability is important in advising
occupation, etc. Any real study of the question requires mental
diagnoses.
It was possible in ten cases to secure a careful mental examination at the Psychological Clinic connected with the department of
Psychology in the University of Pennsylvania. In some other cases
the reports of employers and many personal interviews formed a
fair basis of judgment as to the intelligence of these girls. The
problem of accurately estimating their intelligence is often difficult.
It is very easy for the examiner during his tests to confuse ignorance
with stupidity, especially where the period spent in school has been
short and where the girl's mental horizon has been bounded by the
factory or kitchen. It is possible for him to observe at once that her
vocabulary is meager, that her fund of general information is pitifully
small, and that she fails in many of the so-called "intelligence tests"
which emphasize language development. He may forget that the
mental inferiority of women as a sex was once established on the
basis of similar observations. To come to a satisfactory diagnosis
the psychologist must know something of the opportunity for mental
development which these women have had, and he will take into
account the reports of parents and employers as to the girls' capabilities as well as their reactions to his laboratory tests.
The ten cases examined at the Psychological Clinic were not
chosen because of suspected mental defect. The result of such a
mental examination often has real value for the social worker as a
basis for vocational guidance and for the solution of other practical
social problems involved. The psychologist is asked not "Is this
girl feebleminded?" but "Is she capable of caring for her child and
supporting herself?" or "Is she likely to profit by further training
or should she secure employment for which she is now fitted?"
Of the ten cases examined by a psychologist, five were diagnosed
as normal, three as border-line cases, and two as feebleminded.
No cases of obvious feeblemindedness of low grade appeared among
the ninety cases. It seems probable that about twenty per cent of
the ninety cases should be classed as sub-normal, but that not more
214 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
than ten per cent of them coulcl be certified for commitment to an
institution for feebleminded women if such commitment were
compulsory. It will be the policy of this department to have more
of its cases in the future examined by a psychological expert in order
to have data of statistical value on this subject.
III. Marriage of the girl to the child's father should be considered on
its own merits.
It should never be urged with the idea of saving the situation,
or punishing the man. Technical legitimacy for the child does
not warrant an otherwise undesirable marriage. The worker believes
that marriage should not be contracted except on the basis of mutual
affection. "Forced" marriage is seldom a solution, and even where
it can be arranged, by no means always leads to a satisfactory adjustment. Seven of these women have married the fathers of their
children, however, and five have married other men. The worker
in every case urges the girl to tell the man her full history before
marriage, if he is not the father of her child.
On the other hand?
IV. The father's responsibility should never be ignored.
Legal action for support is almost always desirable and it is a
proper function of social service departments to assist in bringing
such action. The present attitude of the Philadelphia Municipal
Court in these cases is most helpful. Support orders are now made on
the fathers for fourteen years, until the child is of working age, and
in her struggle with the world the mother finds this help invaluable.
V. The mother and the child should be kept together.
The reasons which should make exception to this rule (feeblemindedness, insanity, immorality, etc.) are those which also apply in
the case of legitimate children.
The question of finding suitable employment for untrained
women with little education and often mediocre or defective intelligence is difficult. The necessity of caring for the child adds to the
difficulty. More are placed in domestic service than in any other
occupation, but figures show that this is the occupation which contributes the largest number of cases of illegitimate pregnancy and this
fact makes the wisdom of this disposition questionable in theory,
however much practical consideration may make such work seem
desirable. The standards of intelligence and efficiency in domestic
service are low and the wages relatively high compared with other
unskilled occupations.
SOCIAL TREATMENT OF UNMARRIED MOTHERS. 215
VI. The so-called moral aspects of illegitimaaj itself should not be
stressed.
The moral emphasis should be put upon future self-development
and self-control, responsibility for and care of the child, rather than
upon the irregularity of past conduct.
This study has emphasized the necessity of differentiating cases
of irregular sexual intercourse. Most of the girls studied have never
had promiscuous sexual relations nor have they received financial
remuneration. The problem is not one of prostitution. In many
cases the sexual irregularity of the women has been limited to one
occasion. Even where these relations have extended over a period
of time, it is usually with men whom they expect to marry. Consent
was reluctantly given and in many cases because of belief that this
relation would attach the men's affections permanently to themselves.
A large majority of them are girls of "reputable character." Many
girls from the same social stratum follow the same course of reasoning,
but do not happen to become pregnant. Community reaction
toward such relations is mild compared with that toward the girl
who "gets into trouble" or "gets caught." It is her illegitimate
pregnancy rather than her sex relations for which she is severely
blamed.
The following history illustrates these points. Gertrude B.?
American; Catholic; bright attractive girl of twenty-one; employed
as waitress; parents self-respecting and thrifty; home conditions
excellent; considered a "model daughter." Had been engaged
to John S. (a driver) for over a year; postponed consideration of
marriage on account of his irregular employment; sex relations
for many months; this unknown to parents, who favored the attentions of John S.
Gertrude came to Obstetrical Dispensary in 1912, four months
pregnant. John had learned of her condition and had ceased calling;
his whereabouts unknown to Gertrude; parents not yet informed of
her condition.
The worker advised Gertrude to tell her mother at once. At
first her mother was unwilling to tell her husband, and Gertrude was
placed in a Maternity Home. The worker kept in touch with Gertrude and her mother, who finally was persuaded to tell the father.
He at once said Gertrude "had been too good a daughter for twentyone years to stay anywhere but home." Confinement at home was
arranged. No legal action was taken, as John S. could not be found.
A year later John S. returned to the city and met Gertrude on the
street. She finally consented to marry him and they are now living
with his parents; second child born 1915; social prognosis favorable.
21G THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
VII. Full records of case histories should be kept.
They are indispensable in any scientific study of the problem
involved. They give system to the efforts directed to any particular
case. The following case history shows the value of accumulated
data of this type, even though for months it was to all appearances
valueless.
Rebecca A.?Russian Jewess; seventeen; mentally normal,
but below the average in intelligence; employed in mill at $6 a week;
one of ten children; father alcoholic and brutal; mother decent;
girl spent evenings on street. Rebecca came to the hospital 1913,
two months pregnant; syphilis and gonorrhea. Claimed assault
by Charles 0. Had been married ten days before visit, to Jacob M.
(nineteen), a boarder with family, who did not know of pregnancy
or disease. Later Rebecca admitted that relations with Charles
O. had extended over a year. The worker appealed to a rabbi and
together they tried to persuade Jacob M. to annul the marriage on
account of physical danger to himself and for eugenic reasons. Jacob
refused, fearing the ridicule of friends; objected to Rebecca's being
kept in Philadelphia Hospital for treatment. Rebecca would not
believe that she was pregnant and neither she nor her mother thought
the infection serious. She improved under treatment and was
dismissed; difficult to persuade to continue dispensary treatment;
reported intermittently. Employed in cigar factory for several
months. Later appealed to the worker for help in securing confinement care. Baby born, treated at Skin Dispensary for hereditary
syphilis. Jacob paying small sums irregularly to Rebecca, who lived
at home. Baby died at three months. Family moved to Camden.
Rebecca renewed acquaintance with Charles 0., the father of her
child. Refused to come to dispensary. September, 1914, worker
received word that Rebecca was living as a prostitute in New Jersey.
December, 1914, Rebecca was reported to be living with Alfred R.
Illegitimate child, died when one month old. House raided. Later
Rebecca was arrested and through the evidence accumulated by the
worker she was committed to the New Jersey Reformatory. Prognosis unfavorable; but at least society has been protected for a term
of 3'ears.
The change in the mother's attitude in this case is most significant. She has left her brutal, abusive husband. For the sake of
the younger children she will not allow the oldest daughter, who is a
prostitute, to come home to visit. She has given her eager consent
to have another child who is feebleminded, placed in Elwyn, though
when institutional care for Rebecca was suggested in the beginningshe objected violently. If our premise is true?that illegitimacy
SOCIAL TREATMENT OF UNMARRIED MOTHERS. 217
is due chiefly to environmental causes?the younger children of this
family have a better chance than Rebecca had. The home is already
much improved and the worker feels hopeful that the evil influences
of the past may be gradually obliterated.
VIII. Definite and systematic study of the problem of illegitimacy by
all agencies dealing with the subject is desirable.
It is important that the different agencies which have to deal
with illegitimacy in a practical way should publish studies of the
results of their work not only as a report of accomplishment but as
a contribution to the scientific study of the whole problem.
They must appeal to all interested in reducing the amount of
illegitimacy in our city or in practical dealing with cases of this kind
to look beyond the facts of individual cases for causes of conditions
which are socially pathological, or at best mal-adjusted, in order to
arrive at general principles of prevention and successful social
therapy.
This programme calls for thorough-going scientific effort without
preconceived bias or religious or philanthropic hysteria. It has
practical and theoretical aspects which cannot always be harmonized
under existing social and economic conditions. One may theorize,
for example, about the equal responsibility of both parents for the
care and maintenance of an illegitimate child, and yet in our present
society the burden of responsibility must rest upon the mother in
spite of theory and often in spite of a court decree.
In insisting that she keep the child with her, society assumes that
she is?or can become?a fit mother for it; and it is on that point?
her development in motherhood?that we must lay our emphasis
in the future. It is a task that requires endless sympathy and
patience, unfailing kindness, and a broad knowledge of social trends
and principles.
