Bringing Children up to Grade
==============================

By Carrie A. Ritter,
Syracuse, N. Y.
Why must we endeavor to bring children up to grade in school
work? Why have they fallen below? Why, since few children are
doing all they might, must it be necessary for any to have extra
tutoring? Or, if not up to grade, why should they not be left to
repeat the grade until such time as they are capable of doing ad-
vanced work?
Partly must we endeavor to give them the desired requirements
to please ambitious parents, who wish to see their offspring advance
as swiftly up the educational ladder as do the neighbors' children.
The main point is to arouse interest, for it is much easier to
maintain it than to gain it. Once let the child get in a way of
studying and a satisfaction in results of work accomplished will
spring up, then half the battle is won.
Teachers tell us that for many a child there is a decided turn-
ing point in his educational life, a time when he comes to realize
why he goes to school. From that time on there is less difficulty.
To carry him safely past this point and send him forward, rather
than let him drop out of school is one great reason for trying to
bring him to grade, lest he become discouraged by repeated failures.
Give a child a purpose that he may enter upon some chosen
work, and he will study. A boy must know mathematics that he
may study engineering, a girl must have a certain training before
she can study nursing.
It seems to me that lack of attention and desire to study, play-
ing and whispering in study hours, wasting time by inattention and
watching some other pupil at work or at some mischievous prank,
absence from school often with parents' sanction, rather than want
of ability, cause a child to fall behind in school. There are, of
course, many exceptions to this, children who are "slow" for various
reasons, particularly from physical defects. The slow pupil cannot
quickly grasp the teacher's meaning in her explanations to the class.
While he is puzzling it out, she has gone on to something else with
the quicker ones. Much is lost to the slower, and naturally his
interest lags since the connection of ideas is gone. Have you not
felt a similar lack when attempting to listen to a sermon or lecture
of which you could not get the whole? Presently you gave up try-
ing to hear and went to thinking of something else.
(134)
BRINGING CHILDREN IIP TO GRADE. 135
Often the children who fail are from families where the elders
read almost nothing and the youngsters themselves rarely touch
even a newspaper or magazine, so they lack general information.
We know a young contractor and his wife who read little beyond
the daily paper or a fashion-magazine?and not always those. They
seem to know nothing of the pleasure aside from the information to
be obtained even from fiction. "No, we have no time to read,"
the wife says.
Once we fell to describing to them a story which dealt with
certain phases of life in the Ozarks. They listened very attentively,
finally the man said, "Why, I didn't know you could learn about
places from stories. I believe I would like that kind." They are
an industrious couple, who admire knowledge in others but they
simply do not know where or how to get it for themselves. This
is not due to lack of time, as they thought, for they have spent
more time in telling what they had to do than in doing it.
We know two boys past sixteen years of age who have not
completed the elementary subjects, spelling, history and grammar
being those in which they fail repeatedly. The mother of one told
us her son never read anything. When we mentioned a question in
the state examination in which he had failed, "State who each of
five of the following is: William Jennings Bryan, Colonel Goethals,
Elihu Root, George Dewey, Robert E. Peary, Charles S. Whitman,
Thomas A. Edison," she said, "He would not even know who Bryan
is, for he does not read such things."
A mother may do much to help her child along in school, yet
the principal of one school tells us that when the child must be
brought up to grade he refuses to accept the mother as instructor,
though she may be capable, because she so rarely fulfills her promise
to attend to the lessons. He prefers a professional tutor who can
give all her attention to the work.
Even if the mother intends conscientiously to hear lessons, the
only possible way is to have a specific time for them with which
nothing must interfere. Many things happen in a house to break
in upon home lessons,?visitors, social and business engagements,
household demands, "so we'll put off your lesson today, Robert,
and surely do a double amount tomorrow." When tomorrow with
its new demands comes, again the lessons are slighted.
Often it is only one subject in which the child fails. Dr. Naomi
Norsworthy after experiments with school children says, "It seems
probable that certain functions which are of importance in school-
work, such as quickness in arithmetic, accuracy in spelling, attention
to forms, are highly specialized and not secondary results of some
136 BRINGING CHILDREN UP TO GRADE.
general function. That just as there is no such thing as a general
memory so there is no such thing as general quickness or accuracy
or observation. * * * Accuracy in spelling is independent of
accuracy in multiplication and quickness in arithmetic is not found
with quickness in marking misspelled words."
This is rather a broad statement which will bear investigation
since we are inclined to expect a child accurate in one subject to be
accurate in others. Yet this would carry out the accepted idea
that a pupil who excels in mathematics is not good at foreign lan-
guages. From experience we know this is not always true, but often
when there is a decided preference for one the other is poor.
One writer states as her belief that children do not work well
at school because they have never been taught to work at home,
that the child who from babyhood has had some definite chores
to do daily will concentrate his attention in school. She adds,
"Deplorable as are the evils of child labor, they are not as far-
reaching and destructive as the evils of child idleness." There are
certainly extremes in this matter, and it would be interesting to
follow out a few examples to see what the best and poorest pupils
did out of school hours.
Very few children over-study, though we have known a few,
a very few, who were intent upon study, to the sacrifice of health,
because they set themselves high standards of work.
More often children who claim to study a large number of
hours out of school hours are not studying, they are sitting with a
book or paper before them, merely looking at it or idly drawing
lines, not even pictures on the paper or margins of the book. Mabel,
who had to be tutored to keep her up with her grade and her parents'
ambitions, took much credit to herself because she spent two hours
daily on home work. Her paper bore crude figures, she never was
known to complete any lesson assigned, either long or short, show-
ing that the two hours were wasted. She could have finished the
work in half an hour.
An excellent story is told by a teacher of how a class of boys
were told they might go home a half hour early if their work was
completed. They accomplished it easily, and the next day a similar
amount was given with permission to go even earlier if the work
was well done. They did it in even less time and the time was
shortened each day until they accomplished in a morning what had
formerly taken all day. We tried this out with a boy we were
bringing up to grade and found he could do in twenty minutes what
had taken one hour if he did not want to be dismissed quickly to go
to a ball game. It was well done, too, neatly and accurately, if written.
BRINGING CHILDREN VP TO GRADE. 137
Supervised lessons are what the backward child needs, to be
taught how to study, how to concentrate. "Unfortunately many
have not learned the greatest and most important lesson of all?
to do exactly what he is told to do."
In some schools far too much work is supposed to be prepared
at home, where it is not prepared, for the average house is not a
good place in which to study. There is too much going on. The
child is allowed to cease his preparation on the slightest pretext.
We see very small children carrying home many books, we wonder
if it is not wiser to have them do that work under the teacher's eye.
W. C. Bagley in "The Educative Process" states that "the mind
is constantly open to distractions?it always tends to follow the line
of least effort." We all know how that is from personal experience,
we know how our own attention can be diverted from our work and
we have seen our pupils' attention drawn away by a dog coming
into the room or some person stopping at the door. Immediately
the child is alert to investigate this new matter. Mr. Bagley adds
that a slight distraction may be essential to the best work, but the
power to go on working among distracting influences comes only
after long training. "The capacity for work is the capacity for
sustained effort. It means concentration, organization and per-
manency of purpose." These we find lacking in the child who is
not up to grade, and these are the things we must strive to inculcate,
for they are of more real value in after life than lessons from text-
books. He speaks also of the tendency to revert to type which is
latent in all of us, a return to ancestral conditions?"It finds expres-
sion in love for change, the desire?sometimes overwhelming?to do
'something else.' " To overcome this we must develop the "will-
power," and "self-control."
"While the desire to do 'something else' is always latent the
desire to do nothing at all is perhaps more frequently in evidence,"
but "always to obey the dictates of interest would mean the instant
arrest of all progress." Doris, a backward maiden of thirteen who
needed much tutoring, said one day, "We wanted to go down to
the auditorium and play a game, but Miss Sharp wouldn't let us."
This is the attitude of many a child towards lessons, to get through
them somehow, then play, or even play first. The desire and thought
are on the side of the game.
Yet Mr. Bagley says, "It is safe to say that the point will never
be reached when pain and drudgery can be entirely eliminated from
the educative process." And should it be, since in after life we all
have many disagreeable duties, which cannot be eliminated from our
daily lives?
138 BRINGING CHILDREN UP TO GRADE.
We have heard it said that the valedictorian of a class rarely
makes a success in life. This may be true of those who simply
memorize what is given, but it is not true of the boy or girl who
bears highest honor because he or she has dug it out. The real
worker or thinker is not going to fail by and by out in the world;
he has learned to work. Carrying off high honors does not always
mean that the bearer is especially brilliant, or that knowledge was
easily attained. The child may have had to struggle for what he
obtained. We are inclined to expect more of those with a high
record. There was the boy with a high record in one high school
class who runs a small coal-yard. Now, it is no disgrace to sell
coal?we all need it?but some might sneer at that occupation for an
honor student, as being not just what one would expect of him.
There is more real satisfaction to the teacher in bringing up
to the standard a slow child who is trying to learn, than in dealing
with those who think themselves "smart." The results may not
appear great, but the final victory is a delight to parents, teacher and
child, for the critical point being passed the child may keep in the
upward path doing credit to his teacher.
A child loves novelty. The lessons that stand out most dis-
tinctly in my own mind after many years are the first I ever had
in physiology, upon the bones, taught in a primary grade by means
of a little poem. Then, too, there is a memory of the first drawing
lesson in a real drawing book, a slate having been used previously.
And that recalls the outside of that book and reminds us that teach-
ers never know just how children are receiving the information given
them; that is one reason they fail, because they do not comprehend.
This drawing book had "Boston, L. Prang," printed at the
bottom. Now, of course, that is plain to a grown-up, but I read
it as one name, thinking the man's name was Boston L. Prang. It
was years before experience in punctuating was great enough for
me to realize the mistake. To this day when I see the name of Prang
it recalls Boston L. This is not unlike the story of a boy who
learned the definition of the equator, then described it as a "menag-
erie-lion running around the middle of the world." Set the average
child to reading a page of history or geography aloud and see how he
jumbles and miscalls words, then wonder if he fails, never having
caught the real idea.
There is much criticism of the examination method. It is going
out of our lower schools, but is it out of our colleges? It is a fact
that while promotion upon daily lessons is our ideal, there are chil-
dren who shine in written tests who make a wretched job of a class
recitation. Some are "scared stiff" when asked to recite, diffidence
BRINGING CHILDREN UP TO GRADE. 139
and shyness are often mistaken for sullenness and stupidity and
poor preparation. Of course, ease in public recitation is a habit,
but it is one which some never acquire, and a teacher who does not
understand character will frighten away what little the child knows.
Given a sheet of paper and a pencil they can express themselves.
Yet on the other hand there are children frightened by the very
mention of an examination who cannot do as well as they do at
recitation. The 75 per cent method properly conducted does away
with much nervous strain for a majority of the school. Yet if we
must have tests every few days we might just as well call them
examinations. One of our schools promotes on the monthly work
and the teachers' judgment; no examinations at the end of the
term. But they have "tests" in every subject during the last week.
Where's the difference?
Here is someone's opinion,?"The virtue of the examination
lies in its power to force strenuous mental effort to the task of
organizing a large body of facts and principles into coherent
system. * * * They should be large and comprehensive, so formu-
lated that they will bring out and exercise not the memory for details
but the capacity to grasp large masses of knowledge and weld the
separate facts and principles into systematic unities."
We cannot yet quite do as Gene Stratton Porter suggests in
"Laddie," but we might make school work more attractive so we
would need to bring fewer children up to grade. "Schoolhouses
were made wrong. If they must be, they should be built in a woods
pasture beside a stream, where you could wade, swim and be corns
fortable in summer, and slide and skate in winter. The window-
should be cut to the floor and stand wide open, so the birds and
butterflies could pass through. You ought to learn your geography
by climbing a hill, walking through a valley, wading creeks, making
islands in them, and promontories, capes and peninsulas along the
bank. You should do your arithmetic sitting under trees adding
hickory nuts, subtracting walnuts, multiplying butternuts and
dividing hazelnuts. You could use apples for fractions and tin cups
for liquid measure. You could spell everything in sight and this
would teach you the words that are really used in the world."
Wouldn't that be delightful, children and teachers?
