Employment and Compensation of Prisoners
=========================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.
The Pennsylvania Branch of the American Institute of Criminal Law and
Criminology held its fifth annual meeting in Witherspoon Hall, Philadelphia,
on Wednesday evening, April 14th. The topic for discussion was "The Employment and Compensation of Prisoners." Hon. Robert Ralston, Judge of Common
Pleas Court No. 5, and President of the American Institute, presided at the
meeting.
The commission appointed by the governor to consider provisions for the
employment and compensation of all inmates of penal institutions, recommends
the employment and compensation of all prisoners; the adoption of the Stateuse system; the creation of a central board charged with the production and sale
of the goods; the abolition of county jails, and the formation of six state industrial farms. Bills drafted by the commission, containing these recommendations,
are now pending in both branches of the legislature.
National Conference of Charities and Correction.
The forty-second National Conference of Charities and Correction will meet
at Baltimore, Maryland, May 12-19, 1915, with headquarters at the Hotel
Belvedere. The conference consists of nine committees, each concerned with a
distinct social or charitable problem, as follows,?Children, Corrections, Education for Social Work, the Family and the Community, Health, Public and Private
Charities, Social Hygiene, Social Legislation, and State Care of the Insane,
Feebleminded and Epileptics. Those interested may address the National
Conference, 315 Plymouth Court, Chicago, Illinois.
American Academy of Political and Social Science.
The nineteenth annual meeting of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science will be held on Friday and Saturday, April 30 and May 1, 1915,
for the discussion of "America's Interests as affected by the European War."
The four morning and afternoon sessions will be held in the auditorium of the
Hotel Walton, the two evening sessions in Witherspoon Hall. The gatherings
will be addressed by a notable array of persons prominent in American affairs,
national, municipal, social, and academic. Official delegates appointed by the
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
governors of the several states of the union will attend, as well as delegations
of national civic and trade organizations and peace societies. The secretary of
the American Academy is Prof. J. P. Lichtenberger, of the University of Pennsylvania, to whom inquiries may be addressed.
A New Series of Monographs on Criminal Science.
The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology is entering upon the publication of a series of monograph supplements which will be known as Criminal Science
Monographs. The first monograph is now in the press and will appear early next
fall under the title "Pathological Swindling and Lying." Dr William Healy, of
Chicago, is the author. The volume will approximate two hundred pages. Each
number in this series will be attractively bound in cloth, and will come from the
press of Little, Brown and Co., Boston, Mass. Persons who have manuscripts
in hand or in preparation, which they wish to have considered for publication in
this series should communicate with Professor Robert H. Gault, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois.
National Effort to Improve Teaching on Tuberculosis.
For the purpose of securing more co-operation from physicians and nurses
in the anti-tuberculosis campaign, The National Association for the Study and
Prevention of Tuberculosis has inaugurated a movement to bring the importance
of this subject to the attention of these two groups, according to an announcement
made from headquarters today.
Among the first things which the Association is trying to do is to induce the
medical colleges and schools of nursing to give more instruction, particularly of a
clinical nature, on tuberculosis. An effort will be made also to reach the individual
practitioners and nurses by special booklets prepared for this purpose. The
clinical and other facilities of the various organizations affiliated with the National
Association will as far as possible be made available for the widest possible use in
training doctors and nurses in tuberculosis work.
"The object of this campaign," says Dr Charles J. Hatfield, Executive
Secretary of the National Association, in making the announcement, "is primarily to secure more accurate and earlier diagnosis of tuberculosis on the part of
physicians, and to show nurses the great opportunities of service in the home care of
consumptives. We shall also be able to put the average family physician in
touch with the best methods of treating tuberculosis and with the most recent
literature on that subject, thereby affording to the general public increased protection from this disease. Practically all of the medical colleges and schools of nursing
of the country have expressed their approval of our plan and have offered to
co-operate with us. While the medical profession generally has unselfishly
assisted the nation-wide campaign against this disease, we feel because of its
prevalence, tuberculosis should be given special attention by medical students
and practicing physicians everywhere. No other single disease demands so much
time and attention from the general practitioner in medicine. We shall try to
make it easy for any doctor or nurse to acquire a specialized knowledge of tuberculosis."
