Moral Imbecility from a Respectable Family
===========================================

By Margaret Otis, Ph.D.,
Philadelphia, Pa.
The term moral imbecile, used in contradistinction to mental
defective, indicates that the individual in question is bright in most
respects, but is incapable of appreciating moral standards as ordinarily accepted. The question whether there are moral imbeciles
according to this definition is debatable. The difficulty is that moral
standards are constantly changing, different races and different
nationalities have varying standards, and the various social classes
at present existing have standards which are not compatible with
one other. In addition to this difficulty comes in the time-worn
argument as to whether the moral sense is acquired or inherited.
Is the appreciation of the difference between right and wrong a unit
character which can be handed down from generation to generation
according to the Mendelian law?
It seems unfair to take as an example of a moral imbecile one of
the type usually selected. The social standing of the parents is
important in this regard and also the early environment. Are not
most of those ordinarily classed as moral imbeciles such because of
environment? A case should be selected where the social standing
of the parents is good and the environment cannot be questioned.
Then the mental capacity of the individual must be tested carefully
so that it is perfectly clear that defect of moral view-point only is
involved. It might be noted in passing that most delinquent girls
have faulty environment, so that it is difficult to find from this field
a case for consideration under this head. The following case, however, presents some features which would justify such a classification,
and is submitted for consideration as possibly a true moral imbecile.
Nell Lewis was the child of respectable parents who lived in a
town in the northern part of New Jersey. The environment of the
home was that of the average middle-class household. The father
was industrious, the mother had aspirations for an intellectual life
for Nell and wished her to go to college. Every advantage that
would conduce to this purpose was given the girl. Physically Nell
was remarkably well developed. She was born at full term and was
a very lively baby and exceptionally well, but was always headstrong
and very stubborn. She was deceitful, seemed restless, and would
never settle down to anything. Her mother said that she always
wanted to be "bigger than anybody else" but did not inherit this
characteristic from anyone in the family.
(51)
52 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Mentally Nell appeared to be perfectly normal. On the Binet
testing she missed but two questions, one the long sentence in the XII
group, the other the rhymes in the XI group. Her associations were
logical, and she did well on other tests. She had had a fair education,
had gone through the second year of high school, had studied in a
business college, and had been a stenographer for a year and a half.
Morally Nell was undoubtedly defective. The tendency to
deceive her mother seemed to be the starting point of her criminal
career. She was committed to a Home for Delinquent Girls on the
charge of larceny. She had been guilty of larceny on two or three
different occasions. She was suffering with venereal disease, and had
been in a private institution in New York City. All her wrong doings
were done secretly. Her troubles seem to have begun when she was
a small school girl. It seemed impossible for Nell to speak the truth.
She would invent a long story, later would say that her conscience
troubled her and that she wished to tell just how the event actually
occurred, but what she told on the second occasion was no more the
truth than what she told on the first. Nell was never trusted out of
the Home all the time that she was under state care. She was in all
the mischief that she could well be during this time, and was among
the foremost in having love affairs with the colored girls. It was
learned from one of Nell's friends that she had once told her that
she had "killed a fellow." He was an Italian and Nell had shot him
and covered him with leaves. She had escaped to town and had gone
to a nursing school. She supposed she would go to State's Prison,
but her mother pleaded for her to have her sent to the Girls' Home
instead. This report of Nell's having committed murder was learned
from another source, for another Home girl had made the statement
that there was a rumor among the girls to the effect that Nell had
killed a man. This was probably mere bravado, and was due to
Nell's love of the sensational and desire to pose as a heroine in the
eyes of the girls.
An effort was made to find out from Nell her own interpretation
of her moral delinquency. She was asked what was the reason for
her first lapse from right conduct. She said she thought it was a
lark, also that when she went to Sundaj' School, she went to look at
the boys and to show her clothes. There was a musician there who
played the flute. She hung upon him and went around to the rehearsals. She never had any compunction as to her wrong doing. She
never gave it a thought, thought it was smart. In dancing she thought
of the prize she was going to get. She used to wonder if her father
was following her up. She did all her wrong doing without the
knowledge of her father and mother. Her mother was hard of
MORAL IMBECILITY. 53
hearing, so that made it easier for her to get out nights. She used to
get out of the window and slide down a pole. She used to go in
swimming, and went with an expert swimmer. She became sunburned, and her mother asked her what was the matter. She said:
"When I was working lime blew in my eyes." At one time she had
had friends who were good girls, but later she preferred the "fast set"
rather than the "goody-goods". When asked if she was ever under
her mother's influence, she said: "No, if she ever started preaching
to me, I got out." Nell said that she used to get medals as prizes for
dancing. She sold them and gave the money to young men. One
of them wrote to her and her mother opened the letter when she was
away. Nell was supporting this man by money she earned getting
prizes. He was a gambler. When asked how she felt in regard to
this way of living, she said that then she thought just about having
a good old time, she wanted to be popular with the bunch.
As an experiment Nell was given some moral instruction to see
if she might be capable of benefiting thereby. In any discussion
it was not easy for Nell's mind to get beyond the concrete. It may
be suggested at this point that this characteristic indicates a certain
mental defect. A certain level of intelligence is required for the
appreciation of abstract truth, and this level Nell did not reach. The
difference between subjective and objective was explained to her and
at times she seemed to understand this, though often with this and
other things it was more a matter of verbal memory. She could
remember well the explanations that were given her.
The following association test was given with the purpose of
bringing out the trend of her mind. A paper was given Nell on which
was written a list of words with the instruction that she should write
down the very first thought that came into her mind on seeing the
word. She seemed to carry out this instruction conscientiously,
thinking that it was intended as an examination of her school knowledge. The words and responses were as follows:
Interest I thought of my lesson of interest and discount when I was studying bookkeeping.
Curiosity To know whether certain things I heard
about my going out were true.
Passive I thought about the meaning of this word
right after reading the word. Quiet, a
person can be passive, don't race around.
Knowledge I was thinking if I could have more knowledge than I have about my inner soul.
Truth I thought of the thought you gave me about
truth.
54 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Excitement I thought of how excited I was when I was
told I could go to the car to meet the
Superintendent.
Desire   .Of the time I would be a nurse.
Honesty Honesty is the best policy.
Success Wondering if my nursing would be a success.
I am always thinking of nursing.
Wilfulness I try to be very wilful. I was just wondering
if I were as wilful as I might be.
Love I have been trying to put my love on thoughts
of the sewing I would have to do when I
leave here.
Mechanical My first thought was of a mechanic. Then
I thought of a friend I had who was one.
Criminal UI never was a criminal" was my first
thought.
Hope I hope to be a good woman some day.
Instantaneous Instantaneous means anything said or done
right on the dot.
Beauty Beauty means anything that's pretty to the
eye.
At another time the same experiment was tried with the following
responses. What is especially to be noted in these responses is the
constant reference to self. This indicates an extremely self-centered
individual, and such an inference is certainly justified in this case.
The same instruction was given as in the experiment above.
Riches I thought first about some people I know by
the name of Rich.
Pleasure I was thinking of how I thought out "subjective and objective pleasures."
Mischief My first thought was about all the mischief
I have been in.
Jealousy My first thought was about what the minister
said one Sunday: "Jealousy leads to
murder."
Meanness Some people are very mean.
Self-consciousness. .My self-consciousness has proved itself.
Vigor I have lots of vigor.
Deceitfulness I am not deceitful.
Monstrosity The word puzzled me at first.
Egoism I had this word in class.
Pride I take lots of pride in trying to keep myself
looking neat.
MORAL IMBECILITY. 55
Ignorance I am not ignorant.
Hatred I have noticed the hatred of many people.
Buoyant I am very buoj^ant.
It is interesting to note that some of the responses in this association test could be used as an indication that there might be some truth
in the rumor current in the Home as to Nell's criminal career.
As to the question suggested above of considering this girl a
moral imbecile, it may be urged that the lack was in the mother who
failed early to get control of the child. A strong personality in the
mother, perhaps, would have been able to cope with the strong-willed
child. Yet, after all, Nell chose her own. She had the opportunity
of associating with the best, was even urged and pushed toward what
is regarded as the highest type of life. Yet with all that, though the
best was placed before her, she preferred the worst. Like attracts
like. She gravitated to her kind, and her kind apparently were not
the kind of her parents.
