Prevocational Training in Elementary Schools
==============================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.
A pamphlet of eighty pages recently issued by the department of education
of the city of New York, contains social and economic data whose importance
it would be hard to exaggerate. It is a report on the organization and extension
of prevocational training in elementary schools, prepared by Dr. William L.
Ettinger, associate city superintendent. It has seemed to him, he says, "of
more value to make this report more in the nature of an historical sketch of
what has been done, than to interpret any conclusions thereon, or to make
recommendations as to the future."
On January 22, 1914, the board of education adopted a recommendation to
introduce differentiated experimental courses in the seventh and eighth years of
Public School 62 Manhattan. Six courses were approved, three for boys and
three for girls,?academic, commercial, and industrial. As industrial training
for the boys, provision was made for woodwork, machine shop, electric wiring,
and sheet metal work; for the girls, dressmaking, millinery, pasting and novelty
work, and the use of power machines. At the beginning of 7 A grade the class
of boys was divided into six sections, spending the afternoons in industrial work.
Unusually marked aptitude was considered as establishing a choice of vocational
training. Pupils showing marked deficiency were put back on academic work
until their turn came to try another trade. The classes were organized in
April, 1914.
On January 28, 1914, the board of education adopted a recommendation
introducing an industrial course for girls in the seventh year of Public School
162 Brooklyn, in connection with the regular school work of that year, and
classes were organized in February, 1914. Dr. Ettinger supervised the work
in both schools from the beginning. The experiment involved: (1) Trade
preparatory work; (2) Vocational guidance; (3) No loss of essential academic
work.
In June, 1914, Dr. Ettinger was a member of a party which accompanied
the Mayor and President of the Board on a visit to the schools of Chicago, Cin-
cinnati, and Gary, Ind. Reporting to the president upon the results of this
tour of inspection Dr. Ettinger says, "as far as the discovery of anything new
or valuable in relation to the development of vocational work along elementary
lines, I saw nothing comparable either in scope or in application with the work
of our vocational schools or of our prevocational experiment in elementary
schools." The now famous Emerson School of Gary, Ind., embodying the
educational ideas of Superintendent William Wirt, he found "fruitful in valu-
able suggestions. It is a grade school, a work-shop, and a social center?all in
one and under one management. It is truly a Communal School; it is a com-
posite school with composite courses, and embraces all grades?kindergarten,
elementary, and high school. It has an eight-hour school day?six hours of this
time is taken up with the regular school program, including one hour for lunch?
and the remaining two hours are spent by the child either in supervised play,
(184)
NEWS AND COMMENT. 185
supervised industrial occupations, supervised agricultural occupations, or super-
vised social activities. . . . The administration of the Emerson School embraces
the widest use of the school plant. The school is never idle; it is working every
day and every week during the year; it accommodates pupils to the extent of
double the number of class sittings; it does this by the widest use of shop,
auditorium, gymnasium, playgrounds, and gardens. Because of flexibility in
grading and promotion, the child who is withdrawn from school for any reason,
can resume work without danger of retardation. Vacation periods are not
necessarily confined to the summer months. ... In the Emerson School voca-
tional guidance begins from the earliest period of school life." To his appre-
ciation Dr. Ettinger is compelled to add a word of caution,?"In my opinion,
vocational work in the Emerson School is not the best type of vocational training.
The industrial occupations are all organized with a view to reducing the cost
maintenance of the school, plant, and equipment. The work is therefore neces-
sarily restricted to the particular articles required in the upkeep of the school.
On this side there is a possibility of exploitation of the child without proper
regard for higher development in vocational training."
A conference was held in New York in July, 1914, at which Superintendent
Wirt was present, and he later submitted a report recommending that six schools
be remodeled with practical shops to be used as prevocational laboratories.
The schools chosen by the committee were 64 and 65 Manhattan, 5 and 158
Brooklyn, and 85 Queens, together with one school in the Bronx and one in
Richmond to be selected later. In September, 1914, Dr. Ettinger conferred
with the principals of these schools, and instructed them in the reorganization
of their schedules in accordance with a program whose main features were:
(1) To organize the schools on a two-unit plan, i. e. two duplicate schools in one
building; (2) To provide for a wider use of gymnasium, auditorium, and play-
ground; (3) To take advantage of public libraries, parks, and industries, and
home co-operation.
A circular of information was given to all pupils in the classes concerned,
and sent to their parents as well. It requested co-operation with the school,
and contained among other things a strong economic argument for vocational
training, drawing the following comparisons: "The unskilled laborer with little
training, at the age of 22 earns $10 a week, and seldom earns a higher wage.
Thus, assuming that he works 52 weeks a year for 20 years, his net earnings are
$10,400. The trade worker with little schooling and shop instruction only, at
22 years of age, earns $13.25 a week; he may finally earn as much as $16 a week.
His greatest net wages for 20 years will amount to $16,540.
"On the other hand, trade workers with a good elementary school education
who enter trade schools and remain there until 18 or 19 years of age, earn $12
a week on their entrance into trades, and rapidly rise to $20 or $25 a week. The
net income, as the result of this additional preparation, is $26,000 for the same
period, or 2^ times greater than that earned by the unskilled learner. In other
words, the net dividend on the education to be gained in the combined elementary
and trade school would amount to $15,000."
In October, 1914, the board of superintendents authorized the organization
of the prevocational classes, and provided for the licensing and selection of
186 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
teachers. The eight branches of industrial training already introduced into
the schools were continued, and to them were added plumbing, printing, book
binding, sign painting, garment design, trade drawing, and home making, the
last named being not the least important for the future welfare of families to be
raised in the crowded districts of New York.
How the program has worked out in detail during the year is very fully set
forth by Dr. Ettinger, with pictures of the classes at work. He gives an outline
of the general course of study, and syllabi of the work in the several shops, together
with lists of text-books and equipment. He leaves no point untouched, upon
which information could be desired by any one, either within the system or from
the outside. His pamphlet will be eagerly consulted by the many educators in
this country who are giving serious consideration to the problem of preparing
school children to become wage-earners.
A. T.
An Exhibition of Children's Pet Animals.
One of the objects of the Children's Pets Exhibition to be held at the
Panama-Pacific International Exposition, December 2d and 3d, is to encourage
children to study strange insects or animals instead of killing them. In regard
to this Professor William E. Ritter, of the Scripps Institution for Biological
Research of the University of California, says:
"I would like to see all children so surrounded and so instructed with refer-
ence to animal and plant life about them that they would have a kindly interest
and regard for all creatures, and reach such a rational attitude toward them
that only those who are definitely proved to be injurious in one way or another
should be dreaded and marked as objects of destruction. There should be
nothing in the way of hatred or fear,?excepting legitimate fear, that is, fear
based on knowledge of injurious properties,?for any creature or plant. And on
the positive side, while certain few animals, as some of the domestic varieties,
might properly enough be made pets of, that is, may become companions of
children, there should always be a predisposition to be kind to all living things,
this predisposition serving to determine action until positive evidence prove the
organism undeserving."
The superintendent of the exhibition considers the comradeship of pets a
most valuable factor in the making of men of the future. He has firm faith
that boys who are rightly interested in animals will grow into men interested in
humanity; and he has found by past experience in local exhibitions of children's
pets that what interests the children will eventually interest their parents.
Full information and entry blanks for the Children's Pets Exhibition (for
which there are no expenses), may be obtained by writing to D. O. Lively, Chief
of Department of Live Stock, P. P. I. E., San Francisco, California.
Essay Contest on Thrift.
At the Oakland meeting of the National Education Association, Mr. S. W.
Straus, of Chicago, President of the American Society for Thrift, made a propo-
sition to the Association in which he offered to finance the expenses of a com-
mittee if one should be appointed to study the methods by which instruction
NEWS AND COMMENT. 187
in thrift might be introduced into the public schools. He also offered to furnish
funds which could be used for prize-essay contests on the subject of thrift. This
offer was accepted by the Association and a committee was authorized to be
appointed by the president of the National Council of Education.
In discussing the question of the essay contests with Mr. Straus, it was
decided to conduct two, one of which should be open to school children and
one to adults. The contest for adults will be managed entirely from the office
of the Association, but it was thought best to manage the contest for children
under the following conditions.
Each county superintendent will be asked to endeavor to secure a contest
in each school within the county outside of cities of four thousand population.
That figure was chosen because of the fact that it is the basis for the directory
issued by the United States Commissioner of Education. It is planned
to have each school select the three best essays that are presented, using any
system in the selection which the teacher desires. The three best essays from
each school will be sent to the county school commissioner, who in turn will,
by any method he sees fit, select the five best essays from the schools of the
county and send them to the state superintendent. At the same time there
would be conducted in each city system of four thousand population or more
a similar contest under the direction of the superintendent of schools. Super-
intendents of cities of less than ten thousand population will send one essay to
the state superintendent; superintendents of cities with a population between
ten and fifty thousand will send two essays to the state superintendent; super-
intendents of cities of from fifty to one hundred thousand population will send
three essays to the state superintendent; superintendents of cities of over one
hundred thousand population will send four essays and one additional essay for
each additional one hundred thousand population.
The state superintendent will use any method he desires in determining
the best essays from his state, and will send the ten best essays from his state to
the office of the Association, which in turn will have these essays rated and the
prizes awarded accordingly.
These essays are to be on the general subject of Thrift, the idea being to
draw out the children's ideas on the subject without any suggestion as to methods
by which the same should be treated. Essays will be limited to one thousand
words. All essays sent to the state superintendent must be in sets of three each
and typewritten. To the writer of the best essay a prize of one hundred dollars
will be awarded; to the writer of the second best, a prize of fifty dollars; to the
writers of the third and fourth best, prizes of twenty-five dollars each; to the
writers of the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth best, ten dollars each.
The contest will close, so far as the writing of essays is concerned, December
1st. The county and city superintendents should fix a time for receiving the
essays from the several teachers. It might be well to allow the month of
December for that portion of the work. The month of January can be given
to the county and city superintendents for their work, all essays to be in the
hands of the state superintendents the first of February. The month of Feb-
ruary will be given to the state superintendents for their examination, the essays
from each state to be sent to the office of the Association by the first of March.
188 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The month of March will be used by this office for its work, so that announce-
ment concerning the prize winners can be made before the close of any schools.
In addition to the contest for school children, prizes are offered for the three
best essays presented by adults on the subject of Thrift?with an Outline of a
Method by which the Principles of Thrift may be Taught in our Public Schools.
The first prize will be $750, the second prize $250, and the third prize $100.
Persons intending to compete for these prizes should notify the Secretary
of the National Education Association of their intention not later than Decem-
ber 1, 1915. The essays must be in the possession of the Secretary not later
than March 1, 1916. The essays must not exceed five thousand words and six
typewritten copies must be presented. Further details will be sent to those
indicating their intention to take part in the contest.
President Robert J. Aley, of the National Council of Education, has
appointed the following Committee on Thrift Education:
Arthur H. Chamberlain, secretary, California Council of Education, San
Francisco, Cal.
Robert H. Wilson, state superintendent of public instruction, Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma.
J. A. Bexall, dean, School of Commerce, Oregon Agricultural College, Cor-
vallis, Oregon.
John D. Shoop, assistant superintendent of schools, Chicago, 111.
S. W. Straus, president, American Society for Thrift, Chicago, 111.
Henry R. Daniel, secretary, American Society for Thrift, Chicago, 111.
Milo H. Stuart, principal, Manual Training High School, Indianapolis, Ind.
Kate Devereux Blake, principal, Public School No. 6, Manhattan, N. Y.
C. H. Dempsey, superintendent of schools, Haverhill, Mass.
