Child Training as an Exact Science
===================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM
By George W. Jacoby, M.D. New York
and London: Funk and Wagnalls Co., 1914. Pp. xiv+384. Illus.
To physicians Dr Jacoby's book will doubtless give the satisfaction which it
is but human to feel when told, "Ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with
you." To teachers it will prove disappointing because of the author's failure to
grasp pedagogical problems. It may well arouse, by the way, a justifiable resentment at the tone assumed in speaking of the teaching profession. Why, indeed,
should Dr Jacoby use continually the term pedagog, while he would not dream
of applying to a member of his own profession the equally slighting term medicus?
And finally to men of science the title of the book will convey an absurdity.
Mathematics, mechanics, perhaps physics and astronomy,?these are the exact
sciences. Anything more inexact than child training, or training of any sort
whatever, not even a scientist could imagine.
Dr Jacoby opens his preface by declaring, "A treatise on child training as
an exact science, based upon principles of modern psychology, has seemed to me
to be an urgent necessity." That modern psychology is the basis for efficient
training of teachers, is generally admitted. That it is not the real foundation
underlying Dr Jacoby's treatise, is only too evident. He refers to his book now
as "a work on education based on medicine and hygiene," now as "one dealing
with those pedagogic reforms which appear to be necessary from the viewpoint of
medicine and hygiene," and again as "a presentation of that medico-hygienic
scientific material which the pedagog cannot forego using in the rational exercise
of his profession." This sort of presentation, if we are not mistaken, has already
been amply made. What we would like to see handled by Dr Jacoby is a treatment of those reforms within medical schools which would lead graduated physicians to an understanding of the child's mental growth and development. A
comprehension of the methods of personal hygiene, we venture to say, is becoming
more wide-spread among teachers, than is a comprehension of psychology among
medical practitioners. Far too often we still hear a physician say of a child with
some mental defect which demands prompt educational treatment, "Do not
worry, he will outgrow it," and far too often the parents, in obedience to his
advice, allow the time to slip by, until the bad habit is firmly rooted, the deficiency
ingrained.
"I have considered it necessary," Dr Jacoby remarks, "to prelude the
actual subject matter of my book by an historical survey." This occupies sixteen pages, of which four pages are devoted to Seguin and six lines to Dr Maria
Montessori, although her portrait shares with Seguin's the honor of illustrating
this chapter and later on in the book fourteen pages are given to a fragmentary
discussion of the Montessori method. The only psychologist mentioned is
Wilhelm Wundt, who is dismissed in five lines. Most of the great names in the
history of training defective children are omitted altogether.
This brief "history" forms part first. Part second deals with the pyschology
of childhood, part third with the psychic abnormalities of childhood, part fourth
(23)
24 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
with prophylactic training, and part fifth, therapeutic training. The work is
rounded out by a poorly made bibliography.
It is an unfortunate commonplace that physicians writing upon subjects not
strictly medical, find it impossible to refrain from preaching. Dr Jacoby is no
exception, and much of his book is taken up by reflections which the reader might
be permitted to make for himself, if he so desired. A great deal of valuable
material has been gathered by Dr Jacoby, but it would require the utmost discretion and skill to winnow it from the misleading statements and unsound inferences with which it is mingled. Nearly if not quite all of this scientific material
can be found in other works which are trustworthy and easily accessible, and for
this reason, if for no other, it would be unwise for psychologists, parents, and
above all for teachers, to spend time upon the book.
A. T.
