On the Relation of Intelligence to Efficiency
==============================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1915, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. IX, No. 3.
May 15, 1915
/

By Lightner Witmer, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.
An important chapter in ex-President Eliot's recent book, "The
Road toward Peace," treats of the diverse character of "national
efficiency" under free and autocratic governments in a manner
which tempts me to contribute, not as so many have done to the
polemics of the current European war, but to the differential
diagnosis of efficiency and of a mental trait, intelligence, on which
efficiency in part depends. While Dr. Eliot's book gave the imme-
diate impulse to the preparation of this article, my subject matter
and treatment are the outcome of experimentation with so-called
intelligence and efficiency tests.
At some points my analysis compels me to propose a revision
of Dr. Eliot's terms, but I intend only the constructive criticism
of admiration. The acumen and insight with which he presents
the psychological factors of success in war and peace, put to shame the
work of some professional psychologists in the field of social and
individual diagnosis. Consider for example, this differential diagnosis
of Professor Miinsterberg's:?"The southern peoples are children
of the moment: the Teutonic live in the things which lie beyond the
world, in the infinite and the ineffable." No wonder we think of
Harvard's department of psychology as virtually an "outpost of Kul-
tur," and only incidentally a psychological laboratory.
Dr. Eliot considers the present war to be a supreme test of
British, French, and German efficiency. "The real issue this war is
to decide," he tells us, is "the question of civilization developing
under the forms of free government rather than under the forms of
autocratic government," and he continues, "it becomes a very
interesting study for all the freer peoples how German efficiency is
going to turn out in competition with such efficiency as the freer
nations develop." While Dr. Eliot's treatment of the difference
between German efficiency on the one hand, and British or French
efficiency on the other, has reference to national interests of imme-
(61)
62 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
diate concern, a penetrating analysis of the nature of intelligence
and its relation to efficiency is essential to a satisfactory treatment
of many other problems. Efficiency is now a popular catch-word in
the criticism, not only of public administration, industrial organiza-
tion, and productive processes, but also of educational procedure,
where it has even been put forward to measure the value of the
scientific output of university laboratories. Efficiency, its causes
and its differentia, is a field of direct inquiry within the science of
psychology.
Clear thinking and precise expression are difficult when we lack
the necessary words to indicate differences which we know exist.
A vocabulary develops more slowly than our apprehension of dif-
ferences. This is eminently true of the science of psychology, which
has not as yet been able to produce a technical vocabulary that
shall be both precise and adequate. In the present instance I believe
that under the term efficiency are indiscriminately grouped two very
different kinds of human performance. For the one I propose the
word competency, for the other I would reserve the word efficiency.
Dr. Eliot differentiates clearly enough the two kinds of performance.
Thus he speaks of "the German method of efficiency all the way
through industrial life ? giving instruction and training enough to
produce the amount of skill needed for the daily task, and then
enforcing that subjection of the worker which results in thorough
co-ordination and co-operation in the complex processes of production.
The efficiency of the military system is obtained in like manner ? by
thorough training which leads to the instinctive cooperation of the
individual with a mass of his comrades, and to an absolute obedience
unto death." Of the "freer nations" he says, "The efficiency of all
these nations is based on a high degree of personal initiative and of
political and industrial freedom, not on the subjection or implicit
obedience of the individual, but on the energy and good-will in work
which result from individual freedom, ambition, and initiative."
This is the kind of efficiency that I suggest we now call competency,
a term which I have chosen after a careful consideration of other
terms having a similar meaning, such as capability, aptness, etc.
In one passage Dr. Eliot himself has not been able to dispense with the
use of this word. In discussing the German system of education and
government, he tells us that "under free governments and in com-
munities which have a fair amount of social mobility, the rare men
are surer to come forward into vigorous action," and continuing, he
speaks of these men as "the men who are competent, not only to
invent or imagine the thing or the method that is next wanted, but
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 63
to put their inventions into practical form, and to make them useful
in the actual industries of their nations and the world." Here and
elsewhere he suggests what is to be my express contention, that
competency will tend to develop and use efficiency, but that
efficiency does not necessarily produce competency.
The Problem
The issue thus presented is a fundamental problem in psy-
chological diagnosis, for the differentia of efficiency, competency, and
intelligence, inevitably arise and require analysis, whenever we
carry forward any series of mental tests. For purposes of illustra-
tion, let the test be the adding of a column of figures. Different
persons will add up a column of figures with different degrees of
accuracy and at different rates of speed. After many repetitions of
the test, most individuals will add a column of figures of equal length
with greater accuracy and speed than at the first trial. If two
individuals, A and B, start with the same initial efficiency, measured
in terms of accuracy and speed, and after an equal number of repeti-
tions attain an equal efficiency, A having been given the best
instruction and training known for acquiring accuracy and speed,
and B having been left to his own devices, we have some ground for
diagnosing B as a more competent person than A. B has acquired
efficiency by the exercise of his own intelligence, while A has
employed imitation, memory, and perhaps other mental faculties, to
acquire and use the results of his teacher's knowledge, which itself
is a product of the collective intelligence of the community relating
to this special problem. The source of efficiency is therefore of diag-
nostic importance if we would interpret the significance of different
degrees of efficiency in different persons.
If I call C more efficient than D, I affirm an efficiency difference
without expressing any opinion as to the origin of this efficiency.
We can call machines and persons efficient or inefficient, but we do not
speak of a machine as competent. If, then, I call a person com-
petent after having observed some efficient performance of his, I am
ascribing to him a certain measure of intelligence which is assumed
to be an active agent in producing his efficiency.* I may call him
* Competency and intelligence are teleological concepts, while efficiency as I define it is a
mechanical concept. Whether competency and intelligence may ultimately be resolved into
mechanical concepts, I do not propose to discuss. For my present purpose, it is unnecessary to
decide upon one attitude or the other. With respect to efficiency, however, I believe it must be
used restrictedly as a mechanical concept. If we explain an efficient performance as the product
of inherent efficiency in the performer, we shall make no progress in our treatment of this problem.
To say that efficiency causes efficiency, is like saying that a log floats because it has the property
of flotation. To say that efficiency is a product of intelligence, doubtless affords only a partial
explanation, but at least we are on our way, and after we have taken the first steps of our analysis,
we may proceed to analyse intelligence itself.
64 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
efficient and yet know nothing about his intelligence. An efficient
person may or may not be intelligent, for even stupid persons can be
trained to be efficient. In a given situation the competent person
will probably employ his intelligence to acquire efficiency, but on
the other hand, he might reveal greater intelligence by refusing to
become efficient. It is not an unusual experience to find in schools
and elsewhere, individuals who are inefficient in the simpler per-
formances of life, and yet competent in fields of higher endeavor.
An inefficient college student may show himself competent as a
lawyer or doctor. An inefficient bank clerk may make a competent
bank president. An inefficient junior officer in the army may make
a competent commanding officer. General Grant refused the train-
ing of West Point, not being able to graduate, but showed his mili-
tary competency in the supreme test of war. The resistance which is
encountered in the introduction of civil service examinations, and of
efficiency tests in industrial organizations, in schools and colleges,
is based to some extent on the implicit recognition of this significant
distinction. Our big industrial plants have just been welded into
shape. The men at the top, who have performed this task, were
competent men who did the thing themselves. They have com-
pelled their subordinates to become efficient. We must be careful
that in compelling efficiency we do not destroy natural competency.
Who will fill the positions at the top in the next generation? Is a
path being kept open for the competent, though inefficient, person
to rise to the top? Do German government officials, perhaps even
the military organization of Germany, suffer from an excess of
efficiency? If the British nation is competent enough, it will
"muddle through" again. The efficiency expert, who observes the
inefficiencies of a none the less competent person, forgets that after
all the main issue is the accomplished result, and the muddler who
just gets through may count for as much as the best exponent of
the specialized efficiencies.
The uses to which words are limited in ordinary language often
reveal subtle differences in meaning, which are obscured by their
definitions, for the definition is a formula, and in language as well as
in science the proper formula can be developed only after observa-
tion and analysis. We speak of an efficient accountant or even an
efficient teacher, but we do not speak of an efficient poet, unless it
might be the poet laureate, whose function it is to produce poems to
order. We do not call an artist efficient, although we may perhaps
speak of an efficient illustrator. We do not characterize a great
composer as an efficient musician. This limitation in the use of the
term efficiency bears witness to the fact that production is an art as
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 65
well as a science. We can and do analyze complex human behavior
into simple elementary performances, and we measure the efficiency
of these performances. When we discover and measure the efficiency
of a performance, we rightly diagnose the performer as efficient, but
if we go further and diagnose the performer as competent, or grant
him intelligence, perhaps even " genius," we do something more than
discover or measure the efficiency of his performance. We interpret
the performance as a manifestation of intelligence.
Suppose we set out to test a class of children, and employ for
the purpose some problems in arithmetic. Certain members of the
class solve the problems, others do not. If the problems were
designed to test the elementary operations of addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division, and the children are, say, in the seventh
or eighth grade of public school, however much the children may be
shown to differ in efficiency, the resultant efficiencies will not serve
to indicate differences of intelligence. If the problems, however,
are sufficiently difficult, especially if they require the pupils to
employ their knowledge of the elementary processes in some new
field of application, we may be able to interpret differences in the
performances of the children as differences of intelligence. Take
two different children?the same test with identical results may
reveal the intelligence of one child, and yet tell us nothing about the
intelligence of the other. A three year old child may play with
blocks in such a way as to reveal the fact that he has been endowed
by nature with intelligence. A lecturer may talk for an hour and
display little or no intelligence. We see a chimpanzee sit down at
table, eat and drink, ride a bicycle, use a key to unlock a door, and
we marvel at the animal's intelligence. Do we really observe the
intelligence of a child or animal? As a matter of fact we observe it
no more than we feel some one else's pain.
It is all a matter of interpreting behavior, or using the seen
performance to diagnose an unseen quality of the performer. The
only intelligence of which you can be directly aware when you
observe the performance of another, is your own intelligence. In
observing and interpreting a child's performance, you doubtless
believe that you are exercising this intelligence. What you think of
your own intelligence is as liable to error as what you think of the
child's performance. Your opinion of yourself and of your intelli-
gence may be subjected to diagnostic criticism; your opinion may
reveal intelligence or not, for your interpretation of your own or
another's performance is also a performance. We have a natural
predilection to impute intelligence to ourselves and to think that
our actions flow from this. The timid woman who fears a thunder-
66 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
storm and shuts the window and then gets beneath the feather-bed,
interprets her performance in terms of intelligence. She says that
she is afraid of the lightning, although careful observation shows
that her real fear comes more from the noise of the thunder. She
says that she shuts the window because a draught may carry the
lightning in, and that a feather-bed is a nonconductor. No amount
of scientific explanation will assist her in overcoming her fear.
Offer her statistics which demonstrate that she stands a greater
chance of being killed every time she takes a train than she does
during a particular thunderstorm, and your dissertation will leave
her cold. She is wrong in interpreting her behavior in terms of
intelligence. It should be interpreted in terms of instinctive and
emotional reactions.
What do we observe in a performance which causes us to call
the performer intelligent, to look upon his performance as in part at
least due to hfs intelligence? In unfolding my analysis of what we
mean by intelligence, I find it necessary first to distinguish between
intelligence levels and intelligence grades. For example, we speak
of a chimpanzee as being more intelligent than a sheep, but less
intelligent than a human being. We distinguish the intelligence
of an imbecile from the intelligence of a normal child. We are all
agreed that in some sense of the word, a normal child has less intelli-
gence than a normal adult, and that a savage differs in intelligence
from a man of science. In all the cases just enumerated, we are
distinguishing intelligence levels, which are determined by the average
day in and day out performances. * When, however, I say of my
college students that one is more intelligent than another, I am
employing the term intelligence in an entirely different sense.
Intelligence differences in this sense of the word I propose to call
intelligence grades, and I measure or estimate the grade of intelli-
gence from something I observe in the performance, as this is
related to something which is not observed, but which I affirm to
exist in the performer. Intelligence in this sense I define as the
ability of the individual to solve what for him is a new problem.
Before I proceed to consider what I mean by the words, "what
for him is a new problem," let me point out certain unjustifiable
uses of the word intelligence. Psychology is a science of behavior,
but not of all behavior. It does not, for example, concern itself with
the behavior of plants, but only with those performances for whose
* If you ask, is Philadelphia a hotter place than New York??I can only answer this question by
ascertaining the average daily temperatures of the two cities for a year or a longer period. The
average of average daily temperatures I may call the temperature level. When we assert that the
college professor is a man of higher intelligence than an unskilled day laborer, do we mean any-
thing more than that the average level of daily performances is higher in the one group than in
the other?
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 67
adequate explanation we are compelled to posit the existence of
conscious states like pain, sensations of color, aesthetic feelings,
emotions, thoughts, and ideas. These conscious states are not
merely posited as existing entities, but in many cases are assumed to
be causes or active agents in the production of behavior, as when I
say my friend struck me because he was angry, or the child cries
because he wants his dinner. Science calls this kind of explanation
teleological, and there has alwajys been a tendency in science to unify
the diversity of conscious states in a single teleological concept. At
one time this is 'psyche, from which we get our words psychic and
psychological. At another time it is mind, from which we get such
words as mental and mentality. At another time it is reason, as when
we say that man does by reason what the animal does by instinct.
At another time it is the understanding, or memory; and now the
current fashion in psychological terminology shifts to the word
intelligence. When, for example, a psychologist entitles his course of
lectures, "Non-conscious Factors in Intelligence," and considers
under this caption such topics as "The Simpler Expressions of
Intelligence, Memory and Sensorial Functions," or "More Complex
Forms of Control, Reasoning and its Components," or again "Lan-
guage," and "Inherited Expressions of Intelligence," he appears to
be using the word intelligence to mean what others have meant by
consciousness or mind. Entitled "The Non-conscious Factors of
Consciousness," the course would appear what it really is, a con-
servative treatment of a familiar theme in physiological psychology.
The touch of fresh paint to the old sign board is the word intelli-
gence, which today is the central problem in clinical psychology.
This problem is not directly concerned with consciousness at all,
but with the analysis and abstraction of a particular quality of
behavior, to which quality I would limit the meaning of the word
by precise definition.
Precision of thought will never be reached in psychology if
intelligence as a tferm is thus confused with mind or consciousness.
Nor can we omit to discriminate between intelligence and intellect.
The learned man, the university professor, exercises his intelligence
almost exclusively within the intellectual sphere. Consequently, he
likes to measure intelligence in terms of intellectual activity. It
may or may not be true that the highest grades of intelligence are
revealed only in the intellectual sphere, but it is important to dis-
tinguish one thing from the other, and to recognize the possibility
that a man or a child may be intelligent without being at all intel-
lectual. When, therefore, a recent writer says of universities that
they are "the very citadels of intelligence, the guardians in trust of
68 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the higher intellectual life of our nation," he apparently considers
the sphere of intelligence to be co-extensive with that of the intellect.
If he is employing intelligence in the sense in which I define it, his
statement is false. I do not believe that universities are any more
citadels o,f intelligence than is Congress, or the board of directors of
some large corporation. The members of a college faculty are, it
is true, guardians of the higher intellectual life. The performance
level at which they manifest their intelligence is higher than the
performance level of, say, the students whom they teach, but I
should look with despair upon my task of instructing college stu-
dents, if I did not think that even the freshman class contained
more than one student of greater intelligence than fifty per cent
of the college faculty. I could entertain no hope for the future of
this country, if I did not think that just as intelligent young men
go into the industries as go to college.
Again, we must avoid using the term intelligence when we mean
reason or the understanding. Reasoning is only one kind of per-
formance, the material being facts. Intelligence is not exclusively
a manifestation of the reasoning process, although reasoning, like
every other kind of performance, may be employed to grade intelli-
gence. Understanding is also a specialized performance, a pre-
requisite for which is a stock of information. If I read you a diffi-
cult passage, let us say, in psychology, and discover that you have
not understood it, I do not necessarily obtain any information as to
your intelligence. I may have read the passage in Russian, and you
may not have learned Russian, and if I read it in English you may
not have studied psychology. I may indeed use your understanding
of a passage to ascertain the grade of your intelligence, but I must
make my selection with reference to your level of acquired informa-
tion and accomplishments. The only way in which you can manifest
intelligence in understanding, or in reasoning, or in the intellectual
field, or in business, or as a college student, or as a school child, is
from a relation which must be established between the result of the
test, that is to say, the solution of some problems which are set you,
and your momentary level of information and training. A particular
problem may serve as a test of your intelligence once. If you are
very intelligent and have also a good memory, it will rarely serve
its purpose a second time, for as I have said, intelligence is the
ability of an individual to solve what for him is a new problem.
The mere solving of problems, then, is not the criterion of
intelligence. Take a college class in some subject, let us say, psy-
chology. I teach this class for a year, and at the end of the year I
employ a test, i. e. an examination paper consisting of a number of
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 69
questions or problems which the student is required to solve. Those
who give a certain proportion of correct answers, that is to say,
solve a certain proportion of the problems, I pass. Have I any
information as to whether the students passed have advanced in
grade of intelligence during the year? They may have entered my
class with a certain ability to solve new problems. They may leave
me with the same ability to solve what are for them new problems.
I shall have taught them during the year?such is my pedagogical
optimism?to solve more problems than they could have solved at
the beginning, but all I can learn from the ordinary examination is
that they have retained certain quantities of information and been
trained to employ the proper methods of solving problems. In one
sense of the word, I suppose I may be said to have increased their
intelligence. I have raised their intelligence level, more specifically
their information and training level?their intellectual level if you
please?but in my terminology their performance level. A college
graduate should have a higher performance level than a high school
student. Every college professor should have a higher level than
any college student, but it would be foolish to say that every college
professor has a higher grade of intelligence than any college student,
or that every college student has a higher grade of intelligence than
any high school pupil, or that every high school pupil has a higher
grade of intelligence than any elementary pupil. There is no proof
that grade of intelligence is increased by education, but the level of
performance is undoubtedly raised by education. As a matter of
fact, I do not know how to compare grades of intelligence in individ-
uals who differ greatly in performance level. How, for example,
does the grade of intelligence of a college professor compare with the
grade of intelligence of a chimpanzee? If intelligence is, as I have
defined it, the ability of the individual to solve what for him is a
new problem, it is conceivable that a particular chimpanzee at his
level may exhibit a higher grade of intelligence than a particular
college professor at his level. Your performance level is doubtless
higher than your butler's, if you have one. But do not rashly boast
of your superior intelligence before it has been put to a real test.
Remember the "Admirable Crichton"!
Diagnostics
A performance level is defined by the average day in and day
out performances of an individual or group of individuals. To
define this level it may or may not be necessary for us to study
individuals over a protracted period of time. The performance level
of the chimpanzee can be precisely distinguished from the per-
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
formance level of the human being. The one possesses articulate
language, and the other does not. But the performance level of the
chimpanzee cannot be distinguished in detail from that of the gorilla
or the orang-outang, because the behavior of these animals has not
been sufficiently studied. The performance levels of feebleminded
and of normal children can be adequately stated for many scientific
purposes. There exist recognized groupings of feebleminded
children, classified with reference to their performance levels, such
as morons, imbeciles, and idiots, and among normal children, the
so-called mental age levels of children of five, eight, ten, twelve,
and fifteen years. In defining the differences of level which are due
to education, the ability to read, write, and cipher, separates the
level of the illiterate from levels which lie above.
When differences can be arranged in a series of grades or levels,
we establish a scale. The use of such terms as more or less, greater or
less, higher or lower, implies that we have a scale and that the com-
ponent grades and levels can be measured, or more or less accurately
estimated. Whfen grades of intelligence and levels of performance
are confused with one another, it is assumed that both may be
graded on one and the same scale. If I am right in recognizing that
there is a distinction between grades of intelligence and levels of
performance, then it follows that at least two scales are necessary.
I propose to show that we need twelve scales in order to arrange in
graded series all the differences in behavior under consideration.
I shall first define the eight scales of performance level.
There are two growth scales of performance level: (1) the
species scale; (2) the age scale.
When we say that a chimpanzee is more intelligent than a sheep
but less intelligent than a human being, intelligence here means only
relative complexity, variety, and number of the daily performances
of these three species of animal. At the highest points on the species
scale stand the various sub-species of human beings. Below man
is the chimpanzee or gorilla, and immediately below this level the
orang will probably be placed. Far below these range the horse,
the cow, the sheep, the ant, the bee. Students of animal behavior
will in time establish the relative position of all animals on the
species scale.
An entirely different series of performance levels is obtained
from the behavior of the infant, the child, the adolescent,^the adult,
and at the end of the series, the senile. This series of performance
levels constitutes the age scale. The result of a Binet test is to
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 71
assign a child his position on the age scale. This is called his "men-
tal age". It gives no clue as to the grade of a child's intelligence,
although an experienced observer may estimate it from his behavior
in solving some of the tests.
There are two sex scales of performance level: (1) the scale of
masculinity; (2) the scale of femininity.
We speak of the manly man and the womanly woman, of
effeminate men and of masculine women. Exactly what is meant
by these terms, and whether performances have a sex quality or not,
I confess I do not know. Nevertheless, we must take cognizance of
the fact that feminism, meaning effeminacy, is a not infrequent
clinical diagnosis. The two sex scales range from a zero point to the
maximum of male and female sex characters. Most men and
women will be assigned a position on both scales. The ordinary man
will have, let us say, 95 per cent or less of masculinity and 5 per
cent or more of femininity, and the ordinary woman will have 95 per
cent or less of femininity and 5 per cent or more of masculinity. The
diagnosis of feminism in the case of a man, means that we assign
him relatively a lower position on the scale of masculinity, and a
higher position on the scale of femininity. The value of these
scales in clinical diagnosis lies in the fact that they enable us to
make clear what we mean by feminism, and to distinguish it from
infantilism. Thus it is a matter of common belief that women
frequently manifest a high degree of infantilism. Infantilism means
a lower position on the age scale of performance than the actual age
would lead us to expect. It has no necessary connection with either
femininity or masculinity. Infantilism is seldom diagnosed in the
case of a man, for the simple reason that when it is discovered in
the male, it is called feminism. The performances of a male may
exhibit either infantilism or feminism, both or neither; the per-
formances of a female, either infantilism or masculinism, both or
neither.
There are two culture scales of performance level: (1) the
civilization scale; (2) the education scale.
At the lowest point of the civilization scale stands primitive
man; at a higher level, the existing savage races; next in rank the
barbarian, and then the civilized races, nations, social classes, and
families, in the order that our prejudice or the results of investigation
may place them. At the top stands the German nation,?in its
own estimation. The civilization scale measures the effect of the
organized social environment into which the individual is born and
in which he is reared. It is the Kultur scale. If there are biological
differences of race and family stock, these will be represented on the
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
species scale. Germans may place the German race at the top of
the species scale, even as they place their Kultur at the top of the
civilization scale.
At the lowest level of the education scale stand the illiterate.
The performances called reading, writing, and arithmetic, are at a
very significant point on this scale. Another significant point is
that which marks the level attained by the eighth grade pupil of the
elementary school system, or by the laborer who in addition to the
three R's has acquired some training in a trade. A higher point on
the scale indicates the level of the high school graduate, and at the
same level I think we must place the business man who has not
been to high school but who has obtained some measure of informa-
tion and training in his special occupation. At this level we may
also place the skilled mechanic. A higher point on the scale indi-
cates the level of the college graduate, and not to be distinguished
from him in level is the professional man and the man of fairly large
business affairs. Near the top of the scale will come those whose
accomplishments rest upon a lifetime of education and training,
i. e. men of science, statesmen, and the foremost representatives of
every art.*
There are two normality scales: (1) the deficiency scale; (2)
the insanity scale.
At the lowest point on the deficiency scale must be placed the
idiot, above him the imbecile, and then the moron at the level which
separates the imbecile, who is clearly subnormal, from the normal.
The insanity scale, proceeding from the normal, passes through those
whom we call unbalanced, borderline types, to those who are clearly
insane.
The significant levels in both these scales are determined by
social behavior. The line between the normal and the feebleminded
child is not drawn with reference to grade of intelligence. Feeble-
minded children are those whose performances indicate the necessity
of a peculiar social treatment, namely segregation. They doubtless
have deficient intelligence, but this is not the reason why they are
placed in institutions. They must be segregated because they can-
not be educated with other children or safely granted an equal meas-
ure of independent action in association with other children. Most
normal children will manifest deficiency in some performances.
The level of the normal child will be an average of many per-
* Education alone should not be expected to provide what English speaking persons call
"culture," nor will the social environment, ?. e. being born into a good family, nor yet heredity,
i. e. being born of a good family, necessarily equip the individual with culture. In distinguishing
the culture levels of different persons, it is well to bear in mind that a given culture level may be
determined either by relatively higher position on the civilization scale and lower position on the
education scale, or vice versa.
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 73
formances, in some of which he will be normal and in others sub-
normal. An average of sufficiency in performance establishes
normality, as an average of deficiency establishes subnormality.
The normality point on the scale can be defined only as the average
performance level of all the children who remain in the ordinary
social environment.
The level of those we call normal is therefore to be distinguished
from the level of those we call subnormal, by a patho-social criterion.
On the insanity scale also, at a point which indicates the level of
those we call unbalanced, we distinguish by a patho-social criterion
those who lie nearer the normality level from those who lie nearer
the level of maximum insanity. The insane are placed in institutions,
not because they have insane ideas?for many persons whom we
call normal have insane ideas?but because their performances
render them dangerous to themselves or a menace to society.
I have called these scales normality scales rather than abnor-
mality scales, because the study of the feebleminded and the insane,
whereby we establish different degrees of abnormality, is of less
concern to the science of psychology than the study of so-called
normal individuals. For instance, we would like to know how many
deficiencies an individual may exhibit and how unbalanced he may
be, and yet pass for normal.*
If the diagnostician will bear in mind that each of the several
performance scales represents a different series of facts, he will
avoid some interpretations of behavior which give rise to misunder-
standing and confusion. The Binet testers assume not only that
they are testing intelligence, in which assumption they are mistaken,
but also that they can employ one and the same test in order to
distinguish the feebleminded from the normal child, and to dis-
tinguish the ten year old child, whose mental age is eight, from the
ten year old child whose mental age is ten. Feeblemindedness is not
backwardness, although the feebleminded child is undoubtedly back-
ward. A ten year old feebleminded child, who has a "mental age"
of six years is not at all like a normal child of six. The diagnosis of
feeblemindedness will be based upon more than the mere fact of
four years' retardation. The performances of the feebleminded are
qualitatively and quantitatively different from the performances of
normal children. Every child, normal or feebleminded, can be
assigned a level on both the age scale and the deficiency scale. The
deficiency scale cannot be superimposed upon the age scale to make
a single scale.
* In a later contribution I shall seek to render this point of view more emphatic by designating
these two normality scales:?(1) the sufficiency scale, and (2) the equilibrium scale. At the
present moment I cannot stop to consider the merits of this proposed terminology, and therefore
I adhere to terms which are more nearly in accord with common usage.
74 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
By comparing mental age with actual or chronological age we
derive such diagnostic categories as infantilism and 'precocity. The
terms backwardness and retardation also are employed with reference
to the age scale, although backwardness in my judgment should be
used only with reference to the education scale. When the Binet
tests are adversely criticized on the score that they favor those
children who have been well trained at school, we see the
necessity of clearing up the current confusion in the use of the
terms retardation and backwardness. The Binet tests may indeed
serve to indicate a retarded or arrested growth process, but on the
other hand, they may indicate only backwardness in education.
The terms retardation and arrested development came into the
literature as the result of a partial and perhaps mistaken explana-
tion of the cause of feeblemindedness. Itard and Seguin, in effect,
placed the feebleminded on the species scale below the human being,
or at least below what was assumed to be the highest biological
type of human being, the Caucasian. Thus were secured such
diagnostic categories as the mongolian, the aztec, etc., of which but
one survives today, and even the term mongolian has been stripped
of all etiological reference to that race. Atavism is a diagnostic
category which has reference to the species scale, for an atavistic
trait is one that characterizes the behavior of a species lower on the
scale than the more highly evoluted modern man. Primitivism on
the other hand has reference to the civilization scale, and indicates
performances standing at a low level on this scale, i. e. the behavior
of men in less highly organized social environments than ours.
infantilism has reference to the age scale, and backwardness to the
education scale, although the latter term is commonly employed to
refer to the age scale, for which reason I have found it necessary to
define it more precisely as pedagogical backwardness. A feeble-
minded person may exhibit atavism, primitivism, infantilism, and
pedagogical backwardness, but his feeblemindedness is not to be
diagnosed from this symptom complex but only by employing the
patho-social criterion to measure the sufficiency or deficiency of his
behavior. The terms retardation and arrested development have a
general signification. Retarded or arrested development, referred
to the species scale, is atavism; referred to the age scale, it is
infantilism; to the civilization scale, primitivism; and to the educa-
tion scale, backwardness.
There are two scales for grading intelligence: (1) the invention
scale; (2) the resource scale.
I have defined intelligence as the ability of an individual to
solve what for him is a new problem. A problem must be solved,
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 75
and it must be new. In the relative newness of the problem for each
individual will reside its relative difficulty. The more difficult the
problem the greater originality will be required for its solution. A
given test may present no difficulties at all, for the way to solve the
problem may already have been learned. On the other hand, the
test may provide a problem too far above or otherwise too remote
from the individual's performance level. A problem which is new
may consequently not be a problem at all, as if we should employ a
problem in algebra to test a person who does not know algebra, or
should test an animal with a puzzle box which provides conditions
for which his performance level is not at all adjusted. We can not
test the intelligence of a horse by requiring it to climb trees. The
ability to solve a new problem is invention. It is a creative act.
The invention scale measures the degree of originality displayed
in producing a required result.
Invention may be limited to a single field, or be manifested in
many fields. Whenever intelligence is tested, it can be tested in
only one field at a time, in a problem of arithmetic, let us say, or in
business, or in writing a poem, or in delivering an address. General
intelligence cannot be tested. It may be inferred from the partic-
ular resource tested, or from the variety of invention displayed
in solving a number of problems. The generalness of intel-
ligence is measured by the number of resources through which the
individual manifests his invention. The grade of intelligence, there-
fore, is not to be measured on a single scale. We cannot call any-
one intelligent whose invention is limited to a single resource. The
scale which measures the generalness of intelligence or its range of
distribution I call the resource scale. A line representing intelli-
gence differences increasing from lower to higher intelligence will be
determined by two coefficients, the one on a scale of invention
grades, and the other on a scale of resource grades.
Men of great intelligence are not distinguished from men of small
intelligence by possessing more or less of a single unit character,
i. e. intelligence, but by virtue of the fact that their performances
indicate a high degree of invention combined with a high degree of
resourcefulness. These scales have been in practical use for a long
time. When Mr. Gosse inquires whether America has produced a
poet equal to the twelve greatest English poets, he decides that
Edgar Allan Poe alone has a claim to this rank, but he finally
excludes him on the ground "that his song has but one motive,
sorrow for the irrecoverable dead." Nevertheless he admits that
within the range of this one motive Poe's invention is creative
genius of the first rank. Aristotle, Plato, Leonardo da Vinci, Goethe,
76 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
are examples of an intelligence which ranks high, both in invention
and resourcefulness.
There are two scales for grading proficiency: (1) the efficiency
scale; (2) the operation scale.
Mr. Courtis has contributed results of great value to the scien-
tific treatment of efficiency, because he has so clearly distinguished
between the efficiency of an elementary operation in arithmetic,
such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, and the
number of operations which are involved in solving problems. He
shows us that a child may have a high grade of efficiency in addition
but a low grade of efficiency in subtraction. The proficiency of the
pupil in arithmetic rests upon his knowing an adequate number of
operations and having acquired an adequate efficiency in each
operation. He suggests that an operation may be made too efficient,
for the number of operations will decrease, becoming ultimately less
than adequate, if an effort is made to acquire an excessive, i. e. more
than adequate, grade of efficiency in any one operation. Efficiency
is a scientific term, and should be reserved in scientific discussion
for a single use. Efficiency in arithmetic is to be measured in terms
of the accuracy and speed with which each specific and component
operation is carried on. The great problem in education, therefore,
is not merely to increase the grade of efficiency of the pupils and of
the school system, but also to increase the number of efficiencies.
We should grade efficiency on a single scale, the scale of efficiency,
and distinguish this from every other scale, especially the operation
scale. If we wish to grade individuals with respect to efficiency
combined with the number of operations, we need a separate term
for this complex, for which I propose the word 'proficiency. It is
already in common usage, and science should attempt to be at least
as discriminating as the man in the street. Training schools give
certificates of proficiency. I do not happen to know of any training
school which gives a certificate of efficiency.
When I restrict the term efficiency to a single phase or element
of an operation, I do not mean that efficiency is unimportant, but
that invention, and resourcefulness, and the number of operations,
are also important, and in some cases may be even more important
than efficiency. Which may happen to be most important for an
individual or nation to acquire will depend upon the circumstances
and conditions of the moment. Until I have looked into the matter
I cannot tell whether it would be more important for me to develop
efficiency in a particular student or to extend the number of his
operations, to strive to encourage the development of creative
originality or to add to the number of his possible resources. The
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 77
nations are struggling blindly forward. What may be most important
for the development of each nation?to strive for efficiency, or to
encourage invention,?who can tell? I only know that for science
the immediate task is to study and measure efficiency. Science
must begin with elementary processes. It must learn how to meas-
ure by measuring first what can be measured. Efficiency may be
measured with some precision. Intelligence grades and performance
levels can only be approximately estimated.
To one who has followed my analysis with understanding, it
will be evident that most so-called intelligence tests are not tests of
intelligence at all. Some of them are tests of efficiency, while others
afford data for establishing a differential diagnosis with respect to
the species or the age level, the deficiency or the insanity level, or the
education level. No one has devised as yet a satisfactory test of
intelligence. Intelligence differences are based upon estimates,
which are for the most part as crude as popular estimates of civiliza-
tion level.*
Application.
Dr. Eliot speaks with admiration of the "wonderful efficiency"
of the Germans. They have conceived and carried forward a policy
in government, industry, and military organization, whose aim has
been the acquisition of efficiency in a large number of operations.
Have they neglected to include all the essential operations? "If
we include in the definition of military efficiency the manage-
ment of supporting industries," as well as other operations enu-
merated by him, the outcome of the war?victory for the Allies?
will, according to Dr. Eliot, demonstrate that "German efficiency"
is inferior to "British and French efficiency." Why not admit the
Germans are more efficient whether they win or lose? If Dr. Eliot
means that victory for the Allies will prove that the Germans have
* Summary.?The differential diagnosis of intelligence requires twelve performance scales
for grading and levelling individuals and groups:
Grades
f 1. The invention scale
Inte lgence j 2. The resource scale
_ _ . 13. The efficiency scale
ro ciency j 4 The operation scale
Growth |
Sex |
Levels
5. The species scale
6. The age scale
7. The masculinity scale
8. The femininity scale
9. The civilization scale
10. The education scale
Culture |
.. I 11. The deficiency scale (or the sufficiency scale)
orma y ? \ jg. The insanity scale (or the equilibrium scale)
78 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
neglected to acquire efficiency in some essential operations, he
would have clarified his argument if he had used some term like
'proficiency to indicate the combination of efficiency with the number
of operations concerned. The outcome of the war may prove Ger-
man proficiency inferior to British and French proficiency, but it
cannot show Germany's efficiency to be inferior to what it really
is. It may indeed be questioned whether the Germans have not
developed. efficiency beyond the point where it has maximum
effectiveness.
If grades of efficiency can be measured on an efficiency scale,
then the terms higher and lower should be restricted to mean relative
position on this scale. Greater care in the use of these terms would
remove a possible source of misunderstanding,?as when in his final
paragraph Dr. Eliot concludes that for the "highest efficiency"
both discipline and co-operation should be consented to in liberty.
We discover from other portions of Dr. Eliot's discussion that he
does in fact believe the Germans have omitted some essential
operations from the total number of operations in which they have
already acquired efficiency. Throughout the discussion, however,
he confuses higher and lower, which indicate relative grades on the
efficiency scale, with greater and less importance, which refer to
facts and conditions other than mere efficiency. Efficiency is not
the only desideratum for the successful ventures of a nation or
individual. To arrive at a sound conclusion as to whether one
operation is more important than another involves issues of fact
and theory, which I can barely touch upon in this article.
We are apt to consider that operations are more important
when they are complex than when they are simple or elementary.
Take for example, arithmetic. Everyone will admit that the child
who can add or subtract with a satisfactory efficiency has taken only
the first step toward learning how to employ arithmetic in his daily
life. He must next learn how to use these elementary operations in
solving problems, employing for the purpose not only his acquired
proficiency in arithmetic but also the reasoning faculty. In time it
may be possible for psychology to analyze the complex processes of
reasoning into simple operations, and thus place us in a position to
measure their efficiency. At the present moment, however, a child's
efficiency and reasoning cannot be measured so as to be compared
on equal terms with his efficiency in the elementary operations. We
must be able to do this before we can arrive at a precise estimate of
the relative importance of reasoning and ciphering as elements in
an education.
Another difficulty in estimating relative importance arises from
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 79
lack of agreement as to the purpose or aim of a process, such for
example, as the educational development of an individual or the
progress of a race or nation. The value, and hence the importance,
of an operation, is determined with reference to the conceived end
or object of the total process. We often raise the question whether
vision or audition is the more important sense. This question can
be debated because vision and audition are of nearly equal com-
plexity, and the purposes which these two senses serve are sufficiently
alike to allow us to estimate their relative value. When, however,
we ask which is the more important, the sense of vision or the sense
of hunger, we have asked a question very difficult to answer, because
vision is a complex of many different processes and hunger is an
elementary sensation. When we inquire, to what end??the difficulty
is increased, because vision would seem to have greater value than
hunger in our daily affairs, and yet as a matter of fact children born
blind are easily reared to a fairly normal adult age, while children
born without the sense of hunger would probably die in infancy.
For these and other reasons, I think that questions of relative impor-
tance will remain for a long time matters of opinion rather than
problems in scientific measurement.
Dr. Eliot's "highest efficiency," by which he means the
efficiency of the more complex and socially important operations,
rests upon intelligence, will, and moral purpose. Thus he considers
a volunteer soldier more effective than a conscript, "because he
has more personal initiative, more power of independent action,
more sense of individual responsibility." "Personal initiative" is
will. "Independent action" is a product of intelligence and will.
"Individual responsibility" is a moral quality. The part which
intelligence plays in developing proficiency concerns my present
discussion more directly than the will or differences in moral quality.
In Dr. Eliot's estimation intelligence is a "power in free institutions
which leads to efficiency." "Germany," he says, "has adopted,
adapted, and used with great skill all the inventions of the free
nations." The German has seen that applied science makes for
efficiency, and he has taken and used whatever he found wherever
he found it. He has therefore developed efficiency in a large
number of important operations, displaying thereby his "will to
efficiency," and that modicum of intelligence which is necessary for
gaining information, and for adopting and adapting methods.
"Under free governments," however, and "in communities which
have a fair amount of social mobility, the rare men are surer to come
forward into vigorous action?the men who are competent, not only
to invent or imagine the thing or the method that is next wanted, but
80 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to put their inventions into practical form and to make them useful
in actual industries of their nations and the world." The issue with
respect to intelligence is clearly and justly presented by Dr. Eliot,
but when he goes on to assert that free institutions may also be
expected to develop greater efficiency in industry and in govern-
mental administration than autocratic governments, in my opinion
he seeks to prove too much. Let us give the German nation its due,
and grant the German more efficiency in a larger number of opera-
tions and a greater will to efficiency. We come then to Dr. Eliot's
real argument, which is that autocratic nations are neither so inven-
tive nor so resourceful as the freer nations. The development of
individuals and nations, and I may add of science also, proceeds
along two entirely different paths. One is the road to greater
efficiency in an ever larger number of operations. The other leads
to greater productive originality in an ever expanding field of
resources. If the two paths are conceived to be parallel like the
tracks of a railroad, we shall make the most progress under ordinary
conditions by keeping on both tracks. An invention, or a new idea,
a new hypothesis or discovery in science, however, may suddenly
make all the old operations and their efficiencies unnecessary. The
man who cut the Gordian knot made efficiency in untying knots
superfluous. The submarine may send the superefficient dreadnought
to the scrap heap. At moments when new* inventions are being
offered, our very efficiencies may make us less effective. For
example, psychology as a science is just now at this stage of develop-
ment. The theories and methods which underlie my treatment of
the subject matter of this article, and which are leading many to
define psychology as a science of behavior, find some efficient psy-
chologists unable to adjust themselves to these inventions. Their
very efficiency holds them fast to the old operations and unfor-
tunately empowers them to block the progress of the science, placed
as many of them are at points of vantage in institutions of learning.
Our estimate of the relative merits of scientific men changes as time
enables us better to distinguish the relative value of efficiencies and
inventions. At the moment, Wundt is justly acknowledged to be
the greatest living psychologist. He belongs to the new school, and
yet he was trained in the old; his monumental work is characterized
more by persevering efficiency than by creative originality. He has
employed many resources and shown the highest proficiency, but
seldom in his work do we see the invention which leaps up to us
from every page of William James. In Fechner, the Germans have
*New here means new for the world. An invention is, by definition, always new with refer-
ence to the individual.
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 81
produced a scientific intelligence of the first rank in psychology. The
influence of Fechner's invention upon the science already transcends
the influence of Wundt, whose greatness lies in the skill with which
he has elaborated and diffused the ideas of Fechner and other men.
Darwin and Galton have done more to determine the character of
modern psychology than Helmholtz.
From many fields of art and science Dr. Eliot gathers the data
from which he justly concludes that the British and French exceed
the Germans in creative originality. I agree also with Dr. Eliot's
opinion that this more productive and resourceful intelligence of the
British and French is due to greater political freedom and greater
freedom in education. I cannot, however, believe that it is Ger-
many's very efficiency in education, "which has prevented the last
two generations of Germans from knowing anything about free-
dom." Heine said the French loved liberty like a mistress, the
English loved her like a wife, but the Germans, like a grandmother.
Even though Germans have not cared for freedom, we need not
follow Dr. Eliot in denying them nearly all of the elements of
national greatness. The Germans recognize the value of efficiency in
all individual and collective activities, and seek to acquire it through
discipline. If efficiency is worth while, then discipline in education,
in industry, and in social life, is worth while. So far as efficiency is
concerned, it probably makes no difference whether discipline origi-
nates from without or from within. Intelligence, however, does
not come from without. It is a congenital endowment of the
individual or race. I cannot make my students more intelligent;
I can only present my subject in a manner calculated to exercise the
intelligence of which they are possessed. On the other hand, I may
present my material in a way which will restrict the free play of their
intelligence in invention. By insisting too much upon external
discipline, training in method, and the acquisition of information,
the conditions may be provided?perhaps are provided in school,
high school, and college?which eventuate in the atrophy of intelli-
gence through disuse. We cannot give a child eye-sight if he is blind,
but we can destroy his vision if he has it.
"A man will develop greater mental capacity and greater force
with freedom than without," says Dr. Eliot. If he means by
"greater mental capacity," greater intelligence, I can agree with
him; but if he means by "greater mental capacity," greater
efficiency in a larger number of operations, I cannot agree with
him. A measure of freedom is a necessary condition for the full
exercise of intelligence, and I believe with Dr. Elliot that intelli-
gence may be expected to develop both resources and efficiencies.
82 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Whether, as a matter of fact, intelligence or external discipline
will develop the larger number of resources and efficiencies, can
only be determined after an adequate test. The least known
element in Dr. Eliot's problem is will. The Germans recognize
the supreme importance of will. They even think the "will
to victory" will bring victory. They may be asking too much of
the "will to victory," but certainly the "will to efficiency" will
bring efficiency, and that, too, without calling for a high grade of
intelligence. I am not prepared to analyze the will as I have
attempted to analyze intelligence, but we can at least distinguish
two contrasting modes of developing will through discipline: the one
is freedom, the other is constraint. The British and French cry for
individual and collective freedom; the Germans demand constraint.
The antagonistic forces which may be employed to develop will,
are not freedom and discipline, but freedom and constraint, for the
proximate object of all training of the will is self-discipline. It may
be secured by constraint from without, as when we compel the
obedience of a child and train him to modes of behavior which he
then adheres to, as a matter either of habit or of choice. On the other
hand, if we are wise, we permit a certain measure of freedom even to
children, for the child then learns from his successes and mistakes
to choose the right course of conduct for himself. An equally well-
disciplined school or home may be the product of either the discipline
of constraint or the discipline of freedom. The problem of military
or social discipline is therefore a universal problem in the develop-
ment of will. Both freedom and constraint appear to be necces-
sary to develop the individual's self-discipline. The child who has
not been taught obedience through the exercise of sufficient con-
straint, is apt as an adolescent or adult to display his liberty in the
form of license. Our relatively undisciplined but free cities are an
offense to the Germans. In both German and Anglo-Saxon com-
munities the individual is put under some measure of constraint by
the "collective will," and both communities are in a measure free.
The German has displayed his freedom once and for all by agreeing
to submit to a large measure of constraint, enforced by the power
of the State. The Anglo-Saxon likes to be free to decide "on the
spot" whether the "collective will" or his own will shall control
his action. The German's self-discipline causes him to obey with-
out question the posted order, "Keep off the grass." Long ago he
made his choice with respect to that order and others of like nature.
The Anglo-Saxon considers each time the situation arises, whether
his desire to walk on that particular plot of grass or his appreciation
of the reasonableness of the mandate of the "collective will" shall
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 83
determine his choice of action. In view of the diverse development
of constitutional government in England and in Germany, the
objection may be offered that a large number of Germans, perhaps
even a majority, have never had the opportunity to decide whether
to accept or reject the collective constraint. It must be admitted,
I think, that there is less political freedom, as well as less individual
liberty, in Germany than in England. The development of political
freedom in Germany abruptly terminated with the success of the
greatest modern exponent of autocratic ideals, Bismarck. Neverthe-
less, in the light of the apparently unanimous opinion of the Ger-
mans on the justice of the war and on the value of their military
organization, it would be hazardous to assert that the State Social-
ism of Germany, with its emphasis upon the discipline of constraint
in school, army, and social life, has not been accepted as a matter of
choice by the German people.
Questions of relative value are now apparently to be settled
by the test of war. Whether the Germans win or not, they have
already shown the value of efficiency and constraint. If the Allies
win, it will prove that we may still rely upon intelligence and free-
dom to develop efficiency when it is needed. Whether or not Dr.
Eliot is right in maintaining "there is a power in free institutions
which leads to efficiency/' certainly it has been demonstrated that
there is power in at least one autocratic institution which has led to
efficiency. Which is really the greater power, the war itself must
decide. I hope that Dr. Eliot is right in thinking that proficiency,
even in war, may be brought to a higher condition in a republic than
in an autocratic government, for I like intelligence and freedom
more than I like efficiency and constraint. Unfortunately for my
peace of mind, the progress of the war has already shown how dan-
gerous it may be to over-estimate the value of intelligence and
freedom, to under-estimate the value of efficiency and constraint. I
prefer intelligence and freedom, especially for myself, but I appre-
ciate the value of efficiency and constraint, especially for others.
Nevertheless, I do not want to see intelligence and freedom com-
pelled to accept the yoke of efficiency and constraint. I appreciate,
and even admire, the efficiency of the ant and the bee, but I am
reluctant to take these insect communities as a model of organiza-
tion and co-operation for human society.
Intelligence and proficiency, freedom and constraint, are not the
only factors of competency. They are the general expression of
particular mental capacities and traits, which constitute the con-
genital endowment of the individual. Thus, as I have already
pointed out, articulate language is a congenital capacity of every
84 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
normal human being, which he uses intelligently or proficiently as
the case may be. When a capacity is present in more than average
amount, it is called a talent. Thus we speak of a talent for music,
and rightly call the Germans more musical than the Anglo-Saxons.
When a trait is excessively developed, it may seriously interfere
with the individual's progress or success. It is then called a defect.
Thus conscientiousness, or curiosity, or obstinacy, which have
social and educational value, act, when excessive, as defects to
retard progress and handicap success. If a capacity, ordinarily
present in the human being, either does not exist in an individual,
or is present in a very small amount, this constitutes a defect. Thus
tone-deafness, or color-blindness, or insensibility to pain, is a defect.
A mental trait which makes for progress and success, I call an asset.
The total mental capacity of an individual, then, is the algebraic sum
of his assets and defects.
The competency of an individual or nation is a complex of
many elements. It includes intelligence, which we measure in terms
of invention and resource; proficiency, measured in terms of
efficiency and the number of operations; the disciplined will; and
finally the algebraic sum of multifarious assets and defects. In
this complex, the variables I have had under consideration are
invention, efficiency, and the discipline of freedom or constraint.
The British and French, I conclude, have more invention, less
efficiency, and more of freedom than constraint. The Germans
have less invention, more efficiency, and more of constraint than
freedom. Relative competency will appear only when the competi-
tion is over and we know the result. The lessons we may then
draw for the guidance of nations and individuals will depend in
large part upon the soundness of our analyses and interpretations.
Psychology will contribute not only to the analysis and interpreta-
tion, but also to the exact measurement of efficiency and such other
factors as may prove to be measurable.
The relative value of mental traits, however, can never be estab-
lished by psychological investigation alone, and for an indefinite
period we may expect the determination of the relative value of
different mental qualities to remain mere expressions of opinion and
more or less at the hazard of fortune. What we shall consider an
asset, and what a defect, necessarily depends upon the end or purpose
we have in view. Obstinacy in the mule is a defect from the man's
point of view, but an asset from the mule's if it prevents his being
overworked. Obstinacy in a child, parents usually consider a defect,
but it is one of the means whereby the child preserves his personality
from being too much affected by external constraint. Success in
RELATION OF INTELLIGENCE TO EFFICIENCY. 85
war may not reveal but obscure the relative value of qualities like
intelligence and love of freedom. The Germans may have a greater
talent for war than the English or French, and the value of this asset
may be enhanced by another asset?the determination to drive for-
ward to success in war, regardless of the opinions and sympathies
of others. What are virtues in time of peace may play the role of
defects in war, retarding progress and handicapping success. So
thought the German who announced as a general proposition that
"necessity knows no law". He forgot that general principles which
appear to admit of no exceptions are dangerous, for the end may
indeed justify the means, but only in so far as "a very good end"
may justify some "doubtful means". For example, it may perhaps
be open to debate whether the Germans were justified in invading
Belgium, in torpedoing merchant vessels of the enemy, and in using
poisonous gases; but could they justify, even to themselves, an
attempt to poison wells, to organize assassination, or to disseminate
disease germs in an enemy's country? Moreover, war is only a
single incident in a nation's history, a single element of her civiliza-
tion. No one can predict how much Germany will eventually lose
and England gain, in the estimation of the world, because of a dif-
ferent appreciation of the inviolability of a contract. I think we
may assume that established moral principles are those which the
world has found by experience to be assets. For the moment, partic-
ular moral principles may act as defects to retard progress and handi-
cap success, but the individual or nation who will not abide by
accepted principles of law and morals must beware lest his ultimate
loss exceed his immediate gain. With the progress of civilization,
there have been established certain canons of national and inter-
national law, applying even to the conduct of war. To those who
have thus raised the level of our civilization, the world owes a debt
of gratitude, and none of them stands higher for intelligence and
courage?such is the irony of history?than a German professor.
Driven from the University of Leipzig because he sought to free
education from sectarian influence and control, Thomasius, with the
aid of the first king of Prussia, established at Halle an institution of
learning so definitely committed to freedom of thought that a his-
torian of education calls it "the first really modern university."
Thomasius affirmed principles of law and morals which mitigated
the horrors of religious wars in Europe, did away with prosecutions
for witchcraft, and eliminated torture as a recognized procedure in
law. In peril of his life, he wrote for the world's enlightenment:
"I now saw that any being gifted by God with reason sins against
the goodness of his Creator when he allows himself to be led, like an
86 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ox, by any other human being," and he adds, "I determined to shut
my eyes against the brightness of human authority and to give no
more thought to the question, who supports any doctrine,?but only
to weigh fairly the grounds for and against it." These views were no
more popular in Germany then than they are today. The University
of Halle was called in derision the University of Hell. In speaking
of his earlier work at Leipzig Thomasius says, "I was left alone in
my lecture room with my Grotius,"?the founder of international
law, and another advocate of freedom and fair dealing even in
war. In the preface to his great work, De Jure Belli ac Pads,
Grotius pleads for humanity, "I saw in the whole Christian world
a license of fighting at which even barbarous nations might blush.
A declaration of war seemed to let loose every crime." It is said of
Grotius that he "first awakened the conscience of governments to
the Christian sense of international duty." The difference between
the level of civilization before and after the appearance of Grotius'
book is represented by the difference between the sacking of Magde-
burg by Tilly, which horrified all Europe, and Richelieu's humanity
toward the inhabitants of La Rochelle, which earned for him the
title of "The Cardinal of Satan," bestowed by the astonished fanatics
of his own church.
Many brave comrades of Grotius and Thomasius paid with
their lives to create the beginnings of international law, and thus
raise our civilization above the moral level of Machiavelli. To
throw overboard what we have acquired of international morality,
is the kind of reaction we diagnose as primitivism, meaning thereby
a reversion in manners, customs, and principles to what is charac-
teristic of a lower level of civilization. In modern society segregation
is the treatment prescribed for those who think and act like Huns.
Will an indignant world unite to segregate those whom our ad-
vancing civilization has come to recognize as a menace to the in-
telligence, freedom, and morality of nations?
