Open Window Classes.
======================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1915, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. IX, No. 2.
April 15, 1915
By D. C. Bliss.
Superintendent of Schools, Montclair, N. J.
Unfortunately for the development of educational science there
is a strong tendency in the profession to govern practice by opinion,
with little real scrutiny of facts. This attitude of mind is responsible
for the establishment of many open window classes in various school
systems in the country. To many who advocate the classes it seems
a self-evident proposition that pupils working under such conditions
will show increased physical gain and a more efficient mentality than
those who sit in the customary well-warmed room. These enthusiasts
argue somewhat as follows:
Fresh air is absolutely essential to good health; the evidence of
its efficacy as a healing agent in tuberculosis is clearly established;
sickly, anemic children in open air rooms have gained in health and
at the same time have made progress in their studies equal to that of
pupils in the regulation class room; the inference is that normally
healthy children if placed under the same conditions will show a still
greater improvement, due to their better physical status. In accord-
ance with this natural assumption many classes have been estab-
lished and extravagant claims have been made for remarkable
results both physical and mental.
If the classes accomplish the good results alleged, it seems
perfectly logical to assume that such a conclusion is capable of
demonstration. With the hope of establishing some of the facts
relative to such classes the following records were collected.
It should be noted that the writer began the tests with the
expectation that the results would fully corroborate the commonly
accepted opinion. The natural result of this preconceived notion
would be a tendency to interpret the collected statistics to the advan-
tage of the open window class rather than against it. However, an
attempt was made to reach a conclusion based upon the facts as they
appeared, rather than upon the initial conviction. Whatever bias
existed was in favor of, rather than against, current opinion.
It was clear at the outset that any valid conclusions from
(29)
30 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
a study of such classes must be based upon a comparison with other
groups and not upon a study of the open window children alone.
The school conditions in Montclair were very favorable to such a
study. It was possible to select groups for the open window and
control classes from approximately the same type of children; an
efficient medical department provided expert opinion on the physical
condition of the children; and all mental tests were given by one
person.
A second, a third, and a fifth grade class were selected for the
test, no two of these classes being in the same building. Each was
checked by a control group of equal number in the same school
building. The children in the open window classes were placed
there at the request of their parents, and in all probability whatever
advantage accrued from this method of selection was rather in favor
of the open window class, for only those parents who were believers
in fresh air and so were inclined to supplement the school arrange-
ment with favorable home precautions, were likely to make this
choice. So far as could be determined superficially the classes were
physically equal. The open window classes had one possible advan-
tage over the control groups in a lunch provided at the expense of
the parents; the second and third grades being given some warm
food, such as a cup of hot soup or cocoa, about the middle of the fore-
noon session, while the fifth grade ate a light cold lunch which they
brought from home. The rooms were kept at a temperature of about
50o ^ This was secured by raising all windows at the bottom and
lowering them at the top so that the opening was about half the size
of the window. These openings were covered with cheesecloth
screens to protect the children from severe draughts, and the pupils
were provided by the home with extra clothing and a shawl or rug
in which to wrap the lower limbs.
A definite attempt was made to check all pupils in both open
window and control classes on three separate lines:
1. Degree of nutrition, measured in terms of weight gained and
weight lost.
2. General health, as indicated by the number of children
absent because of illness and the total number of days lost thereby.
3. Mental condition, indicated by the comparative amount of
fatigue in the two classes. This was determined by a comparison of
tests, one given half an hour after the opening of school in the morning,
and a similar one given to the same class late in the session. The
weight tests cover the period from November to March. The rest
of the year open windows are the rule in all class rooms, a fact which
makes any comparison of weights useless. The great loss of time
OPEN WINDOW CLASSES. 31
involved in any other method made it necessary to weigh the children
with their clothing on, but previous experiments in weighing open air
children both with and without clothing had shown that the increase
in weight was fairly constant under either condition. The medical
department of the school felt that while under the circumstances
the weight figures were not scientifically exact, they were correct as
far as relative values were concerned.
The following charts show the total number of pounds gained
and the total number of pounds lost by the classes for each weight
period.
39-14 4H2-
^ Y77~\
s
21-2 ^
13-14
13-K
6-4
3 <, V/A **
1^-1 15-15 ^
Fi ? I
m H #
]_) m
riOV toDEC- DEC-to FEB- FEB toMARCH MAR-to MAY1
CHART I.
nl?. JhT^lCt?i?I?S^teaf^timeigr0Up r,ePresents the open window class, the second the control
class. The entire height of the columns shows weight gain while the white portion records weight
o?Sh'i A? NoveRber to December the pupils of the open window class gained 23 lbs. 5 oz.
and lost 6 lbs. 4 oz making a net gain of 17 lbs. 1 oz., which is shown by the blackening of the
upper portion of the columns. During the same period the pupils of the control class gained 23 lbs.
9 oz. and lost 1 lb. 9 oz., leaving a net gain of 22 lbs. In every time group the control class shows a
greater net gain than the open window class.
32 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
.2423-IO
-22-
-20-
-18-
-16-
-I*
?12-
-IO
-8-
-6-
-2H
19-10
17-6
18-7
3-5
i
1-15
?
i-i
14-7
13-12 13-10 L
9-15
3-10
3-4
OCT- to MOV- NOV- to DEO DEC- to J ATI" JAM to MARCH
CHART II.
In the chart representing the comparative gain and loss in weight of the open window and
control classes for Grade III there is less uniformity than in that for Grade V. From October to
November the open window class gained 23 lbs. 10 oz. and lost only 1 lb. 3 oz. Thus the net gain
is 22 lbs. 7 oz. as against a net gain of 14 lbs. 1 oz. for the control class. Again, in the period from
December to January the open window class shows a greater net gain than the control class, but
from November to December and from January to March the advantage is on the side of the latter.
19-10
4-1
15-4
9-15
6-14 W ? ^ T?,
6-1 ?
0-10
OCT- to MOV MOV- to DEC DEC- to JAM- JAM- to MARCH
CHART III.
The chart for Grade II shows an unusual condition in the open window class record from
October to November in that there is no weight loss but a total gain of 11 lbs. Nevertheless, the
control class, in spite of a weight loss of 3 lbs. 5 oz. for the same period, surpasses the open window
class in its net gain of 14 lbs. 1 oz. From November to December the difference in the net gain
of the two is even more strongly in favor of the control class. From December to January, however,
the advantage shifts, though it returns again to the control class in the period from January to
March. In this last period the entire column for the open window class represents weight loss, so
that instead of a net gain the record shows an actual net loss of 1 lb. as against a net gain for the
control class of 11 lbs. 3 oz.
OPEN WINDOW CLASSES. 33
An examination of the charts shows a somewhat inconclusive
result, though taken as a whole the classes held under ordinary
conditions make more consistent gains and have fewer losses than the
open window groups. Had the losses in weight of individuals
during the year been confined to either one of the two classes, only
one conclusion would have been possible. As a matter of fact, the
number of different children losing weight is distributed about
equally between the two groups.
Sept.-Nov.
5 O. W
5 Control.
3 O. W.
3 Control.
2 O. W
2 Control.
Total O. W.
Total Control.
Nov-Dec.
Dec.-Feb.
Feb.-Mar.
Totals.
18
12
17
20
13
42
45
The above table indicates the number of children in each class
actually losing weight during each period. The amount of loss is
not taken into consideration. There are 42 instances of weight
lost in the three open window classes and 45 instances in the control
groups.
The element of weight gained is the one most commonly urged
in support of the open window plan. It does not appear from this
study that children will necessarily gain if required to sit in a room
of that type. Even should a radical gain in weight be found, such
gain is by no means conclusive evidence that the child is better off
physically. The degree to which children are susceptible to the
common ailments of cold and sore throat, or to contagious disease,
would seem to be a reasonable criterion of physical condition and
far more accurate than gain or loss in weight. Records showing
absence from school for these causes were carefully kept and the
tabulated records show no such variability as appeared in the weights.
34 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
HEALTH RECORD, 1913-1914.
Colds
Sore throat
Contagious diseases.
V. Open Window.
No. of
Children.
17
0
5
Days
Absent.
76
0
80
V. Control Class.
No. of
Children.
Days
Absent.
48
G
30
HEALTH RECORD, 1913-1914.
Colds
Sore throat
Contagious diseases.
III. Open Window.
No. of
Children.
13
2
Days
Absent.
52
2
123
III. Control Class.
No. of
Children.
13
1
7
Days
Absent.
37
2
62
HEALTH RECORD, 1913-1914.
Colds
Sore throat
Contagious diseases.
II. Open Window.
No. of
Children.
12
2
12
Days
Absent.
38
4
115
II. Control Class.
No. of
Children.
13
1
7
Days
Absent.
37
2
62
At the beginning of the previous year, 1912-1913, a second
grade open window class had been organized and the health records
were preserved for this class as well as for a control group. These
pupils were given no extra food and the temperature was allowed to
go as low as it would. In extreme weather the room thermometer
often registered below freezing. At the end of the year the un-
favorable physical showing made by the class was thought to be
due to lack of extra food and to the low temperature allowed. Conse-
quently the next year the conditions were maintained as indicated
for the three classes. In spite of these changed conditions there is
a striking similarity in the health record of the 1912-1913 class and
the three classes for 1913-1914.
OPEN WINDOW CLASSES. 35
HEALTH RECORD, 1912-1913.
Colds
Sore throat
Contagious diseases.
II. Open Window
No. of
Children.
11
7
0
Days
Absent.
32
18
0
II. Control Class.
No. of
Children.
Days
Absent.
21
0
20
When we remember that these statistics are for four separate
open window classes in three different school buildings and for
two successive years, it is hardly conceivable that the close similarity
in the records is merely a coincidence. It should not be forgotten
that these classes represent groups maintained at a very low tempera-
ture and groups at a higher temperature; that we have children
supplied with mid-forenoon lunches and children with no lunches.
In fact we have included most of the variations likely to occur,
and variation in conditions seems to make no difference. The
resemblance in the records is noteworthy.
It was felt by those responsible for the classes that the experi-
ment would not be complete unless some attempt were made to
determine the effect of the difference in atmosphere upon the mental-
ity of the pupils. The second grade, with its control class, was selected
for the tests. Two of these were used, marking out " A's," and simple
computation. The "A" test as given in Whipple's Manual was
employed, the pupils being directed to mark out as many "A's"
as they could. The time was carefully kept by the examiner and all
were required to stop promptly at the end of 60 seconds. The other
test was based upon simple mental computation of the following
type: Add 5-9-5-4: 8-6-6-7: 22, take away 3; 13, take away 5.
These problems were dictated by the examiner and the percentage
of accurate answers written constituted the score. The tests were
given regularly, one a half hour after the opening of the school in
the morning and a similar one either just before the closing of the
morning session or just-before the closing of the afternoon session.
The assumption was that both classes, with the development of
fatigue, would make a poorer record on the second test, although
the drop would be less decided in the case of the open window group.
These tests were carried on for days and the results were a complete
surprise. In the "A" test both classes made the poorer showing in
the early morning, and both improved decidedly in the second period.
This tendency was apparent not only at first but continued during
36 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the whole period of the experiment. The element of fatigue seemed
to enter into the arithmetic test, since both classes, as a rule, showed
the expected drop in power in the afternoon; but the anticipated
difference between the two classes in the amount of fatigue was
conspicuously lacking. The fact that both the control and the open
window classes showed the same contradictory results with reference
to the "A" test and the arithmetic test suggests a similar mental
condition in both classes. As the following charts show, the results,
to say the least, are inconclusive.
In marking out u A's" the two groups start at approximately the
same point and end together. The upward tendency of the line is
apparently the effect of practice but is equally marked with both
classes. The control group takes an unaccountable slump in one
morning record but immediately recovers the lost ground. The two
groups differ greatly in their initial ability to handle fundamental
operations, but even here, though on different levels, the lines are
practically parallel.
L
' V / ^v...
/ \
\*y *?s
v
m
/s*-?
3^5 /
/\ 1 ^1*
(f\
' /\ '
' v\yfe5
G-ra.de JL
?- s often window
? = control class
26 II ,
Iks*
??**
ah. m A.n. m an. m An m m p.m. m t.m.
CHART IV.
CHART IV.
OPEN WINDOW CLASSES. 37
A surprising feature of the whole experiment with the open win-
dow classes is the attitude of the parents. Almost without exception
they are convinced that their own children greatly benefited by the
plan. This conviction is so positive that it is not affected in the least
by the statistics of the classes. These parents assert that the children
are less nervous, and that they eat and sleep better than ever before.
A possible explanation of the discrepancy between the results
in Montclair and elsewhere is that the conditions are not identical.
So far as Montclair is concerned the ordinary school ventilation is as
so Grade H
a;79.1
- oftev window
i \    * control class
\ a16'2"
/
/
/
w-r \ /?*
\/
'1/.2.
<69.?
?70.2.
,t3-1
5?.6
/*** 57-3 .51'5
/53-^
516
'50.7
A n. P..'? A.H. p.M AM- P.M. AM- P/1. AH. T.fl.
CHART V.
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
good as can be secured. Large fans force quantities of warm, fresh
air into all class rooms. Consequently the experiment resolves itself
into showing the difference between warm, well-ventilated rooms,
and cold, well-ventilated rooms. It is entirely possible that those
schools in other communities, which have obtained excellent results
from the open window plan, measure the difference between cold
pure air and warm foul air. If this assumption is correct then the
wide variation in the recorded results is not at all surprising.
One conclusion, however, is unavoidable, and that is, the absolute
necessity for basing our school policy upon well ascertained facts
rather than upon mere opinion.
