Vocational Guidance in the High School
=======================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1915, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. IX, No. 6
November 15, 1915

By G. W. Gayler,
Superintendent of Schools, Canton, Illinois.
Four years ago one hundred and fifty-nine eighth grade pupils
in our schools were asked among other things to give their choice
of a life work. In classifying and summarizing the answers we
found that there were thirty-seven different occupations mentioned.
Among these were the following:?farmer, forester, cigar maker,
wireless operator, teacher, physician, nurse, musician, lawyer,
chemist, cartoonist, stenographer, bookkeeper, draughtsman, contractor, telegraph operator, carpenter, milliner, aviator, mail clerk,
hotel clerk, inventor, merchant, soldier, civil engineer, mechanical
engineer, electrical engineer, etc.
By grouping these we found that 26 per cent chose commercial
and industrial occupations, 23 per cent chose professional work,
and 24 per cent chose pursuits so difficult to classify that we placed
them in a group which we called miscellaneous. Twenty-seven per
cent indicated that they had made no choice.
At the beginning of the next year (Freshman year) all members
of this class still remaining in our school, ninety-eight in all, were
asked the same question and the answers were tabulated as before.
During the interval of one year 66^ per cent of the pupils who were
yet in school indicated a change of mind with regard to their choice
of a life work. The remainder, 33Yi per cent, expressed themselves
the same as before, i.e. they remained fully decided in their first
choice or they remained wholly undecided in the matter.
In October, 1914, a further study of the same class now reduced
to seventy-three showed that 47 per cent of those remaining had
changed since the question was first asked them. A large percentage of those remaining constant in choice remained in school while
a large percentage of those changing had dropped out of school.
A few days ago this same question was submitted to the members of this same class for the fourth time. Fifty-two per cent of
(161)
162 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
those remaining in school the entire four years had not changed
their minds concerning their choice of a life work. Twenty-three
per cent changed once and 12 per cent changed twice; 13 per cent
changed three times or more.
This study, extending over a period of four years and as yet
incomplete, seems to point toward several conclusions. First,
a large percentage of adolescent boys and girls do not definitely
decide upon their life work until late in the high school course, perhaps often not until after the course is completed. Secondly,
a large percentage of these students vacillate, now choosing one
thing and now another, influenced often by the most interesting
thing at the time the choice is made, perhaps influenced often by the
personality of a popular teacher, or by the subject of study with
which the mind is filled at that particular time. Thirdly, there
is a greater school life expectancy for those who remain constant
in choice than for those who change.
It is interesting at this point to follow the amount of change
in the enrolment of a given class through a number of years and
to see, as far as possible, what relation there is between the migration of families and remaining in school. In the case of this class
there were one hundred and fifty-nine enrolled the first year in the
eighth grade, ninety-eight the second year, seventy-three the third
year, and fifty-six the fourth year.
This does not mean that all who dropped out of this class have
remained out of school permanently. Although unable to check
all pupils we know that a large number moved out of our district
and we have good reasons for believing that many of them continued in school, at least for a time after moving. Nor does it
mean that the present Junior class in our school has only fifty-six
pupils in it. We have had additions due to families moving into
our district so that at the present time the enrolment is seventy.
Last year in connection with our annual school survey we
gathered data concerning the place of birth of all children enrolled
in the schools. We also secured the place of birth of all parents
attending school. We found that 53 per cent of our pupils were
born outside of our school district. Many of them had made several
moves before coming to our city. We found further that 82 per
cent of the parents were born outside of our district. The migratory instinct is strong in us yet.
The relation of changing schools to choice of a life work is shown
by the fact that a large percentage of those pupils who are constant
in their choice remain in school while a large percentage of those
who change schools, or drop out of school altogether, are not conVOCATIONAL GUIDANCE IN THE HIGH SCHOOL 163
stant in choice of life work. Social and economic conditions which
make it necessary for the family to remove from district to district
affect the choice of a life work and consequently are factors to be
considered in vocational guidance.
In addition to the factor of change there is another which
must be considered in any study of vocational education and especially vocational guidance for the smaller cities, villages, and rural
communities. This is the opportunities offered in the local community, and whether these vocational opportunities are purely
local or whether they are general in their nature. If migration
from community to community is so great, will it pay to give time
and energy to the consideration of merely local occupations?
Should pupils be encouraged to undertake to prepare themselves
for purely local pursuits? Should they be directed into such pursuits as cigar making, stone cutting, tinning, dairying, etc.? The
child who moves from place to place may not get the opportunity
of engaging in his choice of work if his choice is a purely local pursuit.
In order to attack this problem we compiled a list of the occupations of the fathers of the children in our schools. We found
that there were one hundred and twenty-one (121) different occupations listed. The list varied from farmer, factory worker, and
miner, to scavenger, bartender, and pool room proprietor. Only
in three occupations did we find a large number engaged. These
were farmers (126), factory workers (319), and miners (379). The
opportunity for employment is- a negligible quantity in our community outside of these three occupations.
Again many of these are pursuits in which there are few opportunities for advancement. Many are "blind alley jobs." There
is little chance for promotion. In the small city there is little
opportunity for guidance into local pursuits which have a wide
future outlook. Should children be guided into "blind alley jobs"?
Shall they be guided into jobs in which the work is irregular, the
promotion slow and uncertain, and at best the highest place soon
reached ? The answers are not yet in sight.
I am fully convinced from the study I have made that the
kind of guidance we need in our schools today is that which will
lead boys and girls into higher grades of school work and the advice
they need most is that which will cause them to remain longer in
school.
I am further convinced that what we as superintendents,
principals, and teachers need most is that guidance which will help
us so to shape the course of study, and so to manage the school,
that students will regard the school as of so much value to them
164 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that they can not afford to remain away. What we need is that
knowledge and ability which will help us to guide children forward
in their school work faster and further. The question of vocational
guidance, in so far as the schools ought to deal with it, is concerned
largely with the retardation and elimination of pupils, with the
abridgment and enrichment of the course of study, with the vitalization of the subjects already in the course, with the management
of the school and with the spirit of the teaching force.
Every school system should collect a body of facts concerning
the local educational situation, such facts to be used for determining
educational policies. No school can do efficient work for the community which supports it, without these data to guide and direct
the management. For too long a time we have been content to
let tradition dictate our management. We have taught the same
school our fathers have taught and used the same methods our
fathers have used.
Among the many things which can be done by the school to
guide the boys and girls into a better life as well as better places
in life, is a full and complete study, continuing from year to year,
of the age and grade of children with special emphasis upon the
number behind the normal grade and the cause of it. This should
include a rather complete study of the physical condition of children,
sanitary conditions of school buildings and health conditions in
the home. It should include a study of failures in school and the
cause of these, the number of withdrawals and the cause of each.
Going along with this there should be as full a study as possible
of what children do after withdrawing from school. A fund of
information local in its nature will help the teacher to handle
children in school and to hold them in school longer.
The pupils should be encouraged to create, cherish, and foster
ideals. No one thing has more effect on the future life of children
than this. The teacher, like Agnes in David Copperfield, should
always be pointing the way upward. This is the best thing the
teacher can do. In my own life nothing has helped guide me so much
as the ideals formed by contact with men whom I admired, and by
reading biographies of great men. Ideals presented in great selections of literature have inspiration for the student if properly presented by the teacher. Talks by the teacher, principal or superintendent on the value of education, financial and cultural, given
to the school as a whole, or to individuals, discussions concerning
different vocations and opportunities will help pupils to understand
the value of the school to them, and the aid which it attempts
to give each student.
VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE IN THE HIGH SCHOOL. 165
Children in the lower classes should get acquainted with the
work in the higher classes. It is entirely in order to take the time
of any class to explain and discuss with the children the work of
the high school and how it helps in the work of the world. In these
discussions the teacher can get the viewpoint of the children. Visits
to different departments can be made by pupils and oral reports
of work visited can be given to the class. This is good oral theme
work for English classes.
Finally, the question of vocational guidance in so far as the
high school ought to deal with it, is concerned with the abridgment
and enrichment of the course of study. The course of study must
be vitalized. It must touch life at more points. It must appear
worth while to boys and girls. Vocational guidance has to do
with every subject of study and every recitation. It is not a new
subject to be brought into the course. It must not be handled by
a new teacher added to the corps. It should vitalize every subject
and every lesson.
So much of our work, especially our high school work, is not
adapted to the life of today?is traditional, memory work?that
students seeing the uselessness of it, refuse to give their time to it.
Put yourself in the place of the ordinary sixteen-year old boy who
belongs to the 95 per cent who are going to plow corn, lay brick, build
houses, punch holes in a piece of iron in a factory, or act as brakeman
on a train, and see what value you would get from the study of Latin,
or ancient history, or geometry, or botany, or for that matter any
one of the many things offered in our high school course of study.
Put yourself in his place with his choice of life work and his prospect
ahead and see how much of the dry, mechanical, memory work,
appeals to you.
It is not a question as to what we think about these subjects.
We may think they are very much worth while. We cannot
impose our standpoint upon him. What he thinks counts. It
may be it ought not to do so, but it does. How will this course
help him? He does not see that it will. I do not see how some
of it will, do you?
Vocational guidance has to do with the kind of work offered
in school, with the way work is done in school, with the inspiration
breathed by the teacher into her class, with the advice which
she gives when the boy comes to her with his problems. Every
teacher should be a counsellor. Every teacher must be interested
in boys and girls, far more interested in these than in Latin, or
history or science or literature or any subject whatever. It is not
a subject to be thrust upon one teacher as we have been doing with
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Latin, history, etc. This counselling with boys and girls is the
vital work in teaching. Too long we have been concentrating our
attention on subject matter, forgetting that we are teaching boys
and girls, not subject matter. The only excuse the public school
has for existence is that it helps boys and girls to solve life situations
the better for having had the advice and experience of school life.
The vital thing in life is the solution of situations. The main purpose of the schools is to help boys and girls to get ready to solve
these situations correctly. Does the high school help?
One of the things which will be very helpful in vocational
guidance is to study boys and girls in a sympathetic way, viewing
things from their standpoint not from the adult standpoint, and
not from the standpoint of the college, or the college man. Going
along with this, and it may be included in it, is the fact that every
teacher should have the missionary spirit. In the past we have
often been content to take the children who come to us, without
considering the ones outside the school, those who have no inclination to come. The missionary spirit reaches out after those who
are not coming under the influence of the school. It is interested
in seeing that those who are in school are enthusiastic about the
work. It is not interested so much in a high standard for the few
as in higher standards for the many. This leads to the personal
touch and to inspirational work. Perfunctory work dwarfs and
kills. Inspirational work gives life. We have been so wrapped
up in certain pages of subject matter, we have been so concerned
about finishing the assignment?finishing the book?that we have
had no time for talk about the things of vital concern around us.
It would be amusing, if it were not pathetic, to see how concerned
teachers are about finishing pages, all the time neglecting the vital
issues in which children are interested.
In conclusion then let me say that there is a place in high
school for vocational guidance. We ought to have more of it, but
it should come in largely through the regular work and in many
places, rather than in one place through one teacher teaching the
particular subject. Every subject, every lesson has in it great possibilities. Every teacher is and must be a counsellor and guide
of youth.
