Clinical Psychology and the Rural Schools
==========================================

By Ernest R. Groves,
Professor of Psychology, New Hampshire Stale College, Durham.
In The Psychological Clinic for February, 1913, Professor
Pyle makes an appeal for an organized effort to discover the feeble-
minded living in the country. Although it is impossible at present
to determine the proportion of rural aments as compared with those
in the cities, it is certain that we have a large number of physically
and mentally defective children in rural and village communities
who are receiving less attention than those of the same classes who
happen to live in the cities. A recent careful study of the feeble-
minded in New Hampshire1 is very interesting with respect to its
conclusion regarding the feebleminded in the country. The investi-
gation made to discover the number of feebleminded in the state
also found their geographical distribution by counties. "One of
the most significant studies that can be made in the survey of these
counties is the geographic distribution of the feebleminded and the
proportion of the entire state population that falls within this defec-
tive class. Since there has been a report from every town in the
state, either by questionnaire or personal canvass, this proportion
may be considered fairly correct even though many cases have not
been reported. One of the most significant revelations of this table
is the range of feeblemindedness gradually ascending from the
smallest percentage, in the most populous county of the state, to the
largest percentages, in the two most remote and thinly populated
counties."
A student of country-life problems can hardly fail to appreciate
the importance of this proportion of feebleminded in the rural
counties. Without attempting to assume that such a condition is
true of all the states, it is a fair inference that the rural feebleminded
children are relatively given less attention than the seriousness of
the situation justifies. This statement docs not mean that teachers
and superintendents in the country are indifferent to or ignorant of
the significance of the problem of amentia, but rather that there is at
present lacking the efficient, organized, administrative effort to solve
through the schools the problem of the defective country child.
It is most reasonable to turn to the schools as the means by which
the country's need may be met. As in most fundamental social efforts
the instrument for progress is already at hand. The country school
1 Report of tho Children's Commission, Concord, 1914, p. 01.
(272)
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY AND RURAL SCHOOLS. 273
organization must be made use of in the attempt to find the children
who are physically and mentally defective. It is wise economy to
organize the forces of public education so as to enable them to under-
take clinic investigation in localities too small to carry on such work
by themselves. Moreover, there is a special reason why such investi-
gation for the finding of the defective child in the country schools
will appeal to educational officials. They of all persons are likely in
practical and even painful ways to feel the need of such work being
done. Any school administrator of experience realizes the magnitude
of this problem as it appears in matters of school administration,
especially as it is related to moral difficulties.
In any such investigation an interested but unbiased source
of information provides a useful first step in the effort. The teacher
is a most excellent source for such preliminary information. She is
hampered in her daily work by the defective child, and to a consider-
able extent may be trusted to bring such children as need immediate
attention to the notice of the proper official for examination. Her
school records have great value for the expert, and can easily be made
to have still greater value. The rural teacher in some cases may even
use as a preliminary test the Binet scale, or the superintendent may
give a preliminary test. Although such an investigation can not
take the place of expert examination, it can serve a purpose in giving
information of value to the school administration and perhaps in
showing the need of expert help.
The rural ament will never receive deserved attention unless
educators are alive to the greatness of his needs. At this point those
who realize the significance of the defective child must concentrate
educational effort. The demand for the state-wide clinic work along
both physical and mental lines must come from the teachers and
school officials before the legislators can be expected to consider the
matter seriously. The educating of schoolmen and schoolwomen in
regard to the imperative character of this special problem is no hope-
less undertaking. Already a limited attention to such educating
effort has accomplished wonders.
It will be impossible merely to expend social energy in finding
ky clinic tests in small communities the defective children. A
larger public provision for the treatment and segregation of such
children must also be provided, and any attention to the problem
will make this fact very clear. The dull child who improves when
given special class work must have the attention in the rural com-
munities that he now receives in the cities. It would seem as if
special class work for country children involves necessary expenses
and problems of administration greater than the demands of similar
274 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
work carried on in the cities. Who can question, however, the
social economy such work represents?
The large problem of institutional care for mental defectives
created by the discovery of additional aments is not so hopeless as it
at first seems to one who knows that even now proper segregation is
not provided for all who need it. Science of course can hardly fail to
discover many new cases of children needing attention when it investi-
gates rural districts. However, the significance of public opinion,
alive to such needs as a result of educational effort, must not be
forgotten. Indeed the public indifference is largely due to the fact
that the magnitude of the problem of feeblemindedness is just being
recognized by science. It must also be remembered that as soon as
a serious attack is made upon the problem all along the line there
will be a rapid decrease in the offspring born to feebleminded parents.
As segregation is increased the problem must decrease. Our present
situation is due to neglect resulting from not having understood the
real meaning of this social problem. There is also a possibility that
our progress in taking care of the morons will not depend wholly
upon our ability to provide segregation. Science offers hope of other
means of relief.
A very aggressive attack upon the problem of amentia in the
county is certain to provide unexpected social relief along other lines.
It is impossible to know how much the problem of the use of alcoholic
drinks in the country is related to the problem of feeblemindedness.
When one has seen how strong the craving for intoxicants is among
some country people without the suggestions and constant tempta-
tions provided by the saloon industry in the cities, it is clear that
much may be expected of any successful attack upon rural amentia
in decreasing alcoholism. The problem of illegitimacy in the country
is certainly in large measure a problem related to feeblemindedness.
The moral imbecile and the feebleminded boy given to occasional
fire-setting for a time are a most serious menace. When this problem
of rural amentia is more successfully met, a great economic gain
also must result. The best propaganda carried on by experiment
stations and agricultural colleges must fail in communities where a
feebleminded strain by close intermarriage has made nearly an entire
community defective or abnormal or has been a large cause of the
constant loss of the ambitious youth because of their eagerness to
remove from such an unfavorable social environment to a city having
promise of better conditions. Progress in the control of rural amentia
must surely conserve the resources of the various activities that are
attempting to improve social conditions in the country. Political
exploitation also in its different forms in rural communities is tied up
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 275
with amentia. The largest result, perhaps, of all which may be
expected to follow an effective program respecting the country feeble-
minded is the bringing of optimism into the lives of people in some
country places who at present are possessed by a pessimism which
forms the largest obstacle to social and economic progress.
