How Can Parents Understand Their Children?
===========================================

:Author:  Margaret Otis, Ph.D.,
Philadelphia, Pa.

The lack of a place in our educational system for preparation
of the young for the duties devolving upon them as parents is, sadly
enough, too glaring a defect to be longer overlooked. Spencer's
comment upon this point will bear repeating: "But though some care
is taken to fit the young of both sexes for society and citizenship,
no care whatever is taken to fit them for the still more important
position they will ultimately have to fill?the position of parents."
Such a comment calls attention to a need which is definitely
felt in our society. His urgent plea that the "theory and practice
of education" be introduced as a subject of study into our school
curriculum finds unanimous agreement in every thinking mind that
reads his essay on moral education. But how? Has the need been
met sufficiently by the courses in home economics that are at present
so much in vogue? Or has the work been accomplished by the
mothers' clubs and social-center work that is being pushed by our
ardent social workers? How can the art of understanding and
awakening intellect and providing for its further development be
taught? Many courses have been introduced, looking to the physical
comfort of the home. The art of home-making?is it not to keep the
home clean and attractive, to make war vigorously on all germ life,
to study house decoration, to investigate the mysteries of dietetics,
to cook inviting meals, and so on. The physical care of children has
also been much dwelt upon. A nurse's course of training is desirable,
including a thorough-going study of nutrition. Truly a maiden
must have a college course in all these departments before she may
say yes to the man who asks her in marriage.

Alas! She may have had all this and more, and yet fail in the
essential understanding of the child she is endeavoring to rear.
Understanding is not easily acquired by taking courses of study.
A child is an individual not like any one else in the world. His
destiny, pointed by inheritance, is woven from the rich world of
experience that supplies the material for his mental life; his body a
growing organism, his mind a complex of ideas, impulses, and emotional experiences constantly changing, leaving indelible impressions
that determine the character of his later life. How to understand
the proper moment for suggesting the right activity is the mother's
task. Woman's instinct and mother-love may do much. Can
science help her to do more? To steer a youth through the difficult
time of adolescence requires more enlightenment than is now present
in many homes. To know oneself and one's own need, which is the
first step toward self-guidance, is difficult to acquire. How much
more so, to teach this to another! How many mistakes proper
guidance will save the young boy or girl!

To the thinking mind a study of failures well repays the effort
spent. The present results from this study are rich in warning as
to what not to do. These negative results are sometimes as valuable
to science as great discoveries. A study of wrong conditions perhaps
may prove to be the best guide to the right. The study of causes
and conditions that lead to delinquency reveals a noted lack of
mother care and understanding. In a school for delinquents, an
investigation of 200 cases shows that lack of proper mothering occasions at least 80 per cent of these failures in life, for failures at their
very start they are judged to be by society, whatever the future may
hold for them. Studies of particular cases furnish excellent comment
on this need of understanding a girl's nature. The following story
illustrates how a very good mother may be a very inefficient guardian
or companion to her own daughter:

Olive Rosenbloom, a Jewess, grew up in a home where the sternest
code of morality was observed. As the youngest child and only
daughter, she easily became an important member of the household.
Her older brothers at first regarded her as a plaything, a doll-like
creature made expressly for their entertainment. Then "Sissy" was
sometimes in the way and they ordered her around and bullied her.
At hardly any time in her life had she been regarded seriously. She
slept late if she chose; practiced the piano if she wished, otherwise
not. Her mother was a hard-working woman and kept the comfortable home neat and clean. She cooked and sewed for her family
and thought the world of her pretty daughter. Of an intensely
practical nature herself, she felt she had done her duty when the
house was in order, the ironing done, and Olive's best dress was
hanging in the closet ready for the next school entertainment. Olive
never knew what it was to be in need of even a ribbon. All was
thought out and planned for her. No unpleasant tasks were assigned,
and when at home from school she was free to do as she pleased.
Yes, Olive's mother loved her.

Olive was a good-natured, fun-loving girl, and had not the
slightest idea that she was made a baby at home. She was a member
of a girls' society, sang at entertainments, and went around with the
young set of the town in which she lived. Well-developed and large
for her years, she was often thought to be much older than she really
was, and in the town passed for a young lady of at least eighteen,
ready to "keep company". She was in reality but fifteen, in the second
year of high school, where she was taking a business course, at the
advice of one of her practical brothers. She found it rather more
difficult than she had imagined, became quite discouraged over her
school work, neglected it, and sought to drown the reproofs of her
conscience by seeking more amusement in the evenings. No one
knew anything was the matter. Her mother thought that Olive
was going around a little too much and began to make some rules
about the time she should be in her room at night. This led to a few
deceptions and white lies on the part of Olive,?"Oh, yes, mother,
I was in at nine o'clock last night. I came in when you were kneading
the bread in the kitchen and you didn't hear me." She would sometimes even come home at the right time, go to her room, and then slip
out again when no one was looking.

At a dance at Rosie Schreiner's, Olive met Jack Carter, a handsome fellow. No one seemed to know much about him, but he was
good company and Olive had such "dandy" times with him. She
walked with him outside during some of the dances. They were
congenial comrades, and gave and took mutually in the way of
repartee. She made him keep his distance when she wished, but
flirted with him off and on all winter. One night he held her in his
arms and kissed her. She grew hot and ashamed, pulled herself
away, and ran home as fast as she could. She was now genuinely
troubled and felt extremely uneasy. Did she confide in her mother?
Why, no; her mother was always busy either canning fruit or interviewing some meat or grocery man. And why shouldn't she have a
good time with Jack Carter? She wasn't going to marry him, of
course. She felt secretly ashamed of some of his rough, coarse ways;
but Jack's sensual nature had been roused and he seemed obsessed
to get the girl. He watched his chance, and one night, as Olive was
hastening home after a stolen evening of enjoyment, he intercepted
her. She was too frightened to resist. He claimed she had jilted
him and reproached her, saying: "You promised to marry me, and,
by thunder, I'll blow your brains out if you don't." Olive had never
been instructed in any way that would have proved helpful at this
crisis, so she yielded to his impetuosity and went off with him that
night to a neighboring town. He gained his purpose and then left
her. It turned out that he was a married man, whose wife was seeking a divorce, the cause for which he had already given many times
over.
Olive was afraid to go home. She had heard her father and
brothers speak at times in the severest way of women who had lapsed
from morality. It seemed there would be no hope of pardon from
any of the stern moralists of her family. She thought despairingly
of each of her three brothers, much esteemed as they were in the
town. All of them held positions of importance in the community
and were getting up in the world. Now she was condemned, an
outcast doomed to perdition. Where could she go? Who would
take her in? In her home she had been petted and babied, but in no
way given a training that would enable her to become a womanly
woman. And now, in her failure to stand in one of life's difficult
pathways, she naturally would meet with only condemnation and
contempt.

At length she did succeed in finding employment as clerk in a
small shop and remained in hiding for a couple of months. Her
mother, thoroughly alarmed at her daughter's disappearance, had
put a detective at work to search for her. When finally she was
found, her motherly indignation knew no bounds when she learned
all the details of Olive's secret life of amusement, and had her sent
immediately to a home for delinquent girls. It seemed to Olive
that the world had come to an end for her. Her brothers, horrified
at their sister's misfortune, said they would never forgive her for
disgracing the family in that flagrant way. Her mother was stunned
by the blow and could not imagine why this terrible misfortune had
come to her lot. To rear a daughter who could not keep straight!
The disgrace of it!

In the Home, Olive, after a period of rebellion, seemed to come to
herself. She learned to cook, to clean, to wash and iron. Never
before had she done such menial tasks. The superintendent of the
Home, kinder than her own family, assured her that she had a chance
to redeem the past,?let her take heart and work her way out. The
despised stenography even came to be a help to her, and she was
given a chance to work evenings at her books. A place was found for
her after some time by a friend of her own nationality and she worked
hard to deserve the trust and confidence placed in her. A couple of
years later she went home with a good record. Her mother, who had
given her up for lost, was surprised to find her in such good trim and
so capable in all that she did. Could this be Olive, the happy-golucky, ne'er-do-well? Why had she not been able to bring about
this result herself? Wherein had she, as a mother, failed? Olive
had good mental ability, good sense, and a wish to do well and get
along in the world, but the mother knew not what was in her daughter.
She had been a complete stranger to the real Olive.

This story is an instance of unnecessary failure. The girl in
question, with common-sense guidance, would have developed to be
a good, ordinary girl, fit to be the wife of a good, ordinary man.
Mothers must conceive their task as something higher than that of a
housekeeper or a nurse. The best and only advice to a mother, and
advice to be oft repeated, may be given as an adaptation of the
Greek: "Know thyself," Mother, know thy child.
