A Note on Spectral Illusions and Other " Warnings" in a Case of Apoplexy; With Reference to the Fatal Illness of  the Late Earl of Eglinton
=============================================================================================================================================


332

By W. T. GAIItDNER, M.D.
In the last number of tlie Journal of Psychological Medicine
there is an article by Dr. W. A. F. Browne, a well known and much
respected authority, on " Second-sight, or Deuteroscopia." To
write a criticism, or commentary, on the article is no part of my
present purpose. Indeed, fascinating as the subject is, I should
not have been tempted to meddle with it at all but for one of
the anecdotes referred to as proviug that "modern times and
persons whom we might have touched afford similar evidence "
to that which Sir Walter Scott had before him when he em-
bodied in immortal fiction the tale of the Bodach-Glas which
*' appeared to Fergus Mclvor on the eve of his capture and
execution." The sole object of this note is to deal with the one
particular instance here adduced of a very modern "Bodach-
Glas ;" the facts alleged being susceptible of verification, or the
contrary, in a way which might chance to be impossible a few
years hence. The real facts and theories which underlie such
narratives in general are extremely interesting; but obviously
the first point in importance is to have the exact truth, as
nearly as it can be had ; and the purpose of this communication,
therefore, is simply to assist Dr. Browne, and all others who may
follow him, in the attempt to carry out scientific enquiries into
a dark and difficult subject.
The narrative in question is to be found at p. 29 of part 1,
vol. ii. of the new series of this Journal, and is borrowed
verbatim from a book entitled Apparitions: a Narrative of
Facts,by theEev. Bourchier Wrey Saville, M. A. (London: 1874);
a volume to which in general terms Dr. Browne expresses his
acknowledgments as the source of some considerable portion of
his materials. In this particular instance, however, the " facts "
have been filtered through at least two other media before
reaching Mr. Saville's pages : for it is expressly mentioned that
a certain " Henderson," in a certain work passing under the
name of " Folk Lore," attributes the story to a certain " Scotch
clergyman, ivho endorses every 'particular as authentic and
perfectly true."
I am not in a position to be able to track this narrative
through all the various stages indicated, inasmuch as I have not
the slightest idea who is the Scotch clergyman here referred to,
or how the story got into the possession of " Henderson;" but
A NOTE OX SPECTRAL ILLUSIONS, &C. 333
as the compilation of such books as this " Folk Lore," is usually
very ranch of a paste-and-scissors business, and as no names are
mentioned in connection with the absolutely first source of the
information, it is probably not too much to assume that between
this first source and the " Scotch clergyman," or between the
latter and " Henderson," there may have been several other
media of more or less transparency, consciously or unconsciously
imparting a colouring to the narrative. At all events, it is at
least charitable to suppose so much ; for I am in a position to
affirm with the most absolute certainty that the narrative attri-
buted to the " Scotch clergyman," so far from being'in " every
particular authentic and perfectly true," is, in the commonest
particulars, and in almost every individual detail, totally de-
void of the character of a trustworthy report of the facts and
circumstances of the late Lord Eglinton's death.
It happens that I am the only survivor of the medical men
who saw Lord Eglinton on his death-bed,'* and who heard at the
time the exact report of what was said to have preceded his
fatal illness. I have also had the advantage of a communication
from Mr. Whyte Melville, of Mount Melville, at whose house
lie died; and I am able, moreover, to compare the incidents of
Lord Eglinton's last illness with facts and impressions as to his
state of mind and body during the last year, or more, of his life ;
these particulars resting upon the unpublished, but perfectly
exact and carefully considered statements of two friends of the
late Lord Eglinton, who were certainly more in his confidence,
and more in daily intercourse with him, at the time in question,
than any other person or persons whatever, Lady Eglinton alone
excepted. I am thus in the possession of means for the discovery
of the truth in this case which can rarely be at the disposal of
anyone who desires to follow to its sources a tale of death-bed
wonders; the actual subject of the narrative being, of course,
disqualified from giving evidence as to the facts, unless, indeed,
through some other supernatural apparition, which would itself
require a like careful and elaborate process of verification.
The facts are certainly both curious and interesting, and in
lecturing upon the premonitions of apoplexy I have invariably
referred to them (without, however, giving names or local indica-
tions) as illustrating the physical basis upon which such quasi-
supernatural tales as those of the Banshee, Bodach-Glas, wraiths,
and other warning visions have, with great probability, been
* The late Dr. A dam son, of St. Andrews, with his colleague and partner, Dr.
Oswald Bell, more recently Professor of Medicine in the University there, were
associated with me, more or less, throughout; Dr. Adamson having the more im-
mediate charge, and having communicated to me most of the details as understood
at the time. Dr. Begbie, senior, of Edinburgh, was also called in consultation.
334 A NOTE ON SPECTRAL ILLUSIONS
founded. It is, therefore, a matter of considerable interest to
me as a teaclier of medicine to find that a full-blown supernatural
tale has actually grown up and got itself published three times
over within fifteen years?first as " Folk Lore," then as " Appa-
ritions, a Narrative of Facts," and finally as a modern instance
of " Deuteroscopia," in a medical journal. And I have accord-
ingly to thank Dr. Browne for having been the means of bring-
ing under the notice of competent scientific judges what might
otherwise have been left to fructify in " Folk Lore," until the
miraculous element had assumed still larger proportions. I
believe we have here a typical story, from which the true genesis
of many other myths of a like order may be easily inferred.
What is detailed in the published narrative, omitting, for
the present, the apparently supernatural occurrence, may be
briefly thus contrasted with the actual facts, as known to myself
and probably to many others, bearing on the last illness and
death of the late Lord Eglinton. I purposely give, though not
every word, yet every single incident of an ordinary or easily
verifiable kind, related on the authority of the " Scotch clergy-
man " as being in " every particular authentic and perfectly
true."
1. Lord E. was engaged in playing golf at St. Andrews on
the 4th of October 1861. This is incorrect as to date, as will
presently appear. It is correct otherwise.
2. " Within a few hours Lord E. was a corpse. He died
the same night." This is as inaccurate as so brief a statement
could possibly be. Lord Eglinton was taken suddenly ill on
Monday, the 30th of September 1861, and died on Friday, the
4th of October. It was on the former date that he was playing
golf as above stated. Five days, therefore, intervened between
the incidents referred to as occurring on the links of St.
Andrews and his death.
3. Lord E. died " with such suddenness, that he was
engaged in handing a candlestick to a lady, who was retiring
to her room, when he expired." This is altogether inaccu-
rate, and indeed purely imaginary. Lord Eglinton expired
after nearly four days of insensibility, during which he lay in bed
perfectly helpless. He was, indeed, very suddenly taken ill
on the evening uf the day on which lie had been playing golf;
but without going into minute details of what must have been
a painful scene in a private drawing-room, I may say that I
have it on the best authority that Lord Eglinton was himself
retiring from the room at the time of his seizure, after saying
" Good night" to the company, and had reached the door,
walking backwards, and feeling for the handle, in the course of
which his manner was observed to be peculiar, and this led to
AND OTHER "WARNINGS." 335
liis being followed into the passage just in time to be prevented
from falling to the ground.
Now these details, given on the authority of an eye-witness,
would be of no great importance were it not for the clear
evidence they afford, that the first source of the tradition
ascribed to the " Scotch clergyman" was not an eye-witness,
and not even a well-informed secondary or hearsay witness.
The narrative, which is ushered in with such pretensions to
authority and exactitude, is inexact in every particular, and
obviously founded on the merest gossip of outsiders, who were
utterly misinformed as to dates and circumstances, which any
good contemporary newspaper could have supplied, while the
colouring imparted to the narrative is such as to make it
appear to be in all its details " authentic and perfectly
true." Of course I do not blame the unknown " Scotch clergy-
man " for this. When A tells B, who tells C, who tells D, who
tells E, etc. etc., a story which is ultimately printed by a
cunning compiler of " Folk Lore," the errors of the tradition are
not to be placed to the account of any one of these letters of the
alphabet. And in this case we cannot be sure that the " Scotch
clergyman" really meant to authenticate the narrative as we
have it; I am almost sure, indeed, that no Scotch clergyman
was in a position to do so.
The importance of this preliminary investigation as to the
more ordinary or credible incidents of the narrative is that, the
facts being so, we may almost certainly assume that the appa-
rently supernatural incidents require to be discounted, or
severely scrutinised, in proportion to the want of care and good
faith shown in the whole structure of the traditional story.
We know positively that we have to deal, not with such facts as
would stand in a court of justice, but with the flimsiest and
loosest of gossip, gathered in all probability from various
sources, and at such a distance from the actual facts that even
dates had ceased to be, or to appear, of importance. On such
authority as this we are required to receive the following:?
" Suddenly he stopped in the middle of the game, exclaiming,
' I can play no longer?there is the Bodach-Grlas; I have seen
it for the third time; something fearful is going to befall me.'
Within a few hours Lord Eglinton was a corpse; he died the
same night," etc. etc.
We should err, however, if on account of the d 'priori un-
trustworthiness of the narrative we should treat it as wholly
without foundation in its apparently supernatural incidents.
The fact is, that Lord Eglinton unquestionably had some kind
of spectral illusion, or deceptio visus, while playing golf
at St. Andrews on the day of his illness. He did not explain
336 A NOTE ON SPECTRAL ILLUSIONS.
himself very clearly, or in much detail about it, but said to
the bystanders on more than one occasion (as 1 was informed
next day), " There's my little old man again "?as if he had
become more or less familiar with the object. It is not a pai't
of the story, as I heard it, that he manifested any supernatural
awe or terror, or gave expression to any fear of immediate con-
sequences. I am almost as sure as a man can be of anything
derived from testimony, that the language attributed to Lord
Eglinton above is a pure invention, and one long after the fact.
For reasons which I shall state presently, I believe that Lord
Eglinton was fully persuaded, long before this, of his approach-
ing end, and that he looked forward to it, as a brave man
without superstition or guilty fear will usually do, steadily and
unflinchingly, for at least several months. He was not, there-
fore, in a state of mind to be suddenly terrorised by a Bodach-
Glas, or banshee, even had he believed the spectre to be such.
But I never heard it said at the time that he so believed
it. On the contrary, it is certain that he went home, passed
afternoon in society, ate a hearty dinner, and then afterwards
entered into conversation about the gold medal that was to be
played for next day ; rose, however, early, and went to the
drawing-room, where he listened with evident appreciation to
the singing of Scotch songs, and then retired, to be seized, as
stated above, with his fatal illness (apoplexy) just after leaving
the drawing-room. Such are the unvarnished facts of the case
in so far as they bear on the alleged supernatural occurrence.
How long before this Lord Eglinton had become aware of
the premonitory symptoms of disease, and what position he
assigned to these spectral illusions among the premonitory
symptoms, are questions which must probably remain for ever
unanswered. But we have abundant evidence of such premonitory
symptoms in other cases of apoplexy and epilepsy, and of their
probably depending on physical causes. And in Lord Eglinton's
case I am able to supply a missing link, by showing not only
that he had formed a very decided opinion that his life was
drawing to a close, but that he had expressed this opinion in a very
practical form, and entirely without reference to any supernatural
or superstitious impressions of warning. I am even in a position
to show that his symptoms, more than a year before his death,
were such as to suggest to a physician of large experience the
probability of apoplexy, and further, that among these symptoms
were spectral illusions, not indeed so definite in character as
the " little old man" on St. Andrews links, but still such as
probably to concur with the other evidence of impaired health
and vigour in leading to the fixed impression on Lord Eglin-
ton's mind of impending fatal disease. The following statements
AND OTHER "WARNINGS." 337
are simply an abridgment of what has been carefully written
down for my guidance by one of the two very-intimate and
confidential friends of Lord Eglinton above referred to.
Lord Eglinton was, as is well known, a man of robust
bodily frame, and of a remarkably genial presence, fond of all
manly sports, and especially an adept at most of our Scottish
games, but never permitting amusements to interfere with his
various business engagements, which, up to about two years
before his death, had included the public duties of the vice-
royalty of Ireland. In that office he did not spare himself, and
he is known to have gained the goodwill of all classes, and an
almost unbounded popularity. In the autumn of 1860, when
residing at home in Ayrshire, he was observed by a few of
his more intimate friends to be falling off in vigour of body,
but not to such an extent as to attract the notice of casual
visitors. At this time, in consequence of representations made
by the Countess of Eglinton to my informant, seriously remark-
ing upon the altered health of the Earl and his indisposition
(contrary to all his former habits) to take active exercise, he was
induced to make a personal visit to all his tenantry in Ayrshire,
and in the course of these excursions, thus voluntarily under-
taken with a view to his own health, as well as to the gratifica-
tion of those visited, he spoke frequently and confidentially of
his own symptoms, among which the loss of weight was the one
most present to his own mind as indicating derangement of
health. He spoke of it as gradual and progressive, and said
that it was annoying, for at his time of life most men became
heavier, and he could not account for it by anything in connec-
tion with his diet or regimen. He then explained that he had
also had peculiar sensations connected with his sight, and my
informant remembers distinctly the statement, that when out
shooting some days before, he had on several occasions taken
the gun from his shoulder without drawing the trigger, because,
he said, " I could not cover the object." On being asked what
it was that prevented him from taking aim, he replied that " a
little black spot seemed now and then to cross his vision, and he
could not fire."
A fact not stated at the time in connection with these
symptoms, but which became known to my informant after
Lord Eglinton's death, is that even for some time before this
he had been consulting Dr. Macfarlane, of Glasgow, late Pro-
fessor of Practice of Physic in the University, for symptoms
which the latter considered to be " indicative of apoplectic
tendencies." Dr. Macfarlane, in stating this circumstance in
conversation with my informant, added that he had recom-
mended his lordship to take regular exercise, and to dine an
338 A NOTE ON SPECTRAL ILLUSIONS
hour or an hour and a half earlier, but that he was met with
the answer, " Oh, doctor, we cannot give up our eight o'clock
dinners."
I have thus established, beyond all question, the fact that
for more than a year before Lord Eglinton's death he had been
failing in health, had experienced disorders in vision amounting
to a kind of spectral illusion, and had been considered by a
physician of the largest experience the subject of " apoplectic
tendencies." Had Lord Eglinton been a superstitious man, he
was therefore in the very condition to be, even at this time,
visited by a " Bodach-Grlas," or what he might have construed
as a warning vision of some kind. But in the very end of 1860
a great calamity befel him, and shortly after this his confidential
communications to the two friends I have referred to assumed
a new character, with a distinctly increased solemnity of anti-
cipation of the approaching close of his own life.
Lord Eglinton was twice married. His second wife was the
Lady Adela Capel. This lady was delivered of a child in Edin-
burgh on the 6th or 7th of December 1860, and all went well
for three weeks. At the end of that time there was a sudden
and unexpected illness, which terminated fatally on the 31st of
December. It is quite certain that this event caused a very
severe mental shock to Lord Eglinton, and almost from the
very day of the death of the Countess he used expressions inti-
mating that " his heart was broken," and that it would not be
long before his own life would come to a close. Indeed, on the
very day after the funeral of his wife, he gave most minute
instructions to one of the confidential friends alluded to above
as regards his own funeral, and, what is still more striking,
repeated these instructions in detail, pointing out on the spot
the very place where he wished to be laid, and exacting a
solemn pledge to carry out his wishes from the other friend, a
man at least twenty years older than himself, and at the time
by no means in vigorous health. I have a most vivid impres-
sion derived from this last gentleman (now dead) as to the per-
sistency with which Lord Eglinton pressed upon him personally
the duty of seeing him buried in the exact place pointed out by
him, and when told that, according to all ordinary calculations,
he (Lord Eglinton) ought to be the survivor of the two, he said,
" No, my career is ended ; you will soon see me buried there."
With all this there was no hint of any overstrained imagina-
tive terror or superstitious feeling, and no allusion, even in the
most casual way, to any supernatural warning or visitation.
The works referred to by Dr. Browne contain a very circumstan-
tial narrative of a dream which, it is said, warned Lord Eglinton
beforehand of the death of the Countess, and even of the very
AND OTHER " WARNINGS." 339
time when it was to take place, making him cry out with terror.
Dr. Browne does not quote this story, though it is very plausibly
told, and is quite a fitting pendant to the tale of the " Bodach-
Grlas." For the purposes of " Folk Lore " it is quite as good a
story as the other, though it does not assume to be attested
in every particular by a " Scotch clergyman." Upon this sub-
ject my informant writes: "From the day of the Countess's
death, and for many weeks afterwards, I was constantly with
Lord Eglinton, and had many private conversations with him
on the subject of his great loss, but I never heard the slightest
allusion to a dream or foreboding of any kind." Is it at all
probable, or even possible, that Lord Eglinton should have been
for weeks in constant communication with a most intimate and
confidential friend, speaking of the facts connected with the
death of the Countess, and should never have dropped a hint
about a supernatural warning, if the latter story had been true ?
Yet the narrative appears side by side with the other in Mr.
Saville's book, and equally with it assumes to be derived from
authentic sources, or at least claims, by its very form and word-
ing, the credit due to a statement of indisputed fact.
One more illustration I am able to give at once of the
strongly-realised conception that Lord Eglinton had formed of
the probability or certainty of his own premature death, and of
the freedom of that conception from all superstitious fears, or
even traces of supernatural visitation. At the instance of the
elder of the two confidential friends I have mentioned, and
chiefly with a view to the occupation of his leisure hours during
the last year of his life, Lord Eglinton had agreed to a pro-
posal to place on record some of his own personal recollec-
tions, his friend doing the same; and each reading over to
the other, from time to time, the successive portions of the two
narratives as they were completed. Both these autobiographical
Productions still exist, and I believe that the interchange of
?confidences contained in them was a source of much pleasure
and satisfaction to their respective authors, although I have
often heard the elder and survivor of the two say that he
believed Lord Eglinton did not intend his memoir to be pre-
served, or in any way to be made use of, after his death ; regard-
ing it as merely a private or confidential record for his own use,
and that of his most intimate friends. I am not in a position,
of course, to quote or otherwise refer in detail to this document;
but I believe it is true that the last words in it contain an
affecting allusion to the death of his wife nine months before,
conveying, as simply as possible, the sense that in this world he
had no more to do, but to prepare for a meeting in the next.
Had there been any supernatural manifestation or ghostly
340 A NOTE ON SPECTRAL ILLUSIONS, &C.
terror present to the mind of Lord Eglinton. shortly before his
own death, or had his previous experience contained such an
incident as that of the second story referred to above, it was here
that we might have expected to find it. For I am informed,
on the same authority as I have previously so often referred to,
that " the 29th September 1860 was Lord Eglinton's birth-
day. It was a Sunday, and I believe I am right in saying
that on that day he wrote the last sentence which is found in
his autobiography." On the next day, the 30tli September, as
we have seen, he was on the links at St. Andrews playing golf,
and it was then that he experienced the premonitory symptoms
which led up to a fit of apoplexy the same night.
I have endeavoured to present these occurrences in such a
way as may be of service in the investigation of truth, and at
the same time avoid ministering to a morbid appetite for the
marvellous, or a mere love of gossip. The surviving friends of
the late Lord Eglinton will not regret to know that an attempt
has been made to distinguish between fact and fiction in the
current traditions; although had not these been published in a
scientific journal, it is more than probable that the attempt
would never have been made.
