341 The Psychological Aspect of the Bravo Case
===============================================

The circumstances connected with this extraordinary case have
given rise to much comment and conjecture in medical circles.
The theories which have from time to time been propounded,
and the numerous explanations that have been offered, are
peculiar as well as numerous.
It is not our intention to enter into a discussion upon the
facts incidental to the trial, as they are too well known to
need any recapitulation at our hands. The point at issue is,
whether the deceased Mr. Bravo committed suicide whilst in an
unsound state of mind. Public opinion from the very onset
determined not to accept this theory, let the evidence be ever
so strong, or substantiated by convincing facts.
The deceased was a man of excitable temperament, liable to
sudden outbursts of passion without any adequate cause. He
was morbidly jealous ; his mind absorbed in one train of thought
relative to certain events previous to his marriage, upon which
we need not dwell in detail. The evidence went to prove his
frequent liability to these furious outbreaks and fits of morbid
suspicion, which on every opportunity he vented on his wife,
especially when he was in the vicinity of a certain house, the
sight of which stirred up the angry passions rankling in his
breast, and which he was unable to throw off in consequence of
the firm grasp they had obtained. The deceased might have
passed through life without any harm accruing, had not there
been a strong predisposing cause which rendered his mind unable
to battle against!his thoughts. This predisposing cause alluded
to was a taint^of hereditary insanity, prevalent in his family, but
which carried no weight at the inquest. We are much surprised
that, with the facts so prominently elicited, the jury should
have entirely abandoned this consideration. A jury consisting
of tradesmen <?f Balham could not be expected to know that in
342 PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE BRAVO CASE.
cases of insanity there generally exist two distinct causes con-
ducive to mental aberration?an exciting, and a predisposing
cause. Both these existed, the exciting cause being the one pre-
dominant thought previously mentioned; the predisposing, the
hereditary taint. We are strongly of opinion that in an enquiry
of such gravity, and involving such important issues, that the
Coroner should have been assisted by a medical as well as a
legal assessor. The question at issue was whether the case was
one of murder or suicide. If the latter verdict had been given,
we may presume that that verdict would have been " Suicide
whilst in an unsound state of mind," and therefore, with such a
presumption, which must have existed in the mind of the
Coroner, he should have insisted upon having the assistance of a
physician learned and experienced in mental disorders. We do
not, however, know what his full powers are, but we are led to
believe that had he expressed a wish to this effect it would have
been granted, especially as the Crown was desirous of sifting
the matter to the uttermost. We give in extenso an excellent
and able letter, written by Dr Edgar Sheppard, of Colney Hatch,
to the Times, and the views as expressed by the Medical Times
and Gazette, together with the views of the Editor of this
journal as stated in the Daily News.
Dr Sheppard writes : " The ' Bravo Case,' as far as public
proceedings of an incriminating kind are concerned, is probably
over, but the ' Balham Mystery' remains a mystery still. These
are the two verbal formulae which for some weeks have attracted
so much notice, and under the heads of which there has been so
large a revelation of what is unsavoury in our social life. I
venture to submit that there is a psychological aspect of this
4 mystery' which has not been sufficiently contemplated, and
which the unsatisfactory verdict of the Coroner's jury makes it
more imperative to consider. And I ask you to let me place
this aspect before the public in the Times.
" I call the finding of the jury unsatisfactory, because it
attests their incapacity to deal in a proper and manly spirit with
the evidence submitted to them. They fix an indelible stigma
upon certain persons, and at the same time affirm that there is
nothing of a kind sufficiently conclusive to lead to'1 absolute
identification of the guilty. Murder, they say, has been com-
mitted by some one; and while by implication they attach th
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE BRAVO CASE. 343
guilt to one or more of an unfortunate trio, they do not officially
charge it upon either or upon all. It is idle to say that this is
not what the jury really mean when they affirm that Mr. Bravo
has not come to his untimely end by suicide or by misadventure,
but by wilful murder. Certainly it may be questioned whether,
*in a moral point of view, such a verdict admits of justification.
Regarded as an intellectual problem, the position is absolutely
untenable. For if there is any proof of 'wilfulness,' there
should necessarily be proof of the source from which that
wilfulness arose, and the desperate deed should be positively
charged upon one or more persons. The jury are thus thrust
upon the horns of a dilemma from which there is no escape. To
my thinking, therefore, the verdict is both illogical and cowardly
in the extreme.
" What I am chiefly concerned with, however, is the theory
of suicide in this very sad but interesting case. Misadventure,
the jury say, is clearly out of the question. And so, also, of
suicide. Neither of these will furnish a solution of the
' mystery.' But has the theory of suicide been at all -adequately
studied from a psychological point of view ? People have
really been driven from the contemplation of suicide; 1st,
because (they say) there is not a sufficient motive for it;
2nd, because (they say) there has been a sufficient motive for
murder; 3rd, because a dying man (confessedly having no
religious belief) declared that he had no knowledge of the
cause of his approaching death, and had only rubbed his gums
with laudanum and chloroform. It should be added that there
is conflicting testimony as to whether this was or was not a
' corrected' declaration.
" Now, is a higher value to be attached to the credibility of
this witness, even though dying, than to that of the lady who
affirms that Mr. Bravo had previously said to her, * I've taken
poison for Dr Gully; don't tell Florence ? ' Comparing their
antecedents, as far as they can be gathered from the history that
has been unfolded to us, I know to which of these two my per-
ceptive faculties incline me. But the Coroner's jury think
otherwise.
" Let us enquire as to the ' motive' for suicide in this par-
ticular case. Now, the word motive, as conventionally used,
would seem to imply something involving the exercise of judg-
PART II. VOL. II.?NEW SERIES. Z
344 PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF TITE BRAVO CASE.
rnent and reflection. It cannot, therefore, be an equivalent for
the mental attitude of a violent and impulsive man, in circum-
stances of intense and fiery provocation. If Mr. Bravo com-
mitted suicide he did it on the spur of the moment. That spur
may have led him to obtain poison at an earlier date than the
day on which he took it, or he may have procured it a few hours
before the commission of the fearful act. That spur may have
goaded him into the frenzied thought of an escape from tumul-
tuous suffering by a mode commonly regarded as cowardly, and
generally associated with the irresponsibility of disease. There
is much to support the view of temporary irresponsibility here.
It is in evidence that Mr. Bravo was a spoiled and wayward
child, that his passions were strong, that his anger was of a
brief but desperate kind. Fired by an almost fiendish jealousy,
he could strike the dearest object of his affection, and then
prostrate himself in tears of contrition. The extremes of
mental exaltation and depression were equally conditioned by his
emotional temperament. I do not see how any one can read the
history of this unhappy man and not see, growing day by day
in intensity, the fire which at last consumed him in one of the
clumsiest of suicidal acts. Clearly, the 4 green-eyed monster'
was dominating his whole nature. He had threatened on several
occasions to leave the home that had been created for him ; he
was constantly referring, in the most ungenerous manner, to an
earlier period of his wife's career, which had a parallel in his
own, but to which that wife made no corresponding allusion.
He was oppressed also by a morbid conviction of Mrs. Bravo's
extravagance, and to a growing habit with respect to her
alcoholic tendencies. Matters culminated on that fatal day
when he drove into London for the last time, and passed the house
of the man whose image was ever pursuing him. He tries to work
off the steam of his highly-charged system by a Turkish bath,
and subsequently a gallop in which the horse got the better of
the man, and he returned home in a state of complete exaspera-
tion. Better put out this brief candle and make an end to this
distracting misery ! Little, in his recklessness, did he think of
the agony-producing agent which he had selected to serve his
desperate purpose; but he soon discovered it, flies to laudanum
and chloroform, calls for hot water, blurts out to his wife's friend
impulsively what he had done; urges her to secrecy, and, hoping
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE BRAVO CASE. 345
she would preserve it, set himself defiantly to meet a fate which
he knew he had brought upon himself, and which he had not
the manly courage to avow openly in the calmer moments which
followed. When urged, for obvious reasons, to a confession of
guilt, he denied it in terms, the solemnity of which has been
disputed, but as to the evasive persistency of which there has
been no question.
" Is it possible (say those who disbelieve the theory of
suicide) that a dying man should go out into the untried future
with a lie in his mouth, when he might make his exodus with
less imperilling of his condition there by a simple acknowledg-
ment which would render all so easy both for himself and others?
Well, that depends upon the religious belief of the dying man,
and on the mental effect produced by a catastrophe from which
he is assured there is no escape. Jf the jealousy which had so
fired him, and had culminated in this suicidal act, still domi-
nated him, he would be reluctant to admit suicide, but would
satisfy his revenge in the chance of implicating in a charge of
murder the man whose mental presence was ever being obtruded
on him. There would be a tragic completeness about such an
issue which would feed with some satisfaction a morbid psychical
condition with which alienist physicians are not unfamiliar. And
hundreds of men die yearly, and will continue to die, with lies
on their lips, to the end of time.
" There is an alternative. The dying man might have been
ashamed to admit (though it is in evidence that he impulsively
blurted out the admission, with a charge of secrecy to its
recipient) in calmer moments an act of cowardice of which he
was now ashamed ; or he may have wished to spare the woman
he had so passionately adored the pain of reflecting that she had
been the means of driving him to an act which might rob her
future of all consolation.
" Having disposed of this point, we now come to two all-
important questions:?1. Is it conceivable that if 'misadven-
ture ' was responsible for this tragedy, the question would not
have been asked by the poisoned subject, ' How did this mis-
adventure occur ?' Or, knowing himself how it had occurred,
would he not at once have alluded to it in terms and in a man-
ner which could not be mistaken ? 2. Is it conceivable ?is it
not, indeed, contrary to all the instincts of human nature?that
'L 2
346 PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE BRAVO CASE.
a man should believe himself to be poisoned by someone dear or
hateful to him, and make no charge of incrimination ??never
make a single allusion to those who might have had a hand in
despatching him by a deed of transcendant infamy??never
make use of the word ' murder,' or give any verbal intimation
that any other than himself was responsible for the abrupt
termination of this young life ? There can be no instance on
record of such a metaphysical anomaly. Our knowledge of the
human mind forbids its possibility. It could not have occurred
to the meekest and mildest Christian that ever lived. With all
his faults, Mr. Bravo was not base enough to charge others with
his death. Why ? Because he knew that the sin lay at his own
door. And he died commending his wife to the care of his and
her friends and relations.
" It is worthy of note that nearly all suicides which are the
result of sudden and violent impulse are exceedingly clumsy in
their execution, because done without thought and deliberation.
The suicides of calmer moments (and there are such) have a
character for completeness about them which is foreign to those
momentarily conceived and carried out.
" The fact is not without great significance as bearing upon
the psychological aspect of this case which I have endeavoured
to elucidate?that it is in evidence that Mr. Bravo had a deaf
and dumb sister, and another, of feeble capacity, in a convent.
This clearly establishes a family instability of nerve element,
which loves to show its capriciousness?here in weakness, there
in waywardness, and elsewhere, it may be, in undue and fretful
intellectuality.
" I have been anxious to put forward this view of what has
been termed a ' mystery,' for the public mind has been com-
pletely possessed by the theory of murder, without, as it seems
to me, any adequate reason. Nor will the ungenerous verdict
of the Coroner's jury do much to allay the unsatisfactory feeling
which has existed concerning this domestic tragedy?this terrible
revelation of our social life. As I view the matter, I believe the
verdict to be utterly unwarranted ; and I am borne to the irresisti-
ble conclusion that Mr. Bravo met his death by his own hands."
The Editor of this journal writes: "The letter of Dr Edgar
Sheppard elucidates very concisely and clearly the true facts con-
nected with the ' Balham mystery,' and tends materially to throw
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OP THE BRAVO CASE. 347
a true light upon it. A verdict of 'wilful murder,' without one
tittle of evidence to justify such a decision, is of rare occurrence
in England, but in this case such a verdict was arrived at. It is
admitted by psychologists that suicidal insanity is generally an
impulsive act, whilst homicidal is premeditated. This impor-
tant point was entirely lost sight of in the consideration of the
case, and one strange argument urged against a verdict of
suicide was that Mr. Bravo had met some friends the day pre-
viously, who reported his general demeanour, conduct, and
appearance as those of a sane man. This evidence, to all who
have studied the various phases of insanity, is worthless ; let me
draw your readers' attention as a proof of this to the sad suicide
of the Bishop of Meath, which occurred during the hearing of
the case, as one instance of impulsive insanity. Many such
instances could be cited to refute the erroneous conclusions
which might be arrived at from the evidence of such witnesses.
Again, a most important point connected with the case was the
predisposition which existed to mental deficiency stated in the
evidence and alluded to by Dr Sheppard. With this strong
hereditary taint acting as a predisposing cause, and the facts
cognisant to him of the relations between Mrs. Bravo and
Dr Grully?which, according to the evidence, were uppermost
in his mind the day before?acting as an exciting cause, we are
not surprised at the result. We here, then, have a predisposing
and an exciting cause to insanity. The general conduct of the
deceased upon many occasions was not consistent with the
behaviour of a sane man; the violent fits of temper?impulsive,
no doubt?the mind absorbed by the one predominant thought,
and being unable to shake it off, no doubt led to the impul-
sive act. These are important facts which favour strongly a
verdict of suicide, together with the other evidence previously
alluded to.
" Dr Sheppard has ably treated the case in a psychological
point of view, and it is unnecessary for me to go over the same
ground. I wish, however, to endorse the views expressed by
him, that the verdict was quite unjustifiable, and, in my opinion,
not based upon evidence; whereas, if the decision of the jury
had been that of suicide, the history of the case and the evidence
deduced would have justified such a verdict."
348 PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OP THE BRAVO CASE.
The Medical Times and Gazette says as follows:?
" English society is very humane?far too humane to allow
the vivisection of a cat; but it loves sensation, and has found it
of late in the vivisection of Mrs. Bravo,?in the utter remorse-
less dissection of all her inmost thoughts and cherished frailties.
It has been circulating the most atrocious statements respecting
the three persons whose lives and characters were involved in the
' Balham Mystery,' and has been dangling the hangman's rope
before them, as the cat plays with a mouse.
" We propose here only to consider how far the theory is
tenable that the unhappy Mr. Charles Bravo committed suicide,
and shall avoid any details not bearing upon this theory,
although, of course, this involves the guilt or innocence of the
persons who, if he did not kill himself, are suspected of having
killed him.
" Florence Campbell, a beautiful and accomplished girl of
nineteen, married Captain Ricardo in 1864. After three years
of happiness he fell into habits of drunkenness; delirium
and ill-conduct followed; and at last the couple were separated.
He went to Cologne, accompanied by some woman, and there he
died in April 1871. His wife had not been under the same
roof with him since November 1870. This disposes of the
current slander that the vomitings which followed Captain
Ricardo's debauches were the effects of antimony administered
by his wife, and that the captain's corpse had been ' had up'
for analysis.
" During the latter part of her married life, Mrs. Ricardo
visited Malvern, and there met her evil genius in Dr Gully.
She had, in fact, known him from childhood, liked him for his
kindness, and admired his intellectual gifts. He, on his part,
combining the character of paternal and professional protector
and adviser, of " guide, philosopher, and friend," seems, after
the husband's death, to have inspired the widow with what her
mother justly called an ' infatuation.' The result was, that
down to last October they were almost constantly in each
other's society: they travelled together, he lived near her and
had a key of the garden gate ; in fact, this young and handsome
woman gave up the society of her family and her good name
for the sake of a man older than her father. She would,
doubtless, have married him had not Dr Griilly's aged wife been
in the way.
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OP TIIE BRAVO CASE. 349
" But in October 1875 Mrs. Ricardo seems to have felt lier
estrangement from the members of her own family, and de-
termined to give up the society of Dr Gully in order to be
admitted again into the family circle. About the same time
she made the acquaintance of a young barrister, Mr. C. Bravo.
He seems to have become enamoured of herself and her for-
tune, and, after about six weeks' acquaintance, married her.
It appears that he knew of the intimacy with Dr Grully,
but was not deterred from the match.
" Four months only of married life followed, and then a
catastrophe. On April 18, Mr. C. Bravo came home to dinner,
sat a short time after dinner with his wife and her companion,
Mrs. Cox, and before half-past nine went to bed, according to
his habit. His wife, who was scarcely recovered from a mis-
carriage, also retired early, was undressed with the help of
Mrs. Cox, and went to bed in another room at about the same
time. Very soon there was an alarm that Mr. Bravo was ill;
he appeared at the door of his chamber, calling loudly for hot
water. Mrs. Cox and the housemaid came to him, and found
him standing by an open window, out of which he had vomited
on to some leads below, and he soon became unconscious. It is
not our purpose to give a history of what followed?how Drs.
Moore and Harrison were sent for, next Mr. Royes Bell and
Dr Gr. Johnson, and Sir W. Gull on the following day ; how the
practitioners who came first found the patient almost dying of
collapse and heart failure ; how, when consciousness returned,
they recognised the symptoms of poisoning by some metallic
irritant, the dose of which had been sufficient to produce at
first an almost fatal collapse ; and how the patient lingered in
great agony, but with a clear intellect, till death occurred in
about sixty hours. Antimony was found in the vomit and
in the fluids of the corpse, and was without doubt the cause of
death.
" Then the question came, How was the antimony taken ?
Was it taken by the deceased as a means of suicide ? "W as it
given him by others with murderous intent ? or was it swallowed
by accident, mistake, or misadventure? The Coroner's jury,
after a lengthened investigation, have decided that the antimony
was given with murderous intent by some person or persons
unknown, and have emphatically negatived the theory of
350 PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OP THE BRAVO CASE.
suicide ; but considering the character of the proceedings, and
the evidence which may have influenced their judgment, it will
be no mark of disrespect to them if we say that the theory of
suicide has a good deal to be said for it.
" Now, forasmuch as suicide is an act depending on the moral
condition of the person committing it, it will be worth while
to sift the evidence given as to the moral and mental character
of the unhappy deceased : and in sp doing we discover two
pictures of the same man?one drawn as he appeared in public
?r in the society of his acquaintance; the other as he was
known to his family and at home,?each picture true so far as
it goes, but each requiring to be combined with the other
before it is taken as evidence of so grave a matter as the pro-
bability or not of suicide.
"According, then, to his outside acquaintance, and what may
be called his public, he was an intellectual, bright, active,
pushing, ambitious man ; determined to rise in his profession;
very frank and outspoken; very happy ; proud of his marriage
with a rich, accomplished, and beautiful widow; high-spirited,
courageous ; with plenty of money,?the whole summed up
in the evidence of Mr. Joseph Bravo, his stepfather, who swore
that, ' knowing him intimately, he could aver that he was a
man not likely to commit suicide.' Mr. Royes Bell, a relation
and intimate friend, described him as ' full of fun,' truthful,
and ' outspoken to a fault,' and said, ' from my knowledge of
him, I can say he was not a man likely to commit suicide.'
Mr. M'Calmont (who described himself as a barrister) swore
that deceased was quite happy about his wife, and spoke affec-
tionately of her; 'he was the last man to commit suicide.'
Miss Bell, ' from intimate knowledge,' would swear that ' de-
ceased was not a likely man to commit suicide.' Mr. Hope
knew the deceased as a high-spirited and cheery person, and
' decidedly a man not likely to commit suicide.' Mr. Wil-
loughby and Mr. Atkinson, barristers, deposed to the same
effect in the same words; and so did Mrs. Campbell, the
unhappy mother of the unhappy widow.
" Now, it never seems to have occurred to these gentlemen
that the value of an opinion depends on the knowledge and
experience of the person who gives it; and we may ask what
knowledge had any one of them of the mental condition of a
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OP THE BRAVO CASE. 351
person likely to kill himself ? The number of suicides is very
small; how many had these barristers seen ? Had they ever
seen any? And if not, what is the value of their judgment
that deceased was the last person likely to destroy himself?
But all this worthless testimony is disposed of by three words
of common-sense evidence from blunt, honest Henry Smith,
who, though he reiterated the formula, ' I do not think from
my knowledge of him that he was likely to commit suicide,'
yet added with perfect fairness that it was difficult to say what
frame of mind indicated suicide; and that of two friends of his
who had done so, one was of the jolliest, the other always
miserable. There is, in fact, no outward demeanour that
excludes the possibility of suicide.
" But, as we have said, there is a reverse to this flattering
picture of Mr. C. Bravo's character. Mr. Henry Smith de-
scribes him as of a morbidly excitable nature ; apt to lose
his temper from trivial causes?in argument, for example,?
'from causes which should disturb no sane man.' Of his
two sisters, one is deaf and dumb ; the other with a nervous
system so feeble as not to allow of her going into society. The
same witness (H. Smith), like Mr. Royes Bell, deposed that
deceased was a ' truthful' man, ' far too communicative and
outspoken.' Thus we are led to suppose that deceased kept
nothing secret from intimate friends; yet H. Smith, though
intimate, was not told by deceased that Mrs. Bravo took too
much wine. Mr. M'Calmont, the gushing barrister, who swore
that Mr. Bravo was not a man likely to commit suicide, and
that he spoke cheerfully and affectionately of his wife, yet
knew nothing of the Gully affair, and confessed that he should
not have thought deceased likely to marry a woman whose
name had been mixed up with such a scandal.
" In fact, if we look a little under the very surface, we shall
see evidence that this cheery, genial, good-tempered fellow,
glowing with happiness, and outspoken to a fault, was at
bottom a very poor devil?a miserable, as the French say ; a
spoiled child, unable to act on the manly doctrine that a man
should leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife ;
quarrelling with his wife, and striking her ; threatening to
leave the house and go back to his mother ; always harping
upon Dr Gully; and annoyed by dastardly anonymous letters
352 PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OP THE BRAVO CASE.
reviling his wife as Dr Grully's mistress, which he believed to
emanate from the doctor. He found that his wife was not
only compromised by Grully (which he did not seem to care for,
so long as his mother did not know it), but that she took
too much wine. And then as to her money, with which he
hoped to get on at the bar, and to get into Parliament; if he
was not embarrassed, he was not flush of cash ; was obliged to
borrow from his step-father, and had just parted from a female
' establishment' at Maidenhead.
" Now, with these things before us, we may ask why such a
man should not commit suicide ? Rousseau says that self-
respect is the only thing that makes life bearable. Could
Bravo respect himself ? Truly the wise man said, ' The heart
knoweth his own bitterness, and a stranger cannot intermeddle
with his joy.' How could his briefless brethren, who heard
him brag of his marriage, and saw him calculating how to save
?300 a year by discharging his wife's companion, and were
invited down to Balham to lawn tennis and champagne, know
that all this outward show was hollow as the apples of Sodom ?
"We have evidence that there had been a kind of squabble
in the morning whilst he was driving to town with his wife on
the fatal 18th; that at and before dinner he was dissatisfied
with everything, and appeared to Rowe, the butler, ill and out
of sorts, and said (according to Rowe) that he should never
go to Worthing?to which place Mrs. Cox, the companion,
had been that morning to take a house. Keeber, the house-
maid, said that he complained on the 17th of being very cross,
and on the 18th looked very queer when going to bed; his wife
described him as looking ill and angry at dinner, with his face
working. All these things betoken a disturbed and unhappy
state of mind. If we want additional evidence that something
was evidently amiss, we find it in a question which Mr. Grorst,
Q.C., who appeared on behalf of the Crown, allowed himself
(and was allowed by the Coroner without rebuke) to put to the
witness Rowe, the butler. Rowe had described the deceased's
manner and looks before and at dinner (when, we should ob-
serve in passing, he was also complaining of stiffness and
soreness from riding a runaway horse), and Mr. Gorst asks,
'Now, tell us, do you think deceased was poisoned before
dinner ?'
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OP THE BRAVO CASE. 353
" A more unfair question can hardly be conceived, inasmuch
as it involves a statement that deceased was 'poisoned' by
some one?which was the thing to be determined, not to be
assumed. But this is a very mild specimen of the interroga-
tories practised at this (so-called) legal enquiry. Anyhow, it
shows that the Crown was ready to admit that the deceased was
ill before dinner, though it involves the monstrous notion that
a man would eat a good dinner with twenty-five grains of
tartar emetic in his stomach.
" As further evidence that the theory of suicide, though en-
veloped in prodigious difficulties, is yet worth considering, we
may adduce the fact that deceased when seized called out for
hot water. Now, we will venture to say that this is unusual,
unless the patient is conscious of having swallowed something
noxious ; and secondly, the profound collapse which must have
come from something swallowed very quickly before. It is
only a killing dose that would produce such collapse, and it
would not be long about it.
" We purposely omit in this place more than a passing
reference to what Mrs. Cox affirmed ?viz. that the deceased
said he had taken poison, and repeated this again and again ;
and to the intricate history of what deceased admitted or not,
and the conversations with Dr Gr. Johnson and Sir William
Grull. If the deceased said what Mrs. Cox avers, it tells in
favour of suicide ; if not, there is but one more added to the
intricacies of this unhappy business.
"If the deceased did not kill himself, the hypothesis occurs
that he might have been poisoned by his wife, or by Mrs. Cox,
or Dr Gully, or by any two, or all three of them conjointly.
" Let us say first, as regards the wife, that, after all due
allowance for the prejudice arising from her past conduct,
nothing can equal the malignant?the almost more than
feminine?ingenuity with which every jot and tittle of her
actions, even the most irrelevant or insignificant, was raked up
and turned against her. As for her husband's mother, she dis-
approved the match, and we can only wish that she had
dissuaded her son from it. She is said to have meddled with
their household affairs, and the kind of feeling towards her
daughter-in-law was well expressed by that happy and most
delicate feminine phrase, 'She hoped to like her in time.'
354 PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE BRAVO CASE.
This is quite intelligible and natural; but Mr. Joseph Bravo,
who tells it to us, was not above petty insinuations, as, for
instance, that ' dinner was served as usual' (at The Priory
during deceased's illness) in several courses, but that he re-
mained upstairs with his son. A man can know but little of the
ways of well-to-do-families who supposes that in a house full of
relations the servants will not provide and send up dinner as
usual, spite of the illness, without waiting to be told. The un-
happy widow is placed in this strange dilemma. If Bravo was
cheerful and happy in his married life, there was no reason why
he should have poisoned himself; ergo, she did it. On the other
hand, if the married life was unhappy, she poisoned him to get
rid of him. There was not a vestige of mercy or consideration
for this woman; and if the inquisitors have failed to discover
the cause of Mr. Bravo's death, they have anyhow been successful
in torturing his widow. They proved that she dyed her hair,
though they did not prove that she poisoned her husband. But
as for evidence, what need of it ??they relied on blasting her
character, so that anything should be believed of her. What a
parody there was of legal proceedings, outdoing anything we
hear of foreign questionings, is evident from one specimen. An
old nurse, Amelia Bushel, was made to depose that ' she did
not know any reason why deceased should not have told every-
thing to Mr. Royes Bell'! The same statement is found in the
reports of the evidence of Miss Bell. How were these people to
have known what they were asked? and what did it matter
whether they did or not ?
" Spite of a protracted public investigation, and the most un-
scrupulous public inquisition which has been known in England
since the Stuarts, nothing has been adduced against the widow
?neither time, place, opportunity, material, nor motive for the
crime.
" As for Mrs. Cox, considering that she was known to be
under the deepest obligations to the Bravo family, who had
treated her with the greatest generosity, and that she was on
the point of starting to see a well-to-do relative in Jamaica, it
is difficult to discover a motive, and equally an opportunity.
No means of administration by any person save the deceased
can be easily conceived. The dinner was eaten by all three
persons. The deceased was a judge of wine, according to Rowe,
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE BRAVO CASE. 355
and the presence of tartar emetic in the burgundy lie drank
seems incredible. As for the water in his bedroom, of which he
usually drank at bedtime, that could not have been tampered
with, according to the evidence of the housemaid, and of Drs.
Moore and Harrison. However the poison was taken, not many
minutes passed before it took effect.
" As for Dr Gully, the fact that the Crown thought it worth
while to prove the purchase of antimony by his coachman in
1869, shows how worthless is any direct evidence against him.
It seems to be forgotten that, supposing a conspiracy existed
to murder Bravo, it could have been but of very short duration.
Is it likely that Gully carried antimony with him whilst a
favoured lover, in order to poison any man who should marry
Mrs. Bravo ?
" On the whole, there is such a conflict of evidence, such
deliberate perjury on one side or the other, such motiveless,
useless, and gratuitously devilish wickedness, that the question
between murder and suicide remains insoluble. We should
prefer the theory of accidental poisoning?a thing not im-
possible or unknown in the history of antimony ; and if this
be objected to because mere speculation, so, be it remembered,
is it with the other two suppositions. Of course, suspicion
falls naturally on one of the three persons named. But, as in
a chess problem, what seems an obvious move at first sight
seldom leads to a solution.
" Lastly, our object is not to screen the guilty, but to protest
against proceedings which are a disgrace to jurisprudence,
which pervert justice at its source, and which, if repeated,
would be as terrible to the innocent as to the guilty. And
we must in fairness point out a series of indiscretions which
justly gave a point to suspicion. That Mrs. Bravo should
consult Dr Gully; that she should receive medicine, or, in fact,
hold any communication with him after her marriage; that
Mrs. Cox should also repeatedly converse and consult with him,
and be the bearer of medicine and ' treatments,' are acts of
indiscretion which deserve the severest reprobation. But what
shall we say of Dr Gully? How was he justified in prescribing
for Mrs. Bravo in April ? Above all, why did he get medicine
(laurel-water) and send it in a roundabout way to Mrs. Bravo
?an act quite unnecessary, unusual, and derogatory in any
356 PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OP THE BRAVO CASE.
physician, and fraught with the worst suspicions to him ? More-
over, as a matter of professional conduct, why did he, being her
lover, treat Mrs. Ricardo for miscarriage, alone and without
another practitioner in consultation ? Why did he prescribe
for her in 1874, for the restoration of the uterine function,
medicines not homoeopathic, but such as are discredited with
the power of doing away with the fruit of illicit love ? No man,
however high and pure he may be, can commit such indis-
cretions without risk."
