161 Case of Homicidal Insanity
===============================

Our attention lias been called to certain statements made
by Dr Davey as to the action of the Commissioners in Lunacy
in the case of J. P., mentioned in his paper, " Eeminiscences of
Lunacy Practice," which appeared in the last number of this
Journal. Some explanation of the statements made appears
requisite, and we therefore revert to the case.
Speaking of the case of Dr Pownall, who shortly after his
discharge from Northwoods murdered a servant-maid, Dr Davey
says: " Though it was given in evidence that J. P. was, to all
appearance, quite well within a few hours of the sad and fatal
casualty, yet was the whole of the blame sought to be attached
to it visited on myself. The responsibility was shirked by all
parties who had to do with J. P.?by the relatives and near
friends, who resisted the employment of an attendant, and who
moreover supplied J. P. with his razors ; by the Commissioners,
who, after the murder of the poor girl, raised a strong objection
to the manner aud circumstances of J. P.'s discharge ; and by
the Visitors, who declined to move in the case in any way, either
before or after his discharge from Northwoods, though they
failed not to give expression to very unqualified terms of dis-
approval after the sad event."
This unfortunate case is noticed fully in the 14th Keport
of the Commissioners in Lunacy (18G0).
Dr Pownall had suffered from various attacks of mania
between the years 1839 and 1859, in which latter year he was
admitted as an inmate of Northwoods Asylum, suffering from
well-marked homicidal insanity. Two months after his admis-
sion into Dr Davey's Asylum, Dr Pownall had so far tempo-
rarily improved, that intimation was forwarded by Dr Davey to
Mrs. Pownall, informing her that it would be desirable for
arrangements to be made in anticipation of Dr Pownall's return
homp. Mrs. Pownall, in reply, stated that she could not do so
without first consulting her relatives and friends, and instructed
a connection of hers fa Mr. Ogilvie, of Bristol), to communicate
with the Commissioners on the subject. A written statement,
drawn up by Mrs. Pownall, was at the same time forwarded to
them, recounting the previous history of the patient, and the
circumstances under which he was sent to Northwoods. The
Board, having these communications and history of the case
PAET I. YOL. II.?NEW SERIES. L
162 CASE OF HOMICIDAL INSANITY.
thus fully placed before tliem, instructed their secretary to
write to Dr Davey on the matter, and enclose the communica-
tions from Mrs. Pownall and Mr. 0 ail vie. The letter received
by Dr Davey from the Commissioners was as follows :?
" Office of Commissioners of Lunacy,
"19 Whitehall Place, S.W.,
" 4th June, 1859.
" Sir,?The Commissioners have had under consideration
the case of Dr Pownall, a patient at Northwoods, and have
received two communications from Mr. Ogilvie, and a state-
ment drawn up by the wife of the patient, which I am directed
to enclose, with a request that, as they are original, they may be
returned to me when done with.
" The Commissioners desire that you will have the goodness
to lay these papers before the Visitors of Northwoods at the
earliest opportunity. They consider Dr Pownall's case to be
one of much importance, requiring, from its antecedents,
peculiar caution and care in dealing with it; and having regard
to those antecedent circumstances, not referred to in Mrs.
Pownall's statement?but which they will in confidence com-
municate for the information of the Visitors, should they require
such knowledge for their guidance?the Commissioners see much
danger in an immediate or unconditional discharge. They are
of opinion that such discharge should be preceded by a leave of
absence under the 86tli section of the Act, whereby the patient's
power of self-control may be tested for some little time.
" I am instructed to request, therefore, that as soon as you
shall have brought the case before the Visitors of Northwoods,
you will have the goodness to communicate the results to this
Board. "Iam, &c.,
(Signed) "John Foester, Secretary.
" Dr Davey, Northwoods."
This letter clearly shows that the Commissioners were of
opinion that an immediate or unconditional discharge was very
hazardous, and advised that the discharge should be preceded by
leave of absence under certificates, so enabling those who were
to have charge of the patient to do so legally, and under proper
surveillance and restraint. This proves conclusively, to our
mind, that no blame could rightly be attached to the Com-
missioners in Lunacy, who used every precaution in the case to
CASE OP HOMICIDAL INSANITY. 163
prevent wliat they feared might ensue from allowing an uncon-
ditional discharge.
The Commissioners, regarding the gravity of the case,
departed from their usual course, and furnished the Visitors with
particulars of the attacks.
The history may be summed up as follows :?The patient
had been confined as a lunatic, in 1839 and 1840, at Fish-
ponds and Northwoods; but his mental condition was
specially brought under the notice of the Commissioners in
1854, by the Eev. Mr. Guthrie, vicar of Calne, one of the
visitors of a licensed house at Calne, of which Dr Pownall was
proprietor. In consequence of his having made a violent attack
upon one of his patients, he was forthwith sent to Minister
House, Fulham, and was reported as being " dangerous to
others." After having remained there three weeks he was
discliax-ged " recovered," and returned home.
Three weeks after his return home lie shot one of his
patients in the leg, and four days afterwards he was again
placed in Munster House Asylum and reported as being
" suicidal and dangerous to others." A few weeks after this he
was transferred to Sussex House, Hammersmith, and discharged
three months after this, " not improved." In January 1859
he became again depressed, and in March of that year he
attempted suicide by taking chloroform. On April 1st he made
a murderous attack upon his mother-in-law, and very nearly
effected his purpose. On the following day he was again
admitted into Northwoods.
These facts were transmitted by the Commissioners to the
Visitors on June 24, but notwithstanding they were made
cognisant of all particulars, they made the following statement
in their official books: " That they consider that the present
movement of the Commissioners has evidently arisen entirely
at the instigation of Mr. Ogilvie, any statement by whom it be-
hoves the Visitors to receive with great caution." By this entry
the opinion entertained by the Visitors was, that it was in con-
sequence of a quarrel between the patient and Mr. Ogilvie that
he was confined. It appears to us an extraordinary proceeding
of the Visitors, after hearing all the particulars of this dangerous
homicidal lunatic.
On August 10 Dr Pownall was unconditionally discharged
from Northwoods recovered, on the authority of liis wife, and
sent to a medical man's house. On the 30tli he -murdered a
L 2
164 CASE OF HOMICIDAL INSANITY.
servant-maid by cutting lier throat with a razor. It appears to
us that in this case, if the cautions and suggestions made by the
Commissioners had been properly attended to, such a frightful
calamity might have been avoided. The medical man in whose
house Dr Pownall lodged was never informed of the previous
homicidal and suicidal tendencies of the patient, and the
attendant stated that his accompanying Dr Pownall was a mere
form, as he had been discharged as a sane man, and that he was
not intended to have any authority or control over him.
This, then, is the history of the case; and from a careful
examination of the facts before us, we feel it our duty to
state that the unconditional discharge of Dr Pownall was
strenuously opposed by the Commissioners, and in no way can
they be held responsible for what ensued, especially as their
instructions were not carried out. They gave proper cautionary
advice for the management of the case, not only to Dr Davey,
but to the Visitors; but we cannot exonerate the latter from
blame in the matter, as they evidently regarded the case in a
wrong light; and if they had only acted in conjunction with
the Commissioners, and agreed to their recommendation, all
harm might have been prevented.
HEREDITARY DISEASE.
[The Editor is indebted to Mr. T. W. Nunn for the follow-
ing interesting cases, which strongly corroborate Dr Winn's
theory of the interchangeableness of all hereditary diseases :?
In the family of M. one died insane, two are in asylums,
another, although not in confinement, borders on insanity.
The remaining two are dead?one (a sister) died of cancer.
The eldest brother (now dead) married. He left six children?
3 sons and, 3 daughters. Two of the daughters died of con-
sumption at about twenty years of age. The remaining
daughter is delicate; the sons all well, and no symptoms of
insanity have appeared amongst them.
Mrs. B. had five children, and has been for nearly forty
years insane. One of her sons died in childhood; her three
daughters of consumption, and one son remains in good health.]
