Condition Of Lunacy In England And Wales
==========================================

303
Art. VII.?
The thirtieth annual Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy
has just appeared, containing a complete record of all facts con-
nected with lunacy in this country. AVe find that on January
1st, 1876, there were on the official books of the Commissioners
64,916 registered lunatics, showing an increase of 1,123 over
that of the year preceding. Of this number 7,509 are registered
as private patients, and 57,407 as paupers. There are also 245
lunatics found so by inquisition, and residing in charge of their
committees. They are not included in the category alluded to
above.
The average annual increase of lunacy during the past ten
years has been 1,726 ; that is to say, 149 private patients, and
1,577 of the pauper class. It is worthy of remark that the
total increase of the past year over the one preceding has been
less than in any other year of the series commencing in 1859.
Among the pauper patients are included only those " main-
tained wholly or in part by, or chargeable to, parishes, unions,
counties, or boroughsand among private patients are included
those maintained at the cost of the State, at the Royal India
Asylum at Yarmouth, Naval Hospital at Netley Abbey, Grove
Hall, Bow, and Broadmoor Criminal Asylum.
The increase during the year of private patients is 119, as
compared with 98 last year, and an increase of 1,004 of paupers,
as compared with 1,668.
The private patients have increased by 51 in licensed houses,
70 in registered hospitals, 19 in county and borough asylums,
and by 3 in the naval, military, and India asylums. There
has been a decrease in number by 19 in Broadmoor Criminal
Asylum, and by 2 in single patients under private care.
The increase of pauper patients is in county and borough
asylums by 1,606 ; in Broadmoor Criminal Asylum by 19; in
workhouses by 133; and at the same time this class has de-
creased in registered hospitals by 72, in licensed houses by 352,
and the outdoor paupers are reduced by 330.
In the last Report the Commissioners noticed with satisfac-
tion that the practice of sending male convicts to Broadmoor
has been discontinued, and during the past year this class of
patients has been provided for at Woking Invalid Prison, and
304 CONDITION OF LUNACY
as a consequence, a decrease has occurred in the number of
private patients at Broadmoor?accounted for, no doubt, by
deaths and removals to county asylums of convicts whose sen-
tences have expired.
The large increase of 1,606 paupers in county and borough
asylums, and the considerable decrease of 352 of this class in
licensed houses, is in a great measure explainable by the opening
of the second Kent Asylum at Chartham, and of additional
wards at the New Lancashire Asylum at Whittingham, as well
as by the completion of considerable enlargements of the Surrey
Asylum, both at Brickwood and Wandsworth. The decrease of
72 paupers and the corresponding increase in the number of
private patients in registered hospitals are chiefly due to
changes which have taken place at the Northampton hospitals,
and it is expected that when these changes are here completed
the whole of the paupers will be removed from this institution,
and it will be exclusively devoted to private patients.
There are 15,509 patients classed as in workhouses. Of
this number 4,205 were in the Metropolitan District Asylums
for Imbeciles at Leavesden, Caterham, Hampstead, and Clapton.
These institutions were, by the Metropolitan Poor Act, 1867,
declared to be workhouses for the purposes of the Lunacy Acts.
The Report contains twelve interesting tables relating to the
distribution of the insane during the last sixteen years, and
supplies detailed information as to the classification, and num-
bers of the insane in England, together with the ratio which
they bear to the population; the admissions, discharges, and
deaths, with the statistics of recoveries and mortality of patients
detained under certificates in asylums, hospitals, licensed houses,
and under single care. By a careful perusal of these tables
we find that the proportion of lunatics as compared with the
population is 26*78 ratio per 10,000, whereas in 1866 it was
22*26 ; the population at present being 24,244,010, whereas
in 1866 it was 21,409,684. The number discharged as re-
covered during the past year, by reference to Table IV., we
find to be 4,909, as compared with 4,828 in the preceding year,
whereas the deaths have been 4,592.
We see with regret by Tables V. VI. and VII. that the re-
coveries are nearly 4 per cent, lower than those of the year
previous, and 1 *5 per cent, below the average of the last 17 years.
The mortality also has been somewhat unfavourable, being about
?5 per cent, higher than that of the previous year and than the
average mortality of the last fifteen years.
The proportion of patients contained in the county and
borough asylums who on the 1st of January were considered
curable amounted to 7*17 per cent, of the total number, as
IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 305
compared with 7*47 of the number resident on the 1st of
January, 1875.
The Report contains a general description of the various
county and borough asylums. The Cambridge Asylum at Ful-
borne continues dangerously overcrowded. We are at a loss to
understand why the suggestions made so frequently by the
Commissioners concerning this asylum have not been carried
out and a second medical officer appointed ; the matter has been
frequently brought forward by Dr Bacon, the Medical Superin-
tendent, but the authorities at present have ignored these
constant appeals for further medical aid, and, as a consequence,
should anything serious occur at the asylum, they will have but
themselves to blame in the matter. An epidemic of erysipelas
broke out in February and March 1875 at tbis asylum, in
consequence of the overcrowding of the patients, and if the
long-delayed enlargement is not soon effected, the patients'
health will materially suffer. We have had many opportunities
of visiting this asylum, and can testify to the onerous duties of
the Medical Superintendent, who does his utmost to further the
interest of the establishment and the well-being of the patients
committed to his charge; but if his exertions are not properly
supported by the governing bodies, his laudable efforts must be
but futile.
The condition of the patients on admission to the Carmar-
then Asylum is considered to be most unsatisfactory. The
following passage occurs in the entry made on the visit to this
asylum, relative to the condition of patients on admission :?
" We are informed that the condition of patients when
brought to the asylum continues in the majority of cases to be
most unsatisfactory, giving evidence of neglect, want of nourish-
ment, and rough usage. An old woman was admitted to-day,
while we were in the house, and we afterwards saw her in bed;
she was extremely feeble, and bore upon her person numerous
marks of violence, and there was strong reason to think that she
had broken ribs. This woman was brought to the asylum by a
policeman, and was not accompanied by any female ; and we
are sorry to report that this most objectionable mode of bring-
ing patients here is the rule, with but few exceptions, from the
Cardigan Union. It is needless to point out the impropriety of
entrusting an insane woman during a long journey to the sole
charge ot' a policeman; but there remains the further and very
strong objection to the practice, which applies equally to both
sexes, that the removal of the patient to the asylum by a
policeman impresses them with the idea that they are prisoners,
and about to undergo punishment, instead of being sent to a
hospital for care and treatment."
306 CONDITION OF LUNACY
A case of suicide is related as having taken place at the
Cheshire Asylum, and also at Durham. This latter asylum is
about to be considerably enlarged. Two suicides have occurred
at the Lancashire Asylum, one by a patient cutting his throat
with a knife, the other by strangulation; in both instances the
attendants appear to have been to blame. Another suicide has
taken place at the Whittingham Asylum.
A suicide which has taken place at the Littlemore Asylum,
Oxfordshire, is reported as follows :?
" A. C., a single woman, set. 34, had been an inmate of the
Littlemore Asylum since May 1875. As she was reported to
be suicidally disposed, a special card of caution was passed with
her from ward to ward, but the asylum authorities did not
consider, from her conduct, that she seriously contemplated
either escape or self-destruction. In the evening, however, of
Saturday, 11th September, she contrived to escape from the
grounds where, with other patients, she was taking exercise.
She was missed almost immediately; but although the police
and the neighbours were given notice of the escape, she w as not
found all Sunday. A little before six on Monday she was seen
near the river by two men, who followed her while she ran
across one meadow by the waterside, through a hedge and over
a ditch (dry), across a second meadow, at which point she
was stopped by a deep ditch. Here she jumped into the junc-
tion of the ditch with the river, the water being nearly up to
her armpits. The first man who followed jumped in, though
unable to swim; but the bottom being very muddy, he could
not reach the woman unless she held out her hand; this he
asked her to do, but she thrice refused, began struggling, and
lost her footing. By this time the second man had come up ;
and he, with a ladder floating in the water, succeeded in reach-
ing the patient; but she was already under water, a considerable
way out from the bank, the stream being rather strong at that
point. Between them she was got out of the water, not dead,
yet unable to speak. The men carried her to the nearest inn,
about 300 yards. During her passage thither she groaned and
? breathed several times. They believed she was in the water
about three minutes. Dr Sankey was called, and was on the
spot by half-past six, but she was then to all appearance dead,
and every effort to restore life was in vain."
A patient at the North Eiding Asylum, Yorkshire, destroyed
himself through the carelessness of an attendant.
Reference is made to the extension of the Birmingham
Asylum, and to an epidemic of typhoid fever, which occurred at
the Bristol Asylum, owing to the impurity of the drinking
water. Immediate measures were suggested by the Commissioners
IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 307
for remedying the evil, and negotiations with the Bristol Water-
works Company were set on foot.
" An attempt at suicide took place at the Bristol Asylum.
" The facts connected with the case are remarkable, and
interesting from a purely medical point of view, affording a
remarkable instance of the recurrence after a lapse of years of
.a morbid propensity once developed in the mind of a patient of
the melancholic type with a suicidal tendency; and also as
showing how much may be done by skill and care to remedy an
injury which at first sight seems likely to prove fatal.
" The particulars which follow we give nearly as reported to
us by the medical superintendent:?
" A female patient, E. W., set. 43, was admitted for the third
time to the Bristol Asylum on the 15th June, 1875.
"On the occasion of her first residence there in 1863, she
swallowed (with a distinct suicidal intention) the entire contents
of a domino box, 54 dominoes in all, 50 of which were reco-
vered by vomiting, along with fragments of stone weighing
14 oz., while four dominoes and some stones passed through
the intestines. A full account of this incident will be found in
the report of the late medical superintendent to the Committee
of Visitors of the Asylum for the year 1863.
" E. W. was soon after discharged from the Bristol Asylum,
for transfer to that belonging to Somersetshire, where she was
chargeable, but she escaped on the road, and was not retaken.
Between this date and 1871 she appears not to have been under
care and treatment. In May of that year she was re-admitted
to the Bristol Asylum, still with suicidal tendencies, and after
two actual attempts, she was again removed to Wells, and dis-
charged thence recovered, in 1873.
" After another interval, she returned, as above stated, to the
Bristol Asylum in 1875, twelve years subsequently to the
swallowing of the dominoes, which circumstance was, we be-
lieve, quite forgotten in the asylum, where many changes in
the staff, including the appointment of a new medical superin-
tendent, had occurred. The certificates again give a history of
renewed suicidal attempts.
" On the 31st July, 1875, early in the morning, she got pos-
session of the fifteen shutter screws belonging to No. 12 Ward,
and in the course of three quarters of an hour she swallowed
thirteen of them. The screws were new ones; and thirteen
of the same pattern weighed 24^oz. avoirdupois weight. She
made a confession before the screws had been missed, and stated
the number to be thirteen. To prevent injury to the coats
of the stomach, Dr Thompson, on hearing of what had hap-
pened, administered a mess of tapioca pudding and gruel, of
308 CONDITION OF LUNACY
which, without much persuasion, she took a very large
quantity.
" The screws consist of a body inches long, ? inch thick
with a square head, and with a raised collar nearly f inch in
diameter.
" It will be seen that to attempt to recover by the oesophagus
any one of those swallowed was out of the question, and it was
even doubted if the pyloric valve would take up any one of
them and pass it on. On the 10th of September, however, the
patient passed some of the screws by the bowel, and on the 4th
of February she passed the last of the thirteen in the same
manner. The dates of ejection were 10th September, 19th
October, 26th November, 27th November, 3rd December, 3rd
January, 9th January, 19th January, 20th January, 3rd Feb-
ruary, 3rd February, 4th February, and 4th February.
" During these months the patient suffered much pain, which
she said was of a spasmodic nature, and very like to labour pain
(she had had children). The treatment was chiefly dietetic,
but in addition she had, night and morning, subcutaneous in-
jections of morphia. At first purgatives were avoided, but
ounce doses of olive oil were given once a day, and enemata
occasionallv. Latterly the medical officers " became more
bold," and gave large doses of castor oil, and it was after this
bolder treatment that the screws came away the faster. On the
3rd of August E. W. passed a large piece of an earthenware
chamber utensil by the bowel, which was followed by severe
hemorrhage, but only once did her temperature rise over the
average point. The weight of the recovered screws was 19f
ounces, showing a loss of 4f ounces.
"' The poor woman,' Dr Thompson observes, ' is a melan-
choliac of the most abject type, and with a touch of moral
obliquity. I do not think she wished to commit suicide, but
rather to draw attention to herself, and to cause trouble.' This
opinion is, of course, entitled to full consideration, but it is to
be observed that during the preparation of the present report,
the Wells Asylum, where E. W. now is, has been visited, and
that on this occasion she admitted to one of our colleagues
that her object was to destroy herself. She appeared in fair
bodily health, though still in a state of extreme mental de-
pression."
A murder of an attendant has occurred at the Leicester
Asylum. An attendant of the name of John Smith was stabbed
by G-eorge Fordham, a pauper patient, in the abdomen, and
died in consequence of the injuries received in about an hour
and a half. The patient was 62 years of age, and previous to
admission had been an inmate of the Leicester Union Work-
IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 309
house for some time, being transferred to the asylum on account
of violent and dangerous propensities. On admission he was
passionate and quarrelsome, making groundless and exaggerated
complaints, and was subject to epileptic seizures. Nine months
after his admission he was overheard to say that he would hunt
the attendant, Smith, to death, even if it were fifty years hence.
He killed the attendant with a carving knife which he had
procured from a cupboard, and which singularly enough had
been left unlocked by Smith. After the discovery of the mur-
der, Fordham exclaimed, "I have had my revenge: you can
hang me now as soon as you like."
The coroner's jury returned a verdict of wilful murder, and
he was committed for trial at the winter assizes at Leicester. The
prisoner pleaded not guilty. The facts connected with the murder
were undisputed, but the counsel for the defence urged an
acquittal on the ground of insanity. Mr. Justice Denman, who
tried the case, pointed out to the jury that the mere fact of his
labouring under a delusion was not a sufficient excuse in law to
justify an acquittal on the ground of insanity. The judge, in
summing up, stated that " where a man committed a crime for
some supposed grievance if he knew that what he was doing
was contrary to law, he was to be held responsible for his
actions. If a man killed another while under a delusion that
he himself was about to be killed, and that he was acting in
self-defence, he would not be punishable; but if a man did so
for some supposed injury to his character or fortune, then the
man would be responsible. If the jury were satisfied that
although Fordham was suffering from delusions he knew what
he was doing, and was not merely taking life under an erro-
neous impression that he was defending his own life, but killing
because he felt himself injured in some form or other, it would
be their duty to find him guilty." The prisoner was found
guilty of murder, but with a strong recommendation to mercy,
by a jury who considered that, notwithstanding he occasionally
suffered from delusions, at the time he committed the deed he
knew he was doing a wrong act. He was sentenced to death
in the usual form, but was afterwards reprieved, and sentenced
to penal servitude for life.
The absurdity of the rule of law laid down in cases of
insanity is here very apparent. We read of a lunatic, who is
legally confined under a certificate, being taken from the
asylum and arraigned as an ordinary criminal of sound mind,
?and although his insanity was never disputed, is sentenced
to death. The doctrine between a knowledge of right and
wrong among the insane is frequently brought forward as an
argument against an acquittal upon the ground of insanity, but
310 CONDITION OF LUNACY
we must confess that the theory is a very absurd one, and as
the majority of lunatics are perfectly cognisant of it, it is to
be hoped that a statute will soon be passed repealing- the present
existing law regarding the trying of lunatics which we can only
regard as a disgrace to our country.
At the commencement of the year there were 2,796 lunatics
confined in registered hospitals, of which number 1,340 were
males and 1,241 females belonging to the private class of
patients, whereas 115 were males and 100 females paupers.
The general condition of these hospitals may be considered
favourable, with one or two exceptions. A few suicides are
reported at some of the hospitals, but this is only to be
expected when the number of lunatics in one establishment
is considerable.
There are 39 private asylums in the Metropolitan district
licensed by the Commissioners, and 62 beyond their immediate
jurisdiction licensed by the justices. The condition of these
asylums may generally be stated as satisfactory.
On the 1st of January last there were 399 patients confined
under certificate in unlicensed houses, and of this number
129 were Chancery patients. One suicide is reported as taking
place at Weston-super-Mare of a patient under the care of
a medical man. We are of opinion that it is far more advis-
able to place patients in asylums than under private care, in
the former of which they have greater chances of proper treat-
ment and care.
On the 1st January, 1876, there were 15,509 lunatics con-
fined in workhouses, being an increase of 133 over the number
last year. This number includes 4,205 patients resident in
the Metropolitan District Asylums at Leavesden, Caterham,
Hampstead, and Clapton, which are still regarded as workhouses.
The Commissioners report on the whole favourably of the
condition of the lunatic wards in workhouses, and with respect
to the accommodation and diet supplied to the inmates. The
relieving officers of some of the parishes appear to entirely
disregard the provisions of the 67th section of the Lunacy Act,
and patients labouring under all varieties of insanity are sent
to the workhouses, no subsequent steps being taken by them
to promote their removal to an asylum ; the result of this
practice is that many lunatics are so confined without having
any treatment, until they either die or their case becomes
chronic. On this point the Commissioners say :
"We have constantly drawn attention to this subject, both
in our Annual Reports and in others ways, but we regret to say
with comparatively little effect; and in any future legislation
we think that more stringent provisions should be made to
IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 311
prevent delay in sending patients to asylums, and also to
restrict, as a general rule, the admission of cases into the work-
house, unless they have passed through the asylum, and are
certified by the medical superintendent as being harmless and
chronic, and suitable for removal."
The relieving officers appear entirely to ignore the law by
which they are required to give knowledge to a justice of the
peace within three days of their obtaining information that a
pauper lunatic is resident in their parish, and should be sum-
marily proceeded against. The Commissioners do this where
evidence of any wilful neglect of duty has taken place, but
as a rule the technical difficulties in obtaining a conviction
are insurmountable, as they are under the control of the board
of guardians.
The Report contains many instances of the evils attending
the indiscriminate reception and detention of insane persons in
workhouses, cases being given which have come to the know-
ledge of the Board casually, no official intimation of accident
or death being sent to them.
Two male patients destroyed themselves at the Marland
Workhouse, Rochdale ? one by cutting his throat with a
razor, never having previously evinced any suicidal tendencies.
The second case was sent to the workhouse by the relieving
officer with the usual order, " of unsound mind," and at the
back of this " order " was written by the master, " Attempted
suicide; brother cut his throat; cousin hanged himself." In
this case no' notice was given by the relieving officer to a
justice, pursuant to the provision of the 67th section of the
Act, and there is no doubt but that the suicide was caused by the
lunatic being placed in a workhouse instead of being removed
direct to an asylum. The medical officer failed to detect that
the patient was suffering from suicidal melancholia, and hence
the fatal catastrophe.
Other cases are quoted in the Report, all of which testify to
the neglect of duties by the relieving officers.
The following cases illustrate the mischief done by placing
lunatics suffering from acute mania in workhouses, instead of at
once removing them to an asylum. We give the verbatim
account of each case; the neglect of duties by the relieving
officers will be apparent without any comments at our hands: ?
"1. A native of Zanzibar, who was brought to Southampton
in the capacity of a wet nurse, became insane and violent, and
her master applied to the relieving officer to remove her from
the house, agreeing to repay to the Union the cost of her main-
tenance. The relieving officer, " in the hope (as the guardians
stated subsequently) that the woman would shortly be able to
PART. II. VOL. II.?NEW SERIES. X
312 CONDITION OF LUNACY
resume service," forcibly took her to the workhouse as a pauper
chargeable to Southampton, where she was classed as a lunatic.
It is to be observed that the only possible justification for this
proceeding, namely difficulty in obtaining the attendance of a
justice at the employer's abode to examine the woman, and
order her removal to an asylum, was never put forward.
" The patient remained in the workhouse for six days, the
relieving officer meanwhile neglecting his express duty, under
the Lunacy Act, of giving notice of such case within three
days to a justice of the peace, until requested to give such
notice by the medical officer of the workhouse. The woman
had then been six days taking little food, and in a constant
state of excitement and violence. The justice's order was given
the same day, and on the next, when the relieving officer came
to remove her as a pauper to the asylum, she was found to be
in so exhausted a state that it was considered unsafe to remove
her, and two days afterwards she died, having been ten days in
the workhouse. There was no inquest in the case, nor any
public enquiry into the circumstances, which only casually came
under our notice upon visiting the workhouse, when a female
imbecile who assisted in taking charge of the patient above
referred to, was found with traces of a severe wound on the face,
which, upon enquiry, was ascertained to have been caused by a
bite inflicted upon her by the insane African. Had this patient
been placed, as she should have been, under treatment in an
asylum, instead of being kept in the workhouse, her life would
probably have been saved. The whole of the facts were com-
municated by us to the Local Government Board, and they had
some correspondence with the guardians, who contented them-
selves with the assertion?and it was nothing more?that the
deceased was not a pauper when brought by the relieving officer
to the workhouse, and with the statement, which, as has been
shown, was untrue, that the Lunacy Acts had been 4 strictly
complied with.'
" 2. The second was a case in which a double murder fol-
lowed workhouse treatment of a lunatic.
" A man of the labouring class resided with his aged parents.
He had suffered from sunstroke, and was in receipt of a sick
allowance from a provident club. He began to act strangely,
'tore up a petticoat as bewitched, and threatened his mother.'
The overseer of the parish, a neighbour, requested the medical
officer of the district to see the man; the doctor came imme-
diately, but the man had then left home and gone to London. The
doctor at once went to the overseer, and told him ' he must have
him found.' The man returned from London next day, and was
then found wandering in the fields, and he was taken to the over-
IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 313
seer's residence. The medical officer was again sent for, and saw
him the same day; the man appeared to him to be in a wild and
insane state, ' and he ordered him to be kept under supervision
that night, and advised his prompt removal to a place of safety.'
The overseer kept the man till next morning, and then took
him, against his will, to the Lexden Union Workhouse, where,
on the overseer's order, he was admitted as insane, and in a
state of excitement. In the workhouse the man gave expression
to a delusion that he was married to the overseer's daughter,
but appeared to be otherwise rational, and gradually recovered
from his excitement. The medical officer of the workhouse
classed the man as insane in the medical relief book, but after
nineteen days' stay in the workhouse, he discharged him, and the
man then went back to his parents' house. The medical officer
of the district there saw him a few days after, and, as he testified,
'not much altered, for upon my visit to him, which was for a
bodily disease, he told me in his peculiar way that he could see
blood.' He at once informed the lunatic's mother that it was
not safe for his parents to be with him alone. A few days after-
wards both were savagely murdered by the lunatic, acting
under delusions of an insane character.
" Had the overseer in this case not taken this lunatic to the
workhouse, but complied strictly with the Lunacy Acts, there
is every reason to believe that the lunatic would have been sent
by a magistrate to an asylum, where the experience of the
medical officer would have prevented such a premature discharge.
We should have prosecuted the overseer had we not been advised
that as he had acted under medical instructions in taking the
lunatic to the workhouse as a place of safety instead of before
a justice, the penalty inflicted would be probably nominal.
"3. A male patient, J. P., about 36 years of age, who had
been an inmate of the imbecile ward of the Bury Union Work-
house for about twelve months previously, became violent
and maniacal on or about the 26th June, 1875. On 1st July
he was removed from the workhouse, and admitted into the
Prestwich Asylum. On examining him upon admission, he
was found to be severely bruised, and to have one or more
broken ribs. He died on the 8th July. A post mortem exami-
nation showed that in fact six ribs were broken, and the verdict
of the coroner's jury attributed his death to the effect of these
injuries ; but the jury were unable to say when, how, or by
what means they were caused. Little doubt, however, could
be felt but that the ribs were broken either at the workhouse
or during the short journey from thence to the asylum, for
there was no reason to suppose that the mischief could have
occurred after admission there.
x 2
314 CONDITION OF LUNACY
Y-
"An enquiry was instituted by the guardians, at the sugges-
tion of the Local Government Board, whom we had addressed
on the subject. The attendants in the imbecile ward, the work-
house medical officer, and other officials, besides the patient's
sister, who had been in the habit of visiting him, were all
examined. Little additional evidence, however, was obtained
as to the cause of the injuries; what evidence there was led
rather to the conclusion that they were sustained in the course
of the drive, in a cab, from the workhouse to the asylum.
The relieving officer, assisted by the head attendant, or male
nurse of the ward, effected the removal, during which the
patient appears to have been much excited, and knocking him-
self about.
" There was nothing to point to any intentional ill-usage of
the deceased in the workhouse ; but it is matter of comment
that earlier steps were not taken to remove him to the asylum.
Page, the ' nurse,' in his evidence before the guardians, stated
that J. P. had ' shown symptoms about a week before ; but that
on Saturday, 26th June, he was fit for no other place' than a
single room, in which he was placed and restrained with gloves.
One of Page's assistants in the imbecile ward carried the com-
mencement of the attack of mania still further back, averring
that the patient was ' going bad for a fortnight' before he was
put in the single room, and that ' for the last eight or nine
days he became very violent.'
"No explanation was offered of the delay in the removal.
Even if the necessity for this step was not apparent sooner (and
the evidence would lead us to believe it must have been),
it is difficult to justify the retention of this patient in the single
room of the workhouse, under restraint, from Saturday, 26th
June, to Thursday, 1st July."
A few cases of illegal detention of persons of unsound
mind have been brought before the notice of the Commissioners,
and in one instance it was found necessary to prosecute. The
case was as follows:?Miss Peyton, set. 63, was living under the
care of Mr. and Mrs. Grovier at Sidmouth. From evidence
which subsequently came out, it appeared that at one time she
was tolerably prosperous, but through intemperate habits she
lost her occupation and expended her savings. She placed her
all, amounting to ?25, in the hands of a relative, who handed it
over to the Groviers, with the consent of Miss Peyton, on the
understanding that she was provided with accommodation in an
adjoining house. A room was taken for her at the rate of
Is. 6d. per week.
Three months after her occupation of this room she was
visited by the before-mentioned relative, accompanied by one
IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 315
of the guardians of the parish, who gave the following descrip-
tion of what they saw :?
" That, in reply to the question of how she was, she gave an
unintelligible, wild and chattering answer; that, on the rug
which she had over her being turned up, the smell was so offen-
sive that it was impossible to remain in the room; that the
bed and sacking under her were sodden with filth; and that
in a corner of the room was a heap of filthy and offensive
feathers."
On the following day she was again examined by a medical
man and a police constable, who confirmed the accuracy of the
description of her state. An opinion was expressed that she
was of unsound mind, and forthwith she was removed to the
County Asylum, as a person of unsound mind, not under proper
care and control, and was then, according to the opinion of the
medical superintendent, in a state of senile dementia.
The patient died within three weeks of admission. The
Groviers were consequently proceeded against for taking charge
of a person of unsound mind for profit, and for wilful neglect,
violating the 90th sec. of 8 and 9 Vic. c. 100.
The case was heard before Mr. Justice Quain, when the
defendants were indicted for wilful neglect as well as for the
illegal care of a person of unsound mind, for profit.
The questions submitted to the j ury were:?
1st. Was Thomasine Peyton a person of unsound mind at
any time during her stay in the house, to the knowledge of
the defendants?
2nd. Did they at any time whilst in the house take the care
or charge of her as a person of unsound mind ?
3rd. If so, did they do so for profit ?
4th. Did they wilfully neglect her ?
All these questions being answered in the negative, the de-
fendants were discharged.
An attendant named Marsh, under the influence of drink,
was proceeded against by the visitors for injuring and fracturing
a rib of a patient confined in the Wilts County Asylum. He
was tried at the Assizes, and sentenced to four months' impri-
sonment.
The following circular letter has been sent by the Commis-
sioners to every hospital and licensed house :?
Office of Commissioners in Lunacy :
19 Whitehall Place, S.W., March 1, 1875.
To Proprietors of Licensed Houses, and Others engaged in the Care of
the Insane.
The Commissioners in Lunacy, having reason to suppose that the
requirements of section 40 of the Act 25 & 26 Vic., c. Ill, regulating
316 CONDITION OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND AND WALES.
the transmission of the correspondence of private patients in asylums,
hospitals and licensed houses, and of single patients, are not always
carefully observed, desire to call attention to the language of the section,
of which a copy is subjoined.
It will be remarked that no power is given to the person signing
the order of reception, or to any other person (save the Commissioners,
or Committee, or Visitors), to sanction restrictions on the correspon-
dence of a private patient; and it follows that no instructions received
from any other person other than the Commissioners, Committee, or
Visitors could be pleaded as a justification of any alleged breach of the
provisions of the section.
It is often desirable, for the patient's own sake, to place some
check on his correspondence. Where this is done, however, the
greatest care should (on every account) be taken strictly to follow the
directions of the Act.
By Order,
C. S. Perceval, Secretary.
The Report concludes with the usual appendices and descrip-
tions of the various hospitals and county asylums, containing
a full report of each one.
The Blue Book appears to increase in "bulk every year, and
contains most valuable information carefully obtained by the
Commissioners, which speak as to the zealous and earnest
efforts of the Board to place before the Lord Chancellor every
fact relating to the treatment of the insane; and it is a
matter of congratulation that in no country are the interests
and welfare of that helpless class of humanity so protected as
in England.
