Contributions to the Physical Psychology of Criminals
======================================================

125
Art. X?
^ n Address delivered in the Vienna Section of the Medical Association
in Lower Austria, November 10, 1875.
By Fhofessor MOBIZ BENEDIICT.
Translated by B. H. Semple, M.D., F.B.C.P. Loud.
My address at the forty-eighth meeting of the German
Naturalists and Physicians at Gratz, has called forth against
me in our medical world an agitation, which did not spring
altogether from honourable motives, and was not carried out
by very creditable means. I have been reproached with build-
ing up a theory on three examinations of the brain. I hat is
simply a gross mistake, or an intentional perversion of the
facts, which are just the reverse. My efforts to establish on
the ground of modern evidence, a natural system of morals,
have led me to limit the domain of responsibility incomparably
more than is the case in positive legislation ; and the tacts of
criminal psychology, the meaning of which is still under-
valued by the mass of jurists, have led me to regaid the impulse
of criminal natures in the light of natural laws. Those
criminal lawyers and police agents who enjo}r a reputation in
the history of crimes are acquainted empirically with these
laws, and have therefore discovered with great acuteness botli
crimes and their perpetrators. But it still remained to consider
whether an anthropological change does not lie at the founda-
tion of the criminal propensity ot brigands, habitual thieves,
relapsing forgers, and criminals from incurable indiscretion.
Long before I had seen a criminal's brain I had expressed my
conviction, in writing, that a deficient organisation lay at the
base of these criminal natures, and at least, occasioned the
disposition to an abnormal moral constitution. The significance
of the three criminal brains, together with the fourth, to
be now demonstrated to you is, however, in itself very
important.
When one after the other in three cases sentence of death
has been passed and carried into execution, and the evidence
of material guilt lias been afterwards shown to be faulty, the
circumstance must cause an enormous sensation, and on the one
hand must warn judges and juries to exercise the greatest
caution, and on the other must cause the ministers ot justice
126 CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PHYSICAL PSYCHOLOGY
to hesitate, so that they do not hastily recommend sentences of
death to he carried out.
But the three criminal brains of which I spoke at Grratz,
and of which I have demonstrated two before you, and to which
I am enabled to add another, have the same significance. In
four cases following one another it is now shown that there
exists a deficient anthropological development. In all four
cases judgment was pronounced on the ground of the existence
of a full responsibility recognised by judges and medical men.
These four cases must suffice to make judges and ministers of
justice, as well as legislators, hesitate in coming to a decision ;
and if sentences of death are necessary they should be justified
on other grounds. If even it should be proved that only in a
small proportion of cases such changes in the dead body can be
detected, still a full responsibility cannot be assumed in any
criminal of this kind without positive evidence that these
changes are wanting.
But a strange freak of accident must exist if these changes
can occur one after the other in three cases, and, as I can now
assert, in four, if the circumstance were not a common one.
What a spectacle would be exhibited if anyone out of a pre-
dominant literary relationship, in a disease seldom tested by
necroscopy, had discovered appearances corresponding four
times one after the other, and which the more bear upon them
the stamp of truth since I have long ago, and before I thought
of criminal brains, laid down the position that morals have
their seat in the most posterior parts of the brain. Allow me
to demonstrate the brain of a murderer of middle age, who
had shot a relative from revenge, with whom he was living at
enmity.
The skull was unsymmetrical in a high degree, inasmuch
as the greatest arching of the parietal bone was on the right
side, in front of the ear, and that on the left was behind it. The
posterior cranial cavity on the left was smaller than on the
right. Examine the brain from above, and on the right the
cerebellum is not covered by the top of the posterior lobe, and
the former lies on both sides uncovered on its outer margins.
Examine first the right hemisphere, and the occipital fissure
exhibits a similarity to that of the apes in the presence of the
?plis de passage, which are also present in the interparietal
fissure, the ascending spur of the Fossa Sylvii, and the fissura
temporalis prima, and also in all the frontal furrows.
The posterior spur of the fissure of the Fossa Sylvii does
not reach to the upper median border, and thence outwards,
but is interrupted by a transitional furrow from the posterior
central lobe to the second vertical lobe. In some other respects
OF CRIMINALS. 127
the appearances in this brain correspond with those observed
in the brains formerly demonstrated.
On the left side the interparietal fissure runs parallel with
the fissura Eolandi. Hence the first and even the second pari-
etal lobe are diminished in size, and the parieto-temporal oper-
culum is placed in front of the horizontal occipital fissure,
and is connected with it. On the other hand the first and
second temporal lobes corresponding to it are greatly developed.
This occipital fissure also contains plis de passage.
The lobuli lingualis and fusiformis are on the lelt \ ery badly,
and on the right are relatively well developed, so that on this
side it appears that the perpendicular occipital fissuie at the
lower edge of the median surfaces is directed in an acute angle
towards the scissura hippocampi. But on the right also the two
convolutions rise steeply upwards towards the gyri hippocampi
and uncinatus. The two last named gyri are on both sides
strikingly deficient in furrows. _
The third frontal convolution at the base is on both ^ sides
merged in the Fossa Sylvii. The left first frontal lobe is divided
into two parts by a sagittal furrow. At the union of the second
and third frontal convolutions in the fissura prsecentralis of
this side there is one operculum and also a second fai in fiont
in the second frontal fissure. The fissura prsecentralis reaches
as far as the upper median border. The second frontal fissure
does not proceed from the third.
By these four examinations following one alter the other
the probability is therefore very great that at least in a large
proportion of murderers the brain is in a low grade of develop-
ment, but still the question must be asked whether this change
, is not already visible in the skull; and, if such be the case, Ave
should have the special advantage of being, perhaps, enabled
to announce during life the probability of the existence of
cerebral abnormities. When I communicated my researches on
the examination of brains to my friend and pupil, Dr John
Badik, physician to the Illawa prison, he hastened to examine
the heads of 365 murderers in that establishment, and invited
me to superintend his researches.
In the case of the murderers at Illawa, Dr Badik was
struck with the want of prominence of the external occipital
protuberance and with the flatness of the occiput. When I
examined a great number of the prisoners it struck me as very
characteristic in their appearance that the occipital pait of the
sagittal diameter of the skull was, in general, strikingly shortened.
It trom the depression which lies on the anterior surface of the
mastoid process (the mastoid fossa) a sagittal diameter is con-
ceived to the highest point of the occiput, the measure amounts
128 CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PHYSICAL PSYCHOLOGY
in normal persons generally to at least and generally more,
of the whole diameter. It is exceedingly rare that in normal
persons this diameter sinks to and only in certain cases, and
generally only on one side, does this diameter amount to less
than The occipital brachycephalia, on the other hand, is
present very frequently in the case of the robber-murderers
who were examined. I propose to represent figures of these
skulls in a forthcoming series of plates.
I offer at present the following provisional numbers in
reference to this subject. The occipital brachycephalia appeared
in the highest degree (namely, under \ of the whole diameter)
in common robber-murderers (raubmorder) in 43 per cent, of
the cases; in murderers from premeditation (motiven-mdrder)
in 34 per cent.; and in habitual thieves in 23 per cent. In a
medium degree (i.e. in ^ to \ of the whole diameter) in common
murderers in 34 per cent.; in murderers from premeditation
in 21 per cent.; and in habitual thieves in 12 per cent.; while
the highest degree (of occipital brachycephalia) in normal
persons?namely those outside the prison?is very rare, and the
medium degree appears in very few. More striking still do the
facts appear when we make the percentage calculation of
those cases in which the disproportion is altogether wanting.
In common murderers it is wanting in 23 per cent.; in mur-
derers from premeditation in 45 per cent; and in habitual
thieves in 65 per cent. In normal persons it is wanting as a
rule. The flattening of the occiput appears to be less charac-
teristic. This appears in the highest degree in the first category
of criminals, in 59 per cent.; in the second in 52 ; in the third
in 53: in the medium degree in the first category in 24 per
cent.; in the second in 20 ; in the third in 18 ; while in normal
persons it is wanting altogether in 56 per cent., and is present
in a high degree only in 16. The want of prominence of the
occipital protuberance exists in common murderers in 75 per
cent., and in the other categories in about 59; but in normal
persons it is only the case in 22 per cent.
It is a known fact that the two halves of the skull are
seldom symmetrical. In no case is this fact so striking as in
habitual thieves. While in common murderers the asymmetry
existed in a high degree in 26 per cent., and in murderers
from premeditation in 32, it was 37 in habitual thieves. In
a small degree the asymmetry was remarkable in 64 per cent,
of the common murderers, and in 63 of the habitual thieves,
while it amounted to 43 in murderers from premeditation.
By the measurement of the eye the asymmetry was not per-
ceptible in common murderers in 10 per cent., and in mur-
derers from premeditation in 25 ; but, on the other hand, it
OF CRIMINALS.
129
was never wanting in the habitual thieves whom 1 saw in
Leopoldstadt, while it was wanting in normal persons in 55
per cent.
As a very characteristic form of the skull, I observed in
56 per cent, of the habitual thieves' skulls in Leopoldstadt a
condition which I designate as vertex-steepness (Scheitelsteilheit)
rising up from before, backwards. While, for example, the
highest point of the crown generally stands a little higher
(U centimeter) than the boundary line between the part of
the forehead covered with hair and that which is uncoveied,
this proportion is altered in habitual thieves, and there aie
differences amounting to 7 centimeters. Thus the frontal
diameter at the top &of the crown is broad, and broader than
that of the forehead ; and further, the highest piotuberance of
the two parietal bones lies commonly in such an oblique hon-
zontal line that one end of it lies before and the other behind
the ear.
Except in habitual thieves, I have seen this form of skull
only once in an individual, of whose moral constitution I have
no information. In many cases the bones of the face have
been found equally unsymmetrical witli those of the skull,
especially in habitual thieves. In connection with these com-
munications I drew you the skulls of two murderers, whose
brains I lately demonstrated to you. "iou see the biachy-
cephalia, the flatness of the occiput, and the want of piomi-
nence of the protuberance in a marked degree.
Permit me to make some remarks on the relation of the
present investigations with the doctrine of Gall. -The funda-
mental idea of Gall, that the psychical functions are localised
in the brain, is an acquisition of the most recent experi-
mental physiology and cerebral pathology, and in a certain degree
undoubtedly correct. I have already published some remarks
on the defects of Gall's theory. The chief of these is, that Gall
imagined complicated psychical processes to take place in a
definite part of the brain. Murder, for instance, is a compli-
cated psychical function; sometimes it is committed from an
overpowering sensitiveness, such as inflicting death from an
excessive sense of honour. At another time it is allied to an
ethical weakness or imbecility, because the materials for the
formation of nobler feelings, especially of compassion and
justice, are wanting. In professional robber-murderers it is an
excess of the feeling of strength which develops a sensation of
pleasure in their own strength, and a certain hoirible feeling of
delight in contrasting it with the weakness and the deficient
feeling of strength in other people. Besides, according to
experience, murder and manslaughter are generally connected
TART I. VOL. II. ? NEW SEIUE;
130 CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PHYSICAL PSYCHOLOGY
with a defect of intellect, which is unable to foresee the conse-
quences of the deed to the perpetrator, while in other cases
there is a satisfaction in the cunning of a premeditated plan
corresponding- with a pressing impulse towards the act. The
factors of such an act are therefore composed of intellectual,
motor, and sensory impulses, both positive and negative; or,
in the language of cerebral pathology, of impulses which find
their expression in the function of the anterior lobe for intelli-
gence, of the middle lobe (i.e. the circumference of the central
lobes, and also probably of a part of the upper lobes) for the
motor part, and of the posterior part of the brain for the
sensory. The same rule applies to stealing in habitual thieves,
to forgery, &c., as to murder. It is therefore especially erro-
neous to assume for murder, for instance, a definite and
exclusive topographical change, since crime is the product of
different qualitative and quantitative factors. It is useful to
remember how it happened that on a false scientific basis the
doctrines of Gall on the localisation of the psychical functions
of the brain were set aside. It was by the experiments of
Flourens, which appeared to prove that there is a single
psychical organ in the brain, inasmuch as by slicing off the
organ the functions were preserved up to a certain degree;
and, as soon as one incision had been reached all the cerebral
functions appeared to cease. These experiments are in the
present day completely contradicted. Their cogency, as in
opposition to Gall, is, nevertheless, not invalidated. It must
further be declared that many impulses in mental actions are
founded on similar anatomical relations in physiological condi-
tions, since apathy and indifference on the one hand, and ready
excitability, irritability, and passion on the other, depend on
physiological conditions of excitability.
Another fundamental idea of Gall is, that the skull is a
model of the brain, and skulls formed the peculiar bases of the
writings of that author. It has been objected that there are
in the skull very many accidental secondary prominences which
have no counterparts in the brain. Fairly considered, however,
this objection is not very material, inasmuch as it refers only
to unimportant and changeable details and comparatively rare
abnormities. No scientific man, even if he does not altogether
agree with Gall, disputes the doctrine that the construction of
the skull is remarkably proportionate to the whole anthropo-
logical organisation in brutes and in man ; and the whole of
craniology, as it is understood by anatomists and anthropolo-
gists, would have no meaning if this idea were not the leading-
one. It must only be admitted that Gall lias sought too much
and found too much, and that he was led astray by a fal?p
OP CRIMINALS.
181
psychological analysis; but his fundamental idea is not
shaken.
Whoever has followed with any degree of interest, on the
one hand the verdicts of juries, and on the other hand knows
how Holtzendorff has examined the fallibility of legislation in
reference to the complicated psychological process of crime,
will be forced to the conviction that only a psychology founded
on a basis of natural science (and which takes into considera-
tion the abnormities of cerebral development and of cranial
structure) is capable of bringing to a scientific conclusion the
important civilised ideas of law, which changes with the times
and with the prevailing classes of the people, &c., and of
impressing the results on the popular understanding. When
we reflect, moreover, that few men stand at the head of modern
scientific knowledge ; that the necessary education in natural
science is wanting in lawyers as well as in the laity, and that
it was regarded as an especial merit, in the physicians of the
last generation to think universally as little as possible; then
it cannot be a matter of wonder how unprepared many people
still are to enter upon developed ideas; and when a distin-
guished jurist says, in an essay, that these ideas are unsuitable
to the State and to the people because they inspire fear of
their consequences, but that the freedom of the human race is
concerned in these ideas, then you will understand that the con-
science of the best men makes them indifferent about contending
against slander and calumny. These are ideas to which cha-
racter belongs, because want of character and weakness of
character tremble at the last consequences of shifting ideas,
and are deceived by sophisms which harmonise with the
prejudices of the masses and of the powerful.
Allow me, in conclusion, to make a few general remarks.
Superficial readers have made it a reproach against me that if
the view taken by me is correct punishment must be abolished.
Such would be the case if the doctrine of responsibility, as it
is taught by most jurists of the present day, were the necessary
basis of legislation. The true basis, however, is the protection
of the existence of normal persons against the ethically dege-
nerate, and the necessary degree of this protection is an
essential measure for the severity of the punishment. The
greater, for instance, is the general corruption, the smaller is
the guilt of each individual, because he is to be regarded for the
most part as being misled; therefore we must punish more
severely because the threatening danger is greater, subjectively
and objectively, for society. From my doctrine of the cor-
rection of criminals on the ethic plan would result the abolition
of the punishment of death, even if the arguments against
x 2
132 CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PHYSICAL PSYCHOLOGY
this were not so weighty as Holtzendorff has so convincingly-
proved. Tn those cases where the criminal is to be regarded
as incurable, and the crime very dangerous, future justice will
punish more severely by rightly appreciating the views ad-
vanced by me. The modern doctrine of judicial punishment
is evidently in a false condition, because it always sets free
criminals whose relapse is certain, allows them to commit
fresh crimes, and then for the first time deprives them of the
liberty to do mischief. Of what importance then must it
be, if the anthropological study of the brain, the skull, and
the head offers us the prospect of determining, at least in a
portion of the cases, with scientific clearness, when a relapse
is to be expected. Criminal psychology must supply the
factors of which, in each special case and in each group of
cases crime is composed, and must determine whether im-
prisonment and education have eradicated or can eradicate a
part of the factors and the predisposing impulses. Now allow
me to close with the passage?
Edle streben, Schlechte hohnen und unterdriicken.
Noble characters struggle, and base ones sneer and oppress.
Supplement.
I will now give the description of the brains demonstrated
in a former meeting. They were those of two murderers who
committed a murder for hire.
In one the cerebellum is not covered by the occipital lobes,
and the occipital brachycephalia is present on the left side.
In the right hemisphere the ascending posterior spur is merged
with the ascending part of the interparietal fissure and reaches
at the median surface into the gyrus fornicatus. The second
parietal lobe is divided from the first temporal lobe by a long
fissure (parieto-temporal fissure) which is lost in an operculum
with plis de passage (parieto-temporal operculum) which is
bounded by the lobulus tuberis and by lobules which are
probably to be regarded as processes of the first and second
temporal lobes, but are pretty clearly distinguished from them.
The ill-developed gyri fusiformes and lingualis rise upwards
steeply from the plane of the gyrus uncinatus towards the
summit of the occiput, and thereby, that the fissura calcarina
may reach to the same point, is the gyrus rectus of the occiput
reduced to a minimum. The vertical occipital fissure is in
direct communication on the one hand with the horizontal
occipital fissure, and on the other band with the sulcus hippo-
campi. The horizontal occipital fissure exhibits the ape-form
with its plis de passage. The firstthree temporal convolutions are
OF CRIMINALS.
133
arranged concentrically according to the brute type, with the
concavity downwards. The gyrus uncinatus and gyrus hippo-
campi are very deficient in convolutions. The fissura prcecentralis
reaches to the middle border. (The first and second frontal fissures
are divided from it by imperfect convolutions.) Plis cle passage
are found both in the horizontal occipital fissure and in the
parieto-temporal operculum, in the posterior spur of the fissure
of the Fossa Sylvii combined with the interparietal fissure, in the
anterior ascending spur of the same fissure, and also in all the
furrows. On the left, the posterior ascending spur of the
fissure of the Fossa Sylvii rises to the median line, and the inter-
parietal and parieto-temporal fissures are separated from it by
ill-developed portions of convolutions. The vertical occipital
fissure is not connected with the interparietal fissure. The
second frontal convolution is crossed with the fissura prse-
centralis, and thereby are the first and second frontal con-
volutions divided into (smaller) posterior and (larger) anterior
halves. The fissura prascentralis reaches as far as the inferior
border, and is excessively convoluted. The first and second
temporal furrows are arranged in a more normal manner. In
other respects the arrangement is the same as on the right.
In the second brain, the body of the organ appeared, on
the other hand, altogether oblique and shortened, and the
obliquely situated cerebellum was deeply imbedded in the
niche of the fourth and fifth temporal convolutions, whereby
the mass of the occiput appeared to be deteriorated in a high
degree behind the gyrus uncinatus. On the right, the posterior
spur of the fissure of the Fossa Sylvii rises high up, but with-
out reaching the median border. The interparietal fissure is
in normal proportion with it, but stands, nevertheless, in direct
communication with the fissura Rolandi. The horizontal
occipital fissure shows no decided similarity to the apes.
The parieto-temporal fissure is not much developed; the
parieto-temporal operculum is well marked. The first three
temporal fissures, with their convexity downwards, concentrically
surrounding with a rim imperfectly formed convolutions. The
fissura prcecentralis goes as far as the median surface, and con-
tains an operculum in the transition between the second and
third frontal convolutions. The same is found (between all the
three frontal convolutions) in the most anterior part of the
first frontal furrow. The second frontal convolution at the
base badly developed; the fissura cruciata showing a com-
plicated operculum. The gyri hippocampi and uncinatus
strongly projecting over the frontal lobes and little furrowed.
The gyri fusiformis and lingualis rising steeply towards the
top of the occiput, much diminished, and especially the first
134 PHYSICAL PSYCHOLOGY OP CRIMINALS.
very much shortened by the first two temporal convolutions,
and connected in a peculiar serpentine manner with the pos-
terior combining part of the lobulus tuberis and the second
temporal lobe at the parieto-temporal operculum. The per-
pendicular occipital fissure is connected with the sulcus hippo-
campi and conceals numerous plis de passage. Especially the
median part of the occipital lobe reduced to a minimum. On
the left, the posterior ascending spur of the fissure of the
Fossa Sylvii and the interparietal fissure exhibit their normal
proportion, but the latter conceals in it numerous plis de
passage. The horizontal occipital fissure exhibits the ape
structure. The parieto-temporal fissure is not well marked, but
the parieto-temporal operculum is. The vertical occipital
fissure is connected with the sulcus hippocampi. The first
temporal furrow shows the brute form by a posterior spur (the
concavity directed downwards). The fissura Rolandi is con-
nected anteriorly with the first and third frontal furrows, and
in all the fissures there are numerous opercular structures. The
third frontal convolution is submerged at the base.
In the case of the first murderer's brain examined the space
of the plis de passage was, in the part behind the posterior
central convolution, almost predominant over the developed
convolutions, so that a normal type of convolutions and furrows
could scarcely be drawn. Here also the furrow of Rolandi
communicated with the fissura pnecentralis. The occipital lobes
scarcely covered the cerebellum.
