361 Psychological Eeteospect
============================

Very little has transpired during the past half year in connection with
psychological medicine. The important subject of legislation for
dipsomaniacs has again been brought prominently forward by a deputa-
tion consisting of the leading men in the profession, who waited upon
the Home Secretary to impress upon him the great importance of
legislation for habitual drunkards. We cannot but regret that the
House of Commons still ignores adopting any measures for the protec-
tion of the victims of the growing evil and curse of this our nineteenth
century. Many motions involving little importance have occupied
much attention of Parliament, to the exclusion of matters of more con-
siderable moment. Many murders and suicides have been committed
by lunatics at large, and one extraordinary suicide was perpetrated by
a prisoner awaiting his trial in Newgate. The modus operandi adopted
in this case was peculiar, and we give the facts below of the circum-
stances connected with the case :?
Extraordinary Suicide in Newgate.?An enquiry took place on
May 2nd, before Mr. W. J. Payne, the coroner for the City of London, in
the vestry of the gaol of Newgate, into the circumstances under which
George Johnstone, aged 47, a prisoner awaiting his trial in the prison, who
destroyed himself on Sunday night in a most extraordinary manner, came
by his death.?Mr. Sydney Roberts Smith deposed that he was governor of
the gaol of Newgate, and the prisoner was delivered into his charge on the
29th of March, having been committed from the Southwark Police Court
with several other prisoners upon numerous charges of fraud and obtaining
goods bjr false pretences. lie saw the prisoner on Sunday afternoon, between
tour and five o'clock, and he then appeared as usual, and made no complaint.
He was locked up in his cell at six o'clock with the other prisoners, and, as
was the custom with prisoners before trial, no alteration was made in his
clothing, and as he appeared perfectly cheerful and not at all desponding, no
suspicion was entertained that he contemplated any act of violence. The
prisoners slept in hammocks, supported by two straps at the head and foot,
attached to four rings in the wall, and there was an inspection hole, and a
watchman patrolled the prison during the night, whose duty it was to look
in occasionally and see that all was right. On Monday morning, about one
o'clock, in consequence of information he received from the chief warder, he
went to the prisoner's cell, and found him lying on his back underneath his
hammock, quite dead and cold. The mode by which he destroyed himself
a a 2
362 EXTRAORDINARY SUICIDE.
was this. He had taken one of the straps from the foot of his hammock
and placed it round his neck, and then, having previously folded up one of
his blankets and placed it underneath the hammock, he laid himself down
and passed a piece of wax-end through one of the holes of the strap. He
then fastened the wax-end to one of his braces, and attached the other end
of the brace to the ring at the head of the hammock, and then laid himself
down, the upper part of his body being about 18 inches from the ground,
the strap being perfectly loose in the front, the only pressure being upon the
sides.?In answer to questions put by the Coroner, Mr. Smith said that the
deceased did not appear to have any dread of his approaching trial, and, on
the contrary, in the course of a conversation he had with him last Thursday,
he expressed his belief that he should get off, and had considerable con-
fidence as to the result.?A Juryman enquired hnw the deceased got
possession of the wax-end.?Mr. Smith said that the deceased was by trade
a shoemaker, and he had been employed in the prison in mending straps,
and might have secreted the piece of wax-end that was the means of causing .
his death.?Mr. Robert Mapperson, the chief warder of the prison, said that
on Saturday the deceased wrote a letter to his brother-in-law, making
arrangements for his approaching trial, and he never gave the slightest
indication of an intention to commit any act of violence.?Dr Gibson, the
medical officer of the prison, said he saw the deceased immediately after the
discovery, and he was quite dead and cold, and rigidity had set in, and he
believed he had been dead for several hours. He saw him every day while
he was in the gaol, and at one time he complained of his back, and witness
ordered him a fomentation and some aperient medicine, and he appeared to
be all right. The manner in which the death was occasioned was quite
unique ; the strap was quite loose, but the pressure on the sides no doubt
stopped the circulation of blood in the vessels of the neck, and thus caused
suffocation, and the death was no doubt quite easy, as the deceased did not
appear to have made the slightest struggle.?The Wife of the deceased, who
was present during the enquiry, was summoned as a witness, and she stated
that her husband had repeatedly complained of his head, and when he was
at large she was in the habit of fomenting it.?The Coroner, in summing
up, observed that it was certainly a remarkable case of suicide, and the only
question was whether it was committed under such circumstances as to
amount to an act of self murder.?The Jury, after a short deliberation,
returned a verdict that the deceased destroyed himself while in a state of
temporary insanity.
The following suicide by a boy is reported :?
Suicide by a Boy.?Mr. W. Carter held an inquest at Camberwell on
the body of Charles Russell, aged 14, who drowned himself in the canal at
Camberwell. The boy had latterly been in the habit of spending the
whole of his money in gambling, and on the Saturday, after receiving
8s., his weekly salary, he lost it all at tossing. Ashamed to meet his
parents, he went to the towing-path of the canal and drowned himself. The
jury returned a verdict of " Suicide while of unsound mind," and expressed
a hope that the police would do their utmost to stop street gambling.
Suicide oe a Foreign Gentleman.?Mr. William J. Payne, the
coroner for the City of London, held an enquiry at the Board Room, Thavies
Inn, relative to the death of Victor Valdenaire, a Prussian gentleman, who
was found floating in the River Thames, near Temple Pier.?Both eyes were
discoloured, and his skull was fractured.?Mr. William Heath said he was
a barrister. The deceased was a personal friend, and an agent in England to
his father, a wine brewer. He was a Rhenish Prussian. The deceased was
MYSTERIOUS SUICIDE. 363
highly cultivated. On Thursday before the suicide the deceased called
upon him, but he did not see him then. He (witness) called at deceased's
residence, and deceased told him that he had just recovered from an attack
of illness. On Sunday deceased dined with witness and his family, and he ap-
peared quite cheerful. Deceased left him about eleven o'clock, and said he
would call and dine with him on Wednesday. On Tuesday morning lie
received the following letter:
" I dare not address you thus, though the act I am on the point of com-
mitting will make me the execration to everybody. It is not the result of
insanity, though I shall be glad if it be thought such. Now I implore you
to keep the tidings as long as possible from my poor parents, or if they must
be sent immediately, do so to Mr. Vichoff, co-'director Vichoff, in Treves. I
have written to him about it. I hope the money I leave behind will pay
the first necessary advances. I have left my things all unpacked in order to
avoid suspicion. I do not know whether I can ask you to have them looked
to, as perhaps you may think it a shame to be brought in connection with
a suicide. Also, in this case, I am so very much indebted to you for your
kindness. I feel it the deeper, as I was very miserable the last few days.
You may think it doubly strange that I should have the courage before hav-
ing well commenced ; yet it is not also madness. Farewell. I conjure you
not to write direct to my parents.
"Victor Valdenaire."
?The Jury returned a verdict of " Temporary Insanity."
This is a well-marked instance of a suicide in which no premonitory
symptoms had been observed.
Mysterious Suicide.?Mr. Carter held an inquest at the Union Tavern,
Yassall Road, Brixton, concerning the death of Mr. J. T. Hewes, aged 78, an
independent gentleman, residing at No. 92 CamberwellNew Road, who shot
himself, leaving on the mantelshelf of his room a memorandum stating
what be had done.?Dr Edward Finder, of Camberwell Green, deposed that
he found deceased's brains on the stock of a gun and about the room, and
the whole of the front of the head was shot away. From the position of the
gun he must have lowered the trigger with his foot, and the discharge had
borne away the whole of the skull, and caused instant death.?Mrs: Box,
housekeeper to the deceased, and Miss Pim, who had lived with him for
several years, stated that of late he had been restless, and expressed a fear,
which they regarded as a delusion, that some one was coming to the house
to arrest him for committing forgery. Upon this evidence the coroner was
about to sum up, when some dispute took place between two solicitors who
represented various persons related to the deceased. One of them wished to
adduce further evidence, and called Mr. Joseph ITewes, a nephew to the de-
ceased, who stated that about a fortnight ago he saw his uncle, and threatened
to take proceedings against him in reference to the false registration of the
birth of a child in 1842 or 1843. He also made reference to the forgery by
his uncle of a receipt, for the presentation of whichwitness suffered two
vears' imprisonment. In reply to these observations his uncle threatened to
blow out his own brains.?The Coroner having summed up at considerable
length, the Jury, after deliberating for halt an hour, returned a verdict of
" Suicide whilst of unsound mind."
A sad instance of friends refusing to recognise the mental condition.
Dangerous Lunatic at Large.?Attempt to Commit Murder and
Suicide in the Borough.?A desperate attempt at wife murder aud subsequent
364 DANGEROUS LUNATIC AT LARGE.
suicide was made on April lltli by a man named Worcester, aged 35, a
furrier, living at No. 4 Collier's Rents, Church Street, Borough. It seems
that early in the morning loud screams were heard by the other inmates of
the house. A young woman living on the ground floor, recognising Mrs.
Worcester's voice, ran up the stairs. She was horrified to see Mr. Worcester
holding the bedroom door, and flourishing in his right hand a small pocket-
knife. His throat was cut across about five inches in length, and blood
was pouring copiously from the wound. He said, "It's all right; I'm
murdering my wife, so she won't trouble me any more." He then staggered
towards the girl, who went for a policeman. Worcester was discovered
in the back yard holding his throat under a tap. In the bedroom on the
first floor front was found Mrs. Worcester, sitting on the side of the bed,
her throat dreadfully cut, and her cheek and mouth cut open. Blood was
streaming from her wounds. Further examination revealed another wound
on the left shoulder, and her hands and arms were fearfully cut and jagged.
The unfortunate man, it appears, has been for more than a year past out of
his mind, and had been confined seven months in Brook wood Asylum, from
which he was discharged a few weeks back. Nearly all the people in the
neighbourhood were in constant fear of him on account of his strange
manner lately. He purchased the knife on Saturday, and on Sunday after-
noon his father saw him in the kitchen carefully sharpening it. His wife
was warned to be careful of him, but she said she had no fear of him. When
sane he was a good father and kind husband. Six small children are left in
the house depending on such little support as the neighbours can give.
The prisoner was brought up for examination on the 14th of May at
Southwark Police Court, charged with attempting his wife's life and his
own. The wife, on being sworn, said the prisoner worked for Mr. Jacobs.
On Monday night, the 10th of April, they went to bed as usual and on very
friendly terms. Between seven and eight the following morning she was
roused from her sleep by a cut on her shoulder near the neck, and she then
saw her husband with a sharp knife in his hand leaning over her. She
immediately jumped out of bed and fell on the floor. He then stabbed her
on the other side of the neck. Witness called out, " Spare my life for the
sake of the children." He was then standing by her side, and as she was
getting up he struck her on the mouth. She roused all her strength and
seized hold of him, and, after a severe struggle, succeeded in getting the
knife from him, and then she nearly fainted. Mr. Benson asked her why
she struggled to get the knife from him. She replied that he had cut his
own throat then and was bleeding frightfully. He said to her, "Never
mind, old girl. I'll have your life as well, and we'll both die together."
He then left the room. In answer to Mr. Benson she said she had been
married to the prisoner eight years, and they had six children. He was a
good husband and a kind father. On the 1st of August last he was sent to
an asylum from that court, and returned home about seven weeks ago. Mr.
Benson asked the prisoner whether he understood what his wife had stated.
After looking at him for a moment he said that he did, but he wanted to
know why Thomas Morris wished to take away his life. The wife here
informed his worship that Thomas Morris was her brother-in-law, and had
done nothing whatever to excite him. Mr. Benson remanded the prisoner,
directing his immediate removal to the infirmary in Horsemonger Lane
Gaol.
Suicide in Imitation of the Sultan.?A retired warrart officer of the
Navy, named Charles Burch, committed suicide at Devonport, in a manner
similar to that said to have been adopted by the late Sultan of Turkey.
EXCITING CHASE AFTER A LUNATIC. 365
About noon one of his children heard him groaning, and upon being called
by him went to his room, where she found him in bed, which was saturated
with blood. He asked for water, which she gave him, and then ran for
assistance. Returning shortly afterwards she found him lying on the floor
quite dead. It was then discovered that the unfortunate man had opened
an artery of the upper part of his arm and had bled to death. The deceased
lost his wife about eighteen months ago and had been in a desponding state
ever since; he leaves four children. It is stated that he had been reading
the papers pretty much of late, and it is thought that the statement as to
how the Sultan had committed suicide induced him to adopt a similar
method.
This case illustrates an act of imitation in a lunatic as a means of
destroying himself. We have had others of a similar nature brought
under our observation, in which opening the veins in the arm similar
to that adopted by the Sultan had been followed.
Exciting Chase after a Lunatic.?An extraordinary affair happened
in the City. A sorter in the General Post Office, named Barton, having
performed his usual duties, went into the lavatory, and, upon reappearing,
was noticed to be covered with blood. His fellow sorters, believing that he
had been making an attempt to commit suicide, conveyed him to St.
Bartholomew's Hospital. However, whilst he was waiting his turn in the
surgery, he took advantage of a moment when the backs of the officials were
turned, and ran into the street. Making his way into the Metropolitan
Meat Market, he was stopped by two policemen, but he broke away from
them, and escaped altogether for a time. A few minutes afterwards the
inmates of the house 22 Red Lion Street, Clerkenwell, were alarmed by
some one running hastily upstairs, and it was found that Barton was going
to the top floor, the front room of which he entered. Barton seized a knife
which was upon a table, when the landlord of the house providentially
came into the room and wrested it from the madman, who then ran to the
window, threw it open, and attempted to leap out. He would have
succeeded but for the intrepidity of Mr. Jacobee, who seized Barton's legs
as he was falling and held him tightly, calling for help meanwhile. A man
living opposite, seeing the struggle, hastened to the rescue, and the lunatic
was ultimately secured, taken to a surgery, and thence conveyed to the
workhouse infirmary.
Attempted Suicide.?Henry Nicholls, telegraph engineer, of No. 23
Moreton Terrace, Pimlico, was charged on remand with attempting to com-
mit suicide by stabbing himself in the throat with a razor.?Sir John Heron
Maxwell, one of the Middlesex magistrates, was present on the bench in the
interests of the prisoner, who had moved in respectable society.?It appeared
from the evidence that on the morning of the 25th of May, the police were
called to the house and found that a doctor was in attendance on the
prisoner, who had left the following note, written in pencil, in his room :?
" The government have taken away my profession and brought me and my
wife to beggary, and so I commit suicide."?Prisoner having expressed his
unqualified regret at what had occurred, which had been attributed to the
effect of sunstroke in India, was allowed to be discharged on the promise
that he should be taken care of.
36G DISEASE OF THE BONES IN THE INSANE.
The condition of the bones in insane patients having recently
attracted much public attention, we have great pleasure in quoting
the following interesting letter which appeared in the British Medical
Journal:?
"Disease op the Bones in the Insane.
" Sir,?You will, I trust, allow me to observe, in reference to your in-
teresting and instructive comments on the case of the late Mr. F. W.
Wimberley, in the Journal of this day, that the peculiar liability of the
bones of the insane to disease, and consequently to fracture, ' even when no
extraordinary violence is used,' has been long known. You have written
thus: 'Numerous observations on the subject have been made in recent
years.' Certainly to Drs. Clouston, Rogers, Brown, Sankey, and others, are
due the credit of teaching, in 1870, that the osseous system of the insane is
especially liable to undergo certain chemical changes, ' approaching that
observed* in osteomalacia.' Much credit is due also to Dr Morselli, of
Florence, for his article entitled 'Fractures of the Ribs, and a Peculiar
Form of Osteomalacia in the Insane.' Let me add, however, that long
years before, or anterior to either one of the several gentlemen named in
your editorial of August 19th, 1876, I had written thus, in 1857: 'One
word more; osteomalacia may be confined to one or more bones, or even
to a portion only of the same bone. In the examination of patients who
have died insane?inmates of the Middlesex Asylums at Hanwell and
Colney Hatch?I have met with six examples of this affection of the
skeleton : the greater number of the patients alluded to were afflicted with
general paralysis. An interesting fact this, and one which bears me out in
the views here taken of both osteomalacia and of this specific form of
paralysis so common to the alienated.' (See my Ganglionic Nervous System,
chap. iii. ' Pathology,' p. 265.) It was in 1842 that I detected, at the
Hanwell Asylum, the existence of osteomalacia in those dying insane.
Furthermore, in the Medical Times, No. 170, vol. vii. p. 195, et seq. (1842),
is seen recorded by me a highly interesting example of the co-existence of
osteomalacia and insanity in a female patient who died under my care at
Hanwell, in whom six spontaneous fractures of the long bones?femur,
humerus, and so on?were found postmortem. In this case I have described
the skeleton as ' converted, in great part, into a dark semi-calcareous
grumous matter.'
" Under the circumstances, then, you will, I trust, afford me this op-
portunity to make a prior claim?one of no less than twenty-eight years'
standing?to the recognition of a ' condition of the bones of the insane,' of
so much importance both to the jurist and pathologist.?I am, sir, your
obedient servant,
" James George Davey, M.D., M.R.C.P. Lond., etc.
" 4 Redland Park Villas, Bristol, August 19th, 1876."
