On the Natural History of Crime
================================

135 Art. XI?

Address of Professor MOBIZ BENEDICT, delivered at the Meeting of the Juridical Society
of Vienna, December 28, 1875.

When medical men and lawyers, in the exercise of tlieir
professions, come into relation with one another, the contact is
generally unpleasant. The lawyer has a great bias to positivism,
and wishes to pour all acquired knowledge into legal decisions
and definitions. The medical man, on the other hand, looks
on his knowlege as a mass of crystal, to which, in the course of
progress, new parts are continually added, and from which old
ones are washed away.

The lawyer stands on an artificially-secured foundation?
the medical man, generally, on a tottering base. I must admit
that many a medical man staggers more than corresponds to
the tottering base: 011 the one hand, perhaps, on account of his
imperfect positive knowledge in special cases, and on the other,
because he often mistakes the point of view presented to him.

You must also, however, admit with me, that the lawyer
generally endeavours to insist too .strongly that nature should
bow beneath the caudine yoke of his definitions.

The most important point of contact of the two kinds of
discipline is judicial psychology, and it is exactly here that a
chasm of leading convictions yawns before us, which is very
difficult to fill up. Explanation is easy with the intellectual
leaders of jurisprudence; but the mass of lawyers stand on the
foundation of a view of things which is growing old and of a
system of nature which is full of tendencies. Tlieir ideas, never-
theless, are primitive. They reckon with the ideas of instinct
and reason in the old sense, which are indeed officially received,
but have long been rejected as untenable by exact science. The
naturalist looks through the glasses of an approaching aspect
of the world, which shows man and his relations to external
objects in the light of natural laws. If he speaks of psychical
freedom, he understands by the term the multiplicity of psy-
chical tendencies on the basis of numerous modifying factors
in the track of natural laws.

A harmonious union is only to be expected when the ex-
periences and the methods of both directions are traversed by
all persons. Then there can be no doubt that, in spite of the
proximity in point of space and time between much in us and
much in them, there is a thousand years between us.

The naturalist resolves the psychological complicated
equations into their elements, and endeavours to establish the
laws of psychological treatment "without allowing himself to
be influenced and led astray by the last metaphysical questions,
just as the natural philosopher studies the laws of motion with-
out troubling himself about the metaphysics of force. We
employ here the physiologico-anatomical language, as it
arises from the structure and function of the psychical organ.
With this natural instrument, however, it is much easier to re-
solve the equations of Nature, and to make them intelligible.
For us naturalists there is no doubt that man is the highest
summit of the animal kingdom, and not merely in a purely
anatomical sense, but also in a physiological and in a further
physiological?namely, a psychological sense. We have no
doubt that man in his psychological relations does not merely
reach this summit in a partial development, but that all the
psychological elements of the animal kingdom are present in
man, and occupy, qualitatively and quantitatively, the highest
grade of development. Hence we come to the manifold
mixtures of character, as they denote races, breeds, members of
certain epochs and of social relationships; and again, within
these great groups, also special groups. Who does not recog-
nise in the peacock spreading his feathers, and in the winding
serpent, in the lion and the fox, in the bee and the farm-
horse, in the bull and the tiger, the types of human characteris-
tics, as if they were exercises of nature for human types ?
Science however knows, on the other hand, with what
wonderful consequences, even into their minutest forms, the
general idea of genus, species, and individual corresponds to
the construction of the animal body. Even from single teeth,
and often from the smallest bones, the zoologist distinguishes
the genus and the species in prehistoric animals, and not only
their external form, but also their food, their mode of life, and
the, climate and the nature of the soil from the foundation of
time. He is able also, however, from these single elements to
pronounce upon the character of the animal?whether it was a
hammer or an anvil in creation, a robber or a gatherer, blood-
thirsty or gentle?whether it preserved its existence by superior
force in attack or in defence, or by stratagem, rapidity, or
invisibility.

With what extraordinary singleness of purpose nature pre-
serves the whole in the part is shown by those two cells which
represent the existence and the peculiarity of the individual. The
whole historical work of development represented in the indi-
vidual and all the work of the individual are given back in the
seed-thread, spermatozoon (Samenfaden). It gives back all
the peculiarities of the whole of the organs to the very
minutest varieties, and where the seed was only in proportion
to the fruit, the father and the ancestors are recognised again
in the son. So does the egg represent in all their
varieties the mother and her ancestors, and also in this circum-
stance, that as the elements of the one or the other cell
predominate in the fruit, so is all the former history of the
whole race expressed. We have in these two cells to deal with
original elements, which neither microscopy nor micro-chemistry
can reach in any way, since science is not able to individualise
seed and egg. Here two important remarks may be made.

We know that every brute and human individual, from the
moment of the fecundation of the egg to its full development,
undergoes a series of phases corresponding to the historical
development of tribe and species. But it may partially stand
still at a certain stage, and then we have to deal with a relapse
into an earlier historical or peculiar stage of development.

Further, we see every organism in a lower stage of develop-
ment to be in harmonious formation, notwithstanding the
incompleteness of its organisation. We do not call the sucking
child idiotic, although it possesses fewer ideas than the dullest
idiot: we do not consider it to be paralysed, although it has
fewer movements at its command than in the far-advanced
general paralysis of a grown-up person. Lastly, we do not call
it wicked, although it has no moral ideas and sentiments. It
presents an incomplete model of a regularly-working organic
machine.

If certain parts fall short of their further development,
then a machine exists which works harmoniously, but perhaps
in a contrary way to that for which it was designed, or it acts
only in this way under unfavourable circumstances.

Such a development represents a deviation of being (Abartung),
in contrast to derangement of mind, which represents a degenera-
tion of being (Entartung). For the first condition the term
given by the French clinicists is appropriate, viz.Diathese?i.e.
another kind of physiological being.

But to those zoologico-anthropological elements, from the
division of which into parts we are able to draw remarkable
conclusions as to the construction and the existence of the
animal, belongs the skull, from the formation of which we are
able (with the assistance of other known elements) to draw the
safest conclusions as to the psychological character of its
possessor.

In every race we observe numerous psychological varieties,
which again may be combined into types. If we look round
within the most strongly marked circle of individualism,
namely, within one and tlie same nation, we find again every-
where the typical varieties. Within the German nation the
Rhinelander and the German-Austrian represent the colouring
of being and of appearing, the more clear sense of the actual,
as well in grasping ideas as in giving them back again; and
therein they approach the Roman type, while the temperate
North-French Protestant runs parallel with doctrinaire Ger-
manism. Just so is it with races. How many men, and among
them the ornaments of cultivated times, represent the psycho-
physical, passively-enduring woman??I name only Christ,
Fiesole, Grillparzer?and how many a woman wears the psycho-
physical trousers ?

There is an hypothesis, probable in the highest degree, that
the observed typical varieties of the skull coincide with different
psychological varieties. The danger is great?and it will only
be reduced to a minimum in the course of centuries?of making
too hasty deductions as to the connexion of the formation of
the skull with the type of character. Yet this is no isolated
fact. Everywhere science goes on tacking towards the goal of
truth, sometimes straying on one side, sometimes on another,
from the straight path.

The excursions sideways are becoming always smaller. To
the objects aimed at by mankind, among which mental develop-
ment plays the chief part, that one is chiefly opposed which, on
account of possible errors, obstructs exertion. This adaptation
of parallel facts of varieties of character and of skulls is a
problem to be solved, but it is one forbidden by facts.

I show you here some specimens of skulls of races from the
collection of this University. You see in the skull of the
Chinese, the Italian, the German-Austrian, and the Moor, types
which are as different as the psychological types of these races.
I also bring under your notice, while I am showing some other
skulls, some varieties of skull-formation which, as I shall show
you, play a great part in the natural history of crime.

If, in the normal skull, in a straight line from before back-
wards, the distance is measured from the fossa behind the
auditory foramen to the most posterior eminence of the occiput,
it will be found to amount to two-fifths and more of the straight
line drawn from before backwards, in the middle line between
the forehead and the summit of the occiput (the sagittal
diameter). I show you now that in other skulls this is not the
case, inasmuch as the first line reaches one-tliird or one-fourth,
or less, of the second. I call this " Brachycephalia occipitalis."
In the second place, I show you that the difference in
height between the highest point of the forehead and the crown
of the head is but small (1^ centimeter). In many skulls the
NATURAL HISTORY OF CRIME. JLo'J
difference is considerable (as much as 7 centimeters), and this
proportion I call " anterior vertex-steepness " (Scheitelsteilheit).
A further variety is the asymmetry of the two halves of the
skull, and, lastly, please to observe the form of the posterior
surface; it is in certain skulls very flat, while in others this
occipital flatness is wanting.

The naturalist constructs for himself, moreover, Man out of
the experiments of Nature. He sees the sketches for,the present
Man in the animal world of the present and of the past, in
original man, and in the developing man of the historical
epoch. His physiological experiments on brutes and his patho-
logical experiences enable him to eliminate much that the
non-naturalist considers necessary to the highest activity of
mental life. Experiment in the last ten years has shown,
for instance, that much action and inaction in man and
brutes are not necessarily connected with the elements of con-
sciousness, on which they were considered to be dependent.
If, in some animal, the bearers of consciousness, namely
the cerebral hemispheres, are divided, an equally important
mechanism remains, which in former times would have been
regarded as a mystic piece of witchcraft. A frog so treated
swims when placed in the water; it leaps on the solid ground,
and makes intentional movements of clinging when it comes
from the water to the edge of the bank. A bird treated in the
same way flies when thrown into the air, clings firmly when
placed on a ledge, and runs on smooth ground. So we see that
the purpose of the mode of action may be present without
consciousness.

There are epileptic and cataleptic states in which such
combined actions may take place without any consciousness,
or with a little remnant of it, and such states are also
observed in severe injuries of the brain. There is no longer
any doubt, in the present day, that the surface of the brain
represents the organ of special mental activity; that from it
the movements are directed in such a succession as corresponds
to the current of the ideas and feelings; and that the form of
the surface, independently of any metaphysical views as to cer-
tain physiological properties of the constituents, represents the
framework in which, up to a high degree a priori, the mental
and the sensitive life of man and his actions are confined. It
is, indeed, indubitable that in all directions the boundaries are
established, and that in relation to them the statement is true,
" Man cannot alter himself, but can only develope himself."

On the surface of the brain are seen the convolutions, which
are divided by fissures. In the development of the human brain
this system of fissures is complicated by the fact that the coming
cerebral convolutions grow out from the deep parts. While in
the brain of brutes the appearance and the completion of
certain fissures is a mark of progress, because these are the ex-
pressions of newly-appearing or further-completed parts of the
brain, the prominence and the preponderance of the fissures in
man forms a sign of arrested development. For this condition
arises from the circumstance that certain convolutions remain
stationary in the deep parts, and are therefore not arrived at
their full development, or have not developed themselves. It
would be going too far to give details to non-medical hearers.
I will only mention at present that I have observed this condi-
tion of arrested development in the criminal brains I have
examined. Another important relation exists between the pos-
terior cerebral lobes and the cerebellum. In the two ape brains
(Chimpanzee and Baboon), which I here show you, and which
do not belong to the highest of the ape series, you see the cere-
bellum almost completely covered by the occipital lobes, while
you see the cerebellum in the sheep completely naked. In
developed man no example has been known, up to the present
time, where this covering of the cerebellum by the occipital
lobes was wanting, while in three brains of murderers this
deficiency existed, and in the fourth an equivalent abnormal
condition was observed. You see also that the occipital
lobes in the normal brain, which I show you, do not stand
much higher than the other parts of the inferior surface of the
brain, while you see here, in the photographs of murderers'
brains, that in them the posterior part of the lower surface
rises up steeply and so the occipital lobe loses remarkably
in size.

On this'Surface of the brain the significance of the smaller
portions is not yet sufficiently determined. Still, it is already
an acquisition of science in the present day that the most
anterior part of the brain is the seat of the life of ideas (Vor-
stellungsleben), the middle part the seat of psychical action
in a motor sense, and the most posterior part is the seat of
the sensations and feelings. The doctrine of the localisation of
the psychical elements on the cerebral surface, rejected a short
time since on the ground of prejudices and false experiments
by most persons, is now an incontestable fact of exact science.
This fact cannot be handled by the ignorant, because, in order
to appreciate it, the most apparently simple psychological pro-
ceedings must be decomposed into their elements. I will make
this clear to you by a simple example. A few decennia ago,
speech was regarded as something placed ready in man by Nature,
and even the comparative study of language was unable alto-
gether to solve the psychological riddle of speech. Pathology
has taught us that there are cases in which speech may be lost
almost independently of all other disturbances. Hitherto, in
consequence of false psychological analysis, an attempt has been
made to assign a definite and simple cause for speech. Nature,
who makes no concession to theoretical convenience, showed
different causes. I determined this controversy some years
ago by a strict analysis of the idea of speech, in showing that
the idea, speech, was built up from different elements, which
again must be localised in different parts of the brain.

Since there is a connection between the centres of sensation and
volition, and certain nerves of the organs of articulation (the
tongue and the muscles of the larynx), there came the original
elements of speech?namely, cries and single syllables, as in the
child. The perception of the second individuals who hear these
sounds, and who hence recognised the simplest forms of volition,
must have led to the attempt to retain such articulate sounds as
means of intelligence, and, when once an instrument is known
as being useful for a definite purpose, man endeavours to apply
and to improve it for all suitable objects. The individual
receives the gift of his speech through hearing and reading,
and therefore by complicated sensations of sound and sight,
which remain in his brain as forms of memory. These forms
of memory, or ideas of speech (Sprachvorstellungen), may,
however, remain in another part of the brain, as the highest
incitement to the articulate movements of the tongue, the vocal
chords, &c. The ideas themselves are constructed out of other
elements of sensation, and then enter into combination with the
ideas of speech. In one series of cases, therefore, the ideas may
be deficient, in another the centres of the ideas of speech, or
the centres of the movements of articulation. Clinical facts
correspond to this analysis, and it is found that this mental
activity of speech may have, and actually has, different centres
on the cerebral surface, and especially in the brain itself. The
same, however, is the case in most of the psychical functions.
Every act is composed of ideas, of urging or restraining feel-
ings of pleasure or of discomfort, and of motor impulses. It
therefore contains different factors and different centres on the
cortical part of the brain. It must, therefore, henceforth be
regarded as altogether erroneous to attribute a complicated
mental effort always to one or another factor, and to make a
distinct part of the brain alone responsible. One factor may
incite to a certain kind of action, but in another lies the
check to its performance, or such a positive preponderance that
the result of the activity projected outwardly has a result which
is opposite to the first incitement.

In order, therefore, to analyse the mode of action in a man,
and therefore also in criminals, it is not alone the product
which should be known, but an analysis of each of the factors
must precede and "be strictly weighed, to find whether some
are not wanting, or are of doubtful value, and whether the
counteracting influences of a counterbalance are thereby re-
moved, or the latter exhibit an unusual development.

Jurisprudence has, as yet, in theory not taken a full account
of these relations; and in practice, namely in legislation,
matters are incomparably worse.

Let me now glance at the psychology of crime. Considera-
tions on this subject must be pointed in two directions, namely:
1. In regard to the prominent positive or negative charac-
teristic features in the several categories of crime; and 2. In
regard to the psychological unity of crime. For on this point
there can be no doubt, namely, that the same criminal propen-
sity which in one individual leads to a criminal act, in
another is neutralised by the counterpoise of the other factors ;
and that under definite political, social, national, and closer
relations the same propensity breaks out, which in the same
individual constitution under other conditions would have
remained latent. I will here adduce some characteristic features
in general, which may especially give occasion for the commis-
sion of crime.

One of these is a fancy for virtuosoship ( Virtuositatskitzel),
which plays a great part with the forgers of bank-notes, and
with pickpockets and burglars. I scarcely need assert that
the same tendency in an intellectually and morally gifted
person might give rise to many follies and absurdities, but
would not necessarily pervert the whole conditions of
existence.

A second characteristic feature, which becomes the psycho-
logical foundation of many categories of crime, is a relapse
of human nature into nomadism. Such men cannot continue
in one place and in a confined space, and a moderate activity is
to them for any long time impossible. Change of place, neigh-
bourhood, and occupation is for them such an urgent impulse
that they cannot resist it. Mountainous countries and great plains
especially predispose to this restlessness. This characteristic
feature plays an important part in the psychology of vagrancy,
of vagabond thieves, of robbery, of poachers and smugglers.
In well-constituted men this restlessness leads to wandering,
to change of business and enterprise, and to fondness for
travelling, and the speciality of bold travellers springs from
high intellect and great energy. This very characteristic may
be the reason why normally organised men step forth out of
everyday life and perform actions which are universally
advantageous.

Another basis of crime is formed by dislike of work, and
may be the result of a bad education, but may be developed
in a psychological form in individuals in whom corporeal exer-
tion does not create a certain feeling- of pleasure, but causes
unpleasant sensations, which they can overcome only under
certain circumstances of compulsion. This peculiarity may
also be developed in a high degree without becoming the basis
of crime, if work is not the essential condition of active
existence. In connection with the dislike of work, the love of
enjoyment is a powerful incitement to crime, because, on the
one hand, means of living out-of-doors are wanting, and, on the
other, together with the love of enjoyment, the motor and men-
tal energy is not present to procure the means of living and
of enjoyment. Both impulses lead especially to crime when
that ethic constitution or development is wanting which is
necessary to the foundation of a powerful feeling of what is
right. A further fundamental element, which stands in psycho-
physical contrast to dislike of work, is an excessive physical
consciousness of strength, which leads to arrogance, and there-
by to the pleasure of misusing strength against the weak.
This impulse leads to the love of bullying, cruelty, and man-
slaughter, if a higher intellect is absent which should turn the
feeling of strength in a right direction, and there is also absent
a complete ethical consciousness which should prevent misuse of
power.

I will here allude to an impulse which is of great sig-
nificance in the' psychology of crime. We observe in several
states of disease a peculiar type, which consists in the fact that
attacks of illness of more or less short duration alternate with
more or less long, and generally for a time preponderant, healthy
intermissions.

We can designate all these pathological states in a broader
sense as epileptiform. In the domain of vices we are met
by that peculiar alteration of different conditions of tension
in the central nervous system, called " quarterly intoxication "
(Quartalrausch)?i.e. a temporary dipsomania returning with a
certain regularity. The same thing is observed in criminals:
for instance, in habitual thieves, Avho, being temporarily
seized with the deepest remorse, are fortified with the best
resolutions. They behave for a time in a most exemplary
manner until they relapse again, and indeed, as they unani-
mously express themselves, from an irresistible impulse. I
would designate this state, which is of great importance to the
practical doctrine of criminal punishment, by the expression
" moral epilepsy."'

Now let us turn to the psychology of special crimes, and
we shall see that the peculiar appropriate impulse to their com-
mission, and the form of the whole psychological product is
exceedingly different in its composition of factors. One of
the most important impulses in the psychology of crime is the
very deficient development of the sentimental life in particular,
and, together with this, of the sentiment of rectitude. Thence
it happens that so many criminals are never penetrated by a
feeling of their guilt or very evidently show repentance.
They may perhaps feel and dread the material consequences of
crime but they are deficient in the feeling of moral guilt.
This ethical weakness, as we have said, may be congenital, or
may arise from deficient education.

Now let us examine specially the case of murder. The
celebrated work of Holtzendorff is known to you all and I need
not analyse it in detail.

I will therefore only state how manifold is the group of
motives from an ethical and psychological point of view, which
leads to premeditated murder, and we may even maintain that
many murderous deeds are committed in certain circumstances
only by better-constituted natures, while the crime in selfish
and lower natures under similar circumstances is not com-
mitted.

To this category belong murders from wounded honour
and within it are also included many murderous acts committed
under certain circumstances of cultivated and social life, which
are impossible under other conditions. For instance, there
exist in countries with feudal institutions many murderers and
robbers from motives of wounded honour, because the lower
orders and the poor find no protection in the law. We must
state that those are just the noblest natures who revolt because
they and their neighbourhood are injured in their honour and
their lawful existence by arbitrary cruelty. The bondslave
and outcast who quietly looks on while his sisters and his
wife are being defiled?who scarcely feels any anger or is
very quiet when his old father is punished with cruel severity,
stands ethically in a much lower position than he who takes a
gun in his hand, and in the name of justice organises his
private revolt against lawless society. With a righteous instinct
the lower class beholds in such districts its national heroes in
its robbers. The ethical inferiority is here in the predominant
and law-giving classes. To this category also belong partly
the murderous deeds from religious or political fanaticism
which generally involve a complete abandonment of the most
vital individual interests in favour of an idea.

In ordinary robber-murder attended with violence, criminal
covetousness is the first impulse?i.e., the struggle to obtain
unlawfully the possession ol the means of existence or of
enjoyment. In such a criminal the consciousness must be
more or less clear that he cannot obtain for himself those means
by his own physical or mental labour, or lie has no pleasure
in such labour. In the professional robber there are usually
added the arrogant feeling of strength and its terrible conse-
quences, or the pleasurable feeling of surpassing cunning, and
further perhaps the nomadic tendency, and. moreover want of
conscience or ethical idiocy.

Covetousness, ethical weakness of mind, pleasure in the
imaginary or actual conviction of obtaining the desired means
of existence by work when mental or bodily power is deficient,
or the dislike of taking this power any longer into account?
such are the factors out of which the psychological product of
assassination for the love of gain is composed.

Violence of temperament, continuance of a strongly excited
dislike, overweening feeling of power and of pleasure in exer-
cising strength over relative weakness of intellect and of ethical
development, form the psychological basis of rough man-
slaughter, as well as of murder from revenge with slight
motives.

The psychology of theft is not simple. Shakespeare has
with his artistic excellence pictured to us the common thief in
Bardolpli. Excessive pleasure in revelling and disgust for
work form the peculiar basis of the common thievish nature.
These are the impulses which cause the consciousness of the
balance between meum and tuum to be disturbed and finally
to disappear altogether. That such a thievish nature, when it
acquires wealth, does not develope itself is clear, for whoever
has the means of revelling and wants nothing to work for has
no need to be a thief. Besides, there comes in the burglar as
well as in the pickpocket the love of virtuosoship ( Virtuositats-
Icitzel), and in the former there is the jileasure in conspiracy.
In the category of thieves relapse is very common. In boldness
the horse-stealer stands next to the robber.

In habitual thieves moral epilepsy is observed in its most
striking form.

The kleptomania of hysterical persons is worthy of observation,
in whom there ? is an impulse to possess everything without
making use of it.

According to what has been stated, the whole psychological
I is affected in the thief, but the ethical and the motor I and the
intellectual in a more limited sense. For it needs hardly be as-
serted that in a developed intellect a thief rarely exists. For with
the same psychological material also, a thief rarely appears
under high mental conditions, but a deceiver. Stealing is too
bad a business for a continuance.

I will mention one more type, the bank-note forger. He is
distinguished by extraordinary but passive cleverness. He shows
himself very clever in all kinds of execution, but he wants con-
ception and he wants the developed feeling of honour. Pleasure
in his cleverness, and the facility of gaining his living by it,
excite him continually to the free exercise of his art, and the
special bank-note forger belongs to that type of criminals who
very generally relapse. The same prominent characteristic
feature of motive ingenuity will protect a man from the path of
crime, if he has the talent of conception and the spirit of
origination, or if a developed ethical talent is present in his
disposition.

The knowledge of the complicated nature of the psychology
of crimes is, however, extraordinarily important in the question of
the degree of punishment to be awarded, and of the possibility
of amendment. When anyone with a fierce temperament and,
an arrogant consciousness of strength has been mentally ill-
developed, has learned only the roughest hand-labour, and lias
not been educated in morals, he may become a useful member of
human society if his intellect and his cleverness are developed
and the slumbering better feelings are awakened. Then is the
individual further developed and the restraints which were
formerly wanting may now come into activity. When the con-
ditions are of this nature that from the impulses leading to
crime there is no dissuasion, and to those restraining from it
there is no persuasion, there is no chance of improvement and
legislative punishment must always become stronger and stronger
for habitual criminals. There is then no advantage in setting
such a criminal free, for he will again commit crime. Further,
it should be carefully considered whether exemplary conduct
insures the probability of improvement. Under psychico-
material restraint criminal nature acts differently from what it
does under the enticements of freedom.

If we now make an inquiry on the ground of these empirical
experiences and their analysis, in order to find whether, in a
certain percentage of certain grades and categories of crimes,
certain changes cannot be detected in the brain or the skull, we
shall find that we do not need to seek, as the old doctrine of
Grail attempted to do, for the foundation of crime in altogether
local developmental alterations, but that excesses and defects of
constitution and development must be present in the three great
centres of ideas, of motion, and of sensation.

But it must besides be declared, that even if it were ascer-
tained that characteristic changes are present in criminal natures,
it should not thence be assumed that men so constituted must
necessarily commit crime. The question here is only as to
a predisposition, j ust as we say that people with a narrow chest
have a predisposition to tuberculosis, or children of insane
parents have a predisposition to insanity. It must always depend
on a number of conditions whether a nature predisposed to
crime will actually become a criminal, and the clearer we are as
to the psychological and anthropological marks by which the
disposition may be revealed, the more surely shall we prevent
crime by education and watchfulness.

The question now arises as to the way we ought to take in
order to meet the predisposition with remedies drawn from
natural science ? Above all things, it is obvious that numerous
brains of criminals must be examined, in order to see whether
in certain categories special corresponding alterations are to be
found. That the first four examinations in murderers have led
to positive results was an encouraging circumstance, and that
these examinations exhibited a resemblance to the brute in the
fact that the cerebellum was not covered by the occipital lobes,
and that there was a deficient development, is in the highest
degree significant.

A second series of investigations by the aid of natural
science must be made on the skull. That types of skull are
generally connected with types of character may be concluded
with safety from the results of craniology in the animal
classes and from the study of the skulls of different
races.

I have formerly brought before you some varieties of
proportion in the human skull, and I now communicate to
you the fact that these varieties exist also in men outside the
prisons, but are incomparably more common in criminals, and
partially in special categories of criminals. This is especially
the case in the shortening of the occiput and in the anterior
vertex-steepness (Scheitelsteilheit), and then, in decreasing pro-
gression in the asymmetry and the flattening of the occiput. I will
observe further that I did not note the vertex-steepness in the
murderers at Illava, because at that time the fact had not yet
particularly occurred to me. I observed it first in the habitual
thieves in Leopoldstadt. Besides, in Illava it was not striking,
and you observe it also in none of the photographs of the heads
of murderers, for which I am indebted, as well as for the
greatest part of my present materials, to Dr Bodik, the prison
physician.

I will now present you with tlie numerical results
Bobber-
murderers
Murderers
from
motives
Thieves
Normal
skulls
(?) Brachycephalia occipitalis?
"Wanting .
Medium .
Great
(b) Occipital flatness??
Wanting .
Medium .
"Well-marked
(c) Asymmetry?
Wanting .
Medium .
Great
(d) Vertex steepness?
Wanting .
Medium .
Large
per cent.
23
34
43
16
24
59
10
64
26
not
examined
per cent.
45
21
34
28
20
52
25
43
32
not
examined
per cent.
60
20
20
49
22-5
28-5
10
47
43
40
60
per cent.
93-5
4-5
2-0
58
30
12
62
25
13
85-2
14-8

These figures do not speak?they cry aloud. They are,
indeed, deficient in the fact that they are not derived from great
numbers, but still they are sufficient to form the basis of a
qualitative judgment.

A double explanation may be possible : first, that crimes
signify only the germs arrived at maturity, while the germ up to
a certain degree is widely spread. Crimes, therefore, would be
merely the most urgent stages in ethical national guilt.
But wherever abnormities occur in a high degree and in
combination, there' exists a relapse into an earlier stage of the
development of mankind, and the examinations of the brains
support this view.

It appears to me indubitable that both these views are con-
nected together, and that in particular the number of those
capable of improvement is to be judged according to the first,
and the incurable according to the second category. The latter
represent the proper criminal natures and they bear about on
their skulls the marks of Cain.

Gentlemen, I should have waited till I could come before
you with results free from fallacy, had I not required your
assistance in carrying them out. It is a prerogative of the
German nation to uphold scientific tendencies even without
sympathising with them, and indeed sometimes to promote
those which are distasteful; and the German-Austrian states-
men and scholars cannot better prove their title to be called
Germans tlian when they follow this example. For to be a
German in the present day is to work with the arms of truth
for mental and moral freedom, to contend, and in necessity to
endure. To perceive and to acknowledge, conviction and mode
of action ought to hang together not by tottering joinings but
by insoluble cement.

