The Physiological Laics of Human Increase
==========================================

REVIEWS.

By Nathan
Allen, M.D. of Lowell, Mass. Thiladeiphia : Collins, 705 Jane
Street.
This treatise is a reprint from the " Transactions of the American
Medical Association." In it Dr Allen enunciates what he terms a new
physiological law of human increase, which is based, he says, " upon a
PERFECT DEVELOPMENT OF ALL TIIE ORGANS IN THE HUMAN BODY, SO THAT
THERE SHALL BE A PERFECT HARMONY IN THE PERFORMANCE OF ALL THEIR
respective functions. It presupposes other conditions are favourable,
such as the age, union, and adaptation of the married parties?provided
no laws of nature are violated or interfered ivitli?that there will uni-
formly be found, with such a standard of organisation, not only the
greatest number of children, but they ivill be found endowed with the
highest amount of physical vigour, strength, and health.''''
If this laAv be confirmed by further researches, and verified by
experience, it is not possible to estimate its importance too highly.
That Dr Allen has strong grounds for his theory will be evident from
the following extracts from his valuable paper:?
" The theory, however, which Ave advocate has its base simply upon
that organisation of man which came perfect from the hands of his
Maker, and was pronounced very good; and when man was commanded
to ' be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it.'
But he, by his course of disobedience and rebellion, lost not only the
moral image and likeness of his Creator, but that harmony and per-
fection in his physical organisation, which he has never yet regained.
" A distinguished writer upon Anthropology makes this curious
remark : ' As giants and dwarfs are rarely prolific, so men of prodi-
giously large or small intellectual powers may be expected to be deficient
in fertility.' Both these statements are undoubtedly true, and find a
rational explanation by means of this law; but upon what other
hypothesis can such phenomena be accounted for, or the following facts
be explained ? It is the opinion of some leading writers upon Insanity
that the insane, as a class, are not prolific, and if left to intermarry
among themselves, they would soon run out. The same remark, we
believe, will hold good when applied to the blind as a class; also to
the deaf and dumb, and the idiotic. There may be found among
these classes cases where individual families are respectable in size,
but they are exceptions to the general rule. All these classes, we be-
lieve, should they marry exclusively among themselves, if they did not
run out in the course of a few generations, will not multiply to any
great extent. It would seem as though Infinite Wisdom had devised in
some way that all such abnormal characters should not long, or upon a
166 CHRISTIAN PSYCHOLOGY.
large scale, be propagated, but that they must, by the very conditions
of their existence, tend to extinction."
The next extract gives a melancholy account of the physical con-
dition of American women. We fear his observations are equally
applicable to our own countrywomen, especially in London :?
" But there is another point of observation which is more tangible
and conclusive in its evidence. If the conformation of Avoman Avere
Avhat it should be for the best propagation of the species, it presup-
poses her ability to furnish a suitable supply of Avholesome nutriment
for her offspring. This Avas the case Avith nearly all the first settlers
in our country, and is very generally so now Avith the German, the
English, the Scotch, and the Irish Avomen. But Avhat a contrast in
this respect is presented by our native American Avomen?especially in
New England ! It is thought by some very competent observers that
more than one-half of our American Avomen are obliged to resort to
the bottle for nursing their offspring, and the number of this class is
every year increasing. In most of these cases it is not a matter of
choice, but of necessity. There is a great deficiency in the vital tem-
perament ; and the mammary glands are found very small, and in some
instances almost entirely wanting. Besides, in all these cases the ner-
vous temperament is altogether too predominant and too active, so
much so as to require an undue proportion of the nutrition of the
body. It is certain that the physical development of all these cases
differs verv materially from the physiological standard upon Avhich the
true laAv of increase is based. In confirmation of our statement respect-
ing the large number of Avomen unable to nurse their offspring, Ave here
present the answer to an inquiry made of a manufacturer of a neAV
and high-priced nursing-bottle, avIio in such a matter Avas a most com-
petent judge: his sales for the last year, he replied, amounted to lJive
hundred gross,' and in his judgment the sale of nursing-bottles in the
United States must amount yearly to not less than 'jifty thousand
f/ross.'1 What a contrast do these facts present in the sale and use of
this article, as compared Avith the same fifty or one hundred years
ago, Avhen nursing-bottles Avere but little knoAvn ! Do not such facts
argue some change not only in the disposition but in the physical
organisation of woman ? "
We recommend the Avliole of this treatise for careful perusal; it Avill
be found of equal interest to the medical philosopher and the political
economist.
