Psychological Retrospect
=========================

It is with extreme regret that we record the death of Mr. John
Forster, one of the Honorary Commissioners in Lunacy. For many
years he acted as one of the Visiting Commissioners, fulfilling the
duties of his office in the most able manner, and winning the esteem
and respect of all those who were fortunate enough to know him
intimately.
A few years ago he resigned, in consequence of failing health, the
post of Visiting Commissioner, and continued to devote his energies to
the less arduous duties of Honorary Commissioner; this enabled him
to employ his spare time in literary pursuits, and his two last works,
the " Life of Charles Dickens " and the " Life of Dean Swift," will of
themselves show what a loss the literary world has sustained in his
death, and they will remain as standard English works on biography.
We announce with great satisfaction the appointment of Dr Crichton
Browne to the office of Lord Chancellor's Visitor of Lunatics, vacated
by Dr Bucknill in consequence of illness.
Dr Crichton Browne is the son of Dr Browne, of Crindan, Dum-
fries, formerly one of the Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland, and
one of our greatest living authorities in lunacy. For many years he
superintended most efficiently the West Hiding Asylum, Wakefield,
Yorkshire, and inaugurated the " West Hiding Asylum Re orts,"
which, under his editorial baton, has become an important w rk on
insanity in England.
All those who have had an opportunity of studying under hif careful
tuition in the clinical wards of the asylum, or in the post-mortem room,
bear testimony to the great benefit they have derived from his valuable
assistance. By his resignation of the post of Superintendent, the
patients lose a kind and skilful physician, and the students a friend
whom it will not be easy to replace. His valuable contributions to
psychological science are too well known to require comment; and
those who know him can bear ample testimony to that combination of
courtesy and business talent which eminently qualify him for the
responsibilities of his new office.
Suicide of a Civil Exgixeer.?Mr. Bedford held an inquest, at
Charing Cross Hospital, on the body of Mr. Thomas Biddle Lloyd, aged 48,
a civil engineer, of 0 Cecil Street, Strand, who was found in Northumber-
land Street, Strand, lying in the roadway, shot through the head. Mr.
PART I. VOL. II.?NEW SERIES. M
178 ROMANTIC SUICIDE OF A PAKSEE.
Jenkins, solicitor, watched tlie case on the part of the family of the
deceased. Mr. Henry John Lloyd, of Pontrilas, Hereford, said that the
deceased was his brother, whom he last saw alive some time ago. Deceased
had enjoyed good health until three years since, when he contracted a
dangerous fever in Spain, from which he had never thoroughly recovered,
his brain having become seriously affected thereby. He had not shown
any actual signs of insanity, and it was never contemplated that he would
raise his hand against his own life. Mr. John Marshall, of 10 Savile Ptow,
W., professor of surgery at the University College Hospital, said that he
had known deceased for very many years past, and had seen no decided
symptoms of insanity. The serious effects of the fever caught in Spain caused
his friends such alarm that witness, Mr. Dallas, and other gentlemen had
made arrangements for deceased to proceed to the South of France,
accompanied by a thoroughly qualified medical student, and the party were
to have started to-day. Witness had no doubt whatever that the mind of
deceased had become aflected by ill-health, which had driven him to take
his own life. By the Coroner: Had seen deceased whilst he lay in the
hospital, when, in answer to inquiries why he shot himself, he replied " I
could not help it." Dr Canton, senior surgeon at the Charing Cross Hospital,
said that the deceased had died from blood poisoning consequent upon the
wound. He had made a post-mortem examination, and found the bullet
firmly fixed in the bone of the skull. Mr. Marshall, recalled, said that
the deceased had been connected with a mining company in Newfoundland,
and his troubles with that company alone would be sufficient to drive him
out of his mind. He need not say more, for it was useless dragging private
matters before the public. The Coroner having summed up, the Jury
returned a verdict of suicide whilst of unsound mind.
Too many persons suffering from mental depression are recom-
mended to travel with students just fledged from an hospital. We are
here told that arrangements had been made for the deceased to travel
with a, fully qualified student ; this implies doubtless a fourth year's
student, one just completing his curriculum, and probably ignorant of
the rudiments of insanity. It would have been far better to have
placed the lunatic under proper supervision and treatment?especially as,
from the evidence given, he required it?rather than to allow him to
become another victim to suicidal insanity, induced by the inability of
his friends and acquaintances to realise his proper mental state.
Romantic Suicide of a Parser?Mr. J. 13. Edge, the district coroner,
held an inquest at Halliwell, near Bolton, on the body of Mr. Dorabjee
Horinusjee Dashai, a native of Bombay, who was found drowned in Brine
Hey reservoir, Halliwell. The deceased, who was 21 years of age, and had
been residing in Bolton about nine months for the purpose of acquiring a
knowledge of cotton spinning machinery, left the house of the gentleman
with whom he resided, a few days previous to the suicide, having for the
previous few days been apparently unwell. As he did not return, how-
ever, his friends became anxious, and inquiries were instituted on all
hands, but without success, until, as already intimated, his body was
found in the reservoir, and by its appearance it had evidently been in the
water some days. From information which has subsequently come to
light, it seems that on the day following that on which he left home he
went to Southport on a visit to a relative, and stayed there until Sunday,
the 26th ult., when he wrote the subjoined letter to a young lady in
Bolton to whom he had become attached :?
SUICIDE or A TURKISH BONDHOLDER. 179
" September 26,1875.
" My dear Nalie,?I Lope you will excuse me for taking liberty for
writing to you, but really I cannot help it, because I love you so much,
and you must truly believe me that I never came across a young lady more
lovely and more affectionate, like you, and I cannot forget you, and in my
remembrance, I have sent you a little present, that you must except 'it, and
jSalie do remember me after I dead and gone. You have longer time to
live yet, but my time is very short, the reason is 1 was so full of thought
about you that it drove me to this because I could not get a chance to
speak to you, and I inquired about you privately, that it was impossible
for me to have a chance, and therefore I could not rest, and it drove my
mind away altogether, and I could not help it, but I meet you there if I
don't see you here again. I hope you will be happy, but don't forget me,
because I sacrifice my heart to you, dear. I always dreamed about you;
I dont't think you hardly believed it, that how I loved you, my dear; but
I am at last disappointed. But never mind, it cannot be helped; but don't
forget me, because you are the only I loved. I don't think j^ou care much
about me, but I did. Remember me, my dear, remember me. I hope you
will be happy.?Yours truly, " Dorais. Dashai."
On the back was written, " Please don't show it to anybody." He returned
to Bolton the same evening, after writing the above, and was in the com-
pany of friends until half-past ten o'clock at night, and from that time,
with the exception of being noticed on the Monday forenoon going in the
direction of the reservoir, he was not seen alive. So determined was he
to put an end to himself, that he had fastened his hands behind him with
his handkerchief. The Jury returned a verdict of Temporary Insanity.
The evidence in this case appears most unsatisfactory, no medical
witnesses being called to testify as to his previous mental condition. It
is desirable in all cases of suicide where doubt appears to exist as
to the mental state of the deceased, that conclusive medical evidence
should be produced, proving in some way or other the condition of the
person.
Suicide of a Turkish: Bondholder.?Dr Ilardwicke, coroner for
Central Middlesex, held an inquest at the Angel Hotel, Islington, as to the
death of Mr. John Henry Miller, aged 09, a single gentleman, of 49a
Pentonville Road, who is stated to have committed suicide in consequence of
losses he has sustained as a Turkish bondholder. Miss Elizabeth Miller
said she was niece to the deceased, who was by profession an engraver, but
he had not followed it for some years, having property in the Funds and
otherwise. He had been ailing and in a desponding state for some time,
but more especially lately, on account of the repudiation of its liabilities by
Turkey, as he was a considerable holder of Turkish bonds. On Sunday morning
she was informed he had committed suicide. Mr. Philip King
Weston, surgeon, of 39 City Road, stated that he was sent for about half-
past ten o'clock on Sunday morning, and found deceased dead in bed. A
handkerchief was tied round his neck, and it had been twisted from right to
left by means of a razor strop acting as a lever, and inserted inside between
the handkerchief and the neck, with such force as not only to produce
strangulation, but to force blood from the nostrils. He was quite dead, and
he had no doubt committed the act himself. He had attended the deceased
from the 12th to the 23rd October, for debility, despondency, and sleepless-
ness. He did not see him after the latter date, but believed he had a
suicidal tendency, and therefore warned his friends not to have him left
alone. He had committed the act under the bedclothes. The landlord of
m 2 ?
180 SUICIDAL MANIA.
the house said deceased had resided with him 1G years. lie had been very-
much cast down of late, and especially since the recent news as to the affairs
of Turkey. During the last twelve months he had said he had more
troubles upon him than he could bear, and wished himself out of the world.
On Sunday, as he did not ring his bell as usual, witness's wife first went up, and
on knocking at his door and receiving no answer, he (the landlord) went up
and entered the bedroom, and seeing deceased dead, ran out and at once
sent for the doctor. The Jury returned a verdict to the effect that the
deceased committed suicide whilst in an unsound state of mind.
We here read of another lamentable suicide caused by the friends
?though warned by their medical attendant?refusing to use theproper
precautions. The evidence of the insanity is conclusive, and we can-
not exonerate his immediate acquaintances from a grave responsibility
in this case.
Distressing Suicide.?Dr ITardwicke. coroner for Central Middlesex,
held an inquest at the Duke of Hamilton Tavern, New End, Ilampstead, on
the body of Mr. Cecil Ashton Henry Beeclieno, aged 18, son of an estate
agent, of 77 Belmont Street, Camden Town, whose body was found in the
large pond in the Yale of Health, Ilampstead Heath, on Sunday morning
last. Deceased had been missing since the 27th of January last. He was
a well-conducted young man, of a religious turn of mind, and was in the
service of Messrs. Hachette, French publishers, of 18 King "William Street,
Strand, as a clerk or librarian, but had been anxious to enter the church.
He was a constant attendant at St. Saviour's, South Hampstead, and was
well acquainted with the Rev. J. C. Hose, the curate. When he left his
office on the evening he was missed, it was observed that he wished one boy
good night in a peculiar way, though he spoke to the other clerks in his
usual manner. Amongst the things found in the possession of the deceased
when his body was recovered was a letter addressed to the Rev. J. C.Hose,
bearing written directions that it was to be opened by no one but that
gentleman. That letter was produced in evidence, but not read to the Jury.
The Coroner, however, stated that in it deceased intimated his intention of
committing suicide, and desired certain things to be sent as mementoes to
various clergymen. Mr. Hose said that some of these clergymen were
almost perfect strangers to deceased. He (Mr. Hose) had received the
letter, and it showed that the mind of deceased was unhinged. Mr. Beecheno
said that in the letter his son accused himself of having been unkind to his
youngest brother, whereas he was one of the kindest of brothers. Deceased
was peculiar in regard to his food, and subsisted principally on bread and
butter. The Jury returned a verdict of suicide whilst suffering from
temporary insanity.
At Marylebone, a respectable-looking youth' appeared before' Mr.
D'Eyncourt and asked him to make an order for his admission to a good
lunatic asylum, as he had been going out of his mind for some time past.
His parents had brought him home from school last Christmas, .and since
then he had broken some articles. Mr. D'Eyncourt asked him what he had
broken, and if he had done it wilfully. He replied that he had broken a
china teapot and a mousetrap, but had not done it on purpose. He could
not hold anything, and he was not right in his mind. lie had been going
mad for some time. He had been working hard at school, and he was not
able to bear it. He had tried to study, but could not, so he was in the
habit of staring about the schoolroom instead of attending to his lessons.
He could not get on, and he was punished in" consequence. He had been
TREATMENT OF LUNATICS IN FRANCE. 181
at school at Ashby, in Leicestershire. Mr. D'Eyncourt aslced him how
old he was, and he said 21. This caused some astonishment, as he
appeared to be about 15 or 16. In answer to further questions he told the
magistrate his father was Richard Thompson, of Nottingham Place, Mary-
lebone, and although he was living with his father, he had not told him
of his intention to make this application. He had overworked himself at
school, and should be glad if he could be sent to a comfortable lunatic
asylum, as he did not wish to go back to his studies. Mr. D'Eyncourt
desired Mr. Stanley, the chief usher, to take the young man to his father's
house and make inquiries. Later in the day Mr. Stanley said that he had
taken the young man to the address he had given. His father said that
his son did not wish to go back to school, and his applying to the magis-
trate was a ruse. He made some curious statements, and told his father
that he wanted to be taken care of. Mr. D'Eyncourt made no comment,
and the matter then dropped.
The result of the above inquiry appears to us very unsatisfac-
tory. The boy doubtless feeling unwell, had informed his father
of his symptoms but with no effect, and as a dernier ressort lie had
sought the aid of a magistrate. It would have been advisable for the
magistrate to have insisted upon a proper mental examination of the boy
instead of simply taking the father's evidence as to his son's condition,
who was quite unfit to form a proper opinion. From a careful perusal
of all points of ibis case, we think that further and more indirect evi-
dence should have been taken. We do not go so far as to say the boy
was a lunatic, but there was no conclusive evidence to the contrary,
and in a case of such importance the greatest care should be bestowed
in demanding an examination from a qualified and efficient specialist.
Among the things which they do dot u manage better in France,"
lunatic asylums figure conspicuously. A few days ago a case was tried
before the Correctional Police which in England would have created a
storm of indignation throughout the length and breadth of the land, but
has passed here without attracting notice. A more atrocious instance of
unpunished murder it would be hard to find in the whole record of causes
celebres, and, indeed, it is difficult to say which is most scandalous, the
sentence passed by the judges, the defence offered in behalf of the culprits
by Dr Legrand du Saule, the superintendent of the asylum, or the crime
itself. The murdered man had been for a couple of years an inmate
of the Bicetre Asylum, and had grown from a harmless imbecile into a
raving maniac, and it may be surmised that this was due to the treatment
he received. In August last this unfortunate creature had a severe fit in
his cell, and kept making a noise at night. His three keepers rushed into
the cell, and as he was violent threw him down, knelt on his chest, and
trampled upon him. After this process the patient was " more quiet," and
the keepers were able to put a strait waistcoat upon him. In this strait
waistcoat he was found dead next morning. A post-mortem examination
disclosed the fact that thirteen of his ribs were broken, and the lungs per-
forated. Well, the case was reported to the authorities, and it was deter-
mined to prosecute them; but strangely enough it was decided not to try
them before a jury for murder or manslaughter, but before the Court of
Correctional Police for a " contravention," that is, a breach of the regula-
tions. Dr Legrand du Saule gave evidence in favour of his employes.
This evidence is sufficiently remarkable to be noticed in some detail. These
men, he said, were very hard worked, and they only received ten sous (i.e.,
182 HOMICIDAL MANIA.
fivepence) a day for their arduous work. There was a regulation, no doubt,
that the keepers should not go into the cell of a -violent lunatic, but then
there was danger in doing so, and they could not resist that temptation.
If they had?" ils rCauraient pas etc iranqais." There might have been
some little violence (thirteen ribs broken!), but it was vei'y difficult to deal
with such cases, and the accused were men for whose general character he
had the highest respect. The Court adopted M. Legrand du Saule's view
of the case, and let off these exemplary Frenchmen with lOOf. fine. Dr.
Decaisne, in the Univers Illustre, commenting on this atrocious case, points
out that the character of watchers, keepers, and attendants at lunatic
asylums is as bad as can be. But it is not to be wondered at, when you
look at their scale of pay. Superintendents, male and female, get 360f.
a year?less than tenpence a day; deputy superintendents 250f. (10/.)
a year, and infirmiers, i.e. the attendants, 800f. (12/.) a year; women in the
same capacity only get 10/. The chief vice is drunkenness, and I am
credibly informed that they are so eclectic as to their liquor that they even
make free with the alcohol used for anatomical preparations. It is evident
that abuses are going on in these establishments which would not be en-
dured in England for a single day after such an exposure as that of the
crime at Bicetre described above.
It is disgraceful that in a civilised land like France the authorities
should allow the murder of a lunatic to be perpetrated by two attend-
ants, by the fracture of thirteen ribs, under the penalty of a fine of
four pounds. The above description, taken from the Standard,
admirably describes the case, and we quote it as an instance of what
goes on at the present day in the public institutions in France, and with
a nominal penalty,
Horrible Tragedy at Montpelier, Sotjtii Africa.?Montpelier, yester-
day morning, became the scene of a horrible tragedy, when, at about 8 o'clock,
Mr. Auguste Titren, a well-known colonist residing at Montpelier, went into
the kitchen where his wife was preparing breakfast, and shot her in the
back. It appears that on entering the kitchen he told his wife (Mrs. Titren)
that he was going for a walk. Mrs. Titren requested him not to do so until
he had partaken of some brealsfast, Titren then is said to have fetched a
loaded gun, and entering the kitchen a second time, shot Mrs. Titren in the
back; she immediately fell down. Mrs. Smith, the mother of Mrs. Titren,
hearing the report of the gun, at once ran into the kitchen, and finding her
daughter on the floor, with blood running from the wound, screamed for
assistance, shouted murder, &c.: and although there was an adjoining house
in which some people resided, yet no assistance came. She was endeavour-
ing, as well as she could, to assist her daughter, and was stooping over her,
when Titren again returned in an excited state. Mrs. Smith endeavoured
to prevent him coming into the kitchen, but her eftorts were of no avail.
Succeeding in making his way into the kitchen he fired at Mrs. Titren
again, and killed her. While Mrs. Smith was stooping down he also fired at
her, and wounded her in the spine. By this time Mr. Sydney Turner and
Mr. Hoffmann, junr., arrived, and entering the house intended to secure
Titren, who immediately pointed his gun at them, when Hoffmann ran away;
but Mr. Turner, who brought a revolver with him, had, in self-defence, to
fire at Titren, who, in consequence, fell down mortally wounded, and died
shortly afterwards. These are all the particulars that have been ascertained
up to the present time. It is a most shocking affair, it being, however,
supposed tli at Titren committed the act in a temporary fit of insanity. Mrs.
Smith is to be brought to Durban for medical attendance, and hopes are
himself.
TIIE SHAKERS. 183
Mr. Turner's intention was
narrow escape from being killed
fortunately entertained of lier recovery. Mr. Turner's intention was
simply to disarm the deceased, and he had a
We have been favoured by a correspondent in Natal with the
above particulars. We quote it. as it will show the frightful atrocities
which a lunatic not under proper control and supervision may be
capable of.
Homicidal Insanity in America.?A horrible domestic tragedy is re-
ported from the interior of the State of New York. Harrison Andrews, a man of
50, and of violent and ungovernable temper, who lived at Venice, near Auburn,
early on the morning of September 12, went to the apartment where his
son, aged 19, was sleeping, and as he lay in bed gave him two murderous
blows on the head with a hatchet, crushing his skull and probably injuring
the brain. Andrews then aroused his two daughters, and shot one of them
through the abdomen, inflicting a severe wound. The girls escaped from
the house and alarmed the neighbours, and in the meantime Andrews poured
oil on the carpet, set fire to the house, and closed his terrible work by
shooting himself through the head. The neighbours came and extinguished
the fire before much damage was done, and the wounded son and daughter
were cared for. The former can scarcely recover. The motive for the deed
is unknown ; it seems to have been an insane freak.
This is another instance of the murderous propensities of lunatics.
The Shakers.?Extraordinary Scene.?An extraordinary scene,
amounting almost to a riot, took place at a meeting of the New Forest
Shakers, at Exeter. Mrs. Girling was accompanied by eight young women
and four men, and whilst she was in the midst of her address,, one of the
girls commenced to dance. This caused some excitement, as the dancing
was prolonged, and was pronounced by Mrs. Girling to be due to religious
influences. One of the audience got up and denounced the whole thing as
a blasphemous farce. This expression was loudly cheered. Mrs. Girling
invited anyone who wished to speak to come on the platform, and at last
one gentleman went there. At the same moment another girl commenced
to dance, and the excitement increased. The audience moved in a body to
the platform, and a large number scaled it. Indescribable confusion followed,
in the midst of which attempts were made to stop the girls, but they
resisted, one of them shouting, " I will rejoice," and " Touch not the Lord's
anointed." The male members of the community were remonstrated with for
permitting such an exhibition, but they expressed themselves powerless to stop
the dancing. The girls were at last forcibly stopped. Some one threatened to
give one of the male Shakers a thrashing, upon which he commenced to
dance, and the disturbance was only ended by the whole body of Shakers
being forcibly ejected from the platform.
We think it quite time that some interference should be made by
Government upon this infatuated community, and deal promptly with
them. If these are delusions, let the victims of them be placed in
asylums ; -if, on the other hand, the Shakers do this with intent of
making a disturbance, let them be dealt with by law; but that
such proceedings should be allowed in the nineteenth century un-
checked appears to us to be disgraceful.
184 NOVEL TREATMENT OF A HOMICIDAL LUNATIC.
" It may seem strange to hear from me that a patient in this asylum
has been subject to contimious mechanical restraint since April last,
yet such is the case : and I think it right to bring the circumstance under
?yvhicli this has occurred prominently forward in my present report; the
more so, as only in twu instances sincel have been here, now more than
twenty-one years, have I had occasion to resort to restraint, and then
only for a short time, on account of the homicidal propensities of a
patient. The man whose case I now especially notice had been here
but a few days when he made an attack on me during one of my visits
to the wards, rushing at me from behind with an implement he had
prepared for the purpose, the handle of a large iron spoon which he had
converted into a kind o? dagger, swearing he would take my life, and
assigning as a reason 'that I had kept patients in the asylum for more
than twenty years and had parted man and wife.' This man had pre-
viously been in the Middlesex County Asylum at Colney-Hatcli, and
it appears from his own confession that he had meditated an attack on
the superintendent of that institution, had prepared for it, and had
intended to carry it out the very day he was unexpectedly removed to
Knowle. Now here were two deliberate plans arranged to take life,
and in one instance the attempt was made. That the man knew what
he was about was very evident from his own expressions, which were,
11 will kill you ; I will bathe my garments in your blood; I am not
mad, but being in an asylum I can do what I like, and not be
responsible for itquoting as a precedent the instance of McKave, who
murdered a Commissioner in Lunacy about two years previously. I
may mention that McKave's trial was stopped by the judge on the
ground of the prisoner's insanity. This homicidal propensity has
existed ever since, and still continues, and I may add that in my opinion
the patient is quite as dangerous to others as to myself. To prevent his
making such another attempt, his arms are confined to his sides by a
waist-belt and armlets, so that his arms cannot be raised above his
head to strike a heavy blow. Some persons would call this man's con-
duct 'uncontrollable'; I call it 'uncontrolled.' But, at all events, whilst he
is so dangerous I see no good reason why the lives of those about him
should be risked from a sentimental objection to the use of restraint,
and, until I see very good reason to the contrary, I shall continue to
prefer the safety of others to the freedom of limb of a would-be
assassin."
We are indebted to Dr Manley for the above description contained
in the Hampshire County Asylum Report. He deserves great praise
for the management of the case. Restraint should be used in all
similar cases where any homicidal tendencies exist; and we hope the
publication of the above particulars will draw the attention of super-
intendents of asylums to similar cases. We have not only to protect
the lunatic himself from harm, but those with whom he must come in
contact.
CASE OF TIERNEY.
Tierney, who was sentenced to death, but who was afterwards re-
prieved on the plea of insanity, and whose case caused considerable
discussion some short time ago, is still an inmate of an asylum, thus
confirming the opinion expressed by Dr Winslow at the time of the
trial as to his mental state.
