Insanity
==========

its Etiology, Diagnosis, Pathology, and Treatment,
with Cases illustrating Pathology, Morbid Histology, and Treatment.
By Edward C. Mann, M.D., Medical Superintendent of State Emi-
grant Insane Asylum, Ward's Island, New York.
This is an admirable retrospect of the subject from the time of
Hippocrates up to the present. We are reminded of the old classifica-
tion into Furiosi, and Mente Capti, and the following divisions:?
I. Idiocy.
II. Dementia.
III. Delusional Insanity.
IV. Emotional Insanity.
V. Mania.
During the past twenty years, it appears that in America the in-
crease of insanity has been considerably disproportionate to the in-
creased population. This is supposed to be due to neglect of physical
exercise in consequence of educational pressure, to artificial habits of
living, competition in business, etc. It would seem also that this
insanity is appearing at an earlier age than formerly. With regard to
the predisposing causes, the first is hereditary predisposition. During
twenty-seven years, at the New York Asylum, this was traceable in
31 per cent, of all admissions. Morbid impulses and insane traits may
not appear in the second generation, and reappear with renewed
vigour in the third. Insanity may assume a different form in suc-
ceeding generations. Thus, a parent may be maniacal, and the child
be afflicted with chorea or epilepsy. Amongst other predisposing
causes may be instanced great disparity of age between parents, influ-
ence of sex, emotions during gestation, epilepsy, lactation, menstrua-
tion, general excess, and onanism.
INSANITY. 173
Among exciting causes may be mentioned, excessive grief,intemper-
ance, any kind of excessive excitement, epilepsy, injuries to head or spine
and overwork. Intemperance appears to exert a very powerful influ-
ence upon the production of insanity. Lord Shaftesbury was of
opinion that, in 1859, 50 per cent, of the admissions into English
asylums were the subjects of excessive drinking. In many foreign
asylums the percentage is stated to be 25, or higher. Dr Mann has traced
intemperance as a cause in many cases of general paralysis, and M
Lanier considers that 50 per cent, of all idiots and imbeciles in the
large cities of Europe have been the children of notorious drunkards
At Charenton, in Europe, drink was considered as the cause of
insanity in 102 out of 350 patients. Three forms of insanity from
alcoholic abuse may be said to exist, viz.:?1. Delirium tremens or
mania a potu; 2. Dipsomania; and 3. Chronic alcoholism. The
first is an acute and temporary mental affection; the second, an irre-
sistible impulse and craving for alcoholic stimulation; the third a
peculiar form of chronic insanity. With regard to the diagnosis of
insanity, we find some valuable hints. Wo "must examine physical
signs and symptoms, and determine by our senses the existence of such
diseases." Previous to seeing our patient, we should find out all we
can from the friends, allowing for information concerning hereditary
predisposition, for many will deny any pre-existing insanity, unwisely
looking upon the same as a disgrace. The patient's confidence should,
if possible, be gained, and enquiry be made with respect to vocation,'
habits, &c., whether there have been any injuries to head or spine,'
sunstroke, &c. The nervous system should be .examined for the pre-
sence of paralysis, epilepsy, catalepsy, hysteria, &c. Then we must
look to the senses, such as sight, hearing, smell, and touch.
Most fearful crimes have been perpetrated by those who previously
have been looked upon as harmless patients. How important then is
the responsibility of advising that a patient should be kept at home !
In criminal cases it is most important to bear in mind that, because his
ancestors have been insane, a man is not necessarily irresponsible for
the crimes he commits. Sometimes the diagnosis of insanity is very
easy. A person previously of moral habits, industrious, and affec-
tionate, becomes immoral, his affections alienated, his business neglected
but the prognosis of insanity is very difficult to determine. The most
unlikely cases are those in which the insane diathesis is clearly
established, oi in cases of imbecility, dementia, general paralysis, and
epileptic insanity. Acute mania, acute melancholia, hysterical insanity,
and puerperal insanity not unfrequently recover.
The pathology of insanity is at present in its infancy, but micro-
scopical examination of the brain has afforded much valuable infor-
mation.
M. Paechaffe, Inspector-General of Asylums in France, informs us
that the pathological changes found in the brain in insanity may be
divided into three classes:?
1. Those which may be considered accidental?viz., cerebral hfemor-
rhaires, softening of white substance, and disease of cerebral arteries.
2. Those found in other diseases, but appear to be concerned in
producing insanity?viz., thickening and opacity of arachnoid, hyper-
lemia of pia mater, and collections of fluid in arachnoid cavity.
174 INSANITY.
3. Those essential to mental disease, viz., subarachnoid ecchymosis,
punctiform injection of cortical surface, with or without softening;
extended softening of middle portion of cortical substance ; adherence
of pia mater to surface of the brain ; various discolourations of cortical
substance ; atrophy of convolutions ; and induration of brain. Histo-
logical investigations reveal that although the dura mater is rarely
thickened, irregularity and dilatation of its vessels exist, whilst fine
granulations have been perceived upon the arachnoid. In the neuroglia
grey degeneration, atrophy, and colloid degeneration have been found.
The cells have been the seat of atrophy, pigmentary and granular
degeneration, calcification, and hypertrophy.
A number of cases illustrative of the pathology and morbid histo-
logy of insanity are presented to us in this admirable treatise, among
which may be instanced those ol melancholia* dementia, and acute
mania, bearing out upon post-mortem examination the remarks before
cited. With regard to the treatment of insanity, Dr Mann calls
attention to the fact of the foolishu of friends and relatives at first
keeping secret the fact of the patient's insanity, and thus depriving
him or her of speedy relief, and in many cases cure. He also shows,
by some carefully-considered statistics, the pecuniary benefits accruing
from early recovery, when the malady has been encountered at its
onset. Allusion is made to the cruel treatment of the insane in times
past, and the remarkable contrast at the present date, when kindness
and diversion of mind constitute the most successful modes of cure.
Amongst therapeutic agents the most effectual are opium, in large
doses, and hydrate of chloral, especially as narcotics. We quite agree
with the author that the combination of opium with the chloral hydrate is
far preferable to either administered singly. Dr Brown-Sequard some
years ago found that ergot was very valuable in some cases of insanity, and
the writer of the work before us quotes a number of cases in which
this drug proved of immense value. The dose given should be 5j
of the liquid extract. The cases in which it is specially applicable
are chronic mania with lucid intervals, recurrent mania, and epileptic
mania.
Dr Mann concludes this interesting discourse by giving numerous
cases illustrative of the treatment of the insane, therapeutically and
otherwise; and we hope we may have many future communications
from the same source.
