Mechanical Restraint In the Management or Treatment of the Insane
===================================================================

112 Art. VIII.?.
By F. MURCHISON, M.A., JI.B. Edin.
Assistant Physician, Cricliton Royal Institution, Dumfries, N.B.
Road to Scotch Branch Psychological Association, Edinburgh, November 14, 1875.
A medical superintendent related to me the following anecdote :
A determined suicide was brought to him by her father, a bluff
country practitioner, who said: " I place this patient in your
hands. She will cut her throat, hang, drown, or destroy herself,
if she can. I care nothing about your restraint or non-restraint,
but I shall require her from you safe and sound, whether sane or
not."
The extreme opinions at one time prevalent in Britain,
adverse to restraint, have never obtained the same countenance
or favour in France, America, &c., where mechanical contrivances
still form a part of treatment. Even in this country the conflict
between the dictates of professional duty and humanitarian
sentimentalism is less keen than it was some years ago. The
bugbear dread of public criticism has faded in cases where life
or limb is known to be in danger; but would it now be prudent
and justifiable to employ such coercion, where the danger is
merely suspected, inferred, or verbally threatened by the
patient ?
The following cases may illustrate this difficulty. They
have all occurred since the reign of the non-restraint creed
became absolute, and are all derived either from my own
practice, or the experience of a medical friend in a Public
Asylum.
1. M. C., a healthy robust maniac, had been permitted to
retire to bed, on the recommendation of the Medical Superin-
tendent, that rest and horizontality should be encouraged. He
was almost immediately afterwards called to see her, in conse-
quence of her having wounded herself; and found her in bed,,
laughing and joking, with a large deep wound extending from
about the middle of Poupart's ligament for about four or five
inches towards the umbilicus. A triangular flap was folded,
laterally towards the ileum, the lower edge of the omentum
loaded with fat, and several folds of the intestine were exposed.
She had detached a pair of scissors from the waistband of the
attendant, and inflicted the injury with this instrument. There
was inconsiderable haemorrhage, as neither the epigastric nor any
large artery had been divided. The patient recovered com-
MECHANICAL RESTRAINT OF T1IE INSANE. 113
pletely from the effects of the wound, and from her mental
derangement.
2. A clergyman, labouring under suicidal mania and the
delusion that he was suffering from a syphilitic sore-throat, was
requested by the attendant to say grace at a t able where ten
other persons were standing around. The attendant had (as is
common in Scotland) shut his eyes during the benediction, and
had laid his carving-knife for a moment on the table. The
clergyman, seeing the opportunity, seized the knife and inflicted
a frightful gash on his throat, dividing the trachea and the
surrounding tissues, without, however, severing the large blood-
vessels. After being sustained for some time by artificial
alimentation, he died.
3. A robust mischievous imbecile, known to be disposed
to injure his skin, but not suspected of eroticism, retired to
bed in good health. Pie was found in the morning with a
frightful mutilation of the penis, scrotum, and testes. He had
inflicted the wounds with a sharp portion of the chamber-
utensil, which he had broken. The haemorrhage was excessive ;
but he seemed to enjoy the consternation of the attendants,
and made a joke of the whole affair. Castration was complete,
but the eunuch lived for many years after this event.
4. A religious melancholic, with a suspected but not well-
marked tendency to self-mutilation or suicide, slept in a dormi-
tory with other patients in M Asylum. It was discovered
one morning that lie had, in the night, quietly gouged out his
right eye, and left it hanging by a few injured tissues outside
its socket. The eyeball was removed, and the patient made
an excellent recovery.
5. M.E.B., an attenuated religious melancholic, and a most
determined suicide, with marks of injuries inflicted with a view
to self-destruction, very recently admitted into the G
Asylum, was given in charge of a trustworthy attendant, who
was instructed to watch her carefully. An hour and a half
after her admission, I was hurriedly sent for, to attend to an
injury which she had inflicted on her right eye. I found the
organ removed from its place, and lying on the cheek, bleeding,
and totally disorganised and collapsed. After some little
hesitation as to the propriety of severing the lacerated tissues
that still suspended the alleged offending and now sufficiently
punished eyeball, I returned it to its place, where it lias ever
since remained, sightless, and much reduced in size ; and if not
" a thing of beauty," at any rate a credit to the vis medicatrix
naturcc, or to a weak solution of carbolic acid, with which
it and the surrounding injured structures were daily dressed.
A consideration of these cases, which a more extended ex-
perience than mine could doubtless easily supplement, entitles
PART I. VOL. II.?NEW SERIES. H
114 MECHANICAL RESTRAINT IN THE MANAGEMENT
me to question the propriety of the total abolition of mechanical
restraint, and of the means which have, from humane but I
think erroneous considerations, been substituted; and emboldens
me to advocate its use for securing the safety of such patients
as are bent upon self-mutilation or destruction. Extremes
are known to be hurtful in every line of life, but, strange to
say, the utmost amount of liberty is, if not already granted,
strenuously advocated for our asylums; and the cry, emanating
chiefly from those who are ignorant of the difficulties to be
encountered in the discipline and management of the insane,
against locked doors, strait-waistcoats, bolts, bars, in short,
prohibitory means of any kind, even if the patient goes to
the extent of tearing himself or his neighbours to shreds, is
now almost universal, although patients themselves sometimes
petition for restraint. Indeed, in some places, where accidents
are not unfrequent, and suicides not quite unknown, all similar
provisions are ignored. To those who, by experience,
understand the many and great difficulties of managing
a class of people with intractable and wantonly destructive
propensities, this method of " non-restraint" treatment appears
inadequate to cope with a morbid determination to injure or kill.
Notwithstanding the general appeal for forbearance, freedom,
and do-nothingism, it will ever remain evident, that in
cases apparently requiring restraint, a moderate and harm-
less use of mechanical contrivances to secure that end will be
less hurtful to the patient, and more likely to guide him in
safety through a war of mental elements, than a living force
that may become too lax or too harsh in its exercise. It is
next to impossible to watch some patients with sufficient
assiduity to prevent their carrying out their dangerous designs
upon themselves or others. Their intention is so fixed, their
determination so strong, and their vigilance for " opportunities "
so sleepless, that whenever an attendant's eye or hand is
removed from them, they injure or destroy whatever may
excite their anger. I knew a lady so determined upon self-
destruction, and so totally regardless of all moral suasion, that
she tried to swallow pins, nails, and such other hurtful articles,
and to set fire to her clothes ; nor could she resist the tempta-
tion of asking me for a knife to cut her throat. A moderate
use of innocent restraint saved her life, as doubtless its absence
would have led to new attempts at destruction. A second lady,
to my knowledge, set herself on fire in a house where she had all
the freedom that the enthusiasts for " non-restraint" would have
heartily admired, and had burned her body so frightfully that she
lived only for a few hours. Numerous examples could be adduced
to show that death and other serious evils have frequently resulted
from the non-adoption of gentle and humane mechanical con-
trivances to prevent a patient from executing his wild designs.
OR TREATMENT OF THE INSANE.
115
Even the " camisole " and similar instrumental expedients have
failed to secure safety, a result demonstrating at once the des-
perate character of the cases to he dealt with, how dangerous
the struggles which must ensue when manual restraint is trusted
to, and how ineffectual must often prove even the humanely
directed exertions of a trustworthy attendant. When such
means are resorted to in private houses, difficulties must
be greatly multiplied. Unenlightened henevolence may pro-
bably blame me when I suggest a linen inanimate strait-
waistcoat as being preferable to the muscular force of two
or three strong, rough, and certainly not passionless attend-
ants, in cases similar to those cited, or when a patient,
surgically treated, is restless and refractory; when for an ex-
cited and dangerous lunatic I prefer a padded room to one in
which he can injure himself or break my head. Liberty to a
person not entirely delirious or demented is, no doubt, dear,
and should never be denied when experience has proved its
advantages; but when it tends to the patient's or his neigh-
bour's injury or destruction, it assuredly becomes a duty to
curtail it to the extent and in the manner that can be pioved
to be the most desirable.
It is my firm conviction that the absence of mechanical
restraint is the cause of the great majority of accidents, and
of many of the suicides that take place in asylums; and
that at the present day a diminution of the freedom of the
patient, by restraint or seclusion, would minimise, and per-
haps abolish, these undesirable items in the statistics of
asylums. Coercion from the very beginning, in suicidal
cases of grave import, would doubtless save life, and much
anxiety to those in charge. In such cases it should, I think,
be unhesitatingly adopted, and continued as long as the
morbid state of the patient necessitates such a measure. The
cases requiring its continued adoption form only a small per-
centage of mental ailments, and they usually improve under
judicious treatment. The great object is to save the patient
from his own excitement and violence; and any course that
secures this, in a harmless way, seems justifiable and right,
however much it may be against the dictates of those whose
sympathies will not allow them to see any virtue in it. Enter-
taining the opinions I express, I should not hesitate to lecom-
mend mechanical restraint in cases of acute mania, when the
patient is not merely incited to destroy all around, but may
exhaust his strength, engender disease, and thus precipitate
that fatuity which so frequently follows such paroxysms. In
addition, it might conveniently be resorted to, as an instru-
ment of harmless reproof, in cases where " temper and
original wickedness, plus insanity, disregard moral discipline,
and defy constituted authority. u 2
