Physical Culture, and Its Influence on the Body
=================================================

156
Art. XIII.?
Mr. President,?In response to the call you make upon
me, as having had something to do with the gymnastics in this
institution, I plead guilty to the charge. I did take an active
part in originating and establishing this department, and have
served on a gymnasium committee from its commencement.
I have tried to do in this direction what seemed to me was
my duty, and upon no work or acts in my life, do I look back
with more interest and satisfaction.
It is now almost twenty years since the question of doing
something to promote the health of students in college was
first agitated and discussed, at the meetings of our Board of
Trustees. This resulted in the erection of the gymnasium in
1859, and the establishment of the department of physical
?culture and hygiene. Since that time fifteen classes have
entered college, and more than 3,000 students have taken part
in these exercises.
Now, what has been the result of this experiment??has it
proved a success or a failure? Once we were compelled to
advocate its necessity, its safety, yes, even its propriety; but
all, I believe, admit now its beneficial results?results which
are invaluable; and a pretty settled conviction exists, I believe,
that almost any other department in college could better be
dispensed with than that of the gymnastic.
In recounting its advantages I might refer you to the great
contrast between the health of students now and twenty or
thirty years ago; that very few now break down in health, com-
pared with what once did?that for years there has been much
less sickness and mortality in college than formerly?that the
average health of each class is found to improve from year to
year; so that when they come to graduate, instead of appearing
with pale faces, picked features, and lean, lank forms, we see
students graduating with health, possessing strong muscles,
and a large amount of vitality laid up in store to meet the
battles of life.
I might refer to the improved discipline in the college, and
the higher standard of scholarship brought about, in part, by
these exercises; I might also speak of the great advantages
* Remarks of Dr Nathan Allen, at the meeting of the Alumni, Amherst
College, July 7, 1875.
PHYSICAL CULTURE. 15T
that this training, and the knowledge obtained of physiology
and hygiene, afford in preparing the student to take better
care of his health in the future; I might allude, too, to the
fine exhibition of gymnastics, witnessed this morning, and the
public interest attending them. But these things are not new;
they are familiar to you, and need no comment. But this
experiment has an interest and significance beyond and outside
of Amherst College. By it we have been establishing certain
great principles, of vast importance to other institutions and
the public at large. When the question was first agitated of'
building a gymnasium and introducing gymnastic exercises, it
was said by some very good, and wise men too, that it was of
no use?that it had repeatedly proved a failure, both in Europe
and in our own country. But for one, I said No, it would not
fail; that, if properly managed?if it was placed on the high-
ground it ought to be, and its merits were fully appreciated?
it could not fail.
But to do this physical culture must be placed on the same
ground as the classics or the mathematics, or any other depart-
ment in college;?it must be made a part of the curriculum'
of college exercises, and must have a teacher or professor in
charge, who should be a member of the faculty, and have a
voice in the government of the institution. The trustees and
faculty must show that they attach importance and cha-
racter to it, as much as to any other department. It must
have the hearty support of the students, the goodwill of the
public, and the commendation of the press. Thus with such a
public opinion created it would not, could not fail.
In this attempt to give it character, and enlist in its favour
public opinion at Amherst, we were fortunate. There has been
no lack of interest or want of popularity. This is one of the
secrets of its success. In fact, it would be idle to anticipate
success for it anywhere, unless it was properly appreciated by
leading minds, and was held as important in public estimation.
This is the main reason why gymnastic training does not
succeed better in other institutions and places.
No large institution, we believe, can be found, in this
country or in Europe, where the human body and the laws
that govern it have received the same attention as they have
in this college. Some dozen years ago President Felton, of
Harvard, was here at Commencement, and witnessed with great
interest our gymnastic exercises. At an interview with him
the same evening, he said to me, " I would give anything if
I had such a department at Harvard." The word if, to my
mind, was very significant. President Felton died the next
year, so that no attempt to introduce it was made by him.
158 PHYSICAL CULTURE,
There is another point deserving notice. When we were
first agitating this matter, the objection came up that the
Trustees and Faculty had no right to establish laws that would
require students to go through with such exercises?or, in other
words, that would direct the movements of the body. We
might require of students certain hours of study and regular
recitations, but could not require anything like physical
exercises. Such a sentiment is still prevalent. Within one
month President Porter of Yale, in publicly advocating boating,
said, according to newspaper report, that he had but " little
faith in enforced, attendance upon physical exercises ;" that is,
I suppose, he would make a distinction between 'physical and
mental exercises. President Porter has no hesitation in adopt-
ing college rules that enforce regular recitations in metaphysics,
and the performance of rhetorical exercises; to comply with
these rules certain laws of the brain must be exercised?this is
indispensable. Now if, in order to apply in the most efficient
manner the laws of the brain, it is found necessary to exercise
systematically the muscles of the arms, the legs, or other tissues
and organs of the body, what should make the difference ? Are
not the limbs, the lungs, the heart, a part of the body as much
as the brain ?
There is another important principle involved in our experi-
ment. We all know what a powerful influence rank or merit-
roll has in college with students. Now the professor, through
his great ingenuity, has so managed to reduce the gymnastic
exercises to certain definite points, either in attendance, de-
portment, or improvement on the part of the student, that in
making up the rank or standing of each one, this department
comes in for its share of marks. This is a step in advance, we
believe, of anything you can find elsewhere, and will attract
attention wherever such exercises are duly appreciated.
Another fact is worthy of notice. A most valuable collection
of statistics is being gathered up by this department, such as
can be found nowhere else in the country. These statistics
refer to the differences in the weight and height of students at
different ages, to the growth of certain muscles from year to
year, to the changes in the capacity of the lungs, to the strength
of the body at different periods, &c. These statistics will
sometime become invaluable in determining certain points in
physical science in its application to student life.
There is only one more topic to which I wish to call your
attention. The establishment of the department of physical
?culture here in its example and the influences going out from
it, has served to increase greatly the interest on this subject
throughout the country. On this point there can be no question.
AND ITS INFLUENCE ON THE BODY. 159
Within a few years wliat a great change has taken place in
games, outdoor sports?in ball-playing, boating, &c.! A mere
glance at the daily press will afford abundant evidence of this
fact. For one, I rejoice in this increased attention to the value
of the human body, and the importance of taking care of it.
As ball-playing and boating seem just now to call forth the
most interest among students, I wish to say a few words on the
comparative merits of these exercises from a ph}^siological
standpoint; and if many years of study and observation can
make a man a good judge here, I surely ought to understand
the nature and effects of such exercises.
In instituting a comparison as to the relative merits of
different kinds of exercise, many things must be taken into the
account?such as the time and place of the exercise, the number
engaged in it, the expenses attending it, the surroundings,
associations, moral influences, &c. But a consideration of
these topics would require more time and attention than can
be given them on the present occasion.
While boating and ball-plaving are peculiarly calculated to
awaken public interest on the subject?even to a state of en-
thusiasm?and improve the physical condition of great numbers,
yet as a means of health, they are not the best adapted for
the scholar, and consequently for literary institutions. They
call into exercise chiefly certain muscles of the chest, the spine,
and the limbs, and when long continued, they produce a pre-
dominance of muscular tissue, an abnormal development of
these particular muscles, at the expense of other muscles in
the body. It is strength of muscle that is here sought above
all other things, and not a harmonious development of the
whole body, upon which health so much depends. In fact, just
so far as these exercises develope an excess of this tissue, it de-
tracts from the healthy action of the brain and nervous system.
Besides, the exercises of boating and ball-playing become at
times so violent and protracted, as to cause such a congested
state of blood in the vital organs, or strain upon the heart and
lungs, as to result in serious diseases, and to endanger life.
Then these exercises can be carried 011 only by a few individuals,
in pleasant weather and at particular seasons?circumstances
which render them unpropitious to the student.
With gymnastics it is very different. These can be carried
on daily and systematically by all, with little loss of time, or
risk of injury of person or to good morals. They can be so
varied as to call into exercise every muscle of the body, and, if
need be, strengthen the weak parts and repress those in excess. *
While they are calculated to improve the general health, by
producing a well-balanced organisation, they aim to bring all
160 PHYSICAL CULTURE.
tlie physical forces of the system into the most favourable con-
dition for study and mental improvement. They tend to bring-
about the greatest possible harmony of action in every part,
especially between the physical and mental, so that the
machinery of both body and mind shall work to the best
advantage, and for the longest time. It is in this balance of
organisation, this harmony of action in the Vital forces, that
the secret of good health and long life consists.
We all know what a wonderful difference there is between
two machines,?one that is perfect throughout, and another,
poorly constructed and ill-balanced. The one seldom needs
repairs ; the other, frequently; the one will last, as it were,
for an age ; the other soon breaks down, and becomes com-
paratively useless. It is somewhat so in reference to the human
body. The idea which we wish to convey may, perhaps, be
more aptly illustrated in the story of the Deacon's " One Hoss
Shay," which must be familiar to all. Now, while we cannot
make new bodies or parts, we can do wonders for their pre-
servation, by striving constantly to produce in every part of the
system a harmony of development, of action and function, so
that the "wear and tear" of life may come upon all portions
more equally. By this means much suffering and disease may
not only be prevented, but life itself greatly prolonged. Thus
in the duration and termination of life these bodies, when the
time comes, will fall to pieces at once?every part literally
worn-out?like the Deacon's Shay, which was just one hundred,
years old!
