Professor Tyndall and His Opponents
====================================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Art. I.?
BY J. M. WINN, M.D., M.E.C.P., &c.
In the Fortnightly Review for November 1875, Dr Tyndall
published his long-expected reply in an article entitled
"Materialism and its Opponents." A more unsatisfactory
or evasive answer can scarcely be imagined. He was chal-
lenged to prove, by inductive reasoning, the truth of
the materialistic theory which he advocated so strongly. He
was, moreover, earnestly pressed to explain the inconsistency
between the opinions given in his Address before the British
Association at Belfast and those which he afterwards published
m his reprint. To this glaring inconsistency I referred as
follows in my treatise on Materialism*:?" The strongest con-
trast, however, to the materialistic opinions so conspicuously
brought forward in the Address, as well as in Dr Tyndall's
other published works, is exhibited in the following extract
from the preface to the reprint of the Address, which appeared
about a month after its delivery : ' I have noticed during years
?f self-observation that it is not in hours of clearness and
vigour that this doctrine [material atheism] commends itself to
yuy mind ; that in the presence of stronger and healthier thought
it ever dissolves and disappears,! as offering no solution of the
* " Materialism" (originally published in the Journal of Psychological
Medicine) -with Appendix: Hardwicke & Bogue, 192 Piccadilly, London.
t Dr Lionel Beale puts this inconsistency very forcibly in his lecture on the
" Machinery of Lifo," delivered before the Philosophical Society of Leamington,
January 7, 1875:?"Perhaps the most marvellous feat ever performed by any
machine, conscious or unconscious, was that of discerning in matter 'the promise
and potency of all terrestrial life' in the month of August, and discovering in the
next month, in the presence of stronger and healthier thought, that the doctrine
issolved and disappeared."
PART I. VOL. II.?NEW SERIES. A
4 PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND HIS OPPONENTS.
mystery in which we dwell, and of which we form a part.' It
is deeply to be deplored that Dr Tyndall did not mention this
fact when he delivered his Address at Belfast, and promulgated
doctrines which are calculated to undermine the faith of
thousands, and which, if true, would shake the very foundations
of all morality and religion." He has fulfilled neither of these
requirements. He has left his molecular hypothesis as baseless
as ever, and has altogether avoided giving a positive answer to
the vital question, whether he is or is not a materialistic atheist.
From a man holding a distinguished and influential position,
and who is also a popular lecturer on physical science, the public
had a right to expect a satisfactory reply to such an inquiry;
and, as he has not given one, there is strong reason to fear,
from the prevailing tone of the article in the Fortnightly Review,
that since the publication of the reprint of his Address, Dr.
Tyndall has not experienced many of those lucid intervals in
which the doctrine of materialistic atheism ceases to commend
itself to his mind, and it must therefore be concluded that he
is still wandering in the dark and dreary region of Atheism.
I will now proceed to make a few observations on the
leading points of the Professor's reply in the order in which
they occur. It is painful to find him always on the alert to
throw discredit on revealed religion, and lie seems never so
happy as when he thinks he has found some flaw in the Bible.
He commences his paper with an irrelevant discussion on the
Colenso controversy, on which he has nothing new to offer, and
forgets that it has nothing to do with the question at issue.
This question has no reference to any particular form of religion ;
it is not whether the Mosaic account of the Creation be true or
false; but it is the question which involves the foundation of
all religion?whether we are to believe in a Creator and over-
ruling Providence, or to substitute the Professor's extravagant
and visionary notion of atomic power. If this latter be true,
a holocaust may at once be made of the Bible, the Vedas, the
Koran, and all other religious books; and every man must be
left to do that which is right in his own eyes.
Dr Tyndall observes that he has "no desire to repay in
kind the hard words" which have been thrown at him. He
cannot expect that those who have read his unjustifiable and
unprovoked attack on religion will allow what they hold most
sacred to be treated with ridicule or contempt without raising
an earnest protest against it. The following passages from his
reply will show that he does not always use language of the
gentlest character. Speaking of the Catholic student, he says:
Let him sit under the immeasurable heavens, watch the stars
in their courses, scan the mysterious nebulas, and try to realise
PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND HIS OPPONENTS. 5
what it all is and means. Let him bring the thoughts and
conceptions which thus enter into his mind lace to lace with
the notions of the genesis and rule of thiDgs which pervade the
writings of the princes of his Church, and he will see and feel
what drivellers even men of strenuous intellects may become,
through exclusively dwelling and dealing with theological
chimeras." ..." But, quitting the more grotesque forms
of the theological, I already see, or think I see, emerging from
recent discussions, that wonderful plasticity of the Theistic
Idea which enables it to maintain through many changes its
hold upon superior minds; and which, if it is to last, will
eventually enable it to shape itself in accordance with scientific
conditions." Again, "The resurrection of our Saviour, says
Dr Reichel, ' is the central fact of Christianity. Without His
resurrection, His birth and His death would have been alike
unavailing; nay, more, if He did not rise from the dead His
birth was the birth of a bastard, and his death the death of an
impostor.' This may be orthodoxy, but, entertaining the
notions that I do of Christ and of His incomparable life upon
the earth, if the momentary use of the term blasphemy were
granted to me by my Christian brethren, I should feel inclined
to employ it here." It is unnecessary to say anything further
about the words used in these passages which I have marked
in italics, but it is of the greatest importance that the un-
philosophical opinions expressed in them should be combated.
If the plasticity of the Theistic Idea be admitted, and we are
to leave the settlement of the whole matter to Dr Tyndall,
there is an end of the discussion, and he would so mould the
plastic Idea that the notion of a Creator would be reduced to
a self-generated molecule. Dr Reichel's expression is perfectly
true and just. If the Divine nature of Christ be not admitted*
the inevitable conclusion is that He must have been illegitimate.
It is to be hoped that Dr Tyndall will give the world the benefit
of the particular notions which he says he entertains of Christ.
I fear that those of a materialist cannot be very exalted, as of
course it is impossible for him to admit his Divinity.
In referring to the question, whether mathematics tends to
give support to theology or not, the Professor exultingly remarks
that " out of mathematics no salvation for theology can possibly
come." We might retort and say, out of mathematics no sal-
vation for materialism can possibly come. No one pretends to
demonstrate the existence of a Deity by mathematics: it is
sufficient to know that the study of this science is not incom-
* Dr Adam Clarke, in his Commentary and Critical Notes on the Bible,
observes, in allusion to the well-known words " I and my Father are one," that "If
Jesus Christ was not God, could Ho have said these words without blasphemy?"
G PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND IIIS OPPONENTS.
patible with religious belief. Some of our greatest mathema-
ticians were believers in the being of a Grod; for instance,
Newton, Pascal, Wallis, Bradley, Brinkley, Peacock, &c.
Moreover, it must be admitted that the discoveries which have
been made in astronomy by the aid of mathematics have given
us grander conceptions of the might and majesty of the Creator.
Dr Tyndall, who will drag theology into the discussion,
heedless of the fact that it has nothing to do with his materialistic
hypothesis, occupies more than half of his article in showing to
what extent he agrees or disagrees with the views of the Rev.
James Martineau. He quotes the following eloquent passage
from that gentleman's writings, and then proceeds to comment
upon it: " The universe which includes us and folds us round
is the life-dwelling of an Eternal Mind; the world of our abode
is the scene of a moral government, incipient but not yet com-
plete ; and the upper zones of human affections, above the clouds
of self and passion, take us into the sphere of a Divine Com-
munion." Dr Tyndall states that he has himself experienced
a Communion of this sort, but it will be seen from the following
passages that there is nothing very Divine in the Professor's
Communion. They are much the same as those to which I
referred at the commencement of this article. He observes
that in the " hours of health and strength and sanity, when the
stroke of action has ceased and the pause of reflection has set
in, the scientific investigator finds himself overshadowed by the
same awe. Breaking contact with the hampering details of
earth, it associates him with a power which gives fulness and
tone to his existence, but which he can neither analyse nor
comprehend." . . . " When I attempt to give the Power
which I see manifested in the universe an objective form,
personal or otherwise, it slips away from me, declining all
intellectual manipulation. I dare not, save poetically, use the
pronoun He regarding it; I dare not call it a Mind; I refuse
to call it even a Cause. Its mystery overshadows me, but it
remains a mystery, while the objective frames which my neigh-
bours try to make it fit, simply distort and desecrate it." But
the Professor should not stop here. Having brought down his
Communion to a poetical emotion, the next step for a materialist
is?to use his own phraseology?to reduce that emotion to the
" thrill of a ganglion."
In a foot-note, Dr Tyndall introduces the following sin-
gular excuse for the versatility of his opinions :?" In the first
preface to the ' Belfast Address,' I referred to' hours of clearness
and vigour,' as four years previously I had referred to hours of
' health and strength and sanity,' and brought down upon myself
in consequence, a considerable amount of ridicule. Why, I
PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND HIS OPPONENTS. 7
know not: for surely it is not when sleepy after a gluttonous
meal, or when suffering from dyspepsia, or even when possessed
by an arithmetical problem demanding' concentrated thought,
that we care most for the starry heavens or the sense of
responsibility in man." It would have been wiser if the
Professor, when on the platform at Belfast, had given to the
world his choicest thoughts; otherwise it must seem as it he
had given utterance to crude materialistic opinions which
might have been engendered at some time when he was
sleepy, when suffering from dyspepsia, after a gluttonous meal,
or when possessed by an arithmetical problem demanding con-
centrated thought.
In reply to the oft-repeated objection to materialism?"If
you only knew the comfort of belief"?Dr Tyndall says, " I
choose the nobler part of Emerson, when, after various dis-
enchantments, he exclaimed ' I covet truth.'" Of all the
cants in this canting world, there is none more unfair than this
perpetual reiteration of the sceptic and the atheist, that it is
truth they seek. Does the Professor suppose that all the
wisest and best men among every denomination of Christians,
are not quite as earnest in the search after truth as he is ?
Dr Tyndall and the materialistic psychologists speak
contemptuously of metaphysics, yet it is curious to observe how
frequently they have recourse to language of a metaphysical
character. The following passage is an illustration of this :
" The term Vorstellungs-taliigkeit [power of representation]
as used by me means the power of definite mental presenta-
tion, of attaching to words the corresponding objects of
thought, and of seeing these in their proper relations, without
the interior haze and soft penumbral borders which the
theologian loves." Here we have an instance, not only of
metaphysical phraseology, but also another specimen of the
pleasure the Professor feels in ridiculing the clergy. He
prides himself on his Vorstellungs-fahigkeit, but anyone
familiar with his writings must have remarked that his own
O
mental vision is not always free from mist.
In order to illustrate the sufficiency of matter to produce
all the marvellous beauty of the vegetable world, he draws a
most illogical comparison between the growth of a tree and
the action of an ingenious acoustic instrument devised by Sir
C. Wheatstone, which Dr Tyndall describes in this manner:?
" There is an experiment, first made by Wheatstone, where the
music of a piano is transferred from its sound-board, through
a thin wooden rod, across several silent rooms in succession,
and poured out at a distance from the instrument. The strings
of the piano vibrate, not singly, but ten at a time. Every
8 PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND IIIS OPPONENTS.
string subdivides, yielding not one note, but a dozen. All
these vibrations and subvibrations are crowded together into
a bit of deal not more than a quarter of a square inch in
section. Yet no note is lost. Each vibration asserts its indi-
vidual rights; and all are at last shaken forth into the air
by a second sound-board, against which the distant end of the
rod presses." . . . . "I turn to my tree and observe its
roots, its trunk, its branches, and its leaves. As the rod
conveys the music, and yields it up to the distant air, so does
the trunk convey the matter and the motion?the shocks and
pulses, and other vital actions which eventually emerge in the
umbrageous foliage of the tree." It requires only a small
acquaintance with the first principles of acoustics and vege-
table physiology to see the fallacy of this parallel. One part
of it is merely an illustration of the mode in which sounds
may be conveyed rapidly, to a great distance, by a vibrating
medium. Far different is it with the other part of the
parallel?with the gradual growth of a tree, which requires for
its accomplishment a variety of processes, under the control
of vital force. Dr Tyndall is himself driven to the necessity
of using the words vital actions, although he denies the exist-
ence of vitality.
Dr Tyndall, whose object it is of course to exalt matter
and lower mind, quotes Tertullian as an authority for the
materiality of the soul, and " wonders what would have hap-
pened to this great Christian Father amid the roaring lions of
Belfast." Tertullian was a bit of a roaring lion himself, and
had Dr Tyndall been better acquainted with his history he
would have known that, however valuable he may have been
as a witness to the truth of Christianity, he had no claim to
be looked up to as an authority on metaphysical questions.
Gabriel Seigneux de Correcon, in his notes to Addison's Evi-
dences of the Christian Eeligion, gives the following sketch of
Tertullian's character:?" Upright and zealous, but at the
same time very rigid, and unpardonably intolerant towards
those he deemed heretics; he calls Marcion a sailor and a
Scythian, not recollecting that St. Peter had been a fisherman,
and that Anacharsis, an acknowledged great philosopher, was
of Scythia ; or rather not recollecting that personalities are
of no weight, and can injure no one but their authors. Too
ardent not to be precipitate, he has been accused of want of
judgment. His credulity showed itself in one of his works.
To prove the materiality of the soul, he quotes an enthu-
siastic woman, who asserts she has seen one" When Dr.
Tyndall discusses metaphysical and theological subjects, his
ignorance of such matters becomes lamentably apparent.
PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND HIS OPPONENTS. 9
Having reduced soul and mind to matter, the Professor,
with that inconsistency for which he is so conspicuous, imme-
diately takes flight in an opposite direction, and suggests that
vegetables may possibly be endowed with consciousness, and
minerals with properties which are only conceded to living
organisms. Consciousness is incompatible with the absence of
a nervous system; it is therefore impossible to believe that the
lowest animal organisms, such as Amoebae and Bacteria, much
less any form of vegetable life, can possess this property. In
confirmation of his hypothesis Dr Tyndall refers to the fly-
catching Dioneea; but the closing of the leaf of this plant and
the movements of the sensitive plant cannot be explained in
the same manner as the vital movements of animals, and aie
probably of quite a different nature. Is it not possible that
they may be owing to electricity ? The Professor would pio-
bably render a great service to science if lie would turn his
rare powers as a scientific experimentalist in this direction.
As to the notion that minerals may have the power of responding
to irritants?it is so extravagant that it requires no comment.
I presume it is only another of those wild flights of fancy
which the Professor dignifies with the title of the " scientific
use of the imagination."
Having made Vorstellungs-fahigkeit (which, as I have
before stated, he defines the power of definite mental pre-
sentation) the basis of his reasoning, it might be expected
that his language would be of the most rigidly exact character;
and it would be startling (if the Professor had not accus-
tomed us to his contradictory opinions) to find him, after
ignoring the ideas of vitality and mind, and after discovering
in matter " the promise and potency of all terrestrial life '
it would be startling, I say, to find him writing in the fol-
lowing strain:?" Nor am I anxious to shut out the idea that
the life here spoken of may be but a subordinate part and
function of a higher life, as the living moving blood is sub-
ordinate to the living man. I resist no such idea as long as
it is not dogmaticaily imposed. Left for the human mind
freely to operate upon, the idea has ethical vitality; but,
stiffened into a dogma, the inner force disappears and the
outward yoke of a usurping hierarchy takes its place. In the
Uame of common sense what notion can any one have of ethical
vitality, whose reasoning has a tendency to destroy the founda-
tion of all religion. Morality has ever been based on religion;
destroy this basis, and substitute for it materialistic or utili-
tarian doctrines, and where would be its vitality ?
But waiving the consideration of this higher life, I will ?
turn to the question of life, simply as it is exhibited in our
10 PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND HIS OPPONENTS.
bodily organisation. The majority of our most eminent
physiologists (I am not speaking of the materialistic physiolo-
gists of the present day) have used the term vital force or
vitality to group together and generalise a large number of
facts which, in our present state of knowledge, cannot be ex-
plained by physical force. But if Dr Tyndall really believes
that all the phenomena generally understood as vital are solely
the result of atomic power, what right has he, strictly speaking,
to employ any term implying vitality in his argument ?
Immediately after warming himself up to a sort of almost
religious sentiment, the Professor falls back again into the cold
depths of materialism. Following close on his remarks on
vitality are others in the following strain : "The problem before
us is, at all events, capable of definite statement. We have on
the one hand strong grounds for concluding that the earth was
once a molten mass. We now find it not only swathed by an
atmosphere, and covered by a sea, but also crowded with living-
things. The question is, how were they introduced ?
The conclusion of science, which recognises unbroken causal
connection between the past and the present, would undoubtedly
be that the molten ea.rth contained within it elements of life,
which grouped themselves into their present forms as the planet
cooled."
I am willing to try conclusions with Dr Tyndall on the
assumption that the earth was once a molten mass. I would
not do so on the assumption that it was once a frozen mass.
As regards animal life, Dr B. W. Bichardson has clearly de-
monstrated that if the animal temperature be raised to eleven
degrees above the natural standard, death is inevitable ; on the
other hand, the degree of cold from which an animal might re-
cover was so great, that he was obliged to leave the fatal degree
indefinite. If, then, the earth was ever liquefied by fire, every
form of life, if there had been any, must have been destroyed ;
it must therefore be admitted that this life itself, this birth, this
growth, this mystery, we cannot yet comprehend, must have been
superadded to matter after the creation of the earth. Dr.
Tyndall would probably reply that he does not deny that
there is a marked difference between organised and unor-
ganised structures, and that intense heat would be fatal to
what we call life; but that he believes that the molten mass
contained the elements of life. By this vague expression
I presume he means the old story of the potentiality of atoms.
The onus jprobandi, however, that matter and physical force
can produce a living germ, rests with Dr Tyndall. Can he
advance a single instance in which there is the faintest shadow
of a proof that a living cell lias been educed by any chemical,
PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND HIS OPPONENTS. 11
electrical, or mechanical process ? As regards spontaneous
generation no one is a more decided unbeliever in this doctrine
than himself. When he has succeeded in manufacturing a little
Bacterium?leave alone the Cingalese Fern, the beauty of
which he has so eloquently pictured?I shall become a convert
to his hypothesis.
" The conclusion of pure intellect points this "way [to scien-
tific materialism] and no other/' This is the Professor's dogma ;
which, however, is immediately followed by passages which
cannot be considered as the offspring of pure intellect; they
rather seem to result from that cloudiness of mental vision
which he admits that he occasionally experiences. He says: " But
this purity is troubled by our interests in this life, and by our hopes
and fears regarding the life to come. Reason is traversed by the
emotions; anger rising in the weaker heads to the height of
suggesting the compendious shooting of the inquirer would be
an act agreeable to Grod and serviceable to man. But this
foolishness is more than neutralised by the sympathy of the
wise ; and in England at least, so long as the courtesy which
befits an earnest theme is adhered to, such sympathy is ever
ready for an honest man. None of us here need shrink from
saying all that he has a right to say. We ought, however, to
remember that it is not only a band of Jesuits, weaving their
schemes of intellectual slavery under the innocent guise of
education, that we are opposing. Our foes are to some extent
they of our own household, including not only the ignorant
and the passionate, but a minority of minds of high calibre
and culture, lovers of freedom moreover, who, though its
objective hull be riddled by logic, still find the ethic life
of their religion unimpaired." This is mere rhapsody. W hat
does Dr Tyndall mean by anyone's contemplating the " com-
pendious shooting " of any inquirer ? I never heard that any-
one ever expressed a wish to shoot him or any other inquirer ;
if anyone had done so, it would have been not only foolish, but
criminal. Who are these terrible foes in our own household
of whom he seems in such dread ? and what does he mean by
the hull of their religion being riddled by logic, though they
fortunately still maintain, in spite of the shots from the
materialistic battery, the ethic life of their religion ?
The Professor, in his seesaw manner, goes on to repeat the
same arguments as he used in the Belfast Address. We have
again the stereotyped sneer of the atheist, who accuses those,
who believe in a Creator, of anthropomorphism, of making
their " God " . . . . "a large Individual, who holds the
leading-strings of the universe, and orders its steps from a
position outside it all." In answer to this, I can only repeat
12 PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND HIS OPPONENTS.
what I have elsewhere observed, that the word Creator is never
intended to convey the notion of the " technic of man,5' but is our
only mode of expressing- our conception of the might and
mystery of the Author of all things. How can man, with his
finite faculties and limited language, speak of Infinite Power
in other than finite words ?
Dr Tyndall's atheistic proclivities become more apparent
towards the close of his article. He hesitates to admit, with
Gassendi and Clerk Maxwell, that even the atoms were created,
and remarks " that little profit to the human heart seems
derivable from this mode of regarding the Divine operations."
Having thus rejected all creative power, both direct and in-
direct, what remains but Atheism ?
With an air of triumph the Professor asks whether an egg
is matter, and whether the gradual additions made to the human
ovum in utero during the period of gestation are matter or
not, and then jumps to the conclusion that matter "is the mys-
terious thing by which all this is accomplished." What can
be more illogical ? He confounds cause and effect. Of course
everyone is aware that living organisms derive their nourish-
ment from matter; but the question is, are not living germs,
which appropriate and assimilate matter by their inherent
vital force, totally different from any known combination of
atoms the result of physical force ?
The concluding paragraph of the reply is so extraordinary
that I cannot refrain from quoting it at length : " The world will
have religion of some kind, even though it should fly for it to the
intellectual whoredom of spiritualism. What is really wanted
is the lifting poiuer of an ideal element in human life. But
the free play of this power must be preceded by its release from
the torn sivaddling bands of the 'past, and from the practical
materialism of the present. It is now in danger of being
strangled by the one or stupefied by the other. I look, how-
ever, forward to a time when the strength, insight, and elevation,
which now visit us in mere hints and glimpses during moments
of clearness and vigour, shall be the stable and permanent pos-
session of purer and mightier minds than ours?purer and
mightier partly because of their deeper knowledge of matter
and- their more faithful conformity to its laws." What does he
mean by the lifting power of an ideal element, which is ulti-
mately to supersede the old-fashioned notions derived from the
Bible ? He has just before stated that matter will account for
all the mysteries that surround us. Is it, after all, Pantheism
that the Professor is driving at ? Why does he not state, in
plain language, what he does believe, beyond the potency of
matter ? What does he mean by his refined expression, " intellec-
PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND HIS OPPONENTS. 13
tual whoredom of spiritualism " ? Have liis opponents ever used
any language half so bad as this ? Is materialism less mere-
tricious than spiritualism ? He looks forward to a sort of
millennium, when the ideal element shall regenerate the world
through the more perfect knowledge of the laws of matter. In
the meanwhile, those who think that literature and art are as
ennobling as physical science, those who have neither time nor
inclination for scientific pursuits, and the multitudes of the poor
and heavy-laden, who have hitherto derived comfort from their
religious belief, must be looked upon as poor, ignorant, credu-
lous creatures, the mere victims of a delusion. Happy indeed
is it that, even by the Professor's confession, the world will
have religion !
Dr Tyndall, in a note to the Times of the 28th of January
last, says, in reference to spontaneous generation, " The dialectic
dust of Dr Bastian's letter I leave to the slow sure process of
self-subsidence." The cloud of cosmic dust which he himself
has raised may be safely left to the same sure process.
Five years since I wrote a little satire for circulation
amongst my friends, with the hope that the veductio cid
obsitrdvLin might be of some use to those who had no fixed
creed. I would commend it to the consideration of those
School Boards which are opposed to religious instruction. It
Was after this fashion :?
A Catechism of Advanced Views.
Designed for the benefit of the rising generation.
Question.?What is your name'!
Ansiver.?Tom Paine.
Question.?Who gave you that name ?
Answer.?The Registrar of Births, Marriages, and Deaths in the
parish where I was born.
Catechist.?Rehearse the articles of thy belief.
Answer.?I believe in the physical constructive forces which made
heaven and earth; in Huxley, Darwin, Robert Owen, Bain, Herbert
Spencer, Tyndall, and in all Avho entertain advanced opinions. I also
believe in the social system, the folly of marriage, the doctrine of
development, the lifting power of the ideal element, and the right
(Divine I was about to say) of the multitude to govern themselves. I
also add, that I believe in the efficacy of elementary drawing, algebra,
14 PROFESSOR TYNDALL AND HIS OPPONENTS.
and geometry ; studies which have been particularly recommended by
Professor Huxley for adoption by the School Board, the great object
being to cultivate the intellect, and leave the morals to take care of
themselves.
Question.?My good?I mean clever-?child, what dost thou chiefly
learn in these articles of thy belief ?
Answer.?That Christianity is a delusion and a snare, and a
stumblincrblock to the diffusion of science and civil liberty, and that there
is nothing in creation which evidences an intelligent design or a Divine
Providence.
Question.?After the wonderfully clever and original statements you
have made, I am almost ashamed to ask you if you believe in the Sacra-
ments and the Ten Commandments.
Answer.?Most assuredly not. Man's conduct must be regulated
by experience, and his first duty is to take care of himself. As regards
his offspring, the abolition of marriage under the social system would
render it extremely difficult for a child to know his father; it
would therefore be incumbent on the State to provide for his children.
I need scarcely remark that the social system especially and forcibly
demonstrates the absurdity of the fifth commandment?based on super-
stition and ignorance?which enjoins that a child should honour his
father and mother.
