Clinical and Physiological Research on the Nervous System
==========================================================

150
Art. XII.

Science, as well as History, has a tendency to repeat itself..
What was attempted in the eighteenth is now reproduced, with
slight modification, in the nineteenth century. Hartley, a
disciple of Newton, modestly essayed to demonstrate that all
impressions from the external world were conveyed along the
nerves to the brain, and thus entered consciousness, by a suc-
cession of vibrations and vibratiuncles, either disturbing an
imaginary ether universally diffused and locally surrounding
the nerves, or by equally imaginary tremors and agitations in
the nerves themselves, or in the fibres and fibrillse of which
they consist; while Dr Hughlings Jackson lias, for several years
past, argued that certain motions, mollar or molecular, it is
not clear which, are propagated or " discharged" along the
course of the nerves to specific muscles or sets of muscles, and,
indeed, to all parts of the system, and there energise or destroy
the functions of these parts in proportion to the nature or force
of the discharge, whatever that may be. It must be confessed
that these discharges, and the thing, the energy, the aura, the
" destroying or discharging lesions," are, as yet, as little sus-
ceptible of proof as the vibrations or vibratiuncles of Hartley.
The main object of this publication appears to be to show that,
contemporaneously with the mental, there take place motor
actions in the convolutions of the cerebrum, which pass along,
or are connected with, remote organs through the medium of
efferent nerves, effecting corresponding changes in the motor or
physical functions of these organs. As this epitome has been
divested of the transcendental language which that school, of
which the ardour and originality of Dr Hughlings Jackson legi-
timately constitute him the leader, has, we think, unfortunately
adopted ; and, as it is possible that the accuracy of our con-
densation may be questioned, it may be prudent to quote the
words of the formula now given forth.

Dr Hughlings Jackson says, page 7, Preface : " It is assumed
that the cerebral hemisphere is made up of pothing else than
nervous arrangements for the co-ordination of impressions and
movements; that, in other words, the unit of composition of
* On the Localisation of Movements in the Brain, by Dr Hughlings Jackson.
this, as of every other nervous centre (the " organ of mind " as
well as the ciliary ganglion, spinal cord, &c.) is sensori-mofor
"an epileptic discharge of a convolution caused 'convulsion
of the arm"' (p. 6); "The spasmodic deviation of the eyes,
spasm of the hand and arm, drawing of the face, and torsion
of the tongue, represent in a brutal way a development in vast
numbers of the motor elements of the anatomical substrata of
visual, tactual, and verbal ideas ; and this amounts to saying
that convulsion is as much a symptom of disease of the ' or?-an
of mind' as delirium is " (p. 39) ; and " I have long believed
that not only the movements ordinarily so called, but the
movements of arteries and the viscera, are represented in the
cerebrum " (p. 18).

Subordinate to the maintenance of these propositions we'
find in this paper collateral issues and objects, such as a
flattering tribute to Hitzig and Ferrier, in friendly forgetfulness
that their experiments are still, in the opinion of many mem-
bers of our profession, sub judice, and are openly questioned
by Burdon Sanderson, Putnam, and others; secondly, a vin-
dication of the author's priority of claim to the discovery of
the supposed dual function of the cerebrum; thirdly, that
the left brain is the leading or driving side, the side or seat
of will, while the influence of the right is automatic?a conclu-
sion suggested, perhaps, by Brocas' "Localisation of Language
fourthly, that both hemispheres are educated in expression, and,
although the left be the leading side, the right is the seat of
perception, educated sensations; and, fifthly, that the anterior
part of the cerebrum is chiefly motor, the posterior chiefly
sensory, etc., the latter being claimed by the author as an
observation of his own. Around all these subjects are grouped
illustrations, analogies, parallelisms, guesses at truth, which
have occurred to many inquirers, but are still undemonstrated
problems. These remarks, however, shall be confined almost
exclusively to what the author conceives the central and most
important position in his brochure, and which he has elaborated
with great solicitude and detail, and to the mode in which that
elaboration lias been conveyed ; the position, viz. that co-ordina-
tion of impressions and movements affected in the very highest
centres the substrata of consciousness ; which may be the streak
of light before the dawn, the penumbra of a discovery, but
assuredly it is neither the dawn nor a discovery. Had Dr.
Hughlings Jackson condescended to employ terms in common
use, his postulate might have amounted to this, that certain
areas of the brain, the convolutions, for example, subserve to,
or are the organs of, movement and sensibility, which come under
the cognisance of consciousness through such parts or organs,
and miglit have been fairly accepted, or, at all events, dis-
cussed ; but, in its present form, it appears to be contradicted
at once by Physiology and Pathology?by Dr Hughlings Jack-
son's own pathology, or what he calls " experiments instituted
by disease," by his doctrine of compensation, remote influence,
and so on.

Declining, at present, to enter upon the rather dark and
devious path of which the substrata of consciousness, memory
of words, ideation, are the goal, it is incumbent to ascertain
the author's precise meaning when using such terms as " co-
ordination of impressions and movements in the convolutions,"
and whether he desires to express merely that volitions or con-
ditions eventuating in movements, voluntary or involuntary,
in remote organs have their origin in the convolutions, or that
molecular movements themselves occur in the structure of the
convolutions, and are consentaneous with the motive which
prompts a motion, and the remote motion itself. Dr Hughlings
Jackson might have been misled by what he would call the
" coarse and brutal," and what we, more mildly, would style the
unphilosophical view that a certain incentive or feeling is con-
temporaneous with external acts, that something?a " discharge"
??proceeds from the central brain to the circumferential muscles,
&c.,?to adopt the former and perhaps popular theory; but
we apprehend that his speculations have compelled him to
embrace the latter, as we find: " For mental states arise
during molecular movements in nerve cells and fibres, and there
is no more difficulty in believing that theyarise during molecular
movements, in nerve cells and fibres representing muscular
movements, than during molecular movements in those repre-
senting peripheral impressions" (p. 34). Now it is almost
needless to affirm that of such molecular movements in cells,
&c., even our most sanguine microscopists have afforded no proof
nor probability. But supposing that such a "pons asinorum"
had been crossed?supposing that the convolutions had been
proved to be sensory motor, and that they were centres of co-
ordination, we find it impossible to reconcile such a doctrine
with Dr Hughlings Jackson's admissions: 1. "That part of
the body is not necessarily paralysed when corresponding part of
brain is destroyed, as neighbouring parts act for it;" for example,
when the corpus striatum is injured, the adjoining convolutions
exercise their conservative influence over the said muscles. 2.
It is true that there is a sort of reservation in the affirmation
that " discharges are not more isolated than the action of single
muscles thus, hemiplegia is referred to a destroying lesion in
the corpus striatum, and convulsion to a discharging lesion of
the adjoining convolutions, which, when both nervous diseases
occur unilaterally or alternately, may be regarded as another
example of this convenient compensatory law. Again, com-
pensation is declared not to be absolute ; when parts of the
brain are destroyed, and are not followed by any obvious
symptoms, it is conjectured that the loss of the muscular
sense may have taken place! These difficulties are enhanced
by the following considerations :?

I. These statements point rather to the diffusion of the
relation, whatever that may consist in, subsisting between the
convolutions and distant parts, than to its localisation.
II. In discussing the effects of a tumour, situated in the
white matter about the middle of the lateral ventricle, it is
.admitted that these must have been remote?in other words,
that they were transmitted through healthy portions of the
brain to that apparently involved by the structural disturb-
ance.

III. And in this section we detect a " destroying lesion"
to the whole of our author's argument, as he confesses that
although the lesion in unilateral convulsions may be found in
the region of the corpus striatum, yet, " occasionally no local
morbid change can be found in any part of the brain "?a con-
fession common to every one who has spent much time in the
dead-house. In connection with this part of the inquiry, the
Appendix may be adduced as militating against many of Dr.
Hughlings Jackson's favourite views.

Dr Hughlings Jackson has written much in the present as
well as in former communications of aphasia as indicating a
lesion both of the faculty and expression of the internal and
external organ of language. Many of his opinions are ingenious,
and all curious: but it is conceived that he has altogether over-
looked the consideration that the recognition of the laws and
the practical use of language are purely mental acts; that they
do not necessarily involve the use of articulate words; that in
the uneducated deaf and dumb no articulate sounds are known,
although the cerebral area and the organs of articulation are
both present and healthy, so that it must be the nexus, what-
ever that may be, which is at fault; that there must be many
cerebral organs, if any, and only some of these injured in certain
aphasics, who lose not their whole language, or difficult and
polysyllabic words, but whole and distinct classes of words only,
such as verbs, nouns, &c., or only one or more of several known
languages; that in employing mentally the signs of any, even
emotive mental states, there is no corresponding action of the
muscles or other vocal organs, and it is matter for regret that
he had had recourse to the solutions afforded by Fournie, who
speaks of a nascent but unobvious movement of the organs of
speech, and by Bain's absurd and untenable proposition, tliat
" When we recall the impression of a word or a sentence, if we
do not speak it out, we feel the twitter of the organs just about
to come to that point."

The author, although propounding dogmata many of which
may be regarded as heretical, is no dogmatist. He introduces
his opinions, even when he regards them as especially novel
and important, sometimes with hesitation, sometimes as if they
were provisional and temporary, always with modesty and for-
bearance towards actual or supposed antagonists; and is worthy
of all praise in urging the necessity for marking and measuring
the precise situation of lesions in the attempt to localise mental
or motor influences; while his instructions as to the course of
observation (p. 22) to be pursued in reference to palsy and
other nervous disorders, indeed the whole of the latter pages
of the pamphlet, are worthy of consideration. But there are two
grand, we would say vital, objections to the mode in which he
lias developed his various convictions and hypotheses. First,
wTe do not speak merely of the vice of style, of the lack of
logical lucidity, involved parenthetical paragraphs, many of
which are incomprehensible to minds of moderate capacity;
but of the technical and still unrecognised terms employed,
which at once obscure his meaning and the force of his
argument. It may be that this metonomy may, in part,
depend upon the poverty or inflexibility of our mother-tongue;
but it is more palpably chargeable against obscurity of thought,
crude notions, doubtful premises, disputable conclusions, and
against that tendency which all innovators, perhaps all dis-
coverers, have yielded to, of devising new words, or misapplying-
old ones, in order to expiscate their own conceptions, rather than
the qualities or entirety of the thing conceived. Has Science
secured any gain by the introduction of " discharging lesion
or has she lost by associating a simple alteration of structure
with an explosive shell, and the expulsion of an imaginary shot
or shell from the brain ; or are our ideas enlarged when we are
told that " chorea and convulsions are discharges of cerebral
cortex," and that the " causes of epilepsy are discharges from
different brain-centres," and that the havoc inflicted by palsy
issues from a " destroying lesion ?" That the illustration is not
overdrawn, may be seen in the application of the specific terms
" abnormal" and " morbid" to such discharges. Can we appreciate
the distinction between a " healthy and nervous discharge in con-
vulsions, by the latter being more sudden, excessive, and brief; "
or can we fully realise that the " spreading of spasm is due to
different lesions in the grey matter exploded;" or that there
was any justification for describing the progress of nervous
diseases from the more simple to the complex, from the
voluntary to the automatic functions, by the new term " dissolu-
tion," in contradistinction to the now hackneyed " evolution ?"
Expressions such as the " coarse, brutal development of func-
tions of brain," and a "coarse lesion as not being a neat experi-
ment," we attribute to the idiosyncrasy of the author ; while the
inability to comprehend such profound truths as, " Deeper in
brain, further in mind, more complex arrangements of motor
processes, reaching interrelation with complex motives," and
the " substrata of consciousness, memory, &c.," to our own.
Secondly, the author, though manifesting considerable anxiety,
knowing that he is dealing with sharp and dangerous instru-
ments, to avoid the infliction of wounds upon the principles or
even the prejudices of moderate men, and to repel charges of
scepticism and materialism, appears on the threshold of what he
believes to be a new revelation in somewhat suspicious company.
Herbert Spencer, Tyndall, Eain, Lewis, represent a certain school
of thought; and if Dr Hughlings Jackson does not doubt and
disbelieve, he assuredly thinks, on many points, as tlie}r think.
Although he distinctly disclaims all disposition to penetrate into
the mode of connection between mind and matter, admitting only
their parallelism, and although he quotes Tyndall's platitude
that we cannot reason out the simultaneous appearance of motor
and mental acts ; yet he concurs with Lewis, that neural process
and feeling are the same thing under different aspects, and
many of his own propositions are susceptible of an interpreta-
tion which may imply that these conditions differ not in nature,
but as they are viewed from different standpoints in philosophy.
Such are the following : " Motion enters as an element, not into
ideas, but into the anatomical substrata of ideas " Sensations,
as mental states, arise during energising of motor as well as
sensory nerve processes," thus concluding that when we see a
rose as well as when we will to pluck it, or extend our hand to
pluck it, there is movement in convolutions.

It is superfluous to carry this analysis further, and we are
disposed to accept the explicit denial that his views of the consti-
tution of mind are, as of the cerebrum cerebral, neutralising-
the inferences which might be drawn from vague and circumlo-
cutive expressions.
