On the Pathology and Treatment of Cerebral Disease
====================================================

40
Art. III.?O
No. II.
By ROBERT HUNTER SEJirLE, 3I.D.
Fellow of the Eoyal College of Physicians of London.
In discussing the pathology and therapeutics of cerebral
disease, these subjects may be treated in two distinct modes?one
of which is best adapted to the student of medicine, and the
other is more suitable for the contemplation of the practitioner.
The former mode would be founded upon the basis of classifica-
tion, which in all cases must be artificial, but would aim at
presenting to the view a series of mental pictures, displaying
certain types or forms of disease, and such canons of treatment
as might dwell in the memory, and constitute starting-
points for subsequent illustration and investigation. The latter
mode would be based on clinical experience, which, although
often failing to corroborate the dicta of nosologists, and even,
in many instances, directly contradicting them, is 110 less useful
in teaching the necessity of examining carefully every case as it
arises, and of disembarrassing the mind, if need be, of any pre-
conceived ideas derived from the authority of books, however
well written, and of teachers however eminent.
Thus, it is only necessary to examine the records of Medicine
for a few years in order to become convinced of the fallacy of
almost all attempts to establish unerring principles of
nosological arrangement, or to institute dogmatic principles of
treatment. Much of the change observable in these respects is
no doubt due to the influence of what maybe called " fashion" in
medicine; but much more is unquestionably attributable to the
increased spread of knowledge, to the improved methods of
medical teaching, to the closer attention paid to anatomical
investigation, to a better appreciation of physiological laws,
and to more extended opportunities of medical research offered
by the invention of the precise instruments in which our age
lias lately been so prolific. To pass over the stethoscope, the
laryngoscope, the sphygmograpli, as being unconnected with
the present subject, the introduction of the ophthalmoscope has
literally thrown a vivid ray of light into one of the darkest
cliambersof cerebral pathology, and has enabled the surgeon
and the physician to infer, from the condition of the retinal
vessels, the existence of structural changes in the cerebral
arteries calculated eventually to lead to the host of diseases
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 41
which, under the names of apoplexy, ramollissement, epilepsy,
coma, &c., may threaten the integrity of the vital and intellec-
tual functions, or cut the thread of life asunder in a moment.
In reference, too, to therapeutical appliances, a complete revolu-
tion has been wrought in the treatment of cerebral diseases?
partly by the guidance of the scientific principles and instru-
ments just referred to, partly by the sceptical tendencies of the
present age (using the word sceptical in the etymological
sense),* and partly even, we must confess, by the lessons afforded
by some forms of quackery, which have shown that many
cerebral and other diseases may be improved, or at all events
not rendered worse, by leaving them, unassisted, to the vis
medicatrix natures.
It must at once be admitted that the pathology of cerebral
disease is still involved in great obscurity in many respects,
although modern physiological research and clinical experience
have done much to remove some of the difficulties of the sub-
ject. It is almost a trite remark, that some of the most serious
diseases of the brain may exist and reach a fatal termination
without giving any appreciable notes of warning during the
life of the patient; and, on the other hand, that derangements
of certain parts of the cerebral mass, though apparently slight,
may give rise to the most serious and alarming symptoms.
One of the most recent instances of the existence of serious
organic disease of the brain, unaccompanied by any pathogno-
monic symptoms during life, was afforded in the post-mortem
?examination of a distinguished member of our own Profession,
who died last September, apparently from the results of an
operation for lithotomy, but in whom there was found a large
tumour pressing upon the cerebral mass, and which is thus
described in the careful notes made of the appearances:
" On raising the calvarium, a soft tumour was discovered, situ-
ated on the right side of the head, about an inch above the ear,
between the dura mater and the bone. It was about the size of
?a hen's egg, and projected towards the brain, so as to produce a
deep pit or hollow into which it fitted. The convolutions were
flattened and pressed down, but not otherwise altered?no
softening, no congestion. The dura mater covering the tumour
was somewhat thickened. The tumour had a cystoid character,
with a distinct investing membrane, and its contents consisted
of a blackish pulpy material resembling the interior of a recent
aneurism, or more closely of a myeloid tumour. Under the
microscope there were seen cells of various descriptions, plates
of cholesterine, fatty granules, and altered blood-corpuscles."
* The Greek -word aKeirrofxcu, it is almost unnecessary to state, means " to
contemplate," " to consider attentively," " to meditate upon."
42 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
The name of the physician in question I do not mention, but
the case will be well remembered by the medical world, and it
is almost unnecessary to remark that no symptoms of cerebral
disease had ever manifested themselves during life. Yet there can
be little doubt that the existence of this cerebral tumour was the
immediate cause of death, and, had not the brain been examined,
the whole case would have been involved in utter obscurity, for
the surgical operation was quite successful, and the patient was
little past the prime of life. In this case it will be urged, and
no doubt with truth, that the growth of the tumour was gradual,
and that the cerebral mass thus became accustomed to the
slowly increasing pressure, until a point was reached when
tolerance could no longer exist, or when some collateral cir-
cumstance (in the present instance, perhaps, the shock of the
surgical operation) overthrew the feeble balance which had so
long kept life and death in a tottering and uncertain equi-
librium.
There can be no doubt that when Ave discard the mere dry
details of the descriptive anatomy of the brain, and regard the
organ rather in its physiological relations with the spinal cord
and the origins of the nerves, a considerable insight will be
gained during life as to the seat of mischief, if any exist. In
making this remark, I omit, for the present, the consideration
of those cases where the whole of the cerebral mass or of its
peripheral portion is involved, and where any diagnostic or
differential decision as to the exact seat of the lesion is
impracticable or unnecessary. But I refer particularly to
those cases where the seat of disease is indicated by the
objective manifestations offered by the nervous cords which
form the media of communication between the central
cerebral mass and the external world. Viewed in the light of
modern science, the spinal cord is really the fundamental and
essential structure to which all the other parts of the nervous
system are subsidiary or subordinate, and it is well known that,
although even a human being may be bom without a brain, it
is impossible for existence to be continued without a spinal
cord. Anencephalous monsters, by means of the reflex action
of the c^rd, are enabled to draw their supply of milk from the
mother's breast, the brain being wholly unnecessary in this
function. Instead, therefore, of the spinal cord being a mere
appendage to the brain, as was once supposed, the fact is just
the reverse, and the brain is an offshoot or development of the
spinal cord. Into the relation existing between the assem-
blage of moral and intellectual faculties constituting the
Mind, and the mass of matter composing the brain, I do not
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 43-
at present enter, as my object is to show the pathological
connection existing between diseased structure and impaired
functions of certain parts of the intra-cranial organs. In this
very interesting but most difficult investigation, Dr Hughlings
Jackson has displayed conspicuous ability, rare sagacity, and
unwearied diligence, and the results he has obtained, though
necessarily imperfect, have revealed some of the most mys-
terious operations of the nervous system. I do not, however,
refer in detail to his researches, because I wish, as far as pos-
sible, to illustrate my remarks by cases which have fallen under
my own observation.
It may be stated, generally, that the exact seat of cerebral
disease is indicated,more or less clearly, according to its greater or
less connection with those nervous fibres which control or direct
the communications between the inner and the outer world, or,
in other words, between the cerebral mass and those external
objects with which the animal fabric is placed in relation. The
anatomist will readily recall to mind the direction taken by
the nervous fibres as he traces them, upwards and outwards,
from the so-called medulla .oblongata, through the Pons
Varolii, then through the ganglia called the optic thalami and
the corpora striata, till they expand into, and becomc merged
in, the general mass of the hemispheres. In this extensive
course they necessarily fall upon the track of many of the
nerves which proceed outwards to various parts of the body,
endowing those parts respectively with sensation, or motion, or
special sense, as the case may be. Thus, speaking generally,,
the posterior columns of the cords, passing through the medulla
oblongata and the other structures just mentioned, are con-
nected with the sensitive branches of what is called the fifth
pair of nerves; while the anterior columns, pursuing a similar
course, are connected with the motor branches of the fifth pair,
and also with the third pair, the fourth pair, and the sixth pair,
and what is called the portio dura of the seventh pair, and the
ninth pair, all of which are exclusively endowed with motor
powers. By pursuing the investigation in a reverse direction,,
and tracing the nervous fibres of the brain downwards and
backwards, these threads are found successively passing through
the corpora striata, the thalami optici, the Pons Varolii, and
then crossing or decussating in the medulla oblongata, so that
the fibres from the right side of the brain pass for the most
part to the left side of the cord, and vice versa. The explana-
tion is thus readily afforded of the fact that paralysis on one
side of the body almost always denotes some disease of the
opposite side of the brain; and it is equally easy to understand
that when the central part of the motor or sensitive tract is
44 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
affected, the paralysis will be on both sides. I do not propose
to give any illustrations of these well-known principles, whicli
are verified by daily observation.
It is not equally well known that when the seat of
disease is in that part of the brain which is not immediately in
the track of the motor or sensory nerves, there may be no
paralysis at all, although the lesion may be very serious and
extensive. It must be borne in mind that the great bulk of the
hemispheres of the brain are, so to say, expansions or outgrowths
from the divergent fibres of the spinal cord, and are, as it were,
outside the motor and sensory tracts, or are only blended with
them in a loose and general connction. The following curious
case is a remarkable illustration of the observations just offered :
Case.?Some little time ago I was requested to see a
gentleman who was suffering from several anomalous symptoms,
but all pointing to some serious cerebral disease. He was
?about sixty years of age, and somewhat plethoric. I learned
from his sister that he had been ill for about a year and a half,
and that he had been obliged to give up his business, owing to
obscure cerebral symptoms, which were attributed to " softening
?of the brain," and for which lie was recommended to travel
about various parts of this country and on the Continent. I
was told that his intellect was somewhat impaired and his
memory was imperfcct, and that he was unable to manage his
affairs satisfactorily. I first saw him in London on a Monday,
he having landed from Boulogne on the previous Saturday. I
was informed that he walked to the steamer at Boulogne, but
was helped out of it at Folkestone, and arrived at his residence
in London the same evening, and walked from the cab into the
house. He soon complained of feeling ill, and accordingly went
to bed, where he remained. It was noticed that he was very
sleepy and snored much, and he also vomited.
When I saw him first, he complained of sickness and vomit-
ing, and great pain in the head. He was rational, and answered
questions satisfactorily enough. The eyes seemed rather intole-
rant of light, and the pupils were contracted, remaining so
during all the rest of life. The bowels were confined. I con-
tinued to attend him till his death, which occurred about three
weeks after I first saw him. The treatment consisted in the
application of blisters to the nape of the neck, although he tore
them off; in the administration of purgative medicines, which
partially succeeded in their object; and in the cautious regulation
of his diet. I carefully examined him from day to day as to the
existence of paralysis in any of the limbs, but I could detect
none. I caused him to lift both his arms, and to place them in
various positions, and also to move both his legs, but he showed
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OP CEREBRAL DISEASE. 45'
no indication of loss of power, and wlien I pinclied the limbs I
elicited the expression of pain. His mental condition was
rather peculiar, for although, as has just been mentioned, he
answered questions rationally enough, he adopted, in conversa-
tion, a jocose tone which was unsuitable both to his acquaintance
with me (for I knew nothing of him before) and to the serious
illness under which he was labouring. He was always very
somnolent, but he could be roused without much difficulty. The
urine was passed involuntarily. It is unnecessary to record the
progress of the case further than to state that the symptoms
gradually became worse, the prognosis unfavourable, and lie
finally became comatose and died.
The post-mortem examination was made twenty-four hours
after death, the time being winter, and the weather very cold.
The head only was examined, owing to the objections offered
by the relations, but the appearances observed were very
interesting. The skull was thickened, and there were strong-
adhesions existing between it and the dura mater. There were
patches of old lymph on the surface of the brain at the vertex.
The arteries at the base were atheromatous, but no plug was
found in any of them, although they were carefully examined.
The consistence of the brain generally was normal, and no
softening existed in any part. But on the right side of the
brain, on the posterior lobe, and very near the surface, there
was a large cavity of about the size of a hen's egg, filled with a
clot of blood, and opening on the surface of the hemisphere-
This cavity and the contained clot presented the characteristic
appearances of such a lesion gradually in progress of cure, for a
membrane was in process of formation on the circumference of
the cavity, and the clot was beginning to lose its dark
sanguineous colour, and to assume a yellowish tint. The
effusion of blood was probably to be dated from the period of
the sea-passage from Boulogne to Folkestone, and from this
time more than three weeks elapsed until the death, during
which interval it would seem that nature was endeavouring to
effect a cure by the usual process of absorbing the clot, forming
a membrane to the cavity, and restoring the rest of the brain
to its normal state. In the present instance, however, the age
of the patient, the long duration of the disease, and the large
size of the effused mass, all combined to render a favourable
issue of the case all but hopeless.
Here, then, was a case where an extensive effusion of blood
existed in the right posterior lobe of the brain, but in which
during life there was no paralysis, the reason obviously being
that the seat of the effusion was out of the track of the
ordinary motor and sensory nerves. The more common seat of
4G PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
apoplectic effusions is in one of the lateral ventricles affecting-
the corpora striata or the thalarai optici, which are both of
them continuations of the motor and sensory fibres proceeding
upwards from the columns of the spinal cord. In the present
instance, too, it must be observed that the primary lesion
appears to have been a chronic inflammation of the membranes
of the brain, together with an atheromatous condition of the
arteries, and the immediate cause of death mast be referred to
the rupture of some minute branch near the periphery of the
organ. Besides the mental condition, the persistent contraction
of the pupils is a remarkable circumstance, and it indicates,
I believe, the existence of some irritation on the surface or
periphery of the brain, while the continuous dilatation of the
pupil is a pretty unerring test of effusion of fluid into the
ventricles or between the membranes. In ordinary apoplexy,
and in some other dangerous conditions of the brain resembling
that disease, it is very common to find one pupil contracted,
and the other dilated.
In contrast to the above case, I shall now adduce another, in
which the brain was proved to be the only organ diseased, but
the disease was of a very serious and complicated character :
Case.?M. T., aged 54, a person of dissolute character, was
seized at the beginning of July, some years since, with a
paralytic attack, for which lie was bled to the extent of thirty
ounces, but not by myself. After this treatment and the
administration of purgatives he partially recovered, but his
intellect became almost obliterated; he passed his urine un-
consciously, and became offensive to the persons in the same
ward, and was therefore placed in one by himself. From July
until the end of May of the succeeding year he remained bed-
ridden, but at the latter period he was again seized with an
attack resembling apoplexy ; the pulse was 180, full and strong,
and there was stertorous breathing. There was also paralysis
of the left side. He was bled to sixteen ounces, and during
the bleeding the stertorous breathing ceased, and did not sub-
sequently return. He remained, however, insensible; the pupils
were fixed in a state between contraction and dilatation; the
pulse fell to 160, and was rather feeble; the bowels were con-
fined, and the urine continued to pass involuntarily. He died
some days afterwards, and the following post-mortem appear-
ances were observed:?
On opening the head, I found the vessels of the dura mater
turgid with blood. The arachnoid membrane was slightly
thickened and opaque ; a large quantity of serous fluid, tinged
with blood, was found beneath it, and flowed copiously,
both from beneath the membranes of the brain, and from
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 47
the theca vertebralis. A large quantity of fluid was also
found in the lateral ventricles and in the third ventricle. The
vessels of the brain itself were not congested, and the general
structure of the organ, except in the parts about to be described,
presented a tolerably healthy appearance. At the posterior
part of the corpus callosum, immediately above the tubercula
quadrigemina, there was a considerable amount of softening, the
cerebral substance in that situation being of the consistence
of thick cream, but of a white colour. In the anterior part of
the right corpus striatum there was a cavity of about the
size of a hazelnut, lined witli a smooth membrane. On the
left corpus striatum there was a large but not deep excavation,
of about the size of a halfcrown, presenting a ragged appear-
ance, and of a dark-brown colour. The texture of this ulcerated
portion was much softer than that of the surrounding tissue,
from which it was not separated by any distinct line of
demarcation. The viscera of the thorax and abdomen were
carefully examined, but I could find no marks of disease, and
the kidneys especially were particularly healthy.
This, therefore, was a case of chronic disease, confined alto-
gether to the brain, and producing palsy, mental imbecility,
involuntary discharge of urine, apoplectic seizures, and eventually
death. There were no symptoms during life specially indi-
cative of softening. The first attack of paralysis was clearly
connected with an effusion of blood into the right corpus
striatum, and the apoplectic cell was the result of that event.
After this first attack it would appear that a liypercemic condi-
tion of the cerebral vessels continued to exist, and at last the
structure of the organ broke down ; and congestion of the mem-
branes, with copious effusions of fluid into the arachnoid sac
and into the ventricles, and central softening of the brain-
structure, were together the immediate causes of death.
With respect to the important but very difficult question
of treatment in cases such as those just referred to, I have some
observations to offer, but I am far from having any dogmatic
views on the subject. Opinions must now be formed and
expressed with the more reserve, because the progress of modern
pathology has proved the existence of so many hitherto unsus-
pected circumstances leading to softening, extravasation of
blood, neoplastic formations, and other serious diseases in the
intracranial mass, that the relief or removal of such conditions
must be a most serious problem. It is evident that in the case
last recorded treatment could have been of no avail; in the
preceding case it must have been equally unsuccessful; whereas
in the first case referred to (that of the deceased physician),
the cerebral malady was not even suspected during life.
48 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
However, as Celsus observes, " proposito metu, spes tamen
superest," and there are many circumstances which afford
gleams of hope in some of the cases of cerebral disease which
are apparently of the most desperate character. For it must
not be forgotten that, although the brain-substance is liable
to the formidable lesions already alluded to, yet the symptoms
indicating brain-disease may be present and the organ itself
be perfectly healthy. For, as is now well known, in conse-
quence of the researches of Marshall Hall, Brown-Sequard,
and others, the brain may be affected only functionally and
secondarily in many cases, the real seat of disease being situ-
ated elsewhere, and being, perhaps, only of a transient or
curable character. If space allowed, I could adduce numerous
instances where, although convulsions, spasms, or coma existed,
yet the brain was perfectly unaffected in its structure, and in
which, the local cause being removed, the brain-symptoms
entirely disappeared. How often has it happened that appa-
rent apoplexy has been dependent on kidney-congestion, and
has vanished when such congestion has been relieved; that
coma and convulsions, which have excited the most anxious
fears, have ceased, as if by magic, 011 the expulsion of an intes-
tinal worm; that cerebral congestion in a female lias been
relieved by the appearance or reappearance (as the case
may be) of the menstrual discharge; that spurious hydro-
cephalus in a child has disappeared on the cutting of a tooth !
But even when all such cases of excentric origin are ex-
cluded, and the attention is fixed upon the presence of actual
disease within the cranial cavity, it by no means follows that the
malady is incurable or hopeless. Mere congestion of the brain,
without extravasation, although often fatal, may be and is very
often relieved by remedial, dietetic, and hygienic measures; and
even when rupture of a vessel has taken place, and extravasation
has ensued into the cerebral mass, nature, assisted by art, may
still effect a cure. In the two cases just recorded from my own
experience, it will be seen that in the second case there was an
apoplectic cell, resulting from the cure of a sanguineous effusion
which had occurred ten months before; and in the first case, the
enormous effusion of blood in the posterior lobe of the brain
was actually in process of absorption, although the patient lived
only three weeks after the apoplectic attack. Hence, in a given
case of apoplexy, it is reasonable to hope (unless there be some
direct evidence to the contrary) that the case may be only one of
congestion; and even if there be an effusion from a ruptured
vessel, it may be anticipated, mil ess the effusion be very con-
siderable (of which no very distinct opinion can be formed
during life) that nature will absorb the effused blood, and,
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 49
though leaving a cyst, may restore the brain to its normal con-
dition. It is quite true that the occurrence of an apoplectic
attack, attended or followed by paralysis, is a most serious
warning; but, nevertheless, in innumerable instances, life may' be
prolonged and enjoyed by means of the application of judicious
remedial measures on the one hand, and by the removal of
injurious influences on the other.
In former times, as is well known, and in the memory of
many of the present generation, the universal rule of treatment
in apoplexy was to bleed the patient, and to a large amount; and
the practitioner who neglected this measure was considered
guilty of malapraxis. Some years since a very distinguished
member of the medical profession, long deceased, incurred
almost universal censure because, on a point ot etiquette (he
being a physician) he had neglected to bleed a medical friend
with whom he happened to be travelling, and who was suddenly
seized with a fit of apoplexy of which he died. It is hardly
too much to state, that had the physician in question adopted
the opposite course in the present day, he would be subjected
to censure just as loud and general, and the death of the
patient would perhaps be attributed to the adoption of the very
measure the omission of which was formerly supposed to cause
the fatal result. In either case, however, the censure would be
unjust. The public is too apt to attribute to human interven-
tion, or non-intervention, a number of fatal occurrences which are
really due to causes over which human art has no control, and
in many cases of apoplexy the result would be unfavourable
whether the patient were bled or not. In the two cases which
I have recorded and contrasted in the present paper, bleeding
was largely adopted in one of them, and entirely omitted in the
other. In the second case it will be seen (whether post hoc or
propter hoc is not very certain) that temporary relief of the
urgent symptoms followed the first copious bleeding; and in
the first case, where the patient was not bled at all, the sym-
ptoms gradually became worse, and the patient died.
The true rule of treatment probably lies between the two
extreme views which have been entertained in the present
century, and may be laid down as follows:?When the attack
is quite recent, and the pulse is full, hard, and strong, the
breathing stertorous, and the patient plethoric, the abstraction
of blood is admissible, and in all probability will be beneficial.
If? on the contrary, the patient be weak and anaemic, the
pulse feeble, and there be a tendency to syncope, blood-letting
will only accelerate the fatal result. Even in cases where the
pulse appears to admit of bleeding, the effusion may be so
extensive that all chance of recovery is lost; but it must be
PART I. VOL. II.?NEW SERIE8. D
50 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
remembered that the amount of effusion can be proved only
after death, and although that event has happened it does not
follow that the bleeding has therefore been injurious.
As I wish to support my views from cases derived from my
own experience, I adduce the following, of which I have pre-
served notes. I have written out and published so many cases
of post-mortem examinations occurring in my own practice,
that I cannot be accused of any attempt to paint my expe-
rience with a couleur de rose, or to pretend that bleeding or any
other treatment is a care for apoplexy; but still I adduce the
cases as honest records of the consequences of treatment. In
this sceptical age I do not even assert that the patients would
not .have recovered if no depletion had been practised, but I
think I may confidently declare that the measure did no harm:?
Case.?E. S., female, aged 70. I was sent for and re-
quested immediately to visit this patient, who was said to be
either dying or dead. I arrived in a few minutes, and ascer-
tained that she had previously been in the enjoyment of her
usual health, and had never suffered from any dangerous dis-
ease ; but that in walking upstairs she had suddenly fallen
backwards with such a noise that it was heard by the neigh-
bours, who immediately ran to her assistance, placed her in
bed, and sent for medical aid. When I saw her she was lying
on her back, with her eyes half-closed ; her mouth drawn to
one side, and convulsively agitated; the limbs motionless; the
breathing loud and stertorous; the pupils fixed in a state
between dilatation and contraction, not altering their size by
the admission or withdrawal of light. She appeared quite
insensible, and could not answer questions, seeming not to
understand their meaning; the pulse was full and strong, and
the action of the carotid arteries powerful. I opened a vein
in the arm, and obtained ten ounces of blood. I also ordered
a drop of croton-oil to be taken immediately, and also some
saline purgative. I visited her the next day, expecting to find
her either dead, or at least growing worse; but to my great
surprise she was much better, in full possession of her faculties,
and without any symptom of palsy; her speech was clear,
and she possessed the full use of all her limbs. On the day fol-
lowing, the patient was engaged in her usual occupations and
declared herself perfectly well.
Case.?J. L., male, aged 60, had experienced several
apoplectic attacks, for the last of which he had been bled,
put upon low diet, and ordered to take purgative medicines.
Under this treatment, which was pursued in an infirmary, his
health became materially improved, but all his requests for
full allowance of meat and beer were disregarded. However,
PATHOLOGY ANTD TREATMENT OP CEREBRAL DISEASE. 51
after a continuance of this regimen for five months, he pro-
cured his discharge from the infirmary, and of course returned
to his usual diet. About nine months after the attack just
alluded to, he was seized with another, and I saw him very
soon afterwards. There was total insensibility and immobility
of the limbs; the pulse was full and strong, the pupils fixed in
a state between contraction and dilatation; breathing loud and
stertorous, and the intellect totally deficient. I bled him to
eight ounces, and ordered a drop of croton-oil to be taken,
and some saline purgatives. The next day he was much
better; he had regained the use of his limbs, and his intel-
lectual faculties had returned. He was able to move both
arms, but could not use the right so well as the left. He was
put upon low diet, with the occasional administration of pur-
gative medicines, and under this treatment he regained his
usual state of health.
Case.?A. K., female, aged 66. I was requested to see this
patient immediately, as she was said to be in a fit. On visiting
^lei\ I ascertained that while conversing with a friend she felt
suddenly very giddy, and appeared to lose the use of her arms
and hands, for she let fall a candlestick which she was holding
at the time. Her condition when I saw her was as follows
She was tying in bed; the features were not distorted, but her
speech was thick and confused, and almost unintelligible; she
appeared to have the use of both her hands and arms, and
could move them without difficulty; when asked to grasp my
hand she did so, and there was no perceptible difference in the
muscular power of either hand; the pupils were contracted,
and did not dilate when the light was withdrawn; action of
"the carotids powerful; pulse strong and full, frequently beating
double; action of the heart corresponding to the pulse at the
"wrist, and the impulse strong. The intellect was impaired,
but not lost; she seemed to understand questions, but answered
them in a confused and hurried manner. She was continually
moving about in the bed and pulling the bed-clothes with her
hands. I bled her in a full stream to sixteen ounces, which
did not cause her to faint. On the next day she appeared
much better ; the intellect unclouded; speech clear and dis-
tinct ; pulse 96, small and irregular. The blood drawn the day
before showed a disproportionately large amount of crassa-
menturn, which had a buffy coat. She was ordered to take
three grains of calomel every four hours, and saline purgatives.
I watched this case from day to day, and the improvement was
rapid, the cure at last being complete. A fortnight after the
original attack I find in my notes, which were taken at the
i) 2
52 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
time, that the patient was then enjoying her usual state of
health and had no bad symptoms whatever.
This case I suspect to have been one of inflammation of
the arachnoid membrane, perhaps attended with the effusion of
serum or lymph ; and my opinion is based on the facts that the
pupils were contracted?a sign usually denoting peripheral in-
flammation or irritation : that the blood drawn was buffy, a cir-
cumstance generally indicative of serous inflammation : that
the intellect was impaired, but not abolished : that the affection
of the limbs was convulsive rather than paralytic: and finally,
perhaps, that the recovery took place under the circumstances
described.
In all these cases I cannot help adverting to the fact,
which I think is worthy of attention, that I saw them almost
immediately after the seizure in each instance, and that the
bleedings were performed at the very onset of the malady.
It is right to mention that these cases occurred at a time
when bleeding was still regarded as indispensable in the treat-
ment of apoplexy and apoplectiform seizures.
Case.?A. B., aged 38, a tall, powerful, and plethoric man,
weighing about seventeen stone, an innkeeper, not immoderate
in his habits for a person in his business, but still eating and
drinking much more than was necessary, was seized with
symptoms denoting an approaching attack of apoplexy. "When
I saw him, he was lying on a couch, breathing heavily, and
almost stertorously; he could be raised, but with difficulty, and
answered questions imperfectly ; the pupils were fixed between
contraction and dilatation, and did not alter their dimen-
sions under the influence of light; the head was hot; the pulse
was full and strong. Although this case occurred rather recently,
and after the tide of professional opinion had turned against
the abstraction of blood in apoplexy, I did not hesitate?
especially as I had, fortunately, a lancet in my pocket?to bleed
him at once, and I took away a large quantity of blood. I do
not know exactly how much he lost, as no professional assist-
ant was with me, and the blood was drawn into a large wash-
hand basin. But the effect was most striking: the patient, who
was before sleepy and lethargic, began to open his eyes, and to
assume a look of intelligence, and to answer questions readily..
I ordered him some calomel and some saline medicine, and
when I saw him the next day, he was in all respects much
better, and, in short, he was entirely restored to health in a few
days.
