Second-Sight; or, Deltteroscopia
=================================

15 Art. II?
BY W. A. F. BROWNE, ESQ.,
Ps} chological Consultant, Crichton Institution, Dumfries ; recently Medical Commissioner in
Lunacy, Scotland.
willi ^ 1*eTer ??uld advance my curiosity to conviction, but came away at last only
lng o believe."?Johnson's Tour to the Hebrides, p. 347.
Second-sight must not be confounded with the visions, vatici-
. 10ns? spiritual apparitions, omens, or auguries which have
111 places and periods extorted belief from the sage, the
S1ynple, the savage. Deuteroscopia may have a connate origin
y?ith these, but admits of the special definition of being an
^voluntary affection, a supersensuous impression, involving a
portent which does not inspire fear or foreknowledge in the seer,
0 has not, generally, any personal interest in the coming
event. It
is likewise susceptible of the characteristic descrip-
tion that it is more prevalent in Northern regions, though
0 bserved universally ; that death or disaster is generally fore-
s ladowed by funereal processions, by corpses so placed as to be
connected with the coffin, the cerement, or the cemetery, by
llouds generally concealing the features of the doomed
wearer, and the position of which on the body indicates the
proximate or remote time of death, and by the facts that the
visitation is intimated to those around previous to the fulfilment
the portent, and that real objects are mingled with, or seen
yond, those which are accepted, or recognised, as supernatural,
and. so on.
It has been customary to identify this mental condition
perstition or delusion is the more popular solution) with the
a^s% insanity of the Laps, the extatices of the Samoiedes
Ustiaks; indeed, Brierre de Boismont * attributes this
^r?|1P Phenomena to an Arctic climate and cold. Yet Hib-
1 v 110 positive confirmation of this supposition. The
a isation in this country has been limited to the Highlands
H b ^an(^s' and to the Celtic race, even to Skye and the vexed
? llcles, where the burst-boom of the mighty Atlantic echoes
the eX^?I1<^s itself amongst the gigantic cliffs which wall in
e semi-sterile hills, or morasses; where the shepherd, his
a , mayhap the hardy deer?secure drowsily and slowly
scanty nourishment; where mists, and exhalations, and long-
n mued twilight favour visual deceptions; and where a
Pie that have passed recently and rapidly fiom Paganism!
* Dcs Hallucinations, 1845, p. 262.
t Philosophy of Apparitions.
J Note 16, Sir Walter Scott's Lord of the Isles.
16 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
to Catholicism and to Protestantism, to Christianity without its
twin civilisation, and are by constitution gloomy, dreamy, and
uneducated, are prone to superstition, to create and to credit
imaginary communications and warnings from the world of
spirits. Another fallacy, flattering it may be to the spirit or
the vanity of the age, has obtained circulation, that the influ-
ence of their belief is dead?has died under the doubts and
preaching of the priesthood?has been laid by the blaze of
enlightenment: yet in Skye, certainly, the focus where the rays of
weird illumination from the cluster of islets around were
concentrated?where this "local habitation and name" were illus-
trated by a literature, and by the collection of the largest
number of examples extant?it would appear that this belief
still survives; and this although the pulses of the steamboat
and the scream of the locomotive mingle with the roar of
ocean, and the tide of Cook's tourists bring as various and as
curious novelties to the shore as the Grulf Stream, and the doubts
and difficulties of Protestantism have supplanted the credulity
and sanction of Catholicism as to communion with the unseen
and the unknown. If any diminution has taken place in the
dominion of such convictions in these remote and ungenial
lands, it must be by the migration of such convictions south-
ward. The most copious and authoritative record of such
revelations in the region to which they are supposed to be
indigenous is to be found in Martin's Treatise on the subject,
incorporating Tracts by Theopliilus Insulanus and Aubrey.
These narratives were written at different times in the eighteenth
century, but are contained in a work called "Miscellanea
Scotica," published in 1820. The frequency of this credence
may be estimated from the assurance made in the first
edition of the Statistical Account of Scotland by the minister
of Applecross?still, notwithstanding continued emigration,
numbering 1,129 inhabitants?that the belief is general
among his parishioners, although they reject that in witchcraft.
Martin's Collection embraces 178 distinct histories, in many in-
stances related to the authors by the seers themselves ; in others
derived directly from, or traced to, trustworthy sources. An
analysis of these facts appears to show that the gift or power of
perceiving such marvels was sometimes hereditary, sometimes
communicable by touch ; that it was never acquired ; that there
was no college or school of seers or prophets ; that it was exercised
independently of the will in a trance-coma condition, and often
only once in the life of the individual. The senses of hearing,
touch, even smell, as well as that of vision, seem to have been
channels through which the phantom impressions reached the
mind; and the objects or pictures thus conveyed were of the
SECOXD-SIGIIT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA. 1'
m?st different and dissimilar kind?-from tlie sound of a saw
employed in the construction of a coffin, or tlie sight of a coipse
a shroud pointing out the spot on which the vision was to
"be realised, to the most minute accidents and details of a
shipwreck?to the solemn pomp and pageantry of a funeral
procession, in which the features and dress oi many of the
attendants, the texture of the mortcloth, even the name, age,
&c. of the deceased, not always known to the seer, were
recognised. The import of such intimations was invariably
lugubrious, and shadowing forth misfortune or misadventure
of some kind. Prescience of the precise evil impending was
not always accorded to the observer, who, however, generally
announced its approach, its formidable or fatal character, and
the person or persons involved. The appearances weie visible
at. noonday as well as at midnight; were seen by many or few,
but generally by one seer; assumed the form, ^ aspect, and
actual condition and relations of surrounding objects, or were
associated with abnormal phenomena?such as seeing and lecog-
nising a second and more distant series of objects, houses,
animals, &c., previously known to exist through and beyond
the supposed spectral illusions. This diaphanous charactei^ of
the vision, which permits of two distinct impressions passing
each other, or being present consentaneously on the retina or
in consciousness, is not so frequent as the more inexplicable
anomaly of the phantasm or imaginary picture obstructing the
view of a real known familiar scene ; nor is it peculiar to this
locality or its inhabitants, as Miiller * refers " the seeing the
images of external objects through the phantasms as through
a veil" to all Northern visionaries. The concealment of the
thorax and lower limbs of a skeleton, who haunted and hunted
to death an unfortunate victim, by the body of the physician
while the skull peered over his shoulder, when attempting,
experimentally, to lay the ghost, is a frightful instance of this
Peculiarity. Abercrombie f mentions a gentleman who was
accustomed to amuse himself by gazing at the furniture seen
through an apparition by which he was repeatedly visited.
Martin's long catalogue is swelled and disfigured by numerous
incongruities, inconsistencies, redundancies. The latter com-
prehend dreams, previsions, prophecies, prodigies, which cannot
possibly be placed under the category oi Second-sight, as
they include specimens of almost all spiritual agencies, spiead
over the whole range of history, from the Siege of Jerusalem
and the age of St. Polycarp to the author's own day. Yet,
Muller's Physiology of the Senses, p. 1393.
?inquiries Concerning the Intellectual Towers and the Investigation of Truth.
part i. vol. ii.?new series. b
18 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
after making* ample deductions of what is extraneous and
absurd, there remains a residuum, which may be dealt with
philosophically, and for the reality of which the amount
of evidence adduced is as great as of any event, recent or
remote, where legal or judicial evidence has not been obtained??
a reality which shall at present be limited to two facts:
1st. That the seer was conscious of seeing certain unusual or
exoneural objects; and 2nd. That subsequent occurrences cor-
roborated or confirmed the interpretation attached by the seer
to such objects. It would be as legitimate and reasonable to
question the trustworthiness of all human testimony, as to
denounce the narrators as impostors, imposed upon, deluded, or
demented. The Rev. M. Kirk, minister of Aberfoyle, much
referred to for supernatural or legendary lore, who is perfectly
trustworthy as to human and everyday events, describes, in
his " Secret Commonwealth," the seers as unperverted by
their belief, and as intelligent, candid, honest, and sociable
citizens.
Either because certain localities are less prolific than others,
or because inquirers are less zealous or more accurate, portions
of wild and mountainous country at no great distance from Skye,
though fertile in ghosts, goblins, warnings, werewolves (Scotice,
worry-cow), yield no undoubted instance of Second-sight. Thus
Mrs. Grant of Laggan,* a clever and popular authoress, in
her "Essays on the Superstitions of the Highlanders of Scotland,"
published in 1811, embracing the magnificent tract between the
Spey and the Spean, gives eight descriptions of apparitions of
different kinds, only one of which even approaches the mental
condition now under discussion. She writes that one of two
widowers, who keenly felt their bereavement, while walking in a
wood and conversing upon this subject, threw himself upon the
ground, exclaiming, " Alas, that I had but one sight of my dark-
haired Anna! " At this very moment his companion saw in a
ray of sunshine the figure of the said Anna, and pointed it out
to her sorrowing husband; but ere the individual principally
concerned could see the apparition, it had vanished, " the flowers
remaining unbent where it seemed to stand."
The easiest course in escaping from the dilemma created by
such experiences, is either to deny and disbelieve the facts, or
to allow their influence to fade away with the state of society with
which they were identified. More strong and stringent remedial
measures, however, have been resorted to. In 1824 appeared
Dr Macculloch's work on the Highlands,! designed and, when
* Essays on the Superstitions of the. Highlanders of Scotland, by Mrs. Grant,
Laggan (London, 1811), Yol. i. pp. 197-276.
t Macculloch's Highlands: Letters to Sir Walter Scott, 1824.
SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA. 19
viewed superficially, calculated to dissipate tlie glamour 01
roseate romance slied by Sir Walter Scott's genius like a sunset
glory over the traditions, social condition, tongue, modes of
thinking and feeling of the Celtic race. In his long and clever
disquisition upon Second-sight, based, to a certain extent, upon
Martin's observations, Dr Macculloch employs the weapons of
scornful satire and scepticism, and, even where reasoning ^ is
resorted to, the basis is rather that of humour than of logic.
He first uses the universal solvent of disputing the occurrence
of every supernatural impression, whensoever or wheresoever
such may have been recorded; but, suspecting that this aqua
regia may be rejected, as inapplicable to many of the moral
difficulties presented, he condescends to enumerate a long series
of secondary explanations, which are true within a certain, but
only a certain range.
Among these causes, the operation of which cannot be
conceived to be limited to the Highlands, are dreams, delirium,
hypochondriasis, lazy indolent rumination, shepherd life, supei-
stition, remnants of their ancient creeds, and starvation. By a
singular inappreciation of the difference and irreconcilability
of the antecedents and positions of the seers, he cites the
miraculous temptations of St. Anthony and the enthusiastic en-
durance of St. Simon Stylites as illustrative of the Taiscli of
Hebridean carle or cobbler. In his wide survey.and exposure
of supposed spectral appearances, Dr Macculloch admits that
Second-sight is not more preposterous or incredible than many
convictions that have been admitted and cherished by kings,
mathematicians, divines, even sceptics?by those of high intel-
ligence and pure life; but he scouts, and justifiably scouts, the
theory that what many or the majority of men believe must
necessarily be true. But this is not logically the point at issue.
The proposition which he was called upon to determine was, can
it be that a faculty or feeling to believe in the marvellous, and
to receive impressions which are not communicated by the
external senses, be given merely to deceive, to plunge in error
and fear, and to disturb the ordinary manifestations of mind
without benefit or purpose?
A more formidable because scientific critic and commenta-
tor on such relations was found in Sir David Brewster, in his
" Natural Magic," 1838. His principle is, that the pictures
reaching consciousness may be so distorted by the physical con-
dition of the organ of sight, and may be so influenced by
certain optical laws, or deviations from such laws, as to suggest
oi 1 ?present the phenomena regarded as supernatural or spiritual.
In his essay, avowedly written for the purpose of demonstrating
the fallacies and delusions which may arise from accidental or
B 2
20 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
diseased deviations from the ordinary and natural laws of vision,
lie conceives that tlie origin of apparitions may be traced to the
following facts and experiments:?
1. Phosphorescence, iridescence, and ultimately redness, are
produced in the interior of the eye by external pressure on tlie
ball, or by disorganisation of its structure, as is noticed in
double-vision, half-vision, colour-blindness, &c., and the insen-
sible part of the retina may be stimulated by impressions falling*
upon other parts of the eye.
2. That when the eye is directed on a burning fire, or
irregularly-shaded surface, a variety of distinct forms, such as
letters, sentences, appear.
3. That the spectral illusions always appear in front of the
eye, and partake in its movements, exactly like the impressions
of luminous objects, after the objects themselves are withdrawn.
This continuity is exemplified in the cases of Newton, Boyle,
&c., where the image of the sun was retained for several years?
such impression generally lasting only for one-eighth of a
second.
4. By looking steadily at one coloured wafer, you lose sight
of another coloured wafer on the same sheet of white paper,
and so whenever one object is intently and steadily regarded?
such effects being varied by the colour of the object and
luminosity of the atmosphere.
5. All objects seen directly are seen indistinctly; and con-
fusion is produced by effort to direct the eye upon objects through
an indistinct medium, or in darkness, when tlie pupil is so
dilated that near objects can only be seen imperfectly.
6. Spectres are seen as white, because this colour is the onl}'-
one that can be seen in imperfect media, and will assume a
different form (human, for instance), according to the actual
colour, &c. of the object seen.
7. Spectral colouration, effected by fixing the eye upon a
particular colour.
8. Deceptions produced by whirling a lighted stick, or by the
Thaumatrope
9. Deceptions from luminous objects in or near the eye, as
where a speck of sealing-wax on the palpebroe reflected images
of candles above and behind the head of the observer.
Sir David Brewster puts, hypotlietically, that if a living*
figure had been projected against the strong light which
imprinted these durable spectra of the sun mentioned
above, which really might happen when the solar
rays are reflected from water, and diffused by its ruffled surface,,
this figure would have necessarily accompanied all luminous
spectres which the fancy might create; but he confesses that no
SECOXD-SIGIIT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA. 21
supernatural effects have been actually produced by the causes
?described. He however asserts, as an event coming within his
own knowledge, that a figure dressed in black, and mounted on a
white horse, proved to be, from the state of the atmosphere, &c.,
a figure in white upon a black horse. An actual spectre in dark
habit, on a white horse, is asserted to have saved a clergyman
from murder, but there is no evidence of any substratum,
or plane for reflection.* Like other philosophers of this
school, Sir David Brewster naturally and inevitably holds that
the retina is the seat of the supernatural, and that the
images from without and the spectral illusions from within
equally impinge thereon, differing only in the degree of
vividness. Postponing any examination of such atlieoi} , and
taking each of the sources of fallacy described individually, 01
taking the whole together, there would be required as gieat an
amount of credulity to accept them as explanatory of spectral
illusions as is required to place implicit faith in apparitions,
Second-sight, &c., such as it is the aim of physicists to account
for. We are inclined to echo the opinion of Miiller: Ihe
spectral phenomena, 01* visions, are not more extraordinary than
the ordinary function of sight." How, for instance, could any 01
all of the deviations from natural and direct vision, whethei lefer-
able to ocular or atmospheric phenomena, even it dread 01
disturbing emotions were superadded, produce or elucidate any
?f the visions, and above all the culminating apparition in
Mrs A.'s case, upon which Sir David Brewster builds so
much.?where a carriage-and-four is seen by her, when seated
in her drawing-room, driving up the avenue* to the poicli
?f her house, in bright daylight, which was occupied by skeletons,
the postilion himself being a skeleton ? It suggests a smile
and a suspicion, when the same writer, obviously distrustful of
Iris previous premisses, declares that the cause of the spectres of
Nicolai, Mrs. A., &c., was " deranged action of the stomach.'
Indigestion, in common with every form of disease, undoubtedly
influences all mental operations, and the manner in which the
communications from the external senses are received by the
ynind. Health, however, is a mere abstraction, and, although
intelligible under the words mens sana in corpore sano, is,
perhaps, never positively possessed by any individual. The
cradle may be denominated a miniature or potential coffin,^ as
iu the tiny body which it contains begins at once a succession
transformations and changes, developments, diseases, in
preparation for death, all of which are accompanied by charac-
teristic phases of instinct, ideation, and passion. But it is not
* Bourchicr, sec p. 1G.
22 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOFIA.
demonstrable tliat such conditions, whether physical or psychical,
except in insanity, subvert the will, the intellect, or the laws
of perception and belief. It would be " a leap in the dark," a
transcendentalism which even modern physiologists would
repudiate, to assert that any bodily ailment or unhealth placed
us in nearer relations to the supersensuous or the supernatural?
in other words, prostrated us as victims before superstition and
delusion; or that certain modifications of unhealth may not
rouse and raise greater mental energy, perspicacity, and
illumination; or that some of the greatest efforts of genius, and
even of useful discovery, have been prosecuted contemporaneously
with, and in despite of, decrepitude, decay, and suffering?
as in the cases of Pascal, Coleridge, &c. Dyspepsia is the
concomitant or heritage of a gluttonous and luxurious in-
dulgence, and of a state of society such as at present prevails ;
so that the frequency of apparitions among the wealthy,
the worldly, the delicate and refined, and their supposed rarity
among those whose diet is porridge and potatoes, and who have
no access to condiments or golden vintages, may to a certain
extent be explained. But there appear no data for regarding
the Second-siglit-seers as diseased, or other than as robust, hardy,
abstemious mountaineers: sometimes educated,and not disturbed
in sentiment or sensuality, receiving the impressions, which
they accepted and interpreted as coming from another world,
without excitement, in their own homesteads, in their daily
walk and work of life, clothed in familiar guise, and, so far as
can be learned, unaccompanied and unmystified by any affections
of the organs of vision, or by any new combinations or corrusca-
tions of the grey and sober lights which fell around, or by any
colouration than that of their native heather.
Dr Carpenter, an able censor and expurgator of all spiritualist
phenomena, has, within a short period,* essayed a new exposure
of such impressions. The central gist and gravamen is to show
that science, and that vague and vapouring process called "human
progress," are undermining beliefs; that, in Locke's words, " the
doctrine proves the miracle, not the miracle the doctrine;" but in
his sweeping generalisations lie includes all convictions that can-
not be logically or mathematically proved. As sources of fallacy,
in dealing with the miraculous, the mysterious, even the unusual,
he enumerates?1, prepossession; 2, the non-correspondence
of states of consciousness with external impressions ; 3, the
accordance of the impression and its interpretation, being-
the effect of mental character or condition; 4, mental expec-
tancy of result; 5, fixity of gaze; 6, religious enthusiasm;
* The Fallacies of Testimony in Eolation to the Supernatural, by Dr "W. B.
Carpenter : Contemporary Review, January 1876.
SECOND-SIGIIT, OR DEUTEROSCOPI A. 2o
/' prejudice in limitation of evidence; 8, amplification of simple
into romantic fiction; 9, popular opinion; 10, fear, as under
Obi curse; 11, unquestioning faitli in external power; 12, action
of mind on body. While most thinkers would experience as
much difficulty in discovering a physiological law explanatory
of the removal of the tumour, by mere reliance on the prediction
of Sir J. Paget that it would be removed, as in believing that
the removal was the result of Divine interference, and while it
may be readily conceded that the intellectual defects and
emotional disturbances do elucidate or fully explain many of
those impressions which are vulgarly regarded as supernatural,
it becomes imperative to inquire as to the causation of such
impressions when received by the impassive, the indifferent, the
doubting, the disbelieving?when there is no prepossession, no
expectancy, no faith, no fear, no influence ot prejudice, populai
opinion, and no corporeal excitement or malady. By such a
process any body of facts might be so disintegrated and dissi-
pated as to render an actual witness doubtful as to the e\ idence
?f his own senses, and to place any secondhand relation undei
the same category that the existence of Napoleon I. was
rendered by the destructive analysis of Archbishop "Whately.
There are, however, affections of the nervous system which
it has been conceived may be assimilated to the state of
Deuteroscopia, or to be reducible to the same psychical elements.
Socrates is reported to have stood immovably in front of the
army in which he served for twenty-four hours, gazing fixedly
forward, perhaps into futurity, and perhaps in concert with his
familiar spirit, " as if his soul were absent from his body.
George Foxe, the lieresiarch, lay for fourteen days mute,
motionless as if dead, " but his sleep was full of divine visions
of beauty and glory." Engelbreclit, previously subject to
sensorial illusions, and after protracted fasting, revivalism,
and forebodings, became partially unconscious, receiving
occasional intimations from without, while transported to the
spiritual world as a participant in things unspeakable, while he
remained for twelve hours with rigid and insensible limbs, and
&s if vision and life were extinct. Closely allied to these states
are death-trance, trance-coma, trance-sleep, somnambulic tiance,
whether natural or artificial; but these differ mainly and mate-
rially trom Second-sight in the complication ot the muscular
system, in the suspension or perversion of the external senses, in
the acts of consciousness being visions, but not previsions, and in
the revelations consisting of imaginings, not of surrounding obj ects.
The perversion, conversion, or transference of sensibility has been
principally marked in somnambulism, where difficult and dan-
gerous acts have been performed with the eyelids closed, where
24 - SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
sounds reach the ear only when in the circle, or connected with
the perception present, or the predominating feeling; and where
it has been asserted the functions of the eye, the ear, and of the
other channels of sensation, have been exercised in remote
parts of the body, in normal states endowed only with common
sensation, and all this without any knowledge or memory on
the part of the individual. Thus, in the celebrated and often-
quoted case, resting npon the authority of the Archbishop of
Bordeaux,* a student rises nightly during profound sleep, rules
selected paper, writes themes, music, corrects and improves
his manuscript, even when pasteboard is placed between his
face and the objects to which attention is directed, even
knowing when his pen requires ink, when the paper is changed,
&c.; or, in the more common but equally curious instances,
when the sleep-walker ascends precipices, roofs of houses, rides
long distances, and performs acts and feats to which when
awake he is unaccustomed, and of which he is incapable?there
appears to be a creative, adaptive, and new-developed power in-
dependent of consciousness. There is no exact parallel of
correlative manifestations in Second-sight, but rapture and
ecstasy have been -observed to accompany the prevision
of which we treat. Trance may be represented by a
concentrated stare, and in one case it is said that the
eyelids required to be readjusted ; but the discriminating-
properties of the seer are, that the portent is shadowed forth
by ordinary occurrences or objects ; that the pictures, whatever
may be their nature, are compatible with perfect health in the
participant, and are unaccompanied by fear, or wonderment, or
perplexity.
There are, besides, conditions which are closely allied to
that under consideration by many points of coincidence,
especially by the characteristics of spiritual apparition and
portent. Without attempting to systematise or exhaust these,
they may be fairly classified under the following heads:
I. Where the spectre or semblance of a deceased person,
or of one about to die, appears to a friend or acquaintance at
the moment or time of death, not to prefigure, but to announce,
event.
The following illustrations of this order may suffice:
]. Two young officers of the 33rd Kegiment, subsequently
distinguished as Sir John Sherbroke and General Wynyard,
are, at 4 r.ir., October 1785, in broad daylight, seated in their
barrack-room in Cape Breton. The room had two doors?one
from a passage, one into a bedroom, from which there was no
other exit. Sherbroke, raising his eyes from his studies, saw at
* Frcncli Encyclopedia: Mayo's Popular Superstitions, 18olr p. 103.
SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA. 25
tlie former entrance a tall emaciated youth, clothed in
summer costume, while tliey were wrapped in their winter fuis,
and who cast a melancholy glance on his companion, as he seemed
to enter the inner room. The latter, having his attention
directed to the figure, horror-stricken exclaimed, " Why, good
God, that's my brother !" There was no brother in the body
there. Willing to regard the appearance as a practical joke,
silence was at first observed, but the anxiety and misery ot the
sufferer revealed the cause to his brother-officers long before
any explanation could be obtained. That at last arrived from
England in the announcement that Wynyard's favourite brother
had died, making an allowance for the difference of latitude,
at the precise moment when he was supposed to be seen at
Cape Breton. Both officers until their death believed that they
had really seen this apparition.
2. Captain Wheatcroft, an officer in the Inniskilling
Dragoons, having exchanged into the Carabineers, was present,
and was gazetted as having perished, at the siege of Lucknow,
on the loth November, 1S57. His wife, who remained with
her mother in Cambridge, on the night ot the 14tli No\embei,
saw, first in dream, and then apparently standing by her bed-
side, her husband, wearing his regimentals, agitated, pain-
stricken, but not blood-stained. The image remained sufficiently
long that she noted particulars, such as the whiteness ot his
shirt, &c. So convinced was the lady of the reality ot this
interview, that she disclosed her secret to her mother, and de-
ported herself as a widow. Delay and difficulty occurred in re-
conciling the discrepancy which existed between the official
report in the War Office and the conviction of Mrs. W.; but
ultimately, six months afterwards, it was placed beyond a doubt
that Captain W. fell in a charge on the 14tli. A painful
blunder was thus corrected by an apparition, whether seen by the
Material or the mental eye.
3. Mr. John Williams, of Scorrier House, a man of pro-
perty, probity, and practical talent, sees in the lobby of the
House of Commons (where he never had been), on the 12th ot
May, 1812, a man with the precise lineaments and habitual
dress of the Prime Minister, Mr. Perceval (whom he had never
seen), and another man dressed in a brown coat amd yellow
hasket-buttons, being the dress of Mr. J. Bellingliam ; the
latter drawing a pistol from under his coat, and discharging it
at the former, who instantly fell, bleeding from a wound in the
left breast. He was then told that the victim was Mr.
Perceval. This dream, or spectral drama, passed thrice before
him during one night, twenty-four hours alter the murder had
heen committed, and was described to his wife, and to a numer-
ous circle of acquaintance, long before intelligence of the cir-
26 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
cumstances reached or coulcl reach Cornwall. The exactitude of
the appalling picture presented to or by his imagination with
the actual scene was afterwards verified by the accounts trans-
mitted from London, and on his visit to the place where the
tragedy was perpetrated.*
4. Lord Chancellor Brougham, while travelling in Sweden,
arrived at a country inn, cold and fatigued. While taking aliot
bath, and enjoying the luxury of the warmth, he saw, seated on
the chair where he had deposited his clothes, Or , with whom
in former years he had held many and animated discussions as
to the Immortality of the Soul, and with whom lie had
entered into a compact, written in their blood, to the effect that
whoever predeceased the other should return from beyond the
grave, and thus resolve the awful problem which had agitated
their youthful doubts. His Lordship seems to have been
powerfully affected, as he afterwards fainted. This occurred,
and was recorded at the time, on the 19th December, 18?.
Although he had almost forgotten the existence of his early
companion, he had a clear recollection of their agreement, and,
although attributing the vision to dream, he seems to have
accepted the warning. From feelings of shame and agitation,
he does not appear to have mentioned this strange eventful
history to anyone, either then or subsequently, although its
influence is confessed by him to have been unfading. On his
return to England, lie received letters announcing that the death
of Of had taken place on the day when the apparition was
seen. This story, here condensed, was transcribed in its entirety
by his Lordship into his diary, 16th October, 1862.f This is
nearly a parallel to the deatli-pledge between the Marquis de
Kambouillet and the Marquis de Precy4
These cases are selected because they are not deformed by
fanatical or sensational adjuncts, because they affect notable
or notorious individuals, personages little likely to be influenced
or deceived by superstitions, national prejudices, or defects of
education. Had there been any disposition to introduce the
marvellous or the horrific into the inquiry, there would have
been preferred such confessions as that of the celebrated Marshal
Blucher, made to his royal master, the King of Prussia, immedi-
ately before his dissolution, who, demanding to be tested as to
his reason and self-possession, clearly and circumstantially
recounted that, after the sad struggles of the Seven Years' War,
lie returned to his native home, arrived in a dark stormy night,
* Abercrombie's Inquiries Concerning the Intellectual Powers, p. 301, 5th edit.
+ Life and Times of Henry, Lord Brougham, written by Himself, vol. i. ch. iv.
{ Calmet's Phantom World, vol. ii. p. 143.
SECOND-SIGIIT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA. 27
found the house closed and in darkness throughout; but the front
door yielding to his knocking, or spontaneously, lie groped his
way to his father's accustomed room, and there saw, by a dim
light, both his parents and four sisters. His father waved oft
his embrace, he kneels before his mother as if in one of the
sportive games of childhood, while his sisters whisper inaudibly;
but the act reveals to him that his parent is a skeleton, and
that the whole spectacle is a shadow of past misfortunes and
death. At the crisis, impelled by terror, he escaped; but return-
ing, to realise the whole truth, and to inter the remains of his
family, he found only a female hand wearing a golden brace-
let on the floor of the apartment where the apparition appeared.
Ihe same group of spectres ag'ain appeared to him two months
previously, announcing that his death would take place on the
very day and hour when he was addressing the King. The
narrative has been purposely denuded of all appalling and
Melodramatic features, but when it was concluded, the King
held the hand of a corpse !
On the other hand, had it been desirable to widen the illus-
tration by an immense accumulation of instances, the Catena
constructed by Grlanvil* (1726), or by Howittf (1863), would have
teen reproduced. The latter, in addition to a long catalogue
of special examples, declares his opinion that the belief in such
is universal, that every family could afford testimony of the
same kind, and that one member of the Cambridge Ghost Club
bad collected 2,000 of a similar kind. Mr. Howitt's instances
range from the knockings, sawings, rappings in the honse of
John Wesley, and similar unexplained and inexplicable sounds and
signs, to the perfect personification and significant warnings
of recognised individuals.
II. The second order is where the spectre or semblance of a
deceased individual appears to a living and indifferent indivi-
dual in order to predict the death of a third party. Of this
division it is only necessary to adduce the statement that the
apparition of the father of Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, stood
by the bedside of Mr. Twose, in Windsor Castle, who had been
in the household, and knew all the members of the family ;
and, through his instrumentality, thrice premonislied his son,
that unless he ingratiated himself with the people, by changing-
his measures, he must die, strengthening his counsel by disclos-
ing two secrets known only to the parties principally concerned.
The revelation was conveyed to the Duke, and believed in by
his mother ; but although he admitted its truth, and the
Evidence Concerning Witches and Apparitions, Ly Joseph Glanvil, 1726.
t History of the Supernatural, by William Howitl (1863), pp. 428-460.
28 SECOND-SIGHT, Oil DEUTEROSCOPIA.
accuracy of the test, lie did not adopt the counsel, and died by
the hand of Felton. A similar omen or oracular intimation is
said to have been conveyed to Louis XIY. The psychical relations
of the dead with the living are solemn, perhaps inscrutable, but
it would be a retrograde philosophy to pronounce all incredible
which is inexplicable.
III. The third order is where the spectre or semblance of
the deceased appears to a living person, with whom or with
whose family some previous connection had existed; and for
some purpose, affecting the seer it may be, or to predict death,
misfortune, or impending events, involving himself or liis con-
nections. The following examples may be cited:?
1. The clever, profligate, infidel Lord Lyttelton was
awakened, during the night of the 25th November, 1779, by
the fluttering of a bird, which gave place to a figure recognised
as Mrs. Amplilet?whom he had greatly injured, and who
had expired immediately before she was perceived by him?who
warned him, first spontaneously, and then in reply to a direct
question, that he must die within three days. Sceptical as to
this communication, he pursued his ordinary course, preparing
a speech to be delivered in Parliament on the subsequent day,
entertained a party in his own house, and tried (in his own
words) "to jockey the ghost" beyond the prescribed hour; but
died at twelve o'clock exactly on the third day, while retiring
to bed. Almost at the moment of his death Lord Lyttelton
appeared in the bedchamber of his friend Andrews, who had been
prevented from attending his lordship's party on the same night,
and uttered the words, " Ah, Andrews, it is all over !" Although
an understanding had existed between these individuals that
he who died first should appear to the survivor, Andrews
treated the supposed intrusion as a jest, and cast his slipper at
the disturber of his rest.
2. Lord Chancellor Erskine encounters in Edinburgh the
family butler, who seemed greatly changed, but who stated
that he was in search of him, in order to secure his interference
that a sum of money due to the speaker, but of which he had
been defrauded at the last settlement by the steward of his
father, might be refunded. He asked the butler to follow in
order to prosecute the inquiry,but the semblance had passedaway.
Recollecting the residence of the man's wife, he discovered that
he had been dead for some months, that he had revealed his
wrong on his deathbed, adding that when "Master Tom" (the
future Lord Chancellor) returned, " he would see her righted."
The allegation was correct, and restitution made. This im-
pression, although received in youth, was declared by the narrator
to be " indelible."
SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEEOSCOPIA. 29'
3. Daring the American War of Independence, two officers,
of rank, seated in their tent, heard the voice of their comrade-
in-arms, Major Blomberg, at the door, earnestly enjoining' one
of them by name to seek for a certain box, in a room in a
house (all minutely described), as it contained documents of
great importance to his infant son. On inquiry the sentinel
bad seen nothing, but intelligence was obtained that Major
Blomberg had been surprised and killed. On the return of
tbe parties to England, the house, box, &c. were easily found.
The papers contributed to secure an heritage to the child,
who, in consequence of the interest created by this tale, was.
chosen by Queen Charlotte as the foster-brother of George IV.
4. We are indebted to fiction for by far the most pic-
turesque and popular illustration of this class, in the Bodach-
Glas (grey spirit) which appeared to Fergus M'lvor on the eve
?f his capture and execution, as it is recited he had so appeared
t? his ancestors immediately before death. But the magic
wand of Sir Walter Scott's genius had in this, as in every
^stance, converted every object it touched into " a thing of
beauty and a joy for ever." For we find, from another of his
Works,* that the genuine familiars or spiritual watchers and
larders of Highland families were in that of Grant of Grant
(now represented by Lord Seafield), a girl with a hairy arm; in
that of Grant of Bothiemurclius the Bodacli-au-dun, or Ghost
of the Hill; and that the Ban-Scliie, associated with so many
clans and Highland communities, was nothing more than an old
woman, in a blue mantle and streaming hair, who shrieked
piteously, in prognostication of disaster to those to whom she
Was attached. But modern times, and persons whom we might
have touched, afford similar evidence.
5. The late excellent and justly popular Earl ofEglinton?
whose sudden death was truly felt as a national loss in Scotland,
and who is famed for an attempt to revive an ancient custom
of mediaeval times by the Tournament held at Eglinton Castle in
?39?-was engaged, on the 4tli of October 1861, in playing-, on
he Links of St. Andrews, at the national game of golf,
uddenly lie stopped in the middle of the game, exclaiming-,
. can play no longer?there is the Bodacli-Glas. I have seen
^Lfor.the third time ; something fearful is going to befall me."'
> ithin a few hours Lord Eglinton was a corpse ; he died the
same night, and with such suddenness, that he was engaged in
landing a candlestick to a lady, who was retiring to her room,
w len he expired. Henderson, in "Folk Lore," mentions that he
received this account of Lord Eglinton's death from a Scotch
* Notes-to Canto III., Lady of the Lake.
30 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
clergyman, who endorses every particular as authentic and per-
fectly true.*
The stories of Lord Tyrone and Lady Beresford, and of
Colonel Gardiner, have been avoided, both because they are
hackneyed, and have been so appropriated to religious purposes
as to be almost removed beyond the pale of literary discussion.
IV. Where spectre or semblance of deceased intimates to
strangers death, or evil by foul means:?
1. A coach driving to Oxford, in a dark snowy winter night,
comes into contact with some object, which the coachman and
passengers had the moment before conceived to be a country-
man in a blouse, to whom they liolloa'd in vain. Immediately
afterwards the coach was tilted to one side, as if the wheels
had passed over a solid substance of some size, which it was
dreaded might be the body of the labourer. The search at
once instituted revealed neither traces of the living nor corpse
of the dead ; but at the next stage, the scared looks of the
stablemen, on hearing of the frightful suspicion that a man
had been run over, provoked further inquiry, when it was ascer-
tained that a man had been murdered, exactly a year before, 011
the very spot where the imaginary accident had occurred.
2. Mr. Hamilton related to Captain and Mrs. Hastings
that, failing to find suitable accommodation in the town of
Portsmouth, he sought shelter in a small alehouse in an obscure
lane, where the arrangements were so bare and humble that
he had to promise a large premium in order to secure a bed-
room for his own use. In this apartment, which contained two
unoccupied beds, lie retired early to rest, having previously
? secured the door. He awoke during the night, and saw in the
bed opposite what appeared to be a sailor, semi-recumbent,
wearing immense black whiskers, and having a red handkerchief
round the head. He suspended his indignation, and again fell
asleep ; but, in the morning, the light enabled him to see that
his companion was still there, and that the redness of the
bandage was caused by blood. While dressing, the impression
ceased. Threats, and the vividness of the scene depicted, ex-
torted from the conscience-stricken landlady the confession, that
a sailor, wounded in a fray, with the aspect, dress, and bandage,
as seen by Mr. Hamilton, had, three nights before, been placed
upon the bed in the room specified, had died there from loss
of blood, the body having been subsequently buried in the
garden in order to conceal the whole of the unfortunate
transaction.
* Apparitions, a Narrative of Facts, by tho Rev. Hourcliier Wrey Saville, M.A.
(London, 1874)?a volume to which a general acknowledgment is due.
SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA. 31
3. A settler in Australia engaged a convict servant, who re-
ported to his friends that he had suddenly sailed for England.
One of these, while travelling in the evening in the country,
saw the absentee seated on a paling, but headless. Horrified
by the sight, the witness persuaded his brother to accompany
him to the spot on the succeeding evening, where the decapitated
trunk was again seen in the same position. Suspicions led to
the employment of a native, endued with bloodhound proper-
ties, who tracked the body of the murdered settler to an
adjoining pond.*
It is somewhat curious that the sources from which these
gloomy anecdotes have been extracted, the Memoirs of the
brilliant and virtuous actor who so long contributed to the
amusement of the public, and of the reverend critic and carica-
turist of dreams, delusions, diablery, &c., should have been con-
verted by their sons into rich repertories of the marvellous?a cir-
cumstance which corroborates the supposition that the Celts
leave their Second-sight in their native glens, and that the
condition upon which such presages or presentiments depends
has established a congenial home in the South.
V. It is expedient to add to the definition previously at-
tempted,that sanctioned by so high an authority as Dr Jamieson,
who says, in his "Dictionary of the Scottish Language," that
" Second-sight is a power believed to be possessed by not a few in
the Highlands and Islands of Scotland, of foreseeingfuture events,
especially of a disastrous kind, by means of a spectral exhibition
to their eyes of the persons whom these events respect, accom-
panied with such emblems as denote their fate,"f in order that
ooth of these definitions may be compared with the narratives
?i recent events to which they seem applicable:?
(a) An inhabitant of the district of Eannoch was met, when
crossing a bridge which narrowed the path, by a funeral cortege
ln yhich he saw many friends and acquaintances. He not only
easily recognised by the moonlight these individuals, but when
passing close to the coffin, the mortcloth, which was a plaid of a
Particular tartan, was blown aside or displaced, as he read 011 the
id the name, age, &c. of a person whom he believed to be alive,
ut who, 011 reaching his home, he learned was ill, and whose
death occurred the dav following. This took place within a few
years. J &
(J>) In like manner it is recounted that a young gentleman,
calling at G-arth Castle, addressed a nurse, who was struggling to
Memoir of Charles Mayne Young, by Julian C. Young, his Son: London,
London i? ^lCV' Barham, Author (f higolisby Legends, by his Son:
t Dictionary of the Scottish Language, p. 573 : Edinburgh, 1846.
32 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEKOSCOPIA.
place a pair of boots on tlie feet of a recusant cliild, in tlie words,
" Tliey will fit him before he will have occasion for them."
Bantered by other members of the family on his new talent for
prophecy, he stated that on his way thither he met, at a bridge,
the funeral of a child, attended by his own father, and that of
his little friend in the nursery, both of whom he knew to be at
a distance, and that the procession wended its way towards the
parish churchyard. The child died next day. In " Brand's
Popular Antiquities " (Vol. iii. p. 159) it is mentioned that such
phantom obsequies frequently show forth death in the Isle of
Man, and that spectators have been convinced of their reality by
bearing the bier on their shoulders, which were bruised by the
weight.
(c) In 1775 one of his farmers confided to Lord Breadalbane,
in great sorrow, that his son, and many others, had been seen
by him lying dead on the field of battle, but was consoled by
the assurance that no engagement had taken place. The news
of the Battle of Bunker's Hill, however, proved to his lordship
that the prevision of the farmer had been faithful, and that the
son was killed at the time and in the manner described.*
(d) Of a family, consisting of the parents and two daughters,
the father was in England, the mother and one daughter in a
city at a distance, while the second remained at home. The
latter, while entertaining a party of friends, cried " Oh, my
mother !" fainted, and on recovering divulged that the cause of
her indisposition was the semblance of her mother passing
through the room. The day and hour corresponded with the
death of the lady. The informant of my authority is still
alive, and confident as to the accuracy of her statement.
(e) The same correspondent describes a scene in North
Uist, communicated to him by a reliable friend, where a seer,
with a reputation for perfect veracity, summons his neigh-
bours to witness a wreck of a vessel, then amongst the
breakers on the shore, which he minutely described. Those
thus called saw nothing, but a few nights subsequently thev
witnessed the actual destruction of a ship and her crew, similar to
what the seeer had delineated, and in the spot indicated by him.
(/) A clergyman of the Established Church of Scotland, in
Invernesssliire, writes: "In March, 1847, a woman, whom
I believed to have the gift, and who seemed to be at the time
in a walking trance, told me, and four or five other persons, that
she saw a vessel being wrecked, and a man in the act of drown-
ing. She described the man, his age, appearance, &c.; and
* Sketches of the. Character, Manners, and Present State of the Highlanders of
Scotland, by Colonel Stuart of Garth, vol. ii. p. xxxii. (1822).
SECOND-SIGIIT, OR DEUTEROSCOPTA. 33
thiee days after a vessel ivas wrecked, just as slie described it,
an a m^n drowned of the age, size, and appearance, exactly as
1U. le* vision. The only difference was that she said it was
night, whereas it was as exactly as possible noonday of a
ay in the second week of March.
. \[J) Mr. D. M'Rae, North Uist, writes to my friend, that
a J omer being engaged in making a coffin, his father's servant-
entered his workshop, and in a frivolous way stated that that
f? 11 was too small for her. The man immediately fainted,
a,n 011 his recovering, reluctantly told that he saw the1 servant's
eacl body placed in the coffin. This girl died suddenly within a
short period.
(70 The same seer predicted from vision that two sailors
Would enter a certain house bearing the dead body of a third,
who had been drowned upon the coast, and this was realised.*
(^) An intelligent schoolmaster, engaged in Lanarkshire,
lough of Highland origin, and so fervent a disbeliever in
aPPantions as to have assailed a phantom of Hugh Miller,
icn accompanied him for miles on a journey, with a cudgel,
1 ?s : " I had a little sister lying hopelessly ill of scarlatina,
off f ^ ^een despatched to a friend's house, about half a mile
? tor some slices of bacon to apply to her throat, which was
sw e hng rapidly. As I returned I quitted the highroad, and
/ through a field bordered by an open ditch and a gnarled
ge, set with stunted alder-trees. On casting my eyes across
me 1jC^1 auc^ *ie(%e' saw the little child gliding parallel to
.' stood?she stood, calmly looking across ; there was no
left tl 6' S^6 Presented the exact appearance she had when I
fo 16 k?use* became terrified, and ran in desperation. I
n , on reaching home, that she was sinking rapidly, and she
expired in about an hour!"
tli f i ^r" ^itken, ?f Inverness, gives, as a veritable tradition,
~~ ?f G"   saw in a dream or fainting-fit, three times,
as iaiV r0Wned *n ^le ^oc^s?f the canal atDochgarroch, and thrice,
dr0le '??ked doAvn in the lock, he discovered that the face of the
a^(^Vnec^ man was his own. He was drowned in the very lock,
in 1 ^ClS ^0U11(^ in the very position in which he saw himself
rela^s ^eam, and which he had described to some of his
(^) A physician, settled near Loch Carron, describes his
'v ei sation with various seers, and ventures on the theory that
that t] Cn belong to families in which insanity has appeared?
that ^ave sorQething " queer about the eyes and affirms
^ ^ generally vomit after a vision, in consequence of the
revolting objects seen.
S?.?WUe, terrier's Theory of Apparitions, passim, Demonologia, p. 201.
art. I. VOL. II.?NEW SERIES. C
34 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
(I) In 1760 two ladies, one of whom is blind, were seated in
an apartment in the ancient mansion-house of Hal,?in Kirk-
cudbrightshire, awaiting the return of the proprietor. Though
late at night, the Laird of M walked into the room,
booted and spurred, and asks for their father. He was conducted
to the library. On the return of the proprietor, the library is
found to be empty; but forthwith there arrived from M , a
messenger, craving the presence of the proprietor, who, on
reaching the residence of his friend, found that he had died
suddenly, at the time of his apparent visit to Hal,?crying
earnestly for its owner while in the agonies of death. This
was related to me by the grandson of the lady who received
and conversed with the apparition.
The following may be added as a suitable appendix :?
" Sir Walter Scott declared to Mrs. Hughes, and that
many years before the event took place, he had heard of a pro-
phecy in the Seaforth family, uttered, or said to have been
uttered, by a second-sighted clansman more than a century
before, to the effect that, ' When the Chisliolm and the Fraser
should be baith deaf, and the McPherson (McKenzie) born
with a buck-tooth, the male line of the Fraser should become
extinct, and that a white-liooded lassie should come from ayont
the sea and inherit a'.' All these contingencies happened in
the late Lord Seaforth's time, who, on reverting to the pro-
phecy, showed two fine lads, his sons, to Sir Walter, and
observed: ' After all's said and done, I think these boys will
ding the prophet, after all.' He was wrong, however. The
two boys died immediately before their father, and the present
Lady Hood (a widow) came from India after his decease, and
inherited the property. The prophecy is said to have included
yet another family misfortune, and to have foretold that the
4 white-hooded lassie' (the widow's cap is clearly alluded to in
the epithet) should cause the death of her own sister. This also
came to pass. By the upsetting of a pony-carriage which Mrs.
Stuart Mackenzie (as Lady Hood had become by marriage) was
driving, her sister was killed on the spot, and she herself so
fearfully injured about the face as to be compelled to wear,
for the remainder of her life, a head-dress of a fashion which
enabled her to conceal the greater part of her countenance
under bands of black velvet." *
The histories in both of these series have been selected
from a large collection possessing similar import and interest.
They have been studiously divested of every fact, and every
phrase, which could have t>een dictated by or have appealed to
the imagination; every collateral circumstance which did not
* Barham, p. 153, ut supra.
SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
tear upon the essential characteristics has been excised; but,
after this privative treatment, there remained the residua o
a vision and a portent. The former has never before existed m
?consciousness; the latter possesses properties and meanings
interpreted only by subsequent events. The former depends,
generally, npon the evidence of one or more persons; the
verification is substantiated by many. The second series are
given as orthodox cases of Deuteroscopia, on the testimony 01
persons, many of whom are still alive, creditable and not
?credulous. But there are exceptions or modifications in the
operation of this power, as where the seer beholds his duplicate
self. Such seems to be the invariable form of the augury in
St. Kilda, though many instances have been known elsewhere.
The shadow-figure corresponds with the original in shape, size,
garb, moves at a certain distance as he moves, simulates every
movement, and, should he vary any article of apparel, whether
a straw rope round the leg or a plaid, presents its counterpart.
" Thirty of the inhabitants," records Martin, " being on the
Island of Soa, espied the body of a man with a grey coat and
plaid floating on the sea on his belly, with a sea-mew pecking
at his neck, which, after being seen for a quarter of an hour,
disappeared. Shortly after one of the spectators was drowned
in the sea, and his death resembled in all things the foregoing
vision, even to the presence of the sea-mew/' * The connec-
tion of two natures of a double self, this replica of persona-
identity, is supposed to have analogues in various states,
normal or abnormal, delineated by philosophers, physicians,
and poets. Such are the phenomena of the Transmigration of
Souls-?as the change of a man into a wolf, or a wolf into a man i"
of double or alternate consciousness, ot antagonistic volitions ,
of the dual cerebral action advocated by Dr "W igan, of the
contradictions in human character, as where profligacy
is combined with piety, science with superstition, as^ ^ in
Swedenborg, suggesting the coexistence of two personalities.
Even a grave and reverend author, carrying such speculations
beyond the confines of secular experience, has advocated, in
support of the doctrine of Immortality, that there is a spiritual
as well as a flesh-and-blood body; that these are generally con-
joined, but may be separated during our physical life ; and lias
written ingeniously, both in prose and verse, in support of this
dogma, for into such a rank he would fain elevate his thesis.+
Even savages are conjectured to cherish similar notions, and
the Cliinoos? are said to conceal
their names, in case their
of a Visit to St. Kilda,
by Charles Hard wick (
S ^.ac,ln(J unto Light, by J. C. Earle, B.A.: London, 1875.
? -Bancroft, vol. i. p. 245.
f J'r,,lic^anca Scotica: Martin's Narrative of a Visit to St. Kilda, vol. ii. p. 66.
+ j/'jf'S118' SuPcrstitions, and Folk-Lore, by Charles Hard wick (1872) p. 232.
?^ gnt Leadinq unto Liaht. hv .T. fl Knrln. RA ? London. 187:V
c 2
36 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
confidant should tlius obtain power to communicate with their
spiritual twin; and Herbert Spencer conceives that men so
situate could not arrive at any other conclusion, after seeing*
their own shadow, their likeness, or any external scratching*
suggestive of a human simulacrum. Confirmation lias even
been sought, from such speculations, of the spiritual portraits or
doubles supposed to be caught by photographers of aerial essences
carried within range of our senses by the actinic rays in the
atmosphere.
A beautiful glimpse of the influence of this belief is afforded
by Sir Walter Scott in the wild episode of the Children of the
Mist, in his " Legend of Montrose," where the gloomy Allan
McAulay is haunted by a spectre assassin plunging a dirk in
the bosom of his rival. He never can trace the features of this
double, for such he knows it to be by noting that when he
reversed his plaid so did the apparition. This may be accepted
as a mocking picture of his own dark designs, but the evil did
not fall upon the intended victim, but upon the designer.
To turn from romance to biography. Aubrey relates, in his
" Miscellany," that " the beautiful Lady Diana Rich, daughter
to the Earl of Holland, as she was walking in her father's garden
at Kensington, to take the fresh air before dinner, about eleven
o'clock a.m., being then very well, met with her own apparition,
habit and everything, as in a looking-glass. About a month
after she died of the smallpox. It is said that her sister,
the Lady Isabella Tliynne, saw the apparition of herself also
before she died."*
This seems an appropriate stage for the introduction of
the various causes assigned for this faculty, and what it reveals :
(i.) An actual apparition, seen or heard through ordinary
channels, portending death, or some future event, in which the
seer is but remotely interested.
(ii.) Ameredelusion or deception (this is the view of Ferrier),,
having no connection with past, present, or future, resulting
from the ignorance, superstition, abstinence, or unliealtli of seer..
(iii.) A vision in consciousness of seer, resulting from his
religious creed or credulity, the reproduction of external im-
pressions, but influencing subjectively the faith and feelings?
such as the prefigurations of St. Augustine.
These observations would be incomplete did they not
embody a reference to the visits and visitations of St. Teresa
and St. Catherine of Siena, and of other saints and celebrities
of the mediaeval Church. Of the reality of such appearances
there cannot be a doubt. They were as real in the mind of the
seer as any recollection of friends or familiars?as any picture
* Bourchicr, op. cit.
SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
of the past or foreshadowing of the future. But these reflections,
or restorations of external impressions on the mirror of con-
sciousness, differed in several respects from the phenomena
treated of here. The imagination to which such forms became
present and palpable had been prepared by penance and prayei,
rapture or ecstasy and expectation, for their reception. They
followed or emanated from acts of desire and emotion, if not ot
"volition. They were copies, images of the paintings and statues
ot Deity and Divine personages, and of holy and heavenly scenes,
which glowed from the walls and the altars by which the
enthusiast, perhaps the ecstatic, was surrounded. They weie
not necessarily prophetic; they were personal, and did not
involve the death, or fate, or fortunes of other and indifferent
persons. They were supersensuous, and although embracing
death, judgment, and eternity, did not condescend to the tiivia ,
transient, and commonplace events of vulgar and ordinaiy 1 e.
(iv.) Dr Abercrombie attributes such expeiiences to t le
reminiscences of a forgotten dream. .
(v.) Professor Laycock refers such conditions to exaltation ot
the sensibility?Morel to abolition of the sensibility, but both
hold them to be signs of disease.*
_ (vi.) Another solution is found in an actual impression on the
retina, coming from within, through the reproduction of foi mei
impressions from without, but actually seen by seers in otliei
words, a picture interiorlv impressed upon consciousness is
recalled by memory, and repainted or impressed anew upon the
retina. This hypothesis is supposed to explain the experience
of certain seers, who have believed that they saw and recognised
the real and familiar objects in the surrounding scene, through
the funeral procession, or whatever pliantasmata might be pie-
sent, these known and substantial objects forming the distance
or background of the whole picture. Two impressions were
thus conceived to cross or pass each other, or to mingle together
at some point in the eye, and at some stage in the process of
vision. This is Sir David Brewster's theory, but (a) even he was
struck by the difficulty in conceiving that two impressions, from
"within and from without, could coexist, or that the sameneivous
fibre could at the same time convey images to and fiom the
biain; (6) lie ignored the sad truth that in 30,000 blind people
in Great Britain, in whom the retina has been destroyed by
glaucoma, &c., many continue to see visions or pictuies of the
external world; and (c) he omits to explain in what manner
memory could conjure up faces, figures, objects never seen
before, or assuredly not seen in the same circumstances and
concatenations.
* Laycock's Nervous Diseases of Women, p. 339.?Morels Etudes Clinigites,
vo1- ?? p. 178.
38 SECOND-SIGHT, OR DEUTEROSCOPIA.
(vii.) That it is a result of a peculiar power or property,
possessed by a certain number of individuals, in virtue either
of their mental constitution, or of the adaptation of the
mechanism of vision, or of both, by which impressions treasured
in memory can be projected upon walls or surrounding objects,
as formerly distinguished, forming perfect pictures, and seen
distinctly in this locality, even in darkness, by the external eye.
Ruskin attests the exquisite fidelity with which a painter of
Cologne transferred from mental images to canvass a large altar-
piece, which had been taken away by the French Army. But
there is more in such a process than mere acts of recollection.
These productions were creations or new combinations of im-
pressions previously received. Groethe is quoted as stating, in
his tract, " Zur Morphologie und Wissenschaft," " When I closed
my eyes and depressed my head, I coiild cause the images of a
flower to appear in the middle of the field of vision ; this
flower did not for a moment retain its first form, but unfolded
itself, and developed from its interior new flowers, formed of
coloured or sometimes green leaves. These were not natural
flowers, but of fantastic forms, although symmetrical as the
rosettes of sculptors. I was unable to fix any one form." "" Others
have possessed this ideal painting power.
(viii.) It may be the result of a partially-developed sixth
sense, such as is supposed to guide migratory uncivilised races,
birds, certain animals (dogs, cats) in reaching home by routes
wbicli they have never previously followed, or by the exaltation
of certain instincts already known to exist in other animals
(such as ants, bees), or by the compensatory strength and scope
displayed by the unimpaired senses in the blind, deaf, &c.
Lastly, that Second-sight is the creation, the innate outcome,
of a certain feeling or faculty implanted, though in different
degrees, in all men, resembling the elevation or discoveries in
imagination, giving the belief in the supernatural, giving the
perception of certain objects, conditions, and relations among-
the surroundings of human beings, not cognisable to the external
senses, and which may, or may not, require for its active opera-
tion excitement, physical or psychical, but which must be
regarded as normal. Theologians as well as psychologists have
admitted a sense of the marvellous and the supernatural, which
transcends the ordinary operations of mind, and which is not
less reducible to the elements furnished by sensible impressions,
than veneration, pride, pity, and which transcends, but is con-
generic with, the supersensuous states ; where the telescopic
or microscopic range of vision is vastly increased, as naturally,
or in somnambulism; where exaltation of memory takes place
* Miiller's Physiology of the Senses, translated by W. Bailey (London, 1848),
p. 1395.
SEC02\D-SIGIIT, OE DEUTEROSCOFIA. 39
during sleep ; where sensibility, even pain, are abolished, or sus-
pended by the will, or during fear or ecstasy ; where there is a
transference of the ego to a second person whose passions and
fate have been temporarily assumed and represented, as in the
celebrated Mrs. Siddons and others.
It might constitute a ground for truce or suspension of
hostilities in the death-struggle at present maintained between
certain controversialists, were it admitted as possible that the
evolution or development now conceived to be going on in
the human frame and functions might ultimately attain such
a degree of elevation as to place consciousness within the reach
of other unknown or partially-known qualities than those of
matter, that we might grow up to what all men have believed
in, but what only a privileged few had felt to be demonstrated.
These considerations apply only to what may be designated the
first stage of Second-sight, the perception of a vision; but, were
this placed beyond doubt, the second stage, or prevision, might
be conceded as possible, under laws involved in the first oi
which we are as yet as ignorant as of the origin and nature of
our intuitions.
