Nightmare and Dreaming
=======================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.

Art. I.?
:Author: J. M. Winn, H.D., H.R.C.P., &c.
Nightmare and dreaming are so closely entangled, that it is
impossible to study their phenomena apart. It is the subject
of nightmare to which I would especially direct attention.
Having been myself a martyr to this distressing complaint, I
have been in the habit, during a period of twelve years, of
making notes of my mental state and physical condition before
and during the attacks, in the hope of throwing some light on
its origin, and thereby leading to the discovery of some means
for preventing or mitigating the horrors of an affection to
which we are all more or less liable. I have also preserved
some memoranda relative to dreams unattended with nightmare,
thinking they might perhaps afford some slight clue towards the
solution of some of the most difficult questions in psychology
and physiology.

Recent writers on the practice of physic, in this country,
have all but tabooed the subject of nightmare?on which the
old authors were so fond of expatiating?as if prompted by the
desire to consign a matter so obscure to the limbo of the incom-
prehensible, the inexplicable, and the irremediable. I find no
mention of it in the works on medicine by Sir Thomas Watson,
or Drs. Reynolds, Aitken, and F. Roberts; and the late Sir Henry
Holland, in his eloquent article on " Sleep and Dreams," which
originally appeared in the Edinburgh Review, in 1873, and
was subsequently published by his son, among Sir Henry's frag-
mentary papers, dismisses the subject of nightmare with a very
few words. He merely observes that nightmare is a familiar
example of the troublous sensations, and troubled dreams which
are so often the effect of the undigested dinner of the pre-
ceding day.

But the obscurity of any matter is no excuse for ignoring
it; if it were, some of the most interesting problems in phy-
siology and pathology might at once be abandoned. For ex-
ample, how little is known of the nature of epilepsy! and yet
there is no disease that at the present time is receiving more
scientific attention.

Dr John Bond, who published an essay on "Incubus, or Night-
mare," in 1753, and who appears, like myself, to have had his
attention drawn to it by his own sufferings, makes the following
remark: " Being much afflicted with nightmare, self-preserva-
tion made me particularly inquisitive about it. In consulting
ancient physicians I found little information except dreadful
prognostics." McNish, in his interesting work on the " Philo-
sophy of Sleep," published in 1830, gives a graphic descrip-
tion of the horrors of nightmare as experienced by himself:
u Imagination cannot conceive the horrors it gives rise to, nor
language describe them in adequate terms They are a
hundred times more frightful than the visions conjured up by
necromancy or diablerie The whole mind during the
paroxysm is worked up to a pitch of unutterable despair."
Shakspeare, in "Richard III.," describes troubled dreams in
language which is equally applicable to nightmare:
O, I have pass'd a miserable night,
So full of fearful dreams, of ugly sights,
That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night,
Though't were to buy a world of happy days:

So full of dismal terror was the time.

The Greek writers are among the earliest who have left us
any account of nightmare. They termed it Epliialtes (from
sQaXXopxi, to leap upon). The Romans gave it the name of
Incubus, from the notion that it was accompanied by a sensa-
tion of external pressure. According to Bosworth, mara is an
old Saxon word, signifying nightmare; and Shakspeare, in
" Henry IV.," makes Dame Quickly say, " I'll ride you like the
mare."

In this country it was formerly called by the peasantry
witch-riding, and in France it was termed coque-mare. Many
of the old writers believed it to be a fairy.

ncubus (from incubo, I sit upon) appears to me to be a
misnomer. Nightmare is a nervous disease, sui generis, and
in the worst attacks that I have myself had there was no sense
of that weight on the chest so generally complained of: it was
chiefly a vague, supernatural horror and dread. Until more is
known of its pathology, perhaps night-terror would be a more
appropriate term. Real nightmare must not be confounded
with the troubled dreams which are caused by the stomach
being oppressed by undigested food.

The symptoms of nightmare are variously described by
different writers. McNish considers the essential features of it
to be an active state of the memory and imagination, an im-
paired condition of the respiratory functions, and a torpor of
the power of volition. Many writers refer it to some disorder
of the organs of respiration. The late Dr Hodgkin, who
suffered acutely from it, published in the British Medical
Journal, for May 16, 1863, an account of his own experience,
and gave a description of his feelings. It appeared to him that
the voluntary movements of respiration were suspended, whilst
at the same time the chest seemed passively to collapse. On
making a strong effort to breathe at the moment of waking, he
found that the diaphragm would not descend. He also ob-
served, as I have myself done, what is in opposition to the
commonly received opinion, that there was no material derange-
ment of the heart or circulation. The only other symptom
he records is, occasionally a sensation of pricking, as from pins
and needles, in the lower extremities. He gives no analysis of
his mental state during the attacks.

I will now select from my memoranda of 112 attacks some
of the most noteworthy instances of nightmare in my own
individual experience. My attacks have been of various de-
grees of intensity and duration?some slight and transient,
others protracted and agonising. On two occasions they Were
accompanied by an intolerable feeling, which I can only describe
as that of dying, and I felt that if no one came to rouse me I
must inevitably expire.

1. This is the first attack I have recorded, and was one of
the two aggravated instances to which I have alluded. It was
marked by an inexpressible sensation of dying. No physical
cause could be assigned for the attack, but at that time I had
great mental anxiety.

2. This attack was preceded by some palpitation of the
heart and tinnitus aurium.
3. The accompanying dream was singular ; I was conscious
of being in my bedroom, and saw everything in it as if I had
been awake.

4. A severe attack ; no palpitation of the heart.
5. This attack occurred after severe bodily fatigue, in
ascending a mountain in Switzerland.
6. Knew in my sleep that it was nightmare from which I
was suffering, and longed for some one to rouse me.
7. Again I was conscious of being under the influence of
nightmare, and I experienced dread without cause.
8. Marked by inability to expand the lungs.

9. Very bad attack. I had gone to bed in good bodily
health. The chief feature of the dream was a fear lest I should
not be roused out of my sleep, as I was accustomed to be.
10. Preceded by neuralgic pains, probably of gouty origin.
11. Occurred about 1 a.m., at a time when I was in
anxious attendance on a friend who was dangerously ill. I
screamed so loudly during the paroxysm that the person in the
house came to my bedroom to enquire after me. In the morn-
ing I had no recollection of screaming, or of having had a night-
mare.

12. Went to bed in apparently good health. Lying on my
back when the attack came on. Sensation, simply the con-
sciousness of being in a nightmare. It was protracted from
there being no one at hand to rouse me.
13. Twice in one night, after slight stomach derange-
ment.
14. Very bad?after anxiety ; followed by palpitation of
the heart.
15. Marked by feelings of great exhaustion and inability
to articulate. A thunderstorm occurred the same night.
16. Felt as if I should never pull through. After great
anxiety.
17. Twice in one night. After neuralgic pain of leg.
18. Three times in one night.
19. Knew in my sleep that I was labouring under a night-
mare, and that I should be able to get rid of it if I could draw
a deep inspiration.
20. A sharp attack whilst sleeping in a cramped position
in an armchair.
21. I overcame an incipient nightmare by force of will,
being conscious that a paroxysm was coming on. I was aware
in my sleep that I was dreaming.
22. This was one of the two terrible attacks to which I
have referred, and was similar to the first on my list. It came
on, after a comparatively long interval of freedom from any
acute attack. I was lying on my right side, and I thought I
should never recover the power of volition, and that if relief did
not come I should not live another second. After waking I
turned on my back and had scarcely fallen asleep when I had
another short, sharp attack, and screamed so loudly that I heard
my own screams. I had gone to bed in good health, though
NIGHTMARE AND DREAMING. 189
I had previously had some anxiety and slight dyspeptic
symptoms.

In these brief sketches I have not thought it necessary to
give the details of the dreams which have generally accom-
panied my attacks of nightmare. They mostly had reference
to some unseen agent on the point of attacking me, whom I
was powerless to resist, and of late years have been mostly
limited to a consciousness that I was suffering from nightmare,
and are remarkable because they have been free from frightful
spectra, though sometimes associated with a vague dread of
something supernatural. Is it possible that as we get older
the imagination becomes less vivid, so that even our dreams
are more realistic ? If this be so, it must be inferred that
early life is not the most favourable period for studying the
intricate phenomena of nightmare. In endeavouring to
analyse them, I shall be-guided chiefly by my own experience ;
for nightmare and dreams are both so entirely subjective that
it is only through the individual consciousness that we can
become cognisant of them. Moreover, it is to the members of
the medical profession, who, like myself, are victims to night-
mare, that we must look for reliable accounts of the malady,
for we cannot expect that the vague reports of those who are
unaccustomed to physiological and psychological observations
will help to solve an obscure and difficult problem.
In investigating a subject so overrun with error and super-
stition as that of nightmare, the first step is to endeavour to
separate the true from the false, so as to circumscribe the field
of enquiry. If we can ascertain what it is not, it may help
us to the knowledge of what it is; and if my remarks do no
more than this, my labours may not be wholly in vain.
The generally received opinion that nightmare is simply a
sensation of weight on the chest, and that it consists essentially
in an arrest of respiration, is, as far as my experience extends,
erroneous. That the voluntary power over the respiratory
muscles is often momentarily suspended is no doubt correct;
but it is not only the power over these muscles that is affected,
but also that which extends over all the voluntary muscles. In
only two instances of my attacks, as I have before stated, were
the respiratory symptoms so prominent as to induce me to
make note of them. In one it did appear to me that if I
could only respire I should recover ; in the other, I felt that
incapacity to inflate the lungs to which Dr Hodgkin has
referred.

It is a common mistake to suppose that lying on the back
is a fertile source of nightmare. From repeated observations
I feel quite convinced that the posture of the body has little
to do with it. I have had attacks whilst lying on either side,
and on one occasion, as I have noted, I had a paroxysm whilst
sleeping in a chair.

Some writers allude to its being accompanied by disorder of
the circulation, marked by great palpitation of the heart. On
carefully examining the state of my pulse immediately after
attacks 1 have as a rule found it very little affected, although
I have in a few instances experienced a slight palpitation.
With regard to the influence of an overloaded stomach in
producing nightmare, whilst admitting that it may be an
exciting cause in some persons, I cannot recall in my own
experience a single instance in which I could attribute it to
any irregularity as to diet; quite the reverse. I can recollect
attacks coming on at times when I have eaten very slight meals,
and consequently was, perhaps, in want of food.
Spasm of the diaphragm has been supposed to be the ex-
citing cause of the symptoms of nightmare; but no sufficient
reason has been assigned for this notion, and I never suspected
it in my own case.

Some writers have surmised that angina pectoris, asthma,
and hydrothorax produced nightmare. It is well known that
these affections give rise to horrible dreams, such as falling off
precipices, etc., but these must not be confounded with the
peculiar nervous disease under consideration.
Boerhaave thought that nightmare was a precursor of
apoplexy ; if it were so, apoplexy would be far more frequent
than we find it to be.

Formerly, during the years when my sufferings were the
most severe, it seemed to me that the attacks had somewhat
of a periodical character, occurring on an average once or twice
a month ; longer observation, however, convinced me that it was
not so, although they showed some approximation to regularity.
Dr Hammond mentions a remittent case which was benefited
by quinine.

At one time it occurred to me that a predisposition to gout
might in my own case have some relation to nightmare, as I have
frequently experienced neuralgic pains which I have suspected
to have a gouty origin; but, on the other hand, I have never had
a fit of gout, and my health has been exceptionally good, having
never been confined to bed by illness for a single day since I was
a child.

If, then, nightmare cannot be traced to any of these causes,
what are the chief agents concerned in producing it ? I am
induced to think, from my individual experience, that the causes
are mainly of a psychological character. In so many instances
have I suffered from nightmare when under great mental anxiety,
that I am drawn to the conclusion that that state of mind is
more likely to be a predisposing cause than any of those that
have been enumerated. The late Dr Elliotson suggested that
the seat of nightmare was in the brain. The fact that literary
men, those of a nervous temperament, and those undergoing
mental strain, are prone to it, favours this opinion.

And now comes the vexed question,?What is the nature of
this mysterious and fearful disease, which often attacks people
apparently in good health suddenly, and, like a thief, in the dead
of night ? What are the mental and physical conditions on
which depends a disease so terrible as to be, as Dr Bond describes
it, " such a source of misery " that sleep, instead of a boon, " is
a source of inexpressible dread and suffering " ? This question
is more easily asked than answered; nevertheless, a careful
analysis of the symptoms during a paroxysm may help in some
degree towards its solution.

The symptoms generally complained of and described by
those who have been the victims of nightmare are inability to
move, articulate, or respire, accompanied by a sensation of
weight on the chest, by screams, or indistinct sounds; some
also have a feeling of numbness; and, in my own case, twitch-
ing of the muscles of the lower limbs (of which I was uncon-
scious) and faint moanings have been observed for two or three
minutes by a watchful friend, before the misery has come to an
agonising crisis. The mental symptoms detailed by authors
are as varied as the dreams which accompany the malady, and
often refer to some horrible monster sitting on the chest, visions
of robbers or assassins, etc., etc. As regards myself, of late
years, as I have already stated, the horrible dread has been un-
attended by spectra, but associated with a vague fear of some-
thing supernatural. Sometimes I have simply had a distressing
feeling of being in a nightmare, as if, after a countless number
of attacks, my mind had become so familiar with its phenomena
that my consciousness recognised them as being the symptoms
of a coming attack as readily as if I had been awake, and
accepted them as such.

The most intolerable of ail the symptoms that I have ex-
perienced is that which I have mentioned as a horrible feeling
of dying, in conjunction with the sense of utter helplessness.
There is no physical pain, but a conviction that if not speedily
roused I must expire.

The only explanation of the phenomena of nightmare that
I can venture to offer is, of course, entirely hypothetical. Is it
possible that from some abnormal condition during sleep the
motor ganglia have temporarily ceased to supply the nerve
force necessary for the due performance of the voluntary move-
ments ? Is not this notion more conceivable than the generally
received opinion that the will* is in abeyance, and entirely
separated from those voluntary muscles which are ordinarily
under its control. I have felt, during these attacks, that I bad
the will, but not the power to shake off the death-like torpor.
The fact, also, that I distinctly recollect having, on one occasion,
overcome a nightmare in my sleep by sheer force of will, sup-
ports the theory.

If sleep be, as is commonly supposed, a state of inaction, or
rest of the organs of sense and motion, either partial (as in
somnambulism) or entire (as in deep sleep), it is reasonable to
infer that, in nightmare, the sleep of those organs actively
engaged in communicating nerve force to the voluntary muscles
has become so profound that they do not respond to the prompt-
ing of the will. As soon, however, as the motor ganglia become
aroused by the waking state, the nerve force is sent along the
motor tracts, and the nightmare spell is broken. May not the
nightmare agony be a provision of nature to awaken the sleeper,
and thus provide for the due performance of the muscular move-
ments, both voluntary and involuntary, which, if not restored,
would cause death by apnoea. Dr Hodgkin thought that, in
his own case, the paroxysm of nightmare sometimes continued
after he was awake. In this I think he may have been mistaken :
perhaps he had a dream so vivid as to lead him to imagine
himself awake; for I have myself frequently noticed that my
nightmare dreams have had an extraordinary appearance of
reality. I have dreamt that I was lying in the very bed in
which I was really sleeping, and that I saw everything in my
bedroom exactly as if I had been awake.

It is much to be desired that some medical man should have
the opportunity of watching some one under the influence of
nightmare, in order to ascertain whether the circulation and
respiration are materially affected or not; such observation
would greatly assist the enquiry into the nature and cause of
the disease.

Dr Hodgkin felt so convinced of the gravity of the sym-
ptoms of nightmare, from his own experience, that he thought it
probable that many persons died during the paroxysm. I think
differently, for, as I remarked before, I look upon it rather as an
effort of nature to restore the equilibrium of the nerve force.
I have little to offer in the way of treatment; all remedies
hitherto suggested have been found of little avail. The main
object is to cut short the paroxysm, and this may be done by a
* Some of the materialistic physiologists -who confound mind and brain, and who,
with all their contempt for metaphysics, make use of metaphysical terms in an
unphilosophical manner, attempt to reason away the idea of a Will; but while
consciousness lasts, it is impossible to divest ourselves of the conviction that
we have a Will, call it by what name we may.

watchful companion who is a light sleeper, quick to detect the
approach of an attack, and prompt to rouse the sleeper by shak-
ing him. I am convinced that by this means I have been saved
protracted misery.

The subject of dreaming is so closely blended with that of
nightmare that a few remarks on the former may not be out of
place.

Eecent writers on dreaming?I refer to the modern
materialistic school?have fallen into the error of losing sight
of its psychical aspect. They confound mind and brain, and
imagine that all the phenomena of dreaming are the result of
physical changes in the nervous system.

In dreaming, consciousness and memory are not lost; the
emotions and imagination are in full force ; whilst judgment and
comparison are in abeyance. It is, I think, a mistake, as I
have previously observed, to suppose that the will is absent
during sleep. Dr Hammond says that volition or will is entirely
suspended during sleep. Dugald Stewart, on the other side, states
it as his opinion that the efforts we are conscious of making in
our sleep, proves the contrary. The chief feature of dreaming,
as in incoherent insanity, is a want of controlling power over the
thoughts, and an inability to perceive the incongruity of the
hallucinations conjured up by the imagination.

The most incongruous dream I ever had, was that I was
Charles I. on the way to execution; but the strangest of all
dreams is that of McNish, who dreamt that he was riding on
his own back.

It has been noticed that we are not startled in our dreams
at seeing the friends who have been long dead still alive ; but
there is a still more extraordinary psychological fact of my own
experience, that I never by any chance dream of departed friends
as dead, the circumstance of their decease being utterly
obliterated from my memory.

The most obscure problem connected with sleep and dreaming,
and the one respecting which there are such conflicting opinions,
is that which relates to the state of the mind in what is called
dreamless sleep. Some assert that at such times the mind is a
perfect blank ; others, as it appears to me, with more probability,
that the profoundest sleep is not unattended with dreams, though
sometimes they are as utterly forgotten as if they had never
occurred. Sir William Hamilton entertained the latter opinion.

Sir Henry Holland, whose elaborate and brilliant paper on " Sleep
and Dreams " has been already referred to, leans to the former
and materialistic view of this question. He observes that there
may be times in which there is a " complete absence of images
and trains of thought;" in other words, dreamless sleep. This
is unexpected and contradictory, as the general tone of his
writings would lead us to infer that he recognises an immaterial
principle ; and he says in the same article, referring to dreams,
that " no less a problem than the intimate nature of the human
soul is concerned in the phenomena." It would almost seem as
if Sir Henry, in spite of his characteristic caution, had allowed
himself to be somewhat influenced by the scientific materialism
of the present day. For a long period I have been in the habit
of observing that if I am suddenly roused up just as I am falling
off to sleep, I never can recover the train of thought which
occupied my mind in the transition state. I have often tried
in vain.. If, then, it is so difficult to recall the ideas of the semi-
waking state, is it not probable, a fortiori, that we should utterly
forget the images and trains of thought carried on in deep
sleep ?

In attempting to unravel the mysteries of dreaming, we
find ourselves face to face with some of the most difficult and
profound problems of mental philosophy, and as yet we have dis-
covered little more than the fact that while the bodily organs are
in a state of repose, the mind, as in a reverie, is left to wander,
fancy free, amongst the images and memories of the past.
