On General Paralysis in Combination with other Diseases of the Brain
=====================================================================

Art. IV.?.
By T. CLAYE SHAAV, M.D. Lond., M.R.C.P. ;
Lecturer 011 Slental Diseases, St. Bai-tholomew's Hospital; Medical Superintendent,
Leavesden Hospital.
It is a common saying, and textbooks on the subject declare it,
that general paralysis of the insane is a disease sui generis,
never grafted upon any other form of insanity; so well-known
as to its vagaries by the initiated that although at one time all
the signs of melancholia may be present, at another those of
mania (whilst either of these conditions may precede the full
development of late symptoms, and the disease be said to remain
tor a longer or shorter time in what are called the earlier
stages), still the melancholia or mania of the general paralytic
are not melancholia or mania proper, but are only the first
stages of a disease which has a definite history. Hence the
difficulty they find of placing general paralysis in any known
system of classification, pathological or phenomenal.
That it is a distinct disease no one who has had practical
experience will dispute, though in what pathological change
the peculiarity consists we do not know. Being a distinct dis-
ease there must be a definite pathological area, which does not
show itself until after the brain has attained a certain stage of
development; but a condition of mania, melancholia, or dementia,
in the ordinary way of speaking, may arise at any time of life,
and I have no more difficulty in seeing how a person might
suffer from the pathological condition which sets up any of
these, and then have the special lesion (if there be one) which
connotes " general paralysis," than I have doubt that such
does occur.
I know that it is said that these antecedent states are only the
primary stages of general paralysis, and that between the lines
the special features of the latter may be read ; but I contend
that the conditions may be distinct, and that, to take an
example, a person with melancholia of a typical form, deluded
and suspicious, refusing food, and with suicidal tendencies, may
either end in recovery, death, or fatuity, or may pass into a
state of general paresis with delusions of the most exalted kind,
and with the greatest difficulty in articulation. Nor is a state
of general paralysis incompatible with an originally weak brain.
I have never seen it certainly in very strongly pronounced
idiocy or imbecility, but a moderate degree of the latter may be
54: ON GENERAL PARALYSIS IN COMBINATION
often seen. Imbecility is, of course, a relative term, and a man,
the sum total of whose faculties would not entitle him to be
held compos, may still have strong development of some parts
of his nervous system, parts susceptible of the special degene-
ration which causes general paresis. We cannot therefore
confine general paralysis to a degeneration attacking intellects
once complete. Nor does coarse pathology give us any reason
for saying that general paralysis is a distinct disease, incom-
patible Avith the presence of the others now named, though it
is said that we are soon to have some northern light thrown on
this subject. Taking the coarse appearances of post-mortems,
there are scores of brains where it is impossible to say, without
a knowledge of the previous history, but judging only from
appearances, that the patient suffered from chronic mania,
melancholia, dementia, or general paralysis, and the micro-
scopical appearances cannot as yet be said to be more decisive.
There.is no difficulty in seeing how, even granting that there is
a special lesion in general paralysis, another affection causing
mental and motor symptoms should not precede, accompany, or
follow. The curious thing is that the fact is denied, and that
a supreme monopolising pathological condition called general
paralysis has been set up, fenced-in by boundaries which are
fallacious, making a fetish of it which larger experience shows
must be demolished as being useless. Arguing from analogy,
we can see how vain it is to give this exclusive character to
general paralysis; for it is no uncommon thing to have two or
more intercurrent diseases in the lungs at the same moment,
just as constitutional and physical skin diseases may co-exist.
Is not general paralysis a compound of signs produced by
physical, i.e. mechanical and chemical, and vital changes, and do
not the extreme vascularity of the brain, its large amount of con-
nective tissue, andthe intimate relationship of its component parts
almost defy such an isolation to exist as many suppose when
they speak of the singularity of general paralysis ? In the
Annates Medico-Psychologiques, September 1874, Eey has de-
scribed general paralysis as coexisting with locomotor ataxia,
i.e. two distinct nervous affections of the cord, distinct as far
as the objective symptoms go; and quite recently Dr.Clouston
has described the coexistence of chorea with general paralysis. If
we find a person in a melancholic condition for years in whom
eventually large delusions and lesion of speech supervene, that
I take to be an instance of general paralysis following on a case
of true melancholia by virtue of a progressive and perhaps
different pathological condition, and I should not consider the
primary melancholic state to be in any way connected
with the subsequent general paralytic condition from the point
WITH OTHER DISEASES OE THE BRAIN. 55
of view generally held, viz. that the patient had simply an un-
usually prolonged period of the depressed state which, according
to ordinary belief, frequently ushers in the well-pronounced,
peculiarities of the general paralytic's condition. If, again,
there is a case of " mania" of the exalted form, resembling in
delusions of the Grand all that is deemed most
characteristic of the general paralytic, but without the hesita-
tion of speech, and if after some years the special signs of
general paralysis announce themselves and the patient dies in
the condition of " paralytic dementia," that I take to be a case
of general paralysis grafted upon one of ordinary mania, and I
should not connect the two in any other way than as coexisting but
not necessarily correlated. There are without any doubt cases
which are general paralytics from the outset: we can predict
a definite course with tolerable certainty. There are others where
we cannot be so certain, and where the most that can be said is
that " he will become a general paralytic," as often is said ; but
those who make this statement have, I think, the idea present
to them that they are talking of the disease as a unit, and if
they were asked whether or not the patient, who is excited or
depressed as the case may be, was in the ordinary condition
of one whom they would call " maniacal" or " melancholic,''
would say " no," failing to recognise that there may be an
exalted or depressed state which may pass through as such to
the end, or which may later on take up the special symptoms of
general paralysis.' It is important torecognisetliis superposition of
one disease upon another, and the clinical truth that they may be
distinguished as running together, at times clashing and con-
founding one another, at times modifying their respective
' symptoms in such a way that only the most accurate observa-
tion can detect the differences. General paresis has a natural
history of its own as yet not thoroughly defined, and " sporting"
at times in a most perplexing manner. The handwriting does
not declare it. I was told the other day of a person whom
most would consider a classical case of melancholia; yet this
man's speech is perfect, though his handwriting exactly
corresponds with what is considered pathognomonic of general
paresis, viz. the uncertainty in the up-strokes of the letters.
To me the affection of certain muscles about the eyes has
seemed the most useful line of demarcation for saying " now
this person is in a state of general paresis." This sign, which I
first described in the St. Bartholomew's Hospital Reports, I
have found of the greatest service, for it is never absent, and
according to my observation precedes the tremor of the mouth
muscles and the slip in the articulation of words. Closely
regarding a general paralytic in the earliest stages of motor
56 ON GENERAL PARALYSIS IN COMBINATION
defect discovers a tremor in the levator labii superioris muscle,
and a contraction of the grief-muscles : the corrugatives become
supercilii and the occipito-frontalis; these latter become in fact
extraordinary muscles of articulation and serve as a point
d'appui for the formation of words by the lips, especially words
containing explosive consonants. As a consequence general
paralytics often assume a melancholy air; and until I found out
the rationale of the expression, I was much puzzled by the
coincidence of gay delusions with a sentiment of grief expressed
in the face. This is, indeed a false expression, and the diagnosis
between it and the real sentiment of grief is that the former is
transient whilst the latter is persistent. After his effort to talk
the face of the general paralytic assumes a placidity, or rather
vacuity, which is never seen in the ordinary most long-stand-
ing dement. In masticating food the same grief-expression,
due to the same cause, may be seen.
Let me now give one or two instances in proof:?
J. A., male, aged 49 years, furniture maker, but never was
very good at his business, small in stature, and of low type of
cranium. Has extravagant delusions and marked hesitation of
speech. Has been five years in the Asylum, exhibiting the
same symptoms on admission as he does now. This is an
instance of general paralysis occurring in a man with congenital
or acquired imbecility, liis frontal and occipital excess being
very small, and the measurement of his palate indicating an
approach to the idiotic type. He performs a certain amount
of manual work, and seems likely to continue some time in his
present state.
Case of J. P., aged 55 years. Admitted in December 1871,
with large delusions and extravagant conduct, saying that he
was the Prince of Wales, Archbishop of Canterbury, &c.
Head well developed, and he has evidently been a man of
considerable mental power. Some doubt existed for a long-
time as to his classification in the pathological series, and no
motor lesion supervening he was put down as a case of chronic
mania with large delusions. So he continued from December
1871 to June 1875, employing himself quietly. At that time I
noticed a slight elevation of the eyebrows in talking, and his
speech is now distinctly affected, and no one would hesitate to
call him a general paralytic. I prefer to call this case one of
general paralysis supervening on mania of the amoenic form?
rather one of primary general paralysis in which the pre-
cursory stage of mental exaltation has preceded for an unusual
length of time the motor affection ; he has, in fact, been a
general paralytic only since June 1875, when the combination
of mental and motor symptoms was noticed, and I should be pre-
"WITH OTHER DISEASES OF THE BRAIN. 57
pared to find in his brain the appearances of an ordinary case of
chronic insanity, with or without those which have been said to
be peculiar to general paresis. Now that the combination of
mental and motor signs exists it is possible to speak with
tolerable accuracy as to the probable duration of this man s
life ; but I should be inclined to give him a much longer span
in the view that his paretic condition began twelve months
since than I should on the hypothesis that general paresis is
never " grafted" on to another form of insanity, but that he
has been really in the "paralysed'' condition for many yeais,
?and that his first stage has been slow. I should add that his
eyes were examined by Professor Liebreich, who found them in
all respects normal before the motor signs appealed. Ihis
may not be much of a guide to show that he was not suffering
from general paralysis, for the fact of the fundus of the eye
being at all at any time affected in general paralysis is dis-
puted; still it maybe taken tor what it is woith. In tie
case oi J. A.5 above quoted^ no affection of the fundus ot t le
eye ever did or does exist. He was also examined by Liebreich.
AN . B., male, aged 41 years. Depressed, and has attempted
suicide, refused food, and had to be fed forcibly; in fact, ex-
hibited all the features of a typical case of melancholia. In
?January last he had a maniacal attack lasting three days,
giving vent to large delusions, and then I noticed for the first
time the twitching about the eyebrows and slight affection of
the^ speech. Even now it is possible to discriminate two con-
ditions in this man; one being that of ordinary melancholia,
the other of general paresis, the signs varying in intensity
from day to day. From what I can find out of the previous
history, this man lias been suicidal and melancholy a long time;
llnd though he is now undoubtedly " paralysed," there is, I
think, but a casual connection between the two states.
I he last case to which I will refer is J. K., aged 52 years,
^ ballast man. This man was first admitted as an imbecile
m March 1873, and of his imbecility there could be no doubt.
He could neither read nor write, was of very low cranial type,
and quite incapable of any but the merest routine work. At
' the request of some of his friends he was discharged, but was
re-admitted in May 1874, after a twelvemonth's absence, when
his speech was markedly hesitating'. Soon afterwards laige
delusions supervened, and he is now in the full swing of general
paresis. I mention this case chiefly to show that on an
originally defective structure a disease may be engrafted which
ls generally supposed to select more intellectually advanced
objects as its victims.
However desirable it is theoretically to adopt a pathological
58 OX GENERAL PARALYSIS.
classification, practically we cannot as yet get rid of " mania "
and " melancliolia." General paralysis I should reserve as a
term for the combination of certain mental and motor symptoms,
and I think that in a true case this combination will always be
found; whilst we shall gain much by recognising that conditions
of general or particular excitement or depression may precede
or coexist.
Especially shall we gain with reference to prognosis. A
person who long remains in the exalted or depressed state
without the motor affection has a much better life than the
general paralytic; but the advent of speech-hesitation gives a
prophetic insight into the probability of the duration of life
which was before impossible. I have simply recorded the
results of clinical observation, without attempting an explana-
tion of the facts. Why do delusion^ of the grand kind, in all
respects similar to those of a " general paralytic," go on for
years without much impairing the condition of the patient
whilst their associations with motor lesions of muscles not very
necessary to the maintenance of the vital processes connotes
a speedy deatli ? There must surely be two different processes
at work. At all events, precision in diagnosis and prognosis
will be gained by admitting that we may have in the same
subject at the same moment the insanity of general delusional
mania or melancholia and that of general paralysis.
