The Psychology of General Paralysis of the Insane
==================================================

296
\
art. VI.?
By FREDERICK TREVES, M.R.C.S.
In a disease of so great interest and of so marked a character
as General Paralysis of the Insane, it would be well to antici-
pate a more accurate knowledge of its pathology by some
attempts to investigate its psychological nature and significance,
and by ascertaining to what mental changes its peculiar charac-
ter is to be ascribed. Such an attempt is useful only when
reviewed in connection with the physical evidences of the
disease, and is justified as perchance forming bases upon which
a more sound and accurate pathology might be raised.
Much has of late been successfully written to show that an
extensive series of actions hitherto assigned to the direct and
present influence of mind are in reality automatic, and per-
formed without even the intervention of consciousness. Such
actions, consciously designed at first, are again and again
repeated; consciousness is at each repetition less and less
involved, until at length their performance becomes purely
automatic, or is at least attended by no conscious activity of
mind. These actions become, as Dr. Maudsley well expressed
it, organically registered; each repetition would appear to
make that organisation more complete, and the degree to which
an action, or series of actions, is performed without the direct
agency of mind would seem to depend upon the soundness of
its physical basis in the nervous centres. For example, to sign
one's name is, in the educated, perhaps as automatic, and at the
same time as elaborate, an action as could be selected. In the
nerve-axis one might conceive this action, or rather series of
concerted actions, as organically registered and represented
by a centre which, if suitably stimulated, would cause the said
actions to be displayed, yet without the interference of con-
sciousness, just as in primary reflex acts. Still there was a time
when this act would have no physical basis in the nerve centres;
when each letter and each part of a letter would be formed with
direct consciousness and imply evident guidance of mind: but
at each repetition of the act the mind takes a less and less
apparent part; until at length the elaborate action of signing
a name comes to be classed under the secondary reflex acts, or,
as they may be also termed, acquired or educated reflex acts.
These remarks, which so far refer to physical actions only,
PSYCHOLOGY OF GENERAL PARALYSIS OP THE INSANE. 297
may be applied with perhaps an equal appropriateness to the
actions of the higher centres of the brain, and to a greater
extent than might at first sight appear tenable. Is it possible
for a collection of ideas to be reproduced automatically, and for
individual thoughts and processes of reasoning to produce an
effect, without a consciousness on the part of the individual ?
How far one might speak of unconscious thought or of
automatic reason is certainly very questionable ; but a want of
terms may, perhaps, be some apology for a vagueness of wording.
To take an example of these remarks. An experienced
physician, in examining a case, arrives at once at a diagnosis :
place the same case before a well-read student of equal mental
calibre, and he puzzles long before coming to an opinion. What
is the difference between the mental processes in the two
observers ? It will be said to be merely a question of experience ;
but what does this imply ? The younger observer arrange?
certain ideas and thoughts; he enters into various steps oi
reasoning more or less complicated, and all by an active and
conscious effort of mind, until at length he attains a conclusion
or definite opinion. Each succeeding case of a similar nature
presented to his notice calls up the same ideas, thoughts, and
reasoning; but each time he is aware of less active mental
interference: constant repetition has made the various pro-
cesses on which his diagnosis depended automatic; and at last,
as the experienced physician, he comes to an opinion at once.
If now he were to closely analyse the reason of his immediate
diagnosis he would find that quite unconsciously he must have
gone through all the steps he first undertook, and which, by
constant repetition, have become automatic, or at least exercise
their influence unconsciously.
Or again : a question?say of morals?is presented to a
man for judgment: he at once gives an opinion for or against.
It cannot be said that that decision is arrived at by instinct,
and it would no doubt be ascribed to " preconceived ideas ;"
but such a term implies merely this?that by repeated contact
with similar questions the processes necessary for a conclusion
have become to be unconsciously performed or passed over, the
result alone remaining; the active interference of the mind
becoming less and less apparent at each repetition, just as
repeated physical actions are at length to be classed as
automatic.
It will be seen, then, that mental processes such as have just
been alluded to are under the direction of a power that pri-
marily calls them into being, and is more or less evident on each
occasion of their repetition. To assign a name to this power
would be difficult: it may be looked upon as mind in an active
u 2
298 PSYCHOLOGY OF GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE.
or conscious form, in distinction to such mental movements as
are automatic, or performed without the consciousness of the
individual; or as a modified volition; but as a special power it
cannot be regarded. The conditions may be briefly stated as
these: A certain thought, or series of thoughts, or a certain
step of reasoning, due perhaps to some recognised stimulus, is
at first performed consciously by the individual, and by conscious
effort; at each repetition this conscious power or effort becoming
less and less marked, and, as it would appear, less and less neces-
sary for the proper performance of the mental movement.
During the earlier repetitions the act is quite dependent on this
originating or directing energy, but ultimately it would become
in a way reflex, responding to a given stimulus without con-
sciousness, and independent?so far as the individual is aware
?of any effort. Constant repetition causes the given mental
action, as in the case of the physical action, to be organically
registered in the brain centres. It would appear that to an
injury of this power, whatever it may be named, we must look
for an explanation of the mental symptoms of general Paresis.
Now, it is evident that disorder of this mind-power will
affect in the main two classes of mental actions?those, on the
one hand, that are of quite recent origin, or that have not been
repeated sufficiently often to render them organised or inde-
pendent of the originating energy; and those, on the other
hand, that from their indefiniteness, or from their intricate and
elaborate nature, are still unable to be performed?although
perchance often repeated?without conscious interference; just
as those physical actions that are the most complex are the least
easily learnt, or made reflex, and are the first to suffer in any
case where the mental power is impaired. How these remarks
bear on the psychological symptoms of General Paralysis of the
Insane may now be considered.
It is important to recognise the profound importance in the
human mind of Self: nothing is of more general or more in-
tense interest to man than Humanity, and Self is the segment
of it with which he most certainly is the best acquainted. All
human actions and qualities that are external are brought to
Self as to a standard?not necessarily of excellence, but of com-
parison ; and it is by such comparison that one's defects or virtues
become pronounced, and one's relation to the rest of humanity
defined. From Self as it is man deduces an ideal Self as he
would wish it to be. This is natural to all men, and it is an
outcome of that eternal impression of one's weakness, real or
imagined, that forms the basis for ambition and the desire for
growth and improvement: so the cowardly man is, in his ideal,
a hero, the weakling a tower of strength, and the man in need
PSYCHOLOGY OF GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE. 299
a moneyed idler. Around each man's Self there is a halo of un-
reality in which he lives and moves, as he would wish and
aspire to live and move. All men more or less are dreamers,
from the youth who rises from his novel a hero of romance, even
to the hard practical man who in his still hours will have pro-
jects and speculations as unreal as his life is real; and there is
not a man who has not drawn up and surrounded himself with
an ideal Self, as a kind of standard of perfection to which he
would be elevated. In the healthy-minded this finds no ex-
pression, and one is aware of the existence of such an ideal only,
perhaps, from remarks dropped here and there: some wish, .it
may be, if only his property were such, or his health perfect, or
his condition this or that, from which one learns that he has
placed himself under each of the imagined conditions, and has
acted his new part, lived his new life, and moved in his new
world?a world as unreal as the lotus-eater's, but with a founda-
tion of fact and a structure raised on the ideal of the perfection
of Self.
But this halo of unreality with which the Ego of every man
is surrounded, is not of an entirely indefinite character. A man
does not picture himself as abstractly better or abstractly
wealthier, nor is his imagined condition purely an abstract one:
it has a character more or less precise: he is wealthier by the
addition of so many fancied pounds, ennobled by this virtue or
by that, and physically improved by such qualities as he most
admires or considers himself most deficient in.
Now we have seen that if the power to which all mental
processes are due be impaired, those actions, amongst others,
will be affected which are the most detailed and elaborate, the
most varied, the least rigidly defined, and the least organically
registered. Of all processes of mind those involved in the con-
sideration of Self are certainly at once the most general and
extensive, the most changeable and complicated, the most vague
and the most ill-defined; and of all things, Self occupies in the
mind the widest attention, the most frequent attention, and the
most capricious attention. Assuming, as above suggested, that
in General Paralysis of the Insane this mind-power, whatever it
may be called, is the seat of the main lesion, the psychical pro-
cesses concerned in the consideration o? Self will be the first
involved, and will present the most prominent symptoms.
In General Paralysis the constraining directing energy is
impaired, and Self runs riot: not the actual Self, the mental
processes connected with which are more automatic and are
therefore still properly performed; but the ideal Ego, the man,
not as he is, but as he has pictured himself, and as he would
have himself to be. The complicated, ill-defined and flimsilv
300 PSYCHOLOGY OF GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE.
registered mind movements go first, the more precise and
automatic still remaining intact. Thus the patient feels him-
self "perfect," or in his ideal state; he is "first-class," he ails
nothing, he wants nothing; he is muscular beyond compare,
swift of foot, and keen of vision ; everything is rose-colour, and
his world one of self-gratification and enjoyment. The vague,
intricate thoughts and ideas with which he has built up an ideal
of himself have now free play. He is living in his fancied
world; his day-dreams are being realised and perfection reached;
in money matters he has his thousands?the thousands that
have, perchance, formed often enough a part of his thought; his
estates are limitless, his interest unbounded, nothing is lacking,
and he is, indeed, all he has ever wished himself to be.
The patient is a huge expression of Self, exaggerated and ideal,
and presents no ideas nor delusions that are not selfish in
character. He does not imagine, as others who are insane
might do, that the world is upside down, or on fire, or that
some' extraordinary event is about to happen: had he such
delusions they would assuredly have still some relation to Self,
and the world would have been upset by his own terrific power,
or burned for his own gratification, or the event would have
some bearing on his own perfection and magnificence.
Then, again, the markedly obscene ideas which the patient
generally presents may be covered by the same explanation.
Every man who experiences animal passions, no matter how
simple and exemplary his conduct may appear to the rest of the
world, cannot fail under the impulse of such passions to imagine
some method of gratification; thoughts of this character,
which are the more defined the baser the intellect, are often
repeated, and may assume a prominent part in the ideal Ego a
man deduces from his actual Self. If the mind powers be
impaired, these loosely formed and imperfectly organised ideas
have free play when called into action by a proper stimulus, and,
as the result, we have those expressions of obscenity which are
often a marked feature of the disease. Religious ideas are of
a somewhat less definite character, and do not afford so encourag-
ing a scope to the selfish ideal, unless the individual be of
marked religious tendencies. Expressions of religion are, how-
ever, frequent in the earlier stages of the disease, but very soon
cease to be heard of, and are, as a rule, of a happy, smooth,
and gratifying nature: the patient will, perhaps, spend many
hours in prayer or in reading some religious book, or in what is
apparently deep thought; or his ideas may assume a less
meditative character, and he will imagine himself about to
be made a bishop, or affirm that he is going to preach in a
cathedral,
PSYCHOLOGY OF GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE. 301
In the next place, it is to be remarked in regard to the
patient's delusions that they are progressive?progressive in
number, absurdity, and exaggeration. The first evidence of
grandiose ideas is often slight, and the earlier notions will
generally be found to have some actual and ascertainable basis;
for example, a patient will state that he owes the sum of ?400,
when it will be found perhaps that his mind has been much
exercised of late about a bill of ?4; or again he will praise his
muscles and extol his powers of running and his qualities as an
athlete, while he presents a body markedly feeble and ill-
conditioned.
Now, could the day-dreams and romancings of many sane
men be laid bare and exposed exactly as they pass through the
mind, it is to be doubted whether they would appear one whit
less ridiculous than the earlier mental symptoms of this disease, or
even than the symptoms when the insanity is tolerably advanced.
The drunkard, too, when in his cups, presents in a temporary
form a mental condition akin to that of the general paralytic;
the mental power becoming impaired by the poison, the least
automatic mind actions have free play: the nature of those
actions has been shown, and we see them displayed in the con-
fident bombast, the exalted ideas, the general self-satisfaction
and contentment.
The tippler, rising from his glass, shares with the general
paralytic his happy frame of mind, his ability to do anything
and attempt anything, his increased possessions and his many
personal excellencies; the flimsy intricate ideas out of which
in his sober moments he has woven an ideal self are freed from
the constraining power, and act to a given stimulus in the
manner seen. So, too, many of the very old, from a gradual
impairment of this mind power, present symptoms that may
fairly cause them to be classed as general paralytics. We may
meet with an example in some feeble old man of fourscore
years, propped up in his chair, powerless of limb and vacant of
mind, but with still one great idea of Self: Self is the one
great topic that he harps upon from morning till night: there
were no times like his times; no companions like his companions;
in everything that is modem?or, in other words, that is quite
out of the sphere of Self?there is only rottenness. No one
knows more than he, or can boast a vaster experience. No one
even now can manage his business as he can, and he would wish
to see the man who could do this thing Or that better than
himself.
The symptom that illustrates, perhaps as well as any, the
statement above made, that the disease consists in an unmask-
ing of an imagined Self, is the occurrence of frequent fits of
302 PSYCHOLOGY OF GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE.
melancholy and capricious sadness. These have their basis of
reality in those sudden moments of doubt and despondency to
which all men are at times subject, but those more especially
whose ideas are lofty and aspirations high. In the youth full
of ambition and romance it is perhaps most marked, and is
recognised by a name ; in the great speculator or great dreamer
it will come to mar his thoughts or mock his soarings, and is
perhaps most present when a flash shows him the hopeless dis-
parity between his dream and the reality.
One other point of importance remains to be noted. As
when there is any impairment of the originating mind energy,
those mental processes which are the least automatic or the
most constantly dependent on mind are the first to show evi-
dences of the injury, so those processes that are the most
automatic are the last to be affected. This affords explanation
in the present disease. For although the flimsy strange ideas
connected with his ideal state are luxuriating, he will still
present perfectly reasonable notions connected with his actual
self. Thus a patient possessed of several thousands of ideal
pounds, large estates, and magnificent connections, will yet, in
answer to a direct question, state correctly in most instances
the amount of his wages, however insignificant, and will own
to a trifling 30s. a week, while in the same breath he will talk
of his legacy of some thousands. The idea of his actual income
has become from frequent and constant repetition automatic,
and he answers accordingly. In like manner, he will state
correctly the price of his garments, of any jewellery he might
be wearing, while he will talk at the same moment of a suit of
gold or a chain of diamonds ; and may consider his health per-
fect while acknowledging to certain past diseases, accidents, and
infirmities. All such matters are familiar and defined, and
being constantly passed in review in the mind, acquire a hold
that the flimsy exaggerated ideas cannot lay claim to. The
condition of the memory also presents characteristic features.
Matters of recent occurrence that have had consequently but
few opportunities for repetition, and that still involve con-
sciousness when called into view, are of course far more directly
dependent upon mind than matters of earlier date which have
been so frequently repeated as to assume automaticity. So it
will be found that the patient, while he will furnish with won-
derful accuracy details of his earlier life, will yet give but a
vague account of recent events, and will confuse dates and
occurrences strangely. This defect in memory is often one of
the most marked of the earlier symptoms of the disease, and
is especially to be noticed in persons of business propensities
and formal habits.
