Remarks on the Lunacy Ac1s (Scotland), insofar as They, Refer to the Admission of Patients Into, and their Discharge From, Lunatic Asylums
=============================================================================================================================================

59
Art. V.?
:Author: James  Bobie, M.D., &c.
Eesident Ehj'sician, Boj'al Lunatic Asylum, Dundee.
Lead before Meeting of Scottish Section, Psychological Association, Edinburgh*
Tuesday, Dec. 14, 1875.

The following remarks on the Scotch Lunacy Acts, so far as
ley refer to the admission of patients into, and their discharge
iom, Asylums, are not intended to impart any new information
on the subject, but are made chiefly with the purpose of laying
before this Association certain difficulties which have occurred
to me in the administration of the Acts, and are submitted with
the special view of eliciting the opinions of the other members
on the points which appear to me particularly doubtful. From
nature of the subject, they will naturally have reference to
wo things; 1. The definition of insanity as laid down by the
cotch Law; and 2. The amount of insanity which justifies the
e ^tion of patients in Lunatic Asylums.

J-. sis regards the Definition of Insanity.?So far as I have
tl^en?a ? to ascertain, according to the terms of Scotch Law,
b %iln'Sane are divisible into four classes: a. The furious;
? he fatuous ; c. Idiots; and d. The facile, or persons whose
i.i s are so imbecile, or so liable to be unduly influenced by
AHiG1S' aS .^? considered unfit to manage their own affairs.
ough it would appear that these differences have been fully
of~> it can scarcely, however, be said that the definitions
his ulepUllave ^een as clearly set down. Thus even Erskine, in
f. Sf r_inciples of the Law of Scotland," gives a very unsatis-
ac interpretation of these terms.

tl Referring to the curatory of idiots and furious persons, he
us writes: "Curators are given, not only to minors, but, in
general, to everyone who, either through defect of judgment,
1 unfitness of disposition, is incapable of rightly managing his
j^.n affairs. Of the first sort are idiots and furious persons,
rpi s';or fatui, are entirely deprived of the faculty of reason.

e distemper of the furious person does not consist in the
e ect. of reason, but in an overheated imagination, which
. Cruets the application of reason to the purposes of life and
jn speaking of causes which grant exemption from punishment,
e says: "Far less can we reckon in the number of crimes, in-
p iQ^'e Principles of the Law of Scotland, b}7 John Erskine of Carnock, Esq.,
voluntary actions the first cause of wliicli is not in the agent, as
those committed by an idiot or furious person ; but lesser
degrees of fatuity, which only darken reason, will not afford a
total defence, though they raay save from the poena ordinaria
Another circumstance which adds considerably to the diffi-
culty of arriving at the real meaning of the term " insanity," as
used in the Scotch Law, is the fact, that in many of the Acts of
Parliament referring to Lunacy in Scotland, especially those
recently passed, many terms have been introduced borrowed
from the English Law, which, with the exception of the class
idiots, are quite different from those found in the Common Law
of Scotland, and which naturally have no clear definition as
interpreted by that law. The insane, according to the English
Law, consist of idiots, lunatics, and persons of unsound mind.
Phillips, in his " Law of Lunatics and Persons of Unsound
Mind," thus refers to the English terms :

" It will appear, from the authorities cited below, that the
proper sense to be attached to each of the above phrases has
been fully considered and positively determined. We may
therefore lay it down, that every person whose mind from his
birth, by a perpetual infirmity, is so deficient as to be incapable of
directing him in any matter which requires thought or judgment
is, in legal phraseology, an idiot.

" Every person qui gaudet lucidis intervallis, and who
sometimes is of good and sound memory, and sometimes non
compos mentis, is in legal phraseology a lunatic.
" Every person who, by reason of a morbid condition of
intellect, is as incapable of managing himself and his affairs as
an idiot or a lunatic, not being an idiot or a lunatic, or a person
?of merely weak mind, is in legal phraseology a person of
unsound mind."

He also adds : " It must be remembered, however, that in
legal phraseology a person whose moral feelings are perverted is
not by reason of such perversion a person of unsound mind.
Further, that if the mind is unsound on one subject, it is not
sound on any subject, the mind being indivisible.1'!
These terms, whatever objections may be taken to their
scientific value, possess, at any rate, sufficient practical value
to render them very useful guides in determining what is
really the meaning of insanity, as understood by the English
Law.

That the same cannot be said of the Scotch Law we have
already briefly referred to, and will now further consider ; for
* The Principles of the Law of Scotland, by John Erskine of Carnock. p. 515.
f The Law concerning Lunatics, Idiots, and Persons of Unsound Mind, by
Charles Palmer Phillips, p. 2.
REMARKS ON THE LUNACY ACTS (SCOTLAND). G1
not only is it difficult to arrive at what is to be considered
insanity, according to the Common Law of Scotland, but even
since the passing of the Act 20 & 21 Vict. c. 71 (1857),
considerable alterations in the definition of insanity would
appear to have been introduced in subsequent Acts.
An admirable abstract of the Laws of Scotland referring to
lunatics previous to the year 1857 will be found in the Report
?f the Royal Commission appointed to inquire into the state of
Lunatic Asylums in Scotland, and the existing law in reference to
lunatics, &c. ; and from it we learn that from the earliest period
| he ward and custody of the property of lunatics appears to
have belonged to the Prince, as pater patriae, and to have been
exercised through the intervention of tutors appointed by
him.

By the statute of Robert I., in the beginning of the 14tli
century, the custody and keeping of persons of "furious mind"
were devolved upon their relatives, and failing them, on the jus-
ticiar or the sheriff of the county ; while any damage done by
such persons, in consequence of negligent keeping, was visited
npon their keepers. According to Sir Thomas Craig, a distinction
was at one time recognised in this respect between " fatuous "
and " furious " persons : the custody of the former having been
committed to the next agnate (nearest male relative by the
j er's side), while that of the latter belonged to the Crown,
as having the sole power of coercing with fetters " (p. 4).
* rom the same source we also learn that the difference
je ween the terms furiosity and idiocy was very early es-
^ shed. In referring to the appointments of Tutors at Law,
ls ^ated that, originally, the practice was to issue one brieve,
jlpplicable both to furiosity and fatuity. The essential difference
ween these states of mind, however, soon suggested the ex-
C separate brieves, according to the supposed mental
nclition of the person whose case was to be inquired into?
e one called a " brieve of furiosity," and the other a " brieve
?f idiocy.

We have thus three of the forms established?namely, the
uiious, fatuous, and idiots. The fourth class of the insane, as
eired in Scotch statutes, is first, it would appear, distinctly
jttcntioned in the Poor Law Amendment Act (8 & 9 Vict. c..
)i where, in providing for the proper care of the insane, it is
enacted, " that whenever any poor person, who shall become
e largeable on any parish or combination, shall be insane or
atuous, the parochial board of such parish or combination
_iall, within fourteen days of his being known to be insane or
u?us, provide that such person shall be lodged in an asylum
0r establishment legally authorised to receive lunatics ;"
and in a subsequent clause " adverts to persons who, from
weakness or facility of mind, are unfit to take charge of their
own affairs, as among- the persons for whose accommodation
poorhouses were to be erected," thus demonstrating that, while,
in the sense of the Legislature, weakminded persons are proper
inmates of poorhouses, they are a different class from fatuous
persons, who are classed with the insane as proper subjects for
confinement in asylums or licensed madhouses" (p. 24).
It would appear, however, that by the Act of 1857, this
class became incorporated with the other forms of insanity?at
least no provision seems to have been made for their care and
maintenance out of asylums. From these extracts it will be
seen that, previous to 1857, a marked difference existed between
the English and Scotch Law, three forms being recognised by
the former?viz., idiots, lunatics, and persons of unsound mind?
while four were recognised by the latter, viz., the furious,
fatuous, idiots, and the facile; the three first of which were
?considered suitable and proper persons for treatment in asylums,
and the last in poorhouses. One would naturally suppose that
when the Act of 1857 (20 & 21 Vict. c. 71) was prepared,
the terms established by the Scotch Law would have been care-
fully preserved, but we find such was not the case. The furious
and fatuous classes, it is true, are comprehended in the Act;
but other terms were also added, which may be regarded as the
commencement of the confusion. Thus, in the interpretation
clause of this Act, a lunatic is defined as meaning and including
not only " any mad, or furious, or fatuous person," but also
" persons so diseased or affected in mind as to render them
unfit, in the opinion of competent medical persons, to be at
large, either as regards their own personal safety and conduct,
or the safety of the persons and property of others, or of
the public ; " while in the 35th clause of the same Act we find
the lunatic spoken of as " an insane person, an idiot, or a
person of unsound mind."

The next alteration we find in the definition of the term
" lunatic " is an important one, and it is to be regretted that little
can be said in its favour, beyond its extreme simplicity and
extreme comprehensiveness; as there is little doubt the change
has contributed not inconsiderably to the alleged increase of
insanity, and to other mischievous results in practice. The new
definition was established in 1862, when in the interpretation
clause of the Amendment Act of that year (25 & 26 Vict,
c. 54), it was enacted that " Lunatic, when used in this and
the recited Act, shall mean and include every person certified
by two medical persons to be a lunatic, an insane person, an
idiot, or a person of unsound mind." It is difficult to imagine
how such a clause could ever have been allowed to pass into
law, for practically it amounts to this?that every person is
insane and a lunatic who is certified to be so by two medical
persons ; and, conversely, that every lunatic can be made legally
sane by two medical certificates to that effect.'

The chief cause which appears to have led to this alteration
m the definition of the term was the agitation at the time
raised by the general medical profession, naturally dissatisfied
with the ambiguity which existed in regard to the real legal
definition, and as naturally anxious to secure themselves as
much as possible from responsibility in granting certificates in
cases of insanity ; but the result?as was first pointed out, I
believe, by the late Dr Skae ?was in a great measure
Simply to transfer this responsibility from the shoulders of the
general profession to those of the asylum physicians. Accord-
lng to the definition clause of the Act of 1857, it was evidently
the duty of those certifying persons to be insane to satisfy
themselves that the patient was a lunatic in terms of the
Common Law of Scotland ; and although this in many cases
111 ay have proved no easy matter, in consequence of the obscurity
which surrounds the subject, still, great assistance was afforded
to those granting certificates under this Act, in so far as the
certificates were in a measure subject to revision by the sheriff
his substitutes, whose duty it was to see that the facts men-
loned in the certificate amounted to evidence of insanity in
,le legal sense, before granting their warrant for the transmis-
sion of the patient to an asylum. The definition adopted in
le Act of 1862, however, may simply be said to have conferred
on the general medical profession a power of manufacturing
_Urjatics' tor all that is now required under this Act is that the
ndividual be duly certified by two medical persons to be a
unatic, an insane person, an idiot, or a person of unsound mind?
? > whatever may be his real state of mind, a statutory lunatic
e forthwith becomes. It does not even appear to be obligatory
?n the sheriff or his substitutes to examine the evidence of
insanity given in the certificates; it would seem to be sufficient
. lat ^hey satisfy themselves that the certificates are drawn up
m due form.

. -t>ut it must be borne in mind, that while the sheriff's warrant
gives full power for the transmission of such a statutory lunatic
e an asylum, and for his reception therein, it confers no power
c detention whatever in regard to time, so that the first ques-
ion which the asylum superintendent has to consider is whether
. e *s justified in detaining the patient at all. His first business,
m fact, is to satisfy himself on a subject which ought to have been
c early established before the patient was brought to the asylum.

The only other change or alteration in the definition of
insanity is where, in the third clause of the Act 25 & 26
Vict. c. 54, provision is made for the licensing of lunatic wards
in poorliouses, for " pauper lunatics who are not dangerous and
do not require curative treatment;" appearing to imply a belief
on the part of the Legislature that the insane can readily be so
divided into harmless and dangerous, and to those who require
curative treatment and those who do not. To this, however,
we will refer afterwards.

II. These remarks naturally lead to the consideration of
another important question?namely, what is the amount of
insanity required by the statute and common law to justify a
person's detention in an asylum ??for it is clear that from the
very earliest period it was never intended, or considered necessary,
that everybody who might be insane, in the ordinary or everyday
sense of the term, should be sent to Lunatic Asylums. We have
already seen that, at one time at least, provision was expressly
made that those of the poor whose insanity amounted to facility
of mind, even when sufficiently extensive as to render them
unfit to take charge of their own affairs, might be sent to poor-
houses, apparently as ordinary paupers. Now, it is somewhat
remarkable that in the Act of 1857 no definite information on
this subject is given, although to a certain extent the legal
view might be inferred from the 92nd Clause, which refers to
the liberation of lunatics by relations or others in the following
terms :?" It shall be lawful for any person, having procured and
produced the certificate of two medical persons, approved of by
the sheriff, of the recovery of any lunatic, or hearing that such
lunatic may, without risk of injury to the public or to the
lunatic, be set at large, and also an order from the sheriff for
the liberation of the lunatic, to require the superintendent of
the asylum in which such lunatic is to liberate such lunatic,
and such lunatic shall be liberated accordingly.

In the 17 th Clause of the Act of 1862, however, direct
instructions have been enacted as to the discharge of patients,
as follows : " When it shall appear to the superintendent of
any asylum or house that any lunatic detained therein has so
far recovered that he may be safely liberated without risk or
injury to the public or the lunatic, such superintendent shall
grant a certificate to that effect, or procure one from the
ordinary medical attendant of such asylum or house, and shall
transmit a copy thereof to the person at whose instance such
lunatic is detained "?and so on, terminating in the patient's
discharge from the asylum. Now, from a careful consideration
of these extracts, it will be seen that, whatever may be the
practice followed, the view entertained by the Legislature is,.
that insanity alone is not sufficient to justify the detention 01
a patient in an asylum, but, in addition, there must be evidence
of danger, or threatened danger, to the public, or to the patient
himself. Indeed, the same spirit which originally directed that
the furious should be cared for by the Crown, as the custodier
of fetters, would appear to pervade the Act of 1862; for it is
clear that it is not the care, cure, and treatment of the insane
which are aimed at, but simply their detention and separation
from the world, for the purpose of securing either their own per-
sonal safety or that of the public. But even with this explana-
tion, we have not yet solved the problem as to the patients who
may or may not be detained in asylums. The patient must be
dangerous; but the element of danger in a case of insanity is
a very variable one, and may depend on many different causes :
for example, it will vary materially with the amount of supei-
vision exercised by the patient's friends. In so far as danger to
the public is concerned, there is, as a rule, no great room foi
doubt, although individual cases of particular difficulty may
now and then occur. Assault, threatened injury, and probably
also offensiveness to public decency?in fact, any act which,
perpetrated or threatened by a sane person, would bring such
individual under the jurisdiction of a police-court?would no
doubt be admitted as sufficient grounds tor the patient's deten-
tion. When we consider the question of risk of injury to the
lunatic himself, however, the case becomes considerably moi'e
complicated. As regards attempted or threatened suicide,
there would be no difference of opinion ; it is when we have to
consider the probable risk of injury to the health of the lunatic,
from mental inability to look after himself and his interests, 01*
from neglect on the part of his friends to do so for him, that
the unsatisfactory nature of this definition becomes fully
apparent, for it is evident 110 two cases in this respect can be
precisely alike. A person who has friends, able and willing to
look after him, would not be suitable for detention, while
another labouring under a similar amount of mental defect,
without such friends, would be so ; and thus the somewhat
curious result is arrived at, that the legality of a person's deten-
tion in an asylum, so far as this can be ascertained from Scotch
?Statute Law, depends on the amount of supervision which his
friends and relatives can and are willing to exercise over him
at home.

As intimately related to the above subject may be con-
sidered the various ways in which patients may be discharged
from asylums.

First, a patient may be discharged from an asylum in terms
?f the 17th clause of the Act 25 & 26 Vict. c. 54. This clause
PART. I. VOL. II.?NEW SERIES. E
G6 REMARKS ON THE LUNACY ACTS (SCOTLAND).

we have already considered in its bearing on the question of
the amount of insanity necessary to justify a patient's deten-
tion in an asylum, and need only be referred to here as showing
that it is clearly pointed out that the complete recovery of the
patient, in the ordinary sense of the term, is not to be waited
for, but that the patient snould be discharged as soon as his
recovery has reached that point which renders him no longer
dangerous to the public, and when, also, his discharge will not
prove injurious to himself. In most cases the probable danger
and risk to the public can be pretty closely estimated ; but as
regards the probable injury to the patient, we are met by the
same difficulties which have already been discussed in regard
to the question of the patient's admission : for here, as before, the
probable risk to the patient will vary according to the amount of
care bestowed on him after he has returned home. Secondly,
the same remarks apply to the discharge of patients by the
sheriff or Board of Lunacy, in terms of the 92nd clause of the
Act 20 & 21 Vict. c. 71. By this clause power is conferred
on the sheriff and on the Board of Lunacy to order the dis-
charge of any patient on the application of any person
having procured and produced the certificate of two medical
persons, approved by the sheriff, of the recovery of any
lunatic, or hearing that such lunatic may, without risk
of injury to the public or to the lunatic, be set at large.
Thirdly, a patient may be discharged by being transferred
to another asylum, to houses licensed for a limited num-
ber of cases, or to the lunatic wards of poorhouses. It is
only the last form of transference which here calls for atten-
tion. This is effected under the 3rd clause of the Act 25 & 26
Vict. c. 54, and refers to such pauper patients " only who are
not dangerous, and do not require curative treatment." Here
we have rather a startling innovation in the definitions which
we have been considering. Hitherto they have been based,
more or less, on the legal interpretations ascribed to them;
but what is to be understood legally by the term a harmless
lunatic, or where is the line to be drawn which separates those
who do not require curative treatment from those who do ?
The answer to this is rendered all the more difficult when, as
we have seen, that by the 17th clause of the Act 25 & 26
Vict. c. 54, it is incumbent on every Superintendent to dis-
charge from his asylum (whence it would appear the harmless
lunatics are to be transferred) every patient who has " so far
recovered that he may be safely liberated without risk or injury
to the public or the lunatic." Again, does the term "curative
treatment" mean the application of all remedies, medicinal
and hygienic, physical, mental, and moral, to patients only
who can be so cured, or does it also include the same agents
employed for the amelioration and improvement of those
where so satisfactory a termination cannot be expected ? Far-
ther, is the term " patients who do not require curative treat-
ment " to be regarded as necessarily synonymous with that of
patients who are incurable," or persons who have been duly
submitted to treatment for a reasonable time, and whose
recovery has to be despaired of?

The object of the Legislature in making the above provi-
sion would appear to have been, either to relieve existing
asylums, by providing for patients of the imbecile or facile
class, supposed to have accumulated in them ; or to inaugurate
a bolder policy?namely, to separate the curable and dangerous
from those found by experience to have been incurable, and
who for a time had committed no serious act of violence.
Probably the former was the object originally intended, and if
so? it is to be regretted that more definite instructions had not
been enacted for the separation of these classes.

The statute does not specify the manner in which this is to
be done, nor by whom, further than that the cases for the poor-
nouse wards are to be chosen, " subject to such rules and
conditions as the Board may prescribe," and " according to
xorms, and subject to regulations, approved of by the Board."
?these forms consist of the sanction of the Board, granted on
he application of the inspector of the parish, accompanied by
a statement of the patient's condition, and a medical certificate,
generally granted by the parochial medical officer, that the
pei son is " of unsound mind, not dangerous, and incapable of
erivmg benefit from treatment in an asylum," and " a proper
pei son to be placed in the lunatic wards of a poorhouse." It
would clearly be beyond the object of this communication to
iscuss the question whether lunatics should be placed in poor-
louses or not, or to enlarge further on the subject. It will be
sufficient to state that experience has shown the defects of this
e ause to be?first, a want of precision in the statutory defini-
ion of the cases to be removed; secondly, that the condition
0 the patient is liable to be made secondary, or subservient in
consideration, to the question of available accommodation ; and
urdly, that unsuitable, dangerous, and even convalescent
Patients may be selected for transference.

A patient may be discharged from an asylum by a minute
of the parochial board to which the lunatic is chargeable.
According to the Act 29 & 30 Yict. c. 51, two clauses,
very similar in import, refer to this subject?the 9th Clause,
oy which " it shall be lawful for any parochial board, by a minute
at a duly-constituted meeting, to direct that any pauper lunatic
Inot being a criminal lunatic), with whose maintenance it is
chargeable, and who is detained in any asylum or house, shall
be discharged or removed therefrom," &c.; and the 11th clause,
by which " it shall be lawful for any parochial board, by a
minute at a duly-constituted meeting, to remove from the
poor's roll any pauper lunatic, in any asylum or house, for
whose maintenance it is responsible, and to entrust the
disposal of such lunatic to any party who shall undertake to
provide, in a manner satisfactory to the parochial board, for
his care and treatment," &c. The only restriction upon the
unlimited power these clauses confer on parochial boards is
that, should the superintendent consider " that such lunatic is
dangerous to himself or the public, or in any other way not a
fit person to be discharged," he may report the case to the
board (General Board of Lunacy), who, in their turn, may
authorise the patient's continued detention. It does not appear
to be in any way, however, obligatory on the part of the
superintendent to do anything, or to interfere in this way; and
it may thus be said, that these clauses virtually restore
the pauper insane to the full control of the parochial
authorities.

Finally, a patient may be discharged by the determination
of the sheriff's order, in terms of the 7th clause of the Act
29 & 30 Vict. c. 51. This clause has always appeared
to me an extraordinary one, because, in the first place, it can
lead practically to no useful results; while in the second place,
by limiting the duration of the sheriff's order to three years,
it confers a power on this order which we have seen it did not
originally possess, and at the same time suggests the idea that
it has a penal force, as if sentencing the patients to a certain
length of confinement?a feeling very much at variance with
the present views of the treatment of the insane. If the
object aimed at by this clause was that of securing that
patients should not be unnecessarily detained in asylums, we have
seen that this was already fully provided against by the 17tli
clause of the Act 25 & 26 Yict. c. 54.
From a. careful consideration, then, of the clauses of the
Scotch Lunacy Acts, so far as they refer to the admission into,,
detention in, and discharge of patients from asylums, it will
be found that in many respects they are far from being in
harmony with the practical object, now kept in view, in sending
the insane to these institutions while to those who have
carefully studied the history of this subject for the last twenty
years, many of the enactments, especially those of more recent
date, will no doubt appear distinctly retrogressive. We have
seen, for example, that the principle aimed at by the statute is
chiefly the detention of the lunatic as a dangerous subject,
rather than his treatment and cure as a patient; that by
making a person's sanity or insanity depend on medical cer-
tificates, too great facilities are afforded of sending to asylums
helpless paralytics, or others who may have become troublesome
to their friends, if but the slightest mental infirmity can be
detected in their cases; while in the attempted division of the
insane into the harmless, dangerous, incurable, and those
amenable to curative treatment, we have a legal enactment of
a very unsatisfactory, impracticable, and unscientific character.

It appears to me therefore that a considerable change in the
legal terms will have to be made, before any really satis-
factory reform can take place in the treatment and disposal of
the insane poor. Many circumstances, especially the steady and
gradual increase in the number of those now classed as lunatics,
would appear to indicate that for the future Lunatic Asylums
will have to assume more the functions of places of tieat-
ment and of curative establishments than they have hitherto
done, whatever other arrangements may have to be devised
for the disposal of the fatuous and imbecile insane; but before
this can be effected, much clearer and more precise definitions
of the various forms of insanity will have to be adopted by the
Legislature, than those at present in use ; and especially that the
distinction between the patients who are to be sent to asylums for
treatment, and those who are to be relegated to other establish-
ments merely for conservation, should be clearly set forth by
statutory enactment. In short, the mass of mental and physical
degeneracy which is at present included under the general
term of insanity, will have to be carefully sifted, before the
full benefit which Lunatic Asylums are capable of conferring on
the insane can be brought into operation : but it is evident
that this can never be thoroughly done under a system of
legislation which renders it possible that a helpless paralytic
can, for convenience, be converted into a lunatic, or a lunatic
converted into a sane person, and turned loose on society,
merely by a few strokes of the pen ; or that a convalescent
patient, in the full and fond anticipation of being soon restored
to his friends and his freedom, can by the same means be
changed into a harmless and incurable lunatic, possibly to be
sent to end his days in the lunatic wards of a workhouse.
