Judgment and Reasoning in the Child
====================================

:Type: Book Reviews & Abstracts.
:Author: Jean Piaget, 
Director of the Institut
Rousseau and Professor at the University of
Geneva. Translated by Marjorie Warden.
London. Kegan Paul. 1928. 10/6d-

This book is the second of the trilogy which
Professor Piaget has devoted to a study of the
thought of the child as it finds expression in
language. Every one who has talked much
with children, allowing them to express them-
selves freely, must have had occasion to feel
that his reasoning was not marching with that
of his young companion, that what should be
the clash of thought is a little like a contest
between a whale and an elephant?sound and
nothing more. Arguments which convince the
adult leave the child quite unaffected, whereas
reasons that satisfy the child seem to the adult
irrelevant or absurd. Even up to the age of
eleven or twelve normal children may con-
sistently from given premises draw conclusions
which to all normal adults are clearly false.
For example, a child may in the same inter-
view state that little boats float because they
are light, and big boats float because they are
heavy, both statements appearing entirely
satisfactory to him and in no way con-
tradictory.

Now to Professor Piaget such mistakes are
not mere mistakes; they are not just the result
of inattention or ignorance; they are the pro-
duct of a way of thinking which has its own
characteristics and its own laws. The funda-
mental characteristic is ego-centrism, or in-
ability to enter into or realise any one's point
of view except one's own. A simple example
of this is found in the fact that a child may
know that he himself has a brother, yet may
steadily deny that his brother has a brother.

Hence the child's judgments are all absolute;
relational judgments involving the simultan-
eous awareness of at least two points of view
present to him insuperable difficulties.
The causal relationship as we understand it
makes its way very slowly into the child's
thought world. Yet if asked he is always
ready to supply a cause. Thus if we enquire of
a six-year-old why the sun does not fall down,
he may reply, " Because it is hot," or
" Because it is yellow." Such, to us, arbitrary
and fantastic causes are to him satisfying.
Description possesses explanatory value. Any
feature which has been perceived along with
another may be brought forward as an explan-
ation of that other. For example, an effect
may be cited as explaining a cause; e.g., "The
man fell off his bicycle, because he broke his
arm."

These two facts belong together, but exactly
how they belong together is not clear to the
child. He sets them alongside one another, but
he does not understand the nature of the inner
relationship. He juxtaposes, instead of articu-
lating and really synthesising. This tendency to
juxtaposition shows itself clearly in his draw-
ings; thus, in drawing a bicycle he will show
pedals, chain, cog-wheel, gear, as well as the
frame and the two wheels, but these details
are placed alongside one another without the
relationship being indicated. They go to-
gether, but the question of how they go
together has not yet arisen for the child. The
fact is self-sufficient.

Complementary to juxtaposition is syncretism
which abolishes analysis in any real sense of
the term by creating vague wholes in which
everything is related to everything else. These
may be regarded as phases of thought alterna-
ting over indefinite periods, and they show
themselves in analogous forms and ways on
different levels of thought. Thus, " In visual
perception, juxtaposition is the absence of re-
lations between details; syncretism is a vision
of the whole which creates a vague but all-
inclusive scheme, supplanting the details. In
verbal intelligence juxtaposition is the ab-
sence of relations between the various terms
of a sentence ; syncretism is the all-round
understanding which makes the sentence into
a whole. In logic, juxtaposition leads to an
absence of implication and reciprocal justifica-
tion between the successive judgments; syn-
cretism creates a tendency to bind everything
together and to justify by means of the most
ingenious or the most facetious devices."

As this quotation makes plain, Professor
Piaget rightly draws a clear distinction be-
tween the different levels on which the child's
thought moves, the progression of thought on
these different levels not being necessarily har-
monious. Thus on the plane of action a child
may often show that he knows what in the
sphere of verbal intelligence is quite obscure
to him.

It is impossible here to deal with the nature
of the evidence on which Professor Piaget
bases his theories. Suffice it to say that his
work is a challenge to English investigators
to repeat his experiments in order to see
whether the results obtained in the English
language confirm the hypotheses grounded on
the French results. Meanwhile we congratu-
late Professor Piaget on the wealth of
suggestion which his patient analysis of the
child's mentality has produced.

A more adequate index would increase the
value of the book.

Margaret Drummond.
--------------------

The Child and Society : An Introduction
to the Social Psychology of the Child.
By Phyllis Blanchard, Ph.D. Longmans
Green & Co. 1928. 10/fid.

As "an introduction to the social psychology
of the child" this book has much to recom-
mend it. Printed in clear type, it gives in
readable form a comprehensive survey of the
influence which his environment has on a
child's development from birth to adolescence,
determining the part he is to play in society
when he grows up.

In the first part of the book, besides sections
dealing with the significance of home and
school in a child's life, there are chapters on
such subjects as his religion, his reading and
the effect on his conduct of the " motion
picture." The well-known theories about Play
are given in another chapter, while the
question of intellectual equipment has careful
consideration. Part II is concerned with
" Failures in Socialisation," and here we have
an analysis of the causes of misbehaviour and
delinquency, with suggestions as to methods
of correction. This section contains an in-
teresting account of the movement for estab-
lishing Child Guidance Clinics and some of
the work done in such clinics.

All this is accomplished in brief space and
yet the book is by no means a mere summary
of facts or theories. Starting off with the con-
viction that " social adaptation depends, to a
large extent, upon the proper conditioning of
the emotional responses," Dr. Blanchard sets
out to show from her knowledge and ex-
perience how this must inevitably be so. Other
factors may be, and are, of great significance
in the development of character, but since his
use or misuse of the advantages life offers him
depends upon a man's emotional attitude, the
latter is of supreme importance. For example,
a man of a high level of intelligence may fail
to become effective in society because of
emotional instability. Granted the formation
of desirable " behaviour patterns " in early
childhood, satisfactory conduct is guaranteed,
according to Dr. Blanchard. The sources of
unsatisfactory conduct can be traced to un-
desirable behaviour patterns and the obvious
method of correction is to substitute new and
good habits of emotional response. The book
is, in effect, a plea that we should be " willing
to face the facts as to the child's native abilities
or disabilities, and bend our energies to the
careful nurture of all his capacities, emotional
as well as intellectual, so that adult years will
find him prepared to fit into society at some
point adapted to his level of intelligence with-
out any impairment of his efficiency through
ill-adapted habits of emotional response."

This definite standpoint and purpose round
which the argument centres, gives "The Child
and Society" a unity and interest which it
would otherwise lack. It does, indeed, prevent
us from being oppressed by the feeling, which
is apt to arise as we read the book, that we
have heard all this before, many times. Our
interest is sustained by the development of the
central theme, as well as by occasional refresh-
ing passages like, for example, that in which
the child's claim to be allowed to escape for a
little from reality by watching " the movies,"
is advocated.

The arrangement of the book is good, giving
as it does, a full bibliography of books and
articles written on different aspects of child
life and its problems, as well as an Author
and a Subject Index. There is also a Glossary
which does not seem to serve any useful pur-
pose. It is an insult to even a beginner in the
study of Social Psychology to be told in a
glossary that taboo means " prohibited: for-
bidden," while the explanation of correlation
as "a mathematical expression of relationship"
is hardly enlightening. The Topics for Dis-
cussion, too, are disappointing. Most of these
are expressed in the form of questions and the
wording is unfortunate, savouring as it does
of the examination paper. " Can you give
examples of . . . ? " " What are the chief
theories of play? " etc.

These are, however, minor defects in a book
which is valuable because it not only describes
the lines along which scientific study of the
child in his environment has proceeded, but
also indicates new avenues of approach to the
subject. If the Behaviourist Psychology on
which the central argument of the book is
based is itself open to question, that is a further
incentive to thought and inquiry, and the hope
expressed in the Preface that " this intro-
duction to the social psychology of childhood
may prove stimulating to further thinking
along these lines " is abundantly fulfilled.

Everyday Problems of the Everyday
Child. Douglas A. Thom, M.D. D. Apple-
ton & Co. 1928. 350 pp. Price 2 dollars
50 cents.

This is a book that should live through many
editions and still be in demand, for few upon
whom depend the training of children can
afford to be without its valuable advice.

Dr. Thorn's work is concerned with the nor-
mal child. Every child, in the course of his
journey from infancy to manhood, encounters
difficulties that may tend to upset his balance,
for a longer or shorter period of time, accord-
ing as they are more or less compelling in their
influence. The normal child thus becomes,
temporarily, abnormal, as do we all in moments
of emotional stress. The child in a raging-
temper, for example, is, for the time being, in
an abnormal condition, and this condition will
tend to become more and more his usual state
of mind as outbursts of temper become more
and more frequent. Eventually, therefore, the
child whose temper remains uncontrolled will
attain hardly to adult life; and he will acquire
many undesirable tendencies, and if in the end
he becomes actually unbalanced, small the
wonder ! The average adult, in the face of
such a situation, is dismayed and is totally un-
able to deal with the refractory child. It is for
the help and guidance of many who feel at
such a loss that Dr. Thorn's book is written.
It is simply written and abstruse technical-
ities are entirely avoided. Every phase of
child life is provided for; almost every possible
difficulty is dealt with, and this in no uncertain
manner, but with the authority born of per-
sonal knowledge and experience. Dr. Thom
illustrates his book with examples from the
lives of children with whom he has had to deal
in his Clinic at Boston, and one feels that he
knows and noes not merely theorise.

Whole chapters are devoted to such problems
as undesirable habits, obedience and discipline,
anger, jealousy, sense of inferiority, sex
troubles and many other difficulties met with
in childhood. The author deals with the
child's mind, the root causes of the difficulties,
the attitude that should be adopted by the
parent or teacher, and the course of action that
should be pursued to remedy the evil. He
tackles each problem in a straightforward and
efficient manner, leaving a conviction in the
mind of the reader of the wisdom and ex-
perience of the man who writes. His solutions
are logical and rational and free throughout
from the sentimentality which is to-day so
often showered upon young children, with
deplorable results. Much would be gained if
all parents would read Dr. Thorn's book and
act systematically in accordance with the
sound advice given in it.

An index and an excellent bibliography are
included in the book.
S. J. Hardcastle.
