The Health of the Nation
==========================

20 MENTAL WELFARE.
Book Reviews & Abstracts.
. By Lt.-Col. F.
C. Fremantle, M.P., M.B., F.R.C.P.,
F.R.C.S., D.P.H. Philip Allan & Co.,
Ltd.:1927.
In the " Housing of the Nation," published
earlier in the year, Lt.-Col. F. C. Fremantle
gave a valuable resume of the bewildering re-
cent legislation on Housing and of various as-
pects of this special public health problem. A
companion book entitled, " The Health of the
Nation," dealing with public health broadly,
lias now followed from the pen of the same
author, than whom there is no one in a better
position to undertake such a review. With his
medical training, his experience as an active
Medical Officer of Health for an important
County, as a member of the London County
Council (including Chairmanship of the Pub-
lic Health and Housing Committee) and lat-
terly for eight years as a Member of the House
of Commons, he has had occasion to consider
Public Health Problems from a variety of
standpoints. The advantages he has gained
in these various capacities have been put to
full use in the " Health of the Nation," and
it may be said in one sentence that in no one
of the many books on public health that have
appeared of recent years is there given so com-
plete a bird's eye view of the intricate nature
of the subject, legal and medical, and that in
an octavo volume of about 200 pages of well
displayed type.
Col. Fremantle in the preface says " I hope
(the volume) may be as useful to my Coll-
eagues in both Houses of Parliament, and to
all to whom may fall the opportunity to in-
struct and encourage public opinion in such
matters, as the writing of it has been to my-
self." From the range of the ground covered
Col. Fremantle must have dipped deeply into
the best sources of information and the assist-
ance given to him by various persons named
is gracefully acknowledged in the preface. The
general plan of the book is indicated by the
following selection from the titles of the chap-
ters :?The Joy of Life, History of Public
Health Legislation, Economics of Health,
Mother and Child, Education, Poor Law and
Hospitals, Insurance, The Four Scourges,
Mental, Industrial, Overseas.
The " Mental " chapter deals as fully as
can be expected in a book of this size with
lunacy, criminal responsibility, mental defic-
iency and mental health, giving information
as to the numbers of affected persons, the
agencies dealing with each class and also as
to legislation. In his remarks on this special
subject, as in other sections, Col. Fremantle
gives evidence of the very high value he sets on
the work of voluntary agencies. Thus he ob-
serves "The Central Association for Mental
Welfare has 35,940 cases registered at its Cen-
tral Office, and through its 51 local associations
in 23 Counties and 43 County Boroughs, pro-
vides when required, guardianship, super-
vision, training and aftcr-care. It arranges
courses for Doctors, Teachers, attendants and
supervision of occupation centres, and through
its Occupational and Guardianship Officers and
publications, assists the several councils,
guilds, and societies to arouse interest and deal
with the problems of mental welfare, espec-
ially in the wise and friendly unofficial visit-
ing of the homes of the defectives." Another
more general example is given on page three,
when Col. Fremantle says, " The system (of
public health) must be supple and apply intim-
ately to every individual, thus giving a special
value in health matters to private agencies
which so long as they are filled with
enthusiasm for their several sections of
the common task, may take more trouble than
public authorities, give more encouragement
to initiative and experiment, hit the mark
more certainly, learn much themselves and
pass their learning on." As examples he
quotes District Nurses, Voluntary Hospitals
and the Associations that maintain them.
At the end of the volume are included a
Bibliography of publications for current in-
formation on special problems, on legal
aspects, professional Text Books and general
aspects of health work : a Directory of Lead-
ing Organisations (from which Local Sanitary
Authorities are, curiously, omitted) and an
Index. These all greatly increase the worth
of such a volume to all to whom it is available
and the list of those persons should include not
only those whom Col. Fremantle addresses,
more particularly, his Colleagues at Westmin-
ster, but also Members of Local Authorities,
who are sometimes inclined to forget theiy
MENTAL WELFARE. 21
duties as health administrators owing to ex-
alted ideas as to their responsibilities as rep-
resentatives of the rate payers.
Without being captious it may be permitted
to regret that Col. Fremantle has introduced
so marked a political atmosphere into a very
useful volume. True as it may be that we owe
valuable public health legislation to one polit-
ical party more than another, it does not help
forward a matter that calls for the active co-
operation of all agencies and persons to do
anything to give it the slightest political
colour.
The Rt. Hon. Neville Chamberlain, M.P.,
Minister of Health, contributes a foreword
and to quote from it "I welcome this
book as a useful and comprehensive review of
the organisation and purpose of our public
health service."
J. Middleton Martin.
Clinical and Abnormal Psychology. By
J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D., Professor of
Clinical Psychology, Miami University,
U.S.A. George G. Harrap & Co., Ltd. :
1927. Price 8s. Gd. net.
This book is one of the Riverside scries pub-
lished by Houghton Griffin & Co, New York
and Chicago, and is a companion volume to
another by the same author?" Education of
Handicapped Children "?which appeared
three years ago.
The book forms a refreshing contrast to cer-
tain recent publications by American authors
on the subject of the mentally abnormal child.
Some of these authors appear to have con-
tracted the habit of " thinking in print " with
the result that their publications are charact-
erised more by the exuberance of their verb-
osity than by statements of ascertained facts,
while such views as are expressed have
changed completely in the next edition.
The book under review, on the other hand,
is clear and concise throughout and the views
expressed therein are evidently the result of
years of patient observation and reflection. The
author has carried out, consistently, the inten-
tion expressed in the preface, viz., to open up
the field to the general reader and to supply a
broad foundation of facts, procedures and
principles on which the technical worker may
build. It is claimed that this is the only book
in existence which includes, under a single
cover, all subjects associated with the men-
tally abnormal child. This comprehensive
nature of the book has rendered it impossible
for the author to deal, in detail, with many of
the individual topics. He has, however, en-
larged upon those which are of more general
application and curtailed his remarks upon
those which relate to specific branches of the
subject. While a whole chapter (Chapter V.)
is devoted to general directions and principles
to be observed in making psychological tests,
and two chapters (Chapters XVII. & XVIII.)
to the important subjects of associational pro-
cesses, association defects and complexes, he
refers the reader to the appropriate manuals
for directions relating to the application of in-
dividual tests; restricts, in other parts of the
book, his remarks on the interpretation of
dreams, on Freudian principles, to seven and
a half pages; dismisses the whole subject of
logic in four, and that of automatic writing in
just over one. For additional information on
Freudian methods and other specialities the
reader is referred to an appended fully classi-
fied bibliography.
The volume is divided into four parts. Part
I is introductory and is devoted to clinical ex-
aminations, deviation from norms and general
aims and principles. Part II. is devoted to
general intelligence?levels and specific intell-
ectual abilities and disabilities. Part III. re-
lates to general levels of motor competency
and specific motor abilities and disabilities and
Part IV. to states of emotional development
and emotional, instinctive, temperamental
and character peculiarities. There are no less
than thirty-four illustrations. The addition of
one more to illustrate the positions and rela-
tions of the four cerebral centres concerned
in the aphasias would greatly help the general
reader to understand this part of the text.
Having regard to the frequency with which
correlations are quoted, it would add to the
comprehensive character of the book, and
would add very little indeed to its size, if a
brief explanation were to be given of the sig-
nificance of the co-efficient of correlation and
of the probable error, referring the reader to
the appropriate text books on statistical math-
ematics for details relating to the methods of
calculation,
22 MENTAL WELFARE.
The contents of the book are based upon a
course of lectures delivered by the author in
various universities and other educational
establishments of the United States during the
past fifteen years. The book will prove inval-
uable, first of all to those who desire to gain a
general knowledge of the whole subject pre-
paratory to adopting a specific branch of it,
such as social mental welfare work, teaching
in the special school and kindred matters, as
well as to school medical officers not yet well
versed in psychological matters, school teach-
ers in general, and to magistrates of the
Children's Court. In the second place it will
prove invaluable as a book of ready reference.
It is well indexed and contains, under a single
cover, a masterly summary of knowledge
already acquired in greater detail by the more
expert at this kind of work from a large num-
ber of varied sources.
Robert Hughes.
The Measurement of Mental Capacities.
(A Review of the Psychology of Individ-
ual Differences). By Professor Cyril Burt.
Oliver & Boyd. 6d.
This paper formed the subject of the seventh
Henderson Trust lectures delivered at Edin-
burgh and the Trustees are to be congratulated
not only on their choice of lecturers but also on
their policy of subsidising the publication of
the lectures at a price which facilitates their
wide distribution. In the fifty-two pages of
this lecture Professor Burt has packed in so
tightly an account of the present and probable
future developments in the field of the psy-
chology of individual differences along with
the conclusions which may be drawn from his
own many-sided work in this field that a re-
viewer is compelled to select those points
which have a direct bearing on the field of
this journal and refer everyone who reads this
review to an immediate perusal of the lecture
itself for further illumination. But to the un-
initiated this warning is necessary : in this
relatively short outline of conclusions, where
practically all the necessary background of
elaborate statistical analysis has been removed
for the sake of intelligibility to the layman in
statistics, the full force of the evidence behind
the various statements may not be realised by
the reader who has not followed Professor Burt
through the more abstruse but fascinating-
elaboration of his larger and more technical
treatments of the subject as contained in his
" Mental and Scholastic Tests," and " The
Young Delinquent," and other discussions.
For those who are interested in the special
problem of Mental Welfare the following
points are probably of most interest. Pro-
fessor Burt says, "For any given individual
we have to investigate, first the intellectual,
and, secondly, the temperamental aspect of his
mind; under either heading we then have to
measure, first, the inborn qualities, and, sec-
ondly, those which are acquired ; and these
inborn qualities in turn may be divided into,
first, one or two all-important general factors,
and, secondly, a larger number of more limited
or specialised tendencies." From this group
he selects intelligence as " inborn, general,
intellectual ability."
After dealing with such physical criteria as
the outward aspects of the body, the shape and
size of the skull, the expression of the face and
the study of handwriting, he comes to what he
calls the central maxim of individual psy-
chology of to-day: "Judge mental functions
by mental symptoms, not by physical." After
showing and describing very interesting causes
of the growth of intelligence with age com-
pared with the growth of height with age and
also the distribution of intelligence; the author
takes up the study of the group of special in-
tellectual capacities which are shown by the
statistical methods of correlation to vary some-
what independently of general intelligence.
Anyone who is interested in the two problems
of avoiding the danger of certifying a child as
weak in general intelligence, i.e., mentally de-
fective, who may only be suffering from a
specific defect, and, secondly, in the effort to
discover some form of specific ability in an
otherwise mentally defective child should
make a close study of the eleven special capac-
ities postulated by Professor Burt. An illus-
tration of the first is the inability of some
people to analyse what they undoubtedly hear
with the result that they cannot possibly learn
reading by the phonic method. Illustrations
of the second are the occasional cases of
high or even exceptionally high achievements
of some mental defectives in some highly
specialised line as for example the boy from
a Glasgow older boys' special school who
showed such an exceptional capacity for paint-
ing that he was given a scholarship to the Art
Mental welfare. 33
School. Such are only a few of the very in-
teresting points dealt with in Professor Burt s
customary lucidity in this very succint but
stimulating lecture.
D. Kennedy Fraser.
Readings in Abnormal Psychology and
Mental Hygiene. By Professor Taylor
of Smith College. Appleton. New York.
1927.
This is a book of considerable weight both
literally and figuratively speaking, for it runs
into some seven hundred and fifty pages and
under a very comprehensive variety of head-
ings gives pithy extracts from the writings
of all the most prominent men and women in
the world of Psychology, Psychiatry, and Men-
tal Hygiene in America together with excerpts
from the works of Freud, Jung, Bernard
Hart, Cyril Burt and many others.
It is a book to be kept for reference as well
as to be read, the bibliography which is espec-
ially valuable for reference purposes gives over
three hundred works on various aspects of the
subject.
Many of the extracts are extremely inter-
esting and informative, as for instance one on
page 5, which deals with the sub-normal mind,
and discusses the difference between sub-
normality and feeble-mindedness. It is point-
ed out that mental tests in the American Army
established a mental age of 12 years or under
for some 45 per cent of the soldiers tested, yet
it would be absurd to assume that anything
like this percentage are feeble-minded. Stress
is laid on the point that feeble-mindedness is
only present in cases where there exists " In-
ability to manage their own affairs with ordin-
ary prudence and compete with their normal
fellows."
Thus true feeble-mindedness contains an
element of abnormality as well as of sub-
normality; " The sub-normality being due to
incomplete structure and the abnormality to
imperfect functioning." For example, " a
certain man of 10 year mentality would be
able to support himself if it were not for his
violent temper whereby he continually loses
his jobs."
There is a valuable section setting out the
Classification of Mental Diseases approved by
the American Medico-Psychological Associa-
tion, and now adopted for statistical purposes
by the Mental Hospitals of America, and other
good features of the book are the chapters on
Functional Motor Abnormalities, dissociation
of Personality and the accounts that are fre-
quently introduced of specific cases with
details of the treatment employed and its
results. This last is an aspect which is often
omitted in other works on this and allied sub-
jects, and which is of the first importance.
For the rest the book suffers from " The
faults of its qualities " in its endeavour to
present only the essentials the extracts are
necessarily somewhat scrappy, and we are at
times presented with controversial conclusions
without being given the chain of reasoning
that led up to them. This is neither fair to the
reader nor the writer.
It cannot hope to appeal to a very wide pub-
lic in England at least, in that it is primarily
an expression of American experience and
opinion and also that it is too technical for any
but a specialist and too scrappy to be wholly
satisfying to any who wish to read on the sub-
ject in a scientific spirit.
Doris M. Odlun.
Saorstat Eireann. Report of the Commis-
sion on the Relief of the Sick and Desti-
tute Poor, including the Insane Poor.
The Stationery Office, Dublin, 1927.
Price 2/6d.
This Commission of eleven members was
appointed in March, 1925, and issued its report
last October. The Commission whilst dealing
chiefly with the administration of the Poor
Law and proposed reforms of Local Govern-
ment includes amongst its objects: " To in-
quire into the existing provision in public
institutions for the care and treatment of
mentally defective persons and to advise as
to whether more efficient methods can be in-
troduced, especially as regards the care and
training of mentally defective children, due
regard being had to the expense involved."
The sections of the report dealing with these
questions are naturally of greater interest to
us, but the fact that the report as stated in a
24 MENTAL WELFARE.
footnote (362) interprets the term Mentally
Defective " to include mentally disordered
as well as mentally deficient persons," makes
it rather difficult to abstract anything with a
direct bearing on the problem of mental defic-
iency as understood in this country.
One section of the report (438) deals ex-
clusively with the " accommodation for Men-
tally Defective Children." At the moment the
mentally defective comes under the legislation
of the Poor Afflicted Person Relief (Ireland)
Act, 1878, which gave power to the Guardians
of any Union " to send, with the consent of
the Local Government Board an idiot or im-
becile pauper to the Workhouse or any other
Union or to contract for the maintenance of
such person in any public or licensed estab-
lishment for the relief of idiots and imbeciles
at a cost not exceeding five shillings a week.
No Workhouse was ever yet set apart for these
classes and until recently the only establish-
ment for the care of these idiots and imbeciles
was the Stewart Institution at Palmerston,
County Dublin.
In 1926 the Sisters of Charity of St. Vincent
de Paul, in consultation with the Commission-
ers for the Dublin Union, rented old work-
house school buildings at Cabra and opened
St. Vincent's Home as a school for mentally
defective children. There were in December,
1926, 118 inmates principally from the Dublin
Union. At the same date there were 51 child-
ren idiots and imbeciles in country homes.
The report in recommending that a govern-
ment grant should be made towards the cost
of maintenance states " The Boards of Health
should be encouraged to avail itself of the ac-
commodation for mentally defective children
that now exists. The only difficulty that arises
is on the question of cost. At present, whilst
there is a government capitation grant in res-
pect of lunatics in district and auxiliary men-
tal hospitals, there is no grant towards the
maintenance of mentally defective children
unless they are placed in mental hospitals?
institutions which were not intended for them.
If a government grant of half the net cost of
maintenance were made, it would be reason-
able and, we think, sufficient inducement to
the local authority to send these children to
those who were fitted to train them." There
is at present no data available from which to
estimate the total number in need of provision.
" Where the parents of a mentally defective
child are unable by reason of expense to make
provision for the education or the care of such
a child we recommend that the Board of Health
be empowered with the consent of the parents
to send the child to an approved institution
and to pay the expenses of maintenance or
join with the parents in paying the expenses,
subject to the condition that the child can ben-
efit by the training.
It appears that the Stewart Institution,
originally intended for the training of defect-
ives, has become more and more an Asylum
for the most hopeless cases.
The Commission is perhaps unduly optimis-
tic with regard to the results of training the
mentally defective. They say " The training
side of the work " (in a special institution)
" must be kept uppermost and we think that
no child should be retained in a training estab-
lishment at the public expense beyond the
time when improvement in his or her condition
cannot be effected." The boy or girl should
then either be returned home or transferred
to the auxiliary mental hospital of the district
from which he or she was sent. Where
the numbers would justify it the auxiliary
mental hospital should have a department
dealing especially with cases of congenital
mental deficiency. Judging by experience in
Institutions in this country, the probability of
any considerable number of mental defectives
being discharged from Institutions, capable
of earning a living, or even of living in safety
at large in the community, is very small. Dr.
Turner in his report as Medical Superinten-
dent of the Royal Eastern Counties' Institu-
tion writes on this point " I must confess to
a considerable degree of pessimism about the
possibility of getting the higher grade cases
back into the world."
At present too there are no voluntary After-
care Associations in Ireland, although the
report encourages the formation of these.
A rather striking reform is the suggested
abolition of the Board of Health (282-287).
The Commission suggests "the assumption by
the County Council itself of the control of poor
relief working through a paid official whom
they could place in charge of the entire Poor
Law Services of the county in the same man-
ner as the general manager of a company
under the control of a board of directors."
MENTAL WELFARE. 25
The Health of the School Child. Annual
Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the
Board of Education for the year 1926.
H.M. Stationery Office, 1927. Price l/6d.
Before entering on the main part of his
report the Chief Medical Officer emphasises
the importance of the School Medical Service
and the real purpose of school medical inspec-
tion. Sir George Newman describes the duties
of the service as falling into four categories :
to fit the child to receive the education pro-
vided by the State, to detect any departures
from normal psychological health and growth
and advise a remedy or amelioration of them,
to seek the causes and conditions of such defect
and disease and as far as may be to prevent
them, to teach and to practise personal hy-
giene in every school.
Schemes have been developed during the
past year for the treatment and training of the
cripple (p. 23). 132 Local Education Author-
ities are now concerned in working these out.
(Orthopaedic treatment is carried on in 59
hospitals, 122 school clinics and upwards of
100 voluntary clinics.
A section of the report is given to the prob-
lem of special schools and the care of the
mentally defective child. The chief advance
in this respect has been the opening of Open
Air Schools. The number of these has been
increased during the year by 9 and the future
programme includes proposals for the acquis-
ition of sites for 32 such schools, which, when
completed, will accommodate 3,600 children.
A summary is given of what was said in the
last report on the subject of mentally subnor-
mal children, the division of these into three
classes, the dull and backward, the educable,
and ineducable mentally deficient children.
Sir George Newman says " It is true to say
that the very much larger group is that of the
Dull and Backward who constitute not less
than 10 per cent, of all the children of school
age ... it is from this group that we get our
neuropathies, delinquents, unemployables and
criminals." The difficulties are greater when
dealing with the rural areas, " which are not
large^ enough to make possible either a useful
classification of mentally subnormal children
?r the provision of special accommodation
for their treatment and education. Thus, the
establishment of special schools, valuable
though it has been in urban districts, does not
wholly meet the problem and indeed it cannot
be said that in any area the provision made for
these mentally subnormal children is entirely
complete or comprehensive. A special resi-
dential school on the one hand or a custodial
institution on the other do not alone solve the
problem. Special classes are an alternative
method." These classes have been tried in
Cheshire in several of the larger schools, also
in Kent. At Barnstaple a school for 40 back-
ward children has been in existence for some
years. At various such schools test and trial
enquiries and experiments in practical teach-
ing methods have been made. Apart from
benefiting the children they have led to new
methods of ascertainment of deficient children.
The characteristics of the Neuropathic Child
are described (p. 48). With regard to their
clinical examination, Sir George Newman says
" The clinical examination of debilitated
children is dependent in large degree upon
their individual and domestic history and upon
a closer observation of the objective signs of
disease or abnormality. The history should
include particulars of the family and the indiv-
idual  Its present illness should be
traced step by step from the last date on which
the child was quite well the clinical
examination of the child will usually include
general inspection as to facial expression, nu-
trition, character of the respiration, posture
and nervous condition the usual meas-
urements (height, weight, etc.) should be
made, etc." Both here and in other sections
of the report Sir George Newman stresses the
importance of realising that all the factors
likely to be the cause of disease must be con-
sidered; " no system of medical inspection is
really adequate that fails to take into account
the child as a whole/' He describes disease
as " disharmony arising from untoward phy-
sical conditions, the reaction of the body to the
influence of unfavourable agents or infections.
Not only is this reaction disabling to the body
(making the person invalid) but both in origin
and in effect its province is very wide, almost
illimitable. For the origin of this reaction,
this disease, and its results, may, and gener-
ally do, concern the whole nature of man?his
body, mind and spirit, his comprehensive
social being."
