News and Notes
================

MENTAL WELFARE. 13
Occupation Centres.
In the last issue we announced the opening of a new Occupation Centre at
Edmonton. This is going on very well. There are now 16 in attendance of ages
ranging from 6 to 36 years. It is open every morning from 10-12.15 and is in
charge of a Supervisor and guide helper.^
Another new centre was opened at Ealing on October 10th. It is held at
St. Mary's School Room, Ealing, every afternoon and is in charge of a Supervisor
and guide helper. There are 16 in attendance here, their ages varying from 5 to
30 years.
Arrangements are in hand for the opening of a new centre for the Ponders
End and Enfield districts and it is hoped to open there on January 10th at the
Co-operative Hall, Enfield Highway.
There were Christmas Parties held at Kings Cross, Tottenham and Edmonton,
Ealing and Willesden Centres. The Tottenham children were invited by the
Ed monton children to their Party and a large room was lent by the Council at
Pymes Park. The children had an excellent tea provided chiefly by friends of
the Centres and after giving a very creditable display of drill, singing and games,
Eather Christmas arrived and presented each child with a present from a beauti-
fully lighted tree.
At Kings Cross the tea was again provided by the Finsbury Borough Council.
The Mayor and Mayoress of Finsbury paid a visit during the proceedings. The
children gave a little concert and some very good handwork was shown as the
work of the older boys. The 1st Tufnell Park Brownies very generously gave
a number of toys which were distributed to the children after the performance.
At Ealing, though the Centre has only been opened for a short time, some
promising hand work was shown and the girls acted a little Christmas play and
gave a display of country dancing which was most promising.
At Willesden the boys gave a drill display, and some action songs, after which
they sat down to a good tea. After tea, Mr. Viant, Labour M.P. for the Willesden
borough, came and gave out presents for each child. He spoke a few words to
the mothers about the work at the Centre.
At all the Centres the mothers had been invited to come to the concert and
tea and they gladly accepted the invitation, and in many cases expressed their
great gratitude for the help that was being given through the Centres to their
children. Altogether about 100 children had the pleasure of a Christmas Party
in the Middlesex area.
Superannuation Scheme for Staff in Small Homes.
We have received an enquiry from the Managing Committee of a small home
for defective girls with regard to superannuation schemes available for the
staff of similar homes. We are aware that in the large Institutions such schemes
are working, but we have no information as to the possibilities of a contributory
scheme for workers in small homes where the staff may not exceed six or ten
persons. If the officials of any small home will send information regarding
any scheme which may be in operation among their own staffs to the Hon. Sec-
retary, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W. 1, we should be most
grateful.
14 MENTAL WELFARE!.
International Conference on Speech Training.
On November 8th, 9th and 10th, a Speech Conference was held at the Society
of Arts, John Street, Adelphi. Among those present were representatives from
Speech Clinics attached to several London Hospitals, the Board of Education,
various Schools of Speech Training and Dramatic Art, Associations of Head Mas-
ters and Mistresses, Assistant Masters and Mistresses, Verse Speaking Associa-
tions, etc.
The first day was devoted to the question of Defective Speech and its treat-
ment. A most interesting and instructive paper was read by Dr. Boome, Medical
Officer in charge of the L.C.C. Stammering Clinics. This was followed by a
discussion in which the Hospital representatives took part. Miss I. C. Ward (Uni-
versity College Phonetics Department) touched on the question of the Mentally
Defective Child and the possibility of speech improvement by means of simple
voice articulation exercises. She pointed out, with reference both to the high
grade and the very low grade cases, that, though occasionally no progress could
be noted, yet in the vast majority of cases the improvement was quite remarkable
and a considerable degree of control over the speech organs was gained, which
resulted in a general increase of mental and physical control. This was the only
reference to the problem of the speech training of Mental Deficients.
The King's Hospital representative stressed the necessity of a definite stand-
ard of training for those who intend to undertake the correction of defective
speech. This important work should not be entrusted to untrained people, or
to those elocutionists, voice trainers and others who look upon it as a " side line,"
but to those who have specialised in the various subjects necessary to a true under-
standing of the problem.
The phonetic and aesthetic aspects of speech were considered on the second
and third days.
Miss Elsie Fogerty, Principal of the Central School of Speech Training, is to
be congratulated on the admirable way in which she carried out the arduous
task of organising the Conference.
A New Method of Teaching Children.
Dr. Decroly, Professor of Child Psychology at the Brussels University, will
lecture in London under the auspices of the New Education Fellowship, at
Friends' House, on Friday, January 27th, and Saturday, January 28th, on his
special method of educating children which is founded on " centres of interest "
or " projects." It is in use in his own school in Brussels, has been adopted in
many of the State Schools of Belgium, and is well known on the Continent. No
text books are used, the children making their own books for observation from
material collected by themselves. The principles of his number work and his
synthetic methods of teaching children to read and write are particularly inter-
esting. An Exhibition of materials will be shown. Full details can be obtained
from the New Education Fellowship, 11, Tavistock Square, London, W.C. 1.
Encophalitis Lethargica.
Dr. Borthwick, the Medical Superintendent of the Northern Hospital, Winch-
more Hill, has recently issued a very interesting report on the results of the
second year's working of the post encephalitis lethargica unit under his charge.
It may be remembered that the Metropolitan Asylums Board established this unit
in November, 1925. Through their courtesy we are able to give extracts from
this report.
MENTAL WELFARE. 15
Observation and research have been continued on the same lines as prev-
iously. The unit still consists of 100 beds for both sexes, from 3 to 16 years of
age. An experiment was tried in the Institution of a school holiday, of not more
than a fortnight, in order to see the effect on the patients. In most cases this was
followed by a deterioration in conduct and discipline. Any children of school
age discharged from the unit have been carefully followed up in their home life
by the School Medical Department of the London County Council. Some cases
were discharged definitely against medical advice, but of these 11 have been re-
admitted at the request of relatives.
Of the position of the medical knowledge of post encephalitis lethargica, Dr.
Borthwick writes, " despite the investigations and research carried on through-
out the world, the causal agent remains unknown?no one has been able to dem-
onstrate it microscopically or to grow it on any artificial medium?and there is
still great controversy as to whether it is possible to transmit the disease to
animals or not. Most authorities are agreed that the virus has a predilection for
the grey matter of the central nervous system and in particular the grey matter
of the basal ganglia, the mid brain and pons varolii, although no part of the grey
matter is exempt."
Treatment has been continued on the same lines, with the addition of sun-
light treatment introduced in September last. The milder cases of children show-
ing psychic changes have done well and many have been discharged with satis-
factory results. The more severe cases have also benefited by residence in the
hospital school but Dr. Borthwick is still of opinion that permanent institutional
treatment is necessary for these children. In dealing with cases of Parkinsonism
Dr. Borthwick holds out very little hope for recovery, " although under careful
treatment many of them tend to remain stationary, yet it is impossible to state
that they will not commence to deteriorate."
In conclusion Dr. Borthwick states, " The experimental unit has not yet
been productive of any positive curative results, but it has proved very valuable
as an observation station where cases may be investigated and classified
whilst I cannot whole-heartedly recommend the Board to continue the section
as an experimental unit with the hope of ultimately curing patients suffering from
encephalitis lethargica, yet the absolute necessity of housing these difficult and
pitiful cases, either from a mental or physical point of view, is perhaps sufficient
justification for carrying it on."
We understand from the Metropolitan Asylums Board that at the last meeting
it was decided to continue the unit until further orders.
New Home in India.
A new home for defectives is to be opened by the Society for the Protection
of Children in India, in the hill district of India, in connection with St. Andrew's
Home at Kalimpong. The Home may first consist of two cottages to take perhaps
from twenty to thirty Anglo-Indian and English children. The staff is to be
European and will consist of a Superintendent and one or two teachers, and we
have been asked to make this known to young teachers who might be keen enough
to undertake this pioneer work and who would consider going out to India.
Any reader wishing for further details should communicate with us so that we
can put her in touch with the Authorities.
Scottish Association for Mental Welfare.
The Scottish Association for Mental Welfare has issued a Report of its Fifth
Year of work. The Secretary's report states that " Nearly 2,000 mental defect-
ives are known to the existing Local Care Committee and to the Association.
16 Mental welfare.
The cases are visited regularly and helped when possible. In some industrial
areas as many as 50 per cent of the pupils leaving school have secured work and
many of these are doing well.
There are now 14 Local Care Committees already in existence and the organ-
isation of seven others is under consideration. The majority of those already
formed are running Occupation or Employment Centres. The Association under-
takes systematically the after-care of all defectives discharged from Larbert and
Baldovan Institutes.
A course of Lectures for School and Parish Council Medical Officers was
held in Glasgow in May, at which 22 Medical Officers attended.
An address was given to the Meeting by W. W. M'Kechnie, Second Secre-
tary, Scottish Education Department. He spoke of the attention that the
Association of Education Authorities in Scotland was paying to the training of
mentally defective children, particularly in the rural areas; of the success of the
Medical Officer's Course, and he also paid a tribute to the work of the Scottish
Women's Citizens' Association.
Maudsley Hospital, Denmark Kill.
The Medical Superintendent of the Maudsley Hospital, in his report for the
period February, 1925 to December, 1926, gives an account of the progress of
Occupational Therapy in the Hospital. Those patients who can leave the wards
are employed in the gardens, offices, at carpentery, upholstery, etc., but in ad-
dition to these there is now an Occupational Organiser attending on five after-
noons a week, to teach Handicrafts to those who are confined to the wards. The
Medical Officer says, " The work distracts them (the patients) from their illness
and worries, and its novelty gives them a fresh interest Wherever
possible they are encouraged to design their own patterns and do creative work.
The work produced is useful and attractive and by the proceeds of its sale there
are no expenses incurred by the Hospital beyond the salary of the Occupational
Officer. It is found that many of the patients continue to work at home after they
have left the Hospital and often return for instruction. One woman patient with
a previous training in gardening, received instruction in handicrafts while at
the Hospital and is now earning her living as an Occupational Therapist to a well-
known private mental hospital."
The services of the Occupational Therapist were lent for a month to the
Board of Control in order that industries similar to those taught at the Maudsley
Hospital should be organised at Rampton State Institution for Defectives.
In the Almoner's Department, as much time as possible is given to visiting
the patients' homes and relatives. A great amount of time and thought has been
spent in re-establishing former patients in normal life, and where possible under
conditions with less mental strain than their previous circumstances. Unfort-
unately, owing to the lack of time to visit, most of the after-care work has to
be done by correspondence. The whole report is of exceptional interest.
Homes.
We are very sorry to hear that Miss Heylin Quinn is closing her home at
Fairholme, Chorley Wood, as she is going abroad shortly.
A new Certified House has been opened by Mrs. Mason, late of Streatham.
The full address of the new home is:?Belmont Nursery School, Beddington
Place, Croydon Road, Beddington, Surrey, and Mrs. Mason will be glad to
receive low grade helpless cases at moderate fees.
Mental welfare. 1'7
Fixtures for 1928.
Secretaries' Course. London. February 20th to 24th.
Leicester Course for Teachers. April 10th to May 2nd.
Medical Officers' Course. London. May 14th to 19th.
Ten Weeks' Course for Teachers. London. May 11th to July 19th.
London Course for Teachers. July 7th to 28th.
Supervisors' Course. London. September 8th to 29tli.
Conference. British Medical Association Hall. December 6th and 7th.
National Special Schools Union.
A very successful and well attended conference, the 12th Biennial Conference
of the National Special Schools' Union was held at King Georges' Hall, lotten-
ham Court Road, London, on November 24th, 25th and 26th. There were present
teachers from all parts of Great Britain, representatives of Education Authorities,
Boards of Guardians, Government Departments, Social Organisations, etc. A full
programme of the Conference was printed in our last issue. Unfortunately, we
have not space to give a full account of the three days' proceedings, but can only
mention one or two points.
Councillor Miss Martineau, J.P. (Chairman of the Special Schools' Committee,
Birmingham), read a paper on the " Future of the Day Special Schools." This
was followed by considerable discussion on the general attitude of the Board of
Education to Special Schools. On the third day, the Duchess of Atholl, who
presided, was asked to reply to the questions put by delegates with reference to
the matter. In replying, she said, " I think you are awaiting with anxiety the
report of the Special Committee which has been sitting for some time at the Board
of Education considering the methods of dealing with this big problem It
is not possible for me to say more than this. Whatever new methods of dealing
with this question may be suggested, it seems quite impossible to envisage a state
of matters in which there will be no need for Special Schools under the Board of
Education."
Interesting papers were read on the third day on the Day Special School,
from the points of view of the Doctor, Teacher and Administrator. The Doctor's
view was put forward by Dr. Shrubsall, in the absence of Dr. Acton-Davis; the
leacher's by Miss Russell of the Special Classes School, Paisley. She drew par-
ticular attention to the increase in the number of ex-Special School children in
remunerative employment. Mr. W. J. O. Newton (Assistant Education Officer,
London County Council) dealt with the Administrator's point of view. He laid
stress on the importance of school meals.
On the second day of the Conference the Lord Mayor of London opened an
Exhibition of Work done in London Special Schools, and a Publishers' Exhib-
ition. The school work included some very attractive wood and metal work and
the Publishers' exhibition of books and apparatus was particularly interesting to
teachers.
Institutions.
In the course of the year we receive reports from the various institutions for
mentally defectives in the country. We should like to have given extracts from
some of these, or summarised the work being done in them, but unfortunately,
owing to lack of space and to the numbers that we receive, it is impossible to do
18 MENTAL WELFARE:.
this. We can only mention a few points that we think might be of special interest
to readers.
In looking through the report of the Royal Eastern Counties' Institution,
the reader is struck by the numerous activities of the patients and the facilities
the Institution provides for congenial varied work and amusements. An inter-
esting account is given of the introduction and success of employing the Schick
Test for Diphtheria. In the Royal Albert Report also, the Medical Superintendent
draws attention to the progress made in occupations during the past year. The
Western Counties' Institution is now recognised, by the Royal Medico Psycholog-
ical Association, as a Training School for those nursing Mental Defectives.
The Report of the Besford Court Catholic Mental Hospital is an attractive
production. An interesting account is given of the improvement in the standard
of education since the introduction of the Montessori system. Evidence of this
improvement is given by a series of graphs illustrating the rise in intelligence
levels as tested by standardised tests of Terman and Burt.
Amongst others we acknowledge with thanks reports received from the Mid-
land Counties' Institution, the Baldovan, Calderstones, the Retreat, York, the
Agatha Stacey Home, the Elizabeth Barclay Home, Littleton House.
Mental Deficiency Act, 1927 (17 and 18 Geo. 5, Ch. 33.)
All administrators and others engaged in mental deficiency work will be
encouraged by the passage of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1927, which received
the Royal Assent on December 22nd, 1927, and is now in operation. Readers
will remember that the Mental Deficiency Bill was introduced as a Private Mem-
ber's Bill in the Spring of 1927 by Mr. Crompton Wood, Member for Bridgwater,
to whom the thanks of mental welfare workers are due for the immense amount
of interest and trouble he has taken with regard to the Bill.
Considerable opposition had to be contended with, especially in regard to the
definitions, but this was successfully overcome and the amended definitions
should make considerably easier the task of dealing with adult defectives, in
whose case definite evidence of defect from a very early age cannot be obtained.
Section 1 (i.) (ii.) defines mental defectiveness as " a condition of arrested or in-
complete development of mind existing before the age of eighteen years, whether
arising from inherent causes or induced by disease or injury." The old term
" Moral Imbecile " has been abandoned and the better term " Moral Defective "
substituted in Section 1 (i.) (d.).
An important amendment to Section 2 of the principal Act is that which will
enable children leaving Special Schools to be dealt with by being placed under
supervision, as well as by being placed under guardianship or sent to an Institution.
This will inevitably result in a very great increase in the number of cases under
supervision, and Local Authorities will need additional organisation to cope with
the correspondingly increased visitation work necessitated.
The amendment to Section 30 of the principal Act, which relates to the
general powers and duties of Local Authorities, making it obligatory on the part
of Local Authorities " to provide suitable training or occupation for defectives
who are under supervision or guardianship or have been sent to certified institu-
tions," will necessitate the provision of additional Employment and Occupation
Centres, or possibly an organised system of home teaching. Considerable num-
bers of trained craft teachers will be needed to undertake this work and the matter
of their specialised training is one which is receiving the serious attention of the
Board of Control and of the Council of the C.A.M.W.
Copies of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1927, may be obtained from H.M.
Stationery Office, price 2d.
