Combined Open Air Schools for Mentally Defective and Other Handicapped Children
================================================================================

Sir George Newman in his annual Reports on the Health of the School Child
frequently lays stress on the value of Open Air Schools and of the necessity of
providing them for Mentally Defective, Physically Defective and " Delicate "
children. In his Report for last year (reviewed in the last issue of Mental Wel-
fare), he gave a few suggestions as to how these schools might be established at
a minimum cost. He writes, " the children spend the day at the school and
special accommodation is required for the preparation and service of meals, resting
and bathing. Such provision forms an essential part of the treatment and nec-
essarily costs money. Economies however can be effected by using particular
rooms for more than one purpose." He suggests dining rooms that could also be
used as classes, rest sheds and open air classes to be interchangeable, etc. " If
the provision of Open Air Schools is to be increased to anything like the extent
required, all possible avenues for keeping the cost within reasonable limits must
be explored Incidentally this provision for delicate children would in some
degree contribute to the solution of difficulties presented by the needs of the back-
ward child."

There are now several joint Open Air Schools in England, for both mentally
and physically defective children and some which also include provision for
" delicate " children. It was thought that it might be of interest to readers of
Mental Welfare to know in what way the accommodation of these schools is
arranged and what type of school curriculum is followed. The following account
of such schools are extracts from reports kindly sent us by the School Authorities.
LEYTON. The Knotts Green Special School was opened in May, 1927, to
accommodate three types of children, physically defective, debilitated or pre-
tubercular, and mentally defective.

The department for Mentally defective children is almost an ideal one for its
purpose. The class rooms are lofty and the north and south sides consist of doors
which leave these two sides completely open when they are fastened back.
The curriculum is the usual one of a day Special School, the subjects such as
reading, writing and number being taken in the mornings and chiefly handicrafts
in the afternoons. As the garden is large, practically all handicrafts for the boys
are connected with it. The construction of a large fowl house and garden frames
has already been completed and an incubator is being run to provide fowl house
stock. Netting is being taught; woodwork and gardening instruction is given by
a trained Certificated Teacher specially qualified in these subjects. It is hoped
later to provide the boys with instruction in tailoring and boot-repairing.
The girls are taught domestic subjects, their home conditions being specially
borne in mind. Other subjects include lace-work, sealing wax art and weaving.
A minor clinic is held daily and some of the children are receiving sunlight treat-
ment, the apparatus for which is installed in the school.

The children of this school are not isolated from those of the department for
delicate children. They come into frequent contact, particularly in the playing
of games, with benefit to both types of children and a successful Camp was held
in the School grounds last Summer in which both Open Air and Special School
children participated.

KETTERING OPEN AIR RECOVERY SCHOOL. This school, opened in
1913, comprises three separate schools under one head; the Open Air School for
Physically Defective Children, a School for pre-tubercular children and a School
for Mentally Defective Children. The Building includes Class rooms, Bath room,
Dressing rooms and a large Rest Shed, and there is accommodation for 110 child-
ren. The Staff consists of a Head Teacher, five assistants and three domestic staff.
The children being of very varied ages the work is necessarily individual and
the time table elastic. Personal hygiene, prayers, number, drill or games occupy
the time until 10.30 a.m. Reading, writing, general information and singing
are held till 11.45 a.m., and dinner at 12 is followed by a half-hour's rest. The
afternoon school is devoted chiefly to handwork, and particularly to work in the
garden. " The garden is an education in itself for our mentally deficient children
?children who in the main come from poor and squalid homes and have little or
nothing beautiful in their surroundings. Here at school, they see a succession of
the buds on the trees forming into blossom and leaves, and watch the develop-
ment of the fruit. Whilst the boys do the heavier garden operations such as
digging, planting potatoes and other vegetables, the girls share in the work of
weeding, picking gooseberries, raspberries, etc., and help in the kitchen to turn
the fruit into jam." The older boys attend a Woodwork Centre and with the
smaller children a greater amount of time is given to music, dancing and games.
There is on the premises a large bathroom with 11 showers which makes it
possible for the mentally defective children to have two baths a week, and the
other children one bath. Many children in this way learn to dress and look after
themselves.

One of the latest developments in connection with the School has been the
purchase of a Bungalow on the East Coast. This was bought and furnished out
of voluntary efforts. It is maintained by the Education Committee and recognised
for grant purposes by the Board of Education. This will accommodate 15 children
and four staff and is open from the beginning of May until the end of September.
Children are taken there for relays of a fortnight's or a month's stay. During 1927,
103 children benefited in this way. The Bungalow is only 60 yards from the sea,
with bedrooms opening on to a verandah where the children have their meals and
do their lessons. In this way they are able to have a very free and open-air life.
The parents pay 8/- a week towards the children's keep.

DONCASTER OPEN AIR SCHOOL. The building accommodates 240
children of both sexes, in two departments, the larger one for physically defective
and the smaller one for backward children. There are seven class-rooms with a
manual room to each department. Housewifery, carpentry and various handi-
crafts are taught. Particular attention has been paid to the provision for facilities
for medical treatment and the building is fitted with the " Panel Invisible "
system of central heating. The School is constructed so that either the back or
the front can be thrown entirely open.

ABERDARE OPEN AIR SCHOOL. 
--------------------------

The School was opened as a temporary
one in 1914 for mentally and physically defective children. The physically defect-
ive return to their former schools if the medical officer is satisfied with their
recovery while the mentally defective remain in school until they are 16.
The work of the mentally defectives is strictly practical and individual in
character. Handwork for the older boys consists of gardening, cobbling, basket
making and chair-caning; for the younger boys, simple weaving of cane; straw
plait and raffia into shop bags, etc. Special emphasis is laid on domestic training
for girls. Much rough work such as digging, cutting firewood, etc., is done by
the boys partly as an attempt to prepare them for surface work at the local col-
lieries to which most of them go on leaving the School. The school day for the
Mentally defective is shorter than that for the Physically Defective and special
attention is paid to personal cleanliness. Here as in other schools, there is a good
bathroom accommodation. As the Director of Education for Aberdare writes in
a report of the School, " The method of the school is not merely 'school in the
open air ' but a system which affects the life and habits of the child at many
points."

Two other large schools at PRESTON and YORK, though for mentally
defective children only, are conducted on Open Air lines.
In the Preston school there are 90 children in attendance. For lessons the
children are grouped into three classes under the Head Teacher and two assistants.
The afternoons are devoted to handwork and there is a splendidly fitted up
Manual Room. There is a large stretch of ground behind the school where each
child has a piece of land for vegetable growing; in addition they look after the
flower beds belonging to the School.

The school in York has an average attendance of 116 with a staff of four.
The premises consist of an old Mansion with land adjoining. The open air school
for physically defective children is separated from the school for mentally defective
children except that the kitchen and dining room on the ground floor of the con-
verted Mansion serve for both schools. The school is divided into four classes
and the curriculum aims at giving the children healthy bodies, helping them to
adapt themselves socially together with vocational preparation for work and
leisure. Gardening and outdoor work is made an important feature of school life.

It is to be hoped that the number of these joint schools will be materially in-
creased and that Education Authorities and Teachers alike will make full use of
the educational opportunities they afford for increasing our knowledge of the best
methods of education for handicapped children. The close connection between
the mental and physical health of the child though recognised by all has not been
sufficiently emphasised in its educational implication. The physical health of the
mentally defective and dull and backward child is not sufficiently considered in
the school curriculum nor do the physically defective children get the benefit
they might from a closer study of, and adaptation to, the particular needs of the
methods of teaching the mentally defective and backward child. In these joint
schools we have an unique opportunity of working out practical methods of deal-
ing with acknowledged theoretical difficulties.
