Mental Defectiveness
======================

36 MENTAL WELFARE.
As defined in the Mental Deficiency Act 1927.
By A. F. Tredgold, M.D.
Since the beginning of this century, the interest of the general public and
the medical profession in the subject of Mental Deficiency has been steadily
increasing. The reason is clear. It is now known that the number of Mental
Defectives in the community is very considerable, greater, in fact, than that of
the Insane. It probably amounts to at least 8 per 1,000 of the total population
of the country. It is also realized that defectives are a serious economic burden
and, in many cases, a no less serious social menace; consequently, that their
ascertainment, correct diagnosis, and proper administrative care, have become
matters which the Nation can no longer afford to neglect. At the present day
the subject is undoubtedly one concerning which every medical practitioner and
social worker must have an adequate working knowledge.
The term Mental Deficiency is comparatively new. Literally, it may be said
to embrace all conditions of mind in which there is marked diminution of capacity.
It may, for instance, be applied to the dement and the insane. For some
years past, however, the term has gradually been acquiring a more restricted and
specific meaning, and at the present day when we speak of mental deficiency we
mean a condition of incomplete mental development, or, as it is technically
termed, " Amentia."
From at least as early as the fourteenth, to near the close of the nineteenth
century, the only forms of such incomplete mental development which were
generally recognized were the severe and obvious ones termed Idiocy and Im-
becility. Towards the end of the last century, however, it was clearly demon-
strated that less pronounced grades of defect existed, and these occurred amongst
school children as well as amongst the adult population. In the elementary
schools, at which attendance had then become compulsory, it was found that
there was a class of children who, whilst not so defective in understanding as the
imbeciles, nevertheless suffered from a degree of mental defect which seriously
interfered with their education. Amongst the general population it was found
that a class existed who, whilst similarly not so defective as imbeciles, neverthe-
less suffered from such a degree of defect that they were unable to compete on
equal terms with their normal fellows, or to maintain an independent existence
without some external care, supervision or control.
In the course of time the recognition of these two groups resulted in the
passing of two Acts of Parliament. The first of these was the Defective and
Fpileptic Children (Education) Act, 1899, which was subsequently retraced by
the consolidated Education Act, 1921. The second was the Mental Deficiency
Act, 1913, which was subsequently amended in certain particulars by the Mental
Deficiency Act, 1927. The Education Act, 1921, and the Mental Deficiency Acts,
1913 and 1927, are therefore the authoritative and legal pronouncements as to
what constitutes Mental Deficiency.
Unfortunately, the definitions in these respective Acts are not quite in
agreement, and this has led to some confusion, and to two different types of
individuals being designated mental defectives. This discrepancy in the defini-
tions is in large measure attributable to the different purposes underlying the
Education and Mental Deficiency Acts. The purpose of the Education Act is to
provide suitable education for those who cannot profitably be taught in ordinary
schools, hence the criterion adopted is that of educational incapacity. The main
purpose of the Mental Deficiency Acts, on the other hand, is to provide suitable
care and control, and hence the criterion is that of social incapacity. Although
MENTAL WELFARE. 37
the only test laid down by the definition in the Education Act is that of scholastic
ineducability, I am of the opinion that the intention of the framers of the Act
was not to legislate for children who were solely and simply defective in capacity
for school learning, but for children who, whilst suffering from a defect of this
kind, were also defective in general intelligence. That is to say, for children
who, subsequently to leaving school, would be found to suffer from social in-
capacity identical with that which constitutes mental deficiency under the Mental
Deficiency Acts. In many, perhaps even in the majority of children, who are
certified as defective under the Education Act, this is actually the case, for the
reason that defective scholastic educability and defective social capacity are often
associated. But this association is by no means constant. A large number of
children have a low capacity for school learning, but are by no means lacking
in general intelligence, and there is no doubt that many such children are cer-
tified as mentally defective under the Education Act, and sent to special schools,
who subsequently prove capable of fending for themselves. It is necessary to bear
this class in mind, although in my opinion it is unfair to stigmatize such children
as mentally deficient. I regard them as belonging to the lower stratum, the "dull
and backward" group, of the normal population. It is with Mental Deficiency
as defined in the Mental Deficiency Acts that I now propose to deal.
The Mental Deficiency Act of 1913 did not define mental deficiency as such,
but it defined four classes of defectives, namely:?Idiots, Imbeciles, Feeble-
minded, and Moral Imbeciles. With the purpose of making it clear that the Act
only referred to conditions of incomplete mental development, and not to states
of mental disorder or decay, it specified that the defect must have been present
" from birth or from an early age." Experience of the working of the Act
showed that these words caused considerable administrative difficulties, and it
was largely to remedy them that the Mental Deficiency Act 1927 was passed
last year. In this Act, in addition to certain alterations in the definitions of the
four classes, a new section was added defining mental deficiency. This Section,
1. (2), is as follows : ?
" Mental Defectiveness means a condition of arrested or incomplete develop-
ment of mind existing before the age of 18 years, whether arising from in-
herent causes or induced by disease or injury."
It is at once apparent that this definition is based upon a much wider con-
cept of the nature of mental deficiency than that which was held by the Law
before 1913. Prior to that date mental defect was legally and commonly regarded
as consisting of a pronounced want of understanding. The present definition
says nothing about understanding or any particular mental attribute. It simply
says " arrested or incomplete development of mind." It therefore becomes of
importance to consider what form and degree of arrest or incompletion are nec-
essary to bring the individual within the various classes of defectives defined by
the Act.
In order rightly to understand this fundamental question, it is necessary to
make a short digression, and to refer very briefly to certain points regarding the
constitution of mind. We may regard mind as divisible into three main groups
of functions, namely:?(1) instinctive, (2) emotional, and (3) intellectual. The
instinctive functions, or instincts, of man consist of certain inherited tendencies
to particular modes of purposive behaviour which, in all probability have been
gradually acquired by man's primitive human and pre-human ancestors in the
course of their past evolution. They were vital to the survival of the individual
and the perpetuation of his kind, and hence they became organically fixed. At
the present day, human instincts constitute powerful urges to particular modes
of conduct, such, for example, as those of sex, self-preservation, combat, ac-
quisition, self-display, and many others.
38 MENTAL WELFARE.
The emotional functions are the affective or feeling processes of mind. Each
instinct is accompanied by its corresponding emotion. The instinct of combat,
for instance, is accompanied by the emotion of anger or rage. Emotions, how-
ever, are not restricted to the manifestation of instincts; they are associated with
ideas of behaviour, and they then constitute the sentiments or senses. The
emotion which attaches to percepts or concepts of harmony in form, colour, or
sound, for instance, constitutes the aesthetic sentiment; that which attaches to
ideas of right and wrong, and of moral duty, constitutes the moral sentiment.
Since the emotions serve to reinforce and increase the driving power of the in-
stinct or idea, they are exceedingly powerful incentives to behaviour.
The intellectual functions consist of the perceiving, understanding, delib-
erating, discriminating, planning, co-ordinating and controlling processes of
mind. Their development increases with man's gradual evolution from a state of
savagery to one of civilization. The intellectual functions, together with the
higher sentiments, may be regarded as the summation of the mental architecture,
and their importance consists in the increased capacity they bestow upon man
for acquiring knowledge, understanding relationships, making plans, learning
from experience, and modifying and controlling primitive instincts and emotions
so as to enable him to adapt himself to his surroundings and achieve an ideal.
Let us now consider the importance respectively of these instinctive,
emotional and intellectual functions of mind in enabling the individual to main-
tain an independent existence in a civilized community. There is no doubt that
in the various forms of life below that of man, adaptation to environment, individ-
ual survival, and perpetuation of the species, are secured in a very efficient
manner mainly by instincts. It is otherwise with man. Even in the case of the
most primitive human types living in communities of the most simple nature,
some conscious understanding of the relationship between causes and effects,
some capacity to make comparisons, to form simple judgments, to learn from ex-
perience, to look ahead and make plans, and to co-ordinate behaviour in accord-
ance with the plans made, are necessary if the individual is to secure food, to
keep alive and propagate his kind. Moreover, the maintenance of individual
life and the safety of such a community must often necessitate an inhibition or
modification of man's primitive instincts. It would clearly be impossible for any
community to continue to exist if free and unfettered instinctive action were the
order of the day. Hence, whilst instincts and emotions still continue to act as
powerful incentives to conduct, the intellectual processes of mind have gradually
become of more and more importance. We may say, in fact, that while in the
case of the lower animals survival is largely, although perhaps not entirely, de-
pendent upon instincts, in man it is dependent upon the intellectual functions
of mind.
It is necessary to point out, however, that what we term the intellectual func-
tions consist of several groups of processes. The chief of these groups are as
follows:?(1) That group of processes concerned in the acquirement of know-
ledge and the operations of thought. An individual with a high development of
these will be a profound scholar, but he may be devoid of any practical ability
and even lacking in the capacity for adaptation to the ordinary requirements of
life. (2) That group of processes concerned in some specific motor or mental
operation, such, for instance, as music, mechanics, art, or arithmetical calcula-
tion. An individual with a high development of these may not be learned, and
may be lacking in adaptiveness, but he may be a genius in his own particular
sphere. (3) That group of processes concerned in the co-ordination and general
control of conduct, and its adaptation to present and future needs. An individual
with a high development of these may have little learning and no special ability,
but he will be adaptive, and the possessor of " common sense."
MENTAL WELFARE. 39
Now, whilst there are, of course, certain basic processes, such as attention,
perception, memory and ideation, common to all these groups, there is no doubt
that the special processes which are characteristic of each group may be developed
in very different degrees in different individuals.
There is equally no doubt that these groups are not of equal value in enabling
the individual to maintain an independent existence. Thus, there are persons
with a high capacity for learning, or a degree of special ability amounting to
genius, who are incapable of managing their affairs without supervision. There
are others whose capacity for learning is so subnormal as to cause them to be
certified as mental defectives and sent to special schools who are nevertheless
capable of fending for themselves because they possess common sense. In fact,
while learning and special aptitudes are undoubtedly advantageous to the indiv-
idual, they are are not essential to survival. Independent survival, whether in a
savage or a civilized community, demands the presence of that group of mental
processes which determine adaptation, without this the individual will be in
need of some care or supervision?in short, he will be a mental defective within
the meaning of the Act. We may say, then, that the essential psychological basis
of mental defect is a deficiency in that group of the intellectual functions of mind
which determine adaptation to surroundings. But, just as there are variations in
the development of the respective groups which compose intellect, so there are
variations in the development of the various processes which determine adaptation.
Hence, mental defectiveness may be of various grades, and, dependent upon the
defect falling more particularly upon certain processes, it may be of various
types.
It is these variations in degree and type of defect which give rise to the
different classes of defectives defined by Law. There is no hard and sharp line
of demarcation, either between the different grades of defect, or between mental
defectives and the normal. The one passes into the other by insensible grad-
ations. It thus results that the separation of defectives into different classes is
largely arbitrary and artificial, and that, whilst the diagnosis of the lower grades
is a matter of comparative ease, that of the highest grades may be attended with
the greatest difficulty. However, apart from individuals on the borderland,
either of the different grades of defect or of the normal, the bulk of those in the
four classes of defectives do present certain tolerably well defined characteristics
which will be briefly described.
Idiots are the lowest grade of defectives. They are characterized by such a
profound defect of adaptiveness that they are unable to understand the relation-
ship between simple causes and their effects.
Imbeciles are less defective and have sufficient understanding to protect
themselves from ordinary physical dangers. They are defined by the Act as
" incapable of managing themselves or their affairs." This is true, but it is a
misleading definition which does not at all adequately describe the marked
deficiency of imbeciles.
The Feeble-viinded are the mildest grade of defectives and are by far the
most important class for several reasons. They are the most numerous; for every
idiot there are approximately 3 imbeciles and 15 feeble-minded. The fact that
they suffer from a comparatively mild degree of defect causes them to have con-
siderably greater potentialities both for good and for evil, and this entails import-
ant social consequences. As a class they are markedly superior to the imbeciles
in scholastic educability and capacity for work. Many of them acquire a fair
range of school and general knowledge, and, if provided with a suitable occupa-
tion and afforded a little supervision, can earn wages which will pay for, or con-
tribute materially to, their keep. In spite of this superiority, a careful mental
investigation will usually reveal such a definite defect of general adaptiveness
40 MENTAL WELFARE.
as to leave no doubt regarding them. Cut in some of them the degree of defect
is so slight that diagnosis may be a matter of considerable difficulty, and it is
necessary to describe these in greater detail.
Many of these high grade feeble-minded have been educated in ordinary
schools, and although enquiry will show that the majority of them have been
behind the average standard for their years, when they are seen as adolescents
or young adults they present no very obvious educational failing. Their range of
general information is not markedly inferior to that of their social compeers.
They have a good appreciation of their surroundings and they converse intelli-
gently upon ordinary topics. In fact they look, and talk, and apparently behave,
like normal persons. They are consequently far removed from the concept of
mental deficiency which formerly obtained, and which still exists in many
quarters. And yet, when the life history of these persons is investigated, it is
found to be one long record of inefficiency and failure. Some of them may have
been provided with a suitable form of occupation in which they can earn enough
money for their keep; but they cannot lay out the money they earn so as to
provide for themselves without outside help. Should they lose their situation,
they are rarely able of themselves to get another. If any change takes place in
their circumstances they are unequal to the adaptation necessary to meet it. Those
whose parents are well to do are tried at occupation after occupation, but they
cannot make good. Eventually they are usually shipped off to a farm in one of
the Colonies, or some rural clergyman is found who, for a consideration, allows
them to assist with his poultry or garden. In short, it is quite clear that they
cannot fend for themselves, and that they are in need of some special environ-
ment and some amount of care and supervision, if they are not to come to grief.
The class I have just described, apart from their inefficiency, give no trouble.
They are well-behaved and good tempered; and although there is clearly some
defect, their mental equilibrium is stable. There is another class, however, which
I have termed the unstable type, who are markedly different, and in whom the
outstanding characteristic is excessive emotional reaction. Anger, contrition,
jealousy, revenge, elation, depression, overwhelm their minds in succession, with
the rapidity of the turn of a kaleidoscope, and their whole conduct is so fickle
and undependable that no one will employ them. The term " temperamental "
defective has been applied to this type, and it has been suggested that their con-
dition is purely one of excessive emotionality. But I cannot subscribe to this
view, for I cannot see how the excess of a function can constitute mental defect.
It appears to me that the excessive display of emotion is in reality due to a defect
of general control, and that in most, if not all, of these persons this defect of con-
trol is merely an additional complication which is superadded to defects similar
to those which exist in the stable type. I therefore prefer to call them the " un-
stable " type of feeble-minded.
Now whilst the life history of these high grade feeble-minded persons, of
either the stable or unstable type, clearly shows that they are in some way
defective and in need of care and supervision either for their own protection or
for the protection of others, it is nevertheless equally clear that the step which
separates them from the lowest stratum of the normal community, from the
hewers of wood and the drawers of water, is a very slight one. Of what then
does the difference consist ? What is the nature of their defect ? It is this. The
lowest stratum of the normal, illiterate though they may be, have enough
common sense to manage themselves and their affairs without outside help.
They make mistakes, but they profit by the experience and do not repeat them.
Their ability is limited, but they have some ability to adapt themselves to con-
ditions outside their previous experience. They may not be able to look a long
way ahead, but they can look far enough for their needs. They can make plans
MENTAL WELFARE. 41
for their future, and they can co-ordinate and direct their conduct so as to achieve
these plans. The feeble-minded are lacking in these aptitudes. In one person
it may be discrimination or judgment that is chiefly at fault, in another provision
or planning, in another co-ordination or general control, and so on. All of them,
however, are defective in some way or other in that group of mental factors which
are essential for efficient adaptation to the exigencies of life, and which is conven-
iently termed " wisdom " or " common sense." The lack of this, which can
usually be demonstrated by appropriate tests and careful investigation, renders
them in need of care, supervision or control, and brings them within the mean-
ing of the Act.
The fourth and last class of defectives specified by the Act are the Moral
Defectives. They are defined as " persons in whose case there exists mental
defectiveness coupled with strongly vicious or criminal propensities, and who
require care, supervision and control for the protection of others."
I do not propose to give any detailed account of these persons for the reason
that, although they are a very important class, they are an exceedingly small
one. It will be enough to say that moral defectives, from the psychological aspect,
are characterized by three main conditions. These are (1) a defect of wisdom
similar to that which marks all high grade aments. (2) A defect of moral and
social sentiment which results in them being devoid of any of those altruistic
feelings which play such an important part in the inhibition of primitive in-
stincts and the regulation of conduct. (3) The presence of strongly pronounced
instinctive tendencies of the purely self seeking order. The net result of this
combination is to give rise to an individual whose whole life is one of senseless
misdoing, and who is as devoid of shame as he is of sense.
Having now attempted to describe the nature of Mental Deficiency from the
psychological aspect, it remains to consider two other terms of the statutory
definition; namely, that the arrested or incomplete development of mind must
have been in existence before the age of 18 years, and that it must either arise
from inherent causes or be induced by disease or injury.
The development of mind is dependent upon two factors :?(1) a potentiality
for development inherent in the germ cell, and (2) external factors of the environ-
ment which operate to favour or thwart the realization of this potentiality. If
the inherent potentiality is normal, and if there are no unfavourable external
factors, then the development of mind proceeds stage by stage until it
is complete. In the early months and years of life behaviour is almost entirely
the result of emotions and instinctive impulses. The gradual acquirement of
knowledge, the new experiences of each day, the necessity for checking instinct-
ive tendencies in order that some project may be attained or some unpleasant
consequence averted, all combine to favour the development of the intellectual
processes, and to render the individual more and more capable of adapting his
conduct to the demands of his surroundings. The highest and latest development
of all is that of the sentiments, such as those of right and wrong, of honour,
honesty, and of social and moral obligation. With the acquirement of these,
mental development becomes complete, and the individual is fully equipped to
maintain an independent existence in a well ordered and law abiding community.
It is not possible to say precisely at what age this development of mind
reaches completion, and undoubtedly there are individual differences. It is now
generally agreed, however, that in the great majority of individuals development
is complete between the 16th and 18th years of life. In saying this I do not
suggest that no further improvement takes place in mind after this age, or that
the mental capacity of the youth of 18 years is equal to that of the mature indiv-
idual of 45. Clearly this is not the case. What is meant is that by the age of
IS or thereabouts, the normal individual is in possession of all the processes of
mind, and that they are sufficiently developed to admit of independent social
42 MENTAL WELFARE.
adaptation. With further years he undoubtedly acquires more knowledge and
experience. He is capable of a wider outlook, his judgment becomes more sound,
and his general mental capacity greater. But no new mental processes are
acquired; the achitecture of mind is complete by about the 18th year. To descend
to a very materialistic metaphor, we may say that by this age the normal indiv-
idual is equipped with a full set of mental tools, and that further years merely add
to his skill in using them.
It is for this reason that the words "from birth or from an early age " have
been deleted and that the new definition specifies that the defect of mind must
have existed before the age of 18 years. Any mental disability sufficient to
necessitate supervision or control which supervenes after this age is not arrested
or incomplete development, but some form of disorder or decay. These are not
Amentia, and they are not intended to be included within the Mental Deficiency
Act. There is no doubt, however, that under the old definitions many defectives
who were urgently in need of protection, were debarred from the provisions of
the Act. It will now be possible to include them.
It has been said that mental growth is the resultant of two sets of factors,
intrinsic and extrinsic. There are some points regarding these to which it is
necessary to refer. The factor of chief importance is the intrinsic one; that is,
the developmental potentiality inherent in the germ cell. The amount of this
varies considerably in different individuals, and the great majority of mental de-
fectives, probably as many as 4 / 5ths of the total number, owe their condition to an
impaired developmental potentiality. They are consequently termed " Primary
Aments." This impetus to development may be so inadequate as to cause defects
in the development of the body as well as of the mind, and such defects are
known as " stigmata of degeneracy." A marked inadequacy of developmental
potentiality results in Idiocy and Imbecility; if less severe it results in the various
grades of feeble-mindedness. In idiocy and imbecility even the foundations of
mind are not well and truly laid, and the condition is apparent in the early
months of life. At the other extreme, that is, in the high grade feeble-minded,
the developmental impetus has been sufficient for the growth of all but the highest
controlling processes of mind; and then it may not be until adolescence, that is,
until the age at which these processes are normally evolved, that the deficiency
becomes manifest. In such a case the individual may not show any serious
abnormality until he is required to take the responsibilities of life upon his own
shoulders. His defect then stands revealed.
But even if the developmental potentiality of the germ cell be perfectly nor-
mal, arrest of mental growth may be brought about by factors of the environ-
ment causing injury or disease to the growing brain. Although these will produce
the greatest effect during the period of most rapid brain growth, that is, from the
time of fertilization to the third year of life, it is clearly possible for them to
arrest development, and produce mental deficiency, at any age before develop-
ment is complete. In the Act of 1913 no specific reference was made to these
causes, and hence it was often assumed that mental defect arising in this way,
especially after early childhood, did not come within the scope of the Act. The
new definition makes it quite clear that they are included. The number of cases
so arising is undoubtedly very considerable ; but as most of the children so
affected die in the early years of life, their relative proportion becomes greatly
reduced. If defectives of all ages be considered, cases of this kind, which are
termed Secondary Amentia, probably amount to about one fourth of the total.
I do not propose to discuss these factors in detail. It will be enough to say that
they may be conveniently divided into three groups : ?namely, those incident
before, during, and after birth. During birth, the chief factor is some form of
injury. Before and after birth, toxic processes of some kind or other predominate,
causing the various forms of meningitis and encephalitis.
MENTAL WELFARE. 43
In conclusion, the essential concept to keep clearly in mind is this:?That
the legal criterion of Mental Deficiency is social incapacity of such degree and
kind as to necessitate care, supervision and control. If this incapacity is due to
any imperfection of mental development, of no matter what kind, so long as it
has existed before the age of 18 years, then the individual is a mental defective
within the meaning of the Act.
