The Teaching of Art to Children of Limited Intelligence
=========================================================

A FEW HINTS TO TEACHERS.
By Agnes Goodwin.
Of course they can draw and paint. Better, very frequently, than some of
their more wide-awake brothers and sisters. Begin to train them at an early age,
with love and real understanding and, if possible, with enthusiasm, and you will
give them a new language far more adapted to their mental outlook than mere
words. So much of our teaching tends to drown the child in a continuous flow
of talk. We explain and demonstrate far too much?the children, in sheer self-
defence, only listen half the time. " Heureusement, ou ils seraient morts," a
French Inspector remarked.
The value of individual research and personal experiment in every subject
is nowadays understood by most teachers. Drawing is the most direct and best
means of expressing such adventures into the unknown, showing most clearly
the child's reaction to its environment.
The old, systematic way of teaching drawing has proved unsuited, because
too slow, for these newer methods. Children were expected to attain a high
standard of technical skill, before being permitted to attempt any pictorial repres-
entation at all. It was considered almost an impertinence to ask to be allowed to
82 MENTAL WELFARE.
draw a face or paint a flower. Picture-making was considered out of the question,
except for the art student after several years of preparatory study. But when the
precious early years have been thus spent, the child had either taken a dislike to
the drawing lessons, or had got beyond the age of swift unsophisticated state-
ments in line and colour. He had become self-conscious and critical and too
much like the centipede who stopped to think? and could no longer walk. The
rest of the time was spent in making copies of other people's work, no thought
was needed for this, no spirit of adventure, all originality was severely discour-
aged. No wonder that heads of schools grudged the time spent in such unpro-
ductive study, and though secretly they still hoped for some elevating and
refining effect from these drawing lessons, yet they could not see how hard outline
rendering of chairs and tables, patterns and ornament, could possibly bring it
about. The queer thing was that the most backward children so often were good
at drawing, at any rate for a time. In fact a " special " drawing class was
frequently full of such failures in other subjects. The child's interest and result-
ing self-expression can vary greatly, because " expression cannot exist without
character as its stamina." The child who is able to record his impressions
by means of pictures may have great difficulties with words, or he may be unable
to grasp figures and numbers, concentrating all his observation and pleasure on
the rhythmic expression that music, dancing and drawing afford.
It is, of course, not intended to condemn tidy and accurate drawing. We
merely want to reverse the order of procedure and let technical skill develop
naturally and slowly, while encouraging a very wide and untrammelled choice of
subject and object, however crudely rendered. It is too much like waiting for
perfect handwriting before allowing the pupil to write his first essay.
Yet the teacher must be able to read the essay, however badly written. Can
we always read a child's drawings ? There is so often too grown-up and realistic
a standard of judging these first steps, and sometimes, disconcertingly, one who
knows comes along and goes into raptures over a drawing that had been set aside
as a failure.
It is looked upon as a particularly meritorious achievement to give drawing-
lessons without having studied the subject or possessing any executive skill in it.
The average untrained adult would fail to pass an elementary drawing test, though
his understanding and appreciation may go very far. The fault is not his. Had
he been allowed to drop reading or writing at school, as he did drawing, the
result would be just as disastrous in later life.
The first definite drawings of the young person show a sort of rough circle
within which a few features, eyes, mouth, perhaps a nose, are scattered. Two
long protuberances downward, like shoots of a potato, represent legs, and father
is complete, or it may be mother or nurse, or all three in turn. Arms can be
added sideways from the sphere. Soon a second circle appears below the first and
the arms and legs are stuck into this and no longer into the head. Hair begins
to show on the head and buttons decorate the front of the body, for who can go
for a walk till those tiresome difficult things are fastened and the hair has been
brushed and pulled. Vivid impressions these, clearly expressed. Presently a
definite change sets in, usually at the age of 5 or 6, but varying according to the
general development, both mental and physical. The head turns to the left or
right, the nose is in profile, while the eye is still front view, the feet also turn
sideways, coming from a body which faces the spectator. In fact the whole thing-
is very much like an Egyptian hieroglyphic. This discovery of the profile, pro-
vided it comes spontaneously and unaided, can always be taken as a sure sign
of mental growth and marks a definite stage. The study of primitive art in
MENTAL WELFARE. 83
pictures, mosaics, designs on carpets and tapestries is of the greatest help in under-
standing the working of the child's mind. His own artistic development is a
whole history of Art in miniature, passing through the same stages from sym
abstractions and simplicity to realism and close observation of nature, Ihe
mediaeval miniaturist who lets his saint point an enormous ore nger o
heaven, was well aware of the correct proportions, but discarded them for the
sake of emphasis, giving the "historical fact in its poetical vigour. le esigner
of carpets lays out his pattern to fill his space, no mattei if anima s, owers an
trees stand upright or upside-down. The child drawing a farm yard easily puts
the buildings round the four sides, flat and without perspective, the lowest house
standing on its roof. What matter?the idea has been well expressed. Julius
Caesar landing in England with a top-liat and not much else, needs no repriman
or explanation from the teacher; to the poor child the top-hat is a sy^ ? 5?
authority and prosperity, of pomp and ceremony as seen at funerals ana pu ic
functions?most certainly Caesar must wear one.
We hardly notice the anachronisms of early Italian pictures where courtiers
and peasants in the costume of the period illustrate events in Bible History. A
child who drew a hero on horseback was asked to add other soldiers. He drew
these much smaller, explaining that they were not so important. 1 he identical
reasoning is found in early Byzantine art, symbolism, not realism, guiding the
artist. Respect and try to understand it and do not train the child prematurely
to photographic accuracy.
It will be noticed that children are chiefly interested in people and animals
or in moving objects; they also prefer moveable toys to rigid ones, and a picture
which can be manipulated and made to change is a source of unfailing delight.
Iheir own drawings satisfy them completely, being an unhampered expression
of a strong mental concept, unafraid and uncritical the child seems actually to
be making the thing he is drawing and surveys the result with the happy feelings
of the creator who knows his work is good. Take care not to destroy this happi-
ness, it is far removed from conceit. There is no need to praise everything
indiscriminately, and as little need to point out every mistake.
Ihe moment a child is put into a class among other children of varying
temperament and intelligence, new problems arise and the teacher must not play
a passive part, his task is to inspire and to lead. Daily practice will soon give the
necessary skill in handling water-colour and pencil. The size of the drawings vary
according to individual taste. Some children seem to find inspiration in large
sheets of paper, others are merely frightened by them. In either case they should
be encouraged to fill the whole surface, lest the drawings look lost and poor. The
subject for the day is then discussed. Some vivid story, picturesquely told?
picturesque, i.e., fit to be put into a picture?will arouse interest and let the child
form a definite mental image of some part of the action. Get the children before
they begin, to add their own comments, skilfully guiding them at the same time
to some new discovery. Nothing daunts them, ask them to draw a battle scene,
they calmly take out their pencils and begin. The worst way of getting any
l esult is the teachei s own conviction that there can be none. It spreads round
the class as if it had been uttered out loud, which alas it often is.
Many children early show a love of ornament and decorate their figures and
background with very rich patterns and trimmings. Design for its own sake
does not yet interest them, a taste for it is best developed in connection with hand-
work. Rhythmic repetition of cut-out shapes in card-board or coloured paper
plaiting and weaving or easy stitchery in bright colours lead to some under-
standing of pattern making.
84 MENTAL WELFARE.
A few Don'ts must now follow. Doyi't teach that a bright blue sky, colour
already mixed, must meet a bright green field a little more than half-way down
the page. The field is a sea sometimes and is variously adorned with a ship or
a tree, the latter resembling a cauliflower. This is supposed to be the basis of all
picture-making and is generally demonstrated on the black-board. " You must
tell them something," emphasising the " must " or " something." But why?
How does the young child paint a sky if left alone ? High up?as high as it will
go on the paper. Just a narrow strip of blue, and the people far below walking
in a row on a narrow strip of land where grass and flowers and trees grow, the
trees like a candelabra at first, logically branched from a central stem with a few
leaves laid out symmetrically, much like the trees on a Persian carpet. Are the
Liberty-frieze-trees really better ? Does the child's sky not show clearly how high
and lofty it is, and that we in England rarely see it blue down to the horizon, but
falling into a creamy mist ? Who is the better observer, the teacher or the child ?
Do you know those birds that look like two French accents meeting, a grave and
an aigii ? Are they really better than the child's own birds with head and wing
and legs, probably as large as ostriches in proportion to the rest, but, nevertheless,
true to life ?
By all means, once you notice a stand-still, take the class into the field or the
play-ground, let them watch a cloudy sky or a sun-set and discover all they can
about it, tell you about the lovely colours they can see, the shapes of the roofs
meeting it. Take them back to the class-room, and you will get as many different
skies as there are children, and not one stereotyped blue one. In this way, and in
this way only, can we guide these first expression-drawings, slowly and carefully
day by day, avoiding the danger of becoming stereotyped?a sure sign that fresh
stimuli from nature are needed.
Black-board drawing, as visual aid, should be used as much as possible in
every subject except the drawing lesson. If you draw too well the child is dis-
couraged; if you draw badly, your mistakes will be copied. " He who copies
does not execute, he only imitates what is already executed." (Blake.) Your
aesthetic experience and power of observation is abstract and sophisticated and
possibly second-hand, very far removed from the world of the child. The child
compares your drawing with his own and his efforts suddenly seem all wrong,
because he assumes that yours must be right. But are they ?
Don't hold up a poor drawing and ask the children to criticize it The un-
fortunate owner will be covered with confusion, and ever after afraid of putting-
down his own ideas. Rather hold up the good drawings for general criticism,
asking for reasons why they are good, which will make you yourself realise that
" I know nothing about art, but I know what I like," ought to be amended by
" and I know why I like it."
Lastly, don't expect the class to get into an open, receptive, joyous frame of
mind if you have them sitting rigidly at their desks, arms folded, the whole little
person, brain and body, as tightly screwed up as possible. How much nicer to
see them positively fidgeting to get to work. They will sit quite still enough
while you make your story as thrilling as you can, and on the word " go," will
draw as naturally as the bird sings. What if the bird sings in wrong intervals
and heeds no laws. Who cares?
The next stage of growth is seen in dawning curiosity about the actual
shape and make of things represented. The time has come to use the drawing
lessons not only for self-expression but for training the observation and the
memory. Link up with the story?perhaps some children were worried by the
MENTAL WELFARE. 85
witch's broom. Get a besom from the yard, show how it is made, discuss it
thoroughly, use it to sweep with, explaining its upturned nose, then put 1 away
and have it drawn, or painted, or both. Show it again once or twice " this is
needed. Or take a flower and let them learn it by heart before they draw it out
of their heads." Collect a store of memories which will be far more vivid ancl
accurate than any amount of copying can make them. After a few initial failures
you will be amply repaid for your trouble by the extraordinary improvement m
memory and observation, which will, of course, make itself felt in other su ]ec s
as well.
A healthy taste for pure, strong, even crude, colour is characteristic of the
normal child. The boy who painted a blue lire for me had a very melancho ic
disposition?though nineteen other little boys painted a red and oiange re?
could not be induced to change his mind. Ihe choleric, hot-tempered chi
positively revels in vermilion on all occasions, till gradually the blue and the
red calm down and approach each other.
A few additional words about handwork. Let it be creative as far as possible.
1 he simplest little pattern of the child's own invention, if it is only a square
or dot repeated, is of greater value than an elaborate copy. " fell me the what,
i do not want you to tell me the why and how, I can find that out myself as well
as you can." Pattern should be the direct experience of handling material,
whether clay, raffia, wood, stencils, or embroidery, only this experience must be
continuous and begin early. It is a very difficult thing to re-awaken.
Many systems and methods are springing up and have their day, the same
guiding principles go through the best of them; let the child develop slowly and
reasonably, and do not speed up his growth out of season. Never be satisfied that
your own knowledge as a teacher and art-critic is adequate, content to lead others
when you should be led.
