The Neurotic Personality
=========================

MENTAL WELFARE. 49
Book Reviews *32 Abstracts.
. By R. G. Gor-
don, M.D., D.Sc., F.R.C.P. (Ed.). Demy
8vo. pp. 300+ x. Regan Paul, Trench,
Trubner & Co., Ltd. 1927.
The vast amount of literature and diversity
of views on the causation and treatment of the
psychoneuroses in recent years have brought
the whole subject to a state of chaos, and we
have to admit that there may be some truth in
the suggestion that psychopathology is only a
pseudo science consisting of the translation of
what no one knows into a language which no
one can understand.
The author of this book has attempted to re-
duce this chaos to order and to co-ordinate the
views of the different schools, which he has
fearlessly examined and criticised. Though
he has given us nothing new he is to be con-
gratulated in his presentation of a very difficult
subject and in making it not only easily un-
derstandable but also interesting and stimulat-
ing.
Adhering to McDougall's exposition of the
construction of a personality he indicates what
in his view are the main characteristics of the
so-called neurotic personality. Whereas in the
normal individual stability of personality is
reached by the organisation of the various
systems of beliefs, built up in the course of the
development of the higher cognition phases of
mental activity into a definite philosophy of
life, the neurotic is considered to be incapable
of this higher integration and so of the recon-
struction of a satisfactory philosophy when
once mental conflict has disturbed that already
acquired in the course of education?an argu-
ment which might perhaps have been further
elucidated when we consider that almost all
human conduct is the outcome of the solution
of mental conflict and that the formation of
character, as the result of education, is itself
dependent on subjection to conflict.
Neurosis is said to be essentially due to the
failure of integration within the self-regarding
sentiment and of adaptation of the various
parts of the personality to each other, leading
to conflict, repression, and dissociation, the
form of neurosis being dependent on the type
of personality. Though sex is regarded as
being doubtless the most important cause of
conflict it is not by any means maintained to
be the only cause.
Physiologically the neurotic is a person
whose costical control and integration is for the
time being poor in quality, and failure to re-
establish control may be due to an actually
feeble and ill-nourished condition of the costi-
cal cells, the immediate precursor of neurotic
symptoms being the abrogation of costical
function due to a certain extent to the action of
fatigue products. Though the author claims
that his conception of personality has been
built up 011 physiological principles, he inter-
mingles indiscriminately the terms of psychol-
ogy and physiology, and perhaps it may be
pointed out that the mere paraphrasing of the
conceptions of psychology into the language of
physiology does not constitute an explanation
on a physiological basis.
In a book of this kind, which covers so much
of the ground, it is of course inevitable that
each of the different schools will find many
points of disagreement, but undoubtedly there
is a good deal of truth and common sense in
the views expressed by the author. It does
seem however that he has concerned himself
more particularly with only one side of the
problem and one half of the conflict in laying
all the stress on the weakness of the control-
ling sentiments and the abrogation of costical
function, whilst under-estimating the part
played by heredity, temperament and the in-
stinctive tendencies.
His views in general most nearly correspond
to those of Janet?if Janet's conceptions were
translated into the terms of McDougall's psy-
chology and tinctured by the work of Freud.
There can be no question but that the so-called
neurotic personality he describes is an un-
stable personality and one in which any of the
psychoneuroses or psychoses is prone to occur,
or which is found to accompany a neurosis,
but we are still left wondering whether the
failure of integration, said to be characteristic
of this personality, is responsible for the neur-
osis or whether it may not be that the neurosis
is responsible for the lack of integration. It
would seem that his neurotic personality is
simply one which has not developed very far
along the higher plane, such as we find in the
case of the high grade mental defectives and
psychopathic inferiors, but is it necessarily a
neurotic personality?
50 MENTAL WELFARE.
The last few chapters dealing with the hand-
ling and readjustment of the patient and the
scope and limitations of the different forms of
treatment, based on the author's own practical
experience are certainly the best and should
be very helpful to all those who have to deal
with this class of patient.
E. Prideaux.
Mental Tests; Their History, Principles
and Application. By Frank N. Freeman,
Ph.D. Riverside Textbooks in Education.
Harrap & Co. 503 pp. Price 8/6d. net.
Another book on Mental Tests from Amer-
ica ! We note however that it is a " Riverside
Textbook in Education " and that in itself is
a guarantee of excellence. The General Ed-
itor, Professor Cubberley of the Leland Stan-
ford Junior University, points out that we have
long felt the want of a comprehensive teaching
text such as this. It is intended for use in
" college and university classes in Mental
Tests " and throughout emphasis is laid on
theory and principles rather than on coaching
in the use of any existing scales. A thorough
perusal of the book will ensure that the stu-
dent will be able to examine critically various
types of tests and will bring to the actual work
of testing much more than mere facility in ad-
ministering and scoring.
The arrangement of the matter in such a
book as this at once presents problems. Prof-
essor Freeman has adopted a historical ap-
proach, giving in the first chapter a sample
mental test and then proceeding to outline the
development of mental tests and scales. One
doubts the wisdom of devoting the third chap-
ter to the very difficult topic of the application
of the correlation method and again the post-
ponement of the discussion of the nature of
intelligence to the last chapter. The arrange-
ment may be purposely adapted to the course
of study followed by the American student for
whom it is intended. In this country we do
not have separate classes in "Mental Testing"
at our universities and colleges. Such work is
included towards the end of a general course
after the students have a grasp of psycholog-
ical theory and training in experimental meth-
ods. This contrast in the standard and type of
work done in the two countries is revealed in
a recent American review of an English Ele-
mentary Textbook on Experimental Psychol-
ogy. The reviewer points out that the work
suggested would be much too difficult for the
student taking a first course in psychology and
would probably be more suitable for a second
' elective ' course. No doubt this textbook
would be used by students taking a parallel
' elective ' course in mental tests so that little
knowledge of experimental psychology could
be presupposed.
The material is " culled from the work of
hundreds of investigators " and the student is
thereby saved an enormous amount of scat-
tered reading. It is claimed by the author that
whereas most books on mental tests deal only
with intelligence tests, this one includes a dis-
cussion of tests of special capacities and of
non-intellectual or personality tests. Unfor-
tunately we have made little headway as yet
in the development of the latter type of tests
and the treatment here is of necessity some-
what cursory and not very satisfying. It
would have been well to point out one of the
disadvantages of the June Downey Will Temp-
erament Tests?the fact that at least one and a
half hours must be devoted to each individual
tested. They are too quite unsuitable for use
with young children.
By far the most valuable part of the book
is the section treating of the various types of
scales, individual and group, and the problems
connected with the selection of subject matter
and with scoring. Scarcely enough emphasis
is laid on the advantages of performance tests
of intelligence which are clearly not so " de-
pendent on school material," a criticism ap-
plied to tests of the Binet-Simon type. There
is a full discussion of the Accomplishment
Quotient as compared with the Intelligence
Quotient but the question of general and spec-
ial abilities underlying these is left out of
account. It is lightly touched on in the last
chapter on the Nature of Intelligence where
the author is rash enough to discuss Spear-
man's ' g ' definitely in terms of " nervous
energy " ! From a remark on page 229 one
is led to think that Professor Freeman is un-
aware that a considerable amount of work has
been done on the investigation of reading
ability and the devising of tests other than
reading tests to measure the disability.
Readers of this Journal will scarcely accept
without further proof the statement on page
357 that " we may expect backward children
Mental welfare. 51
to gain about as much from year to year and to
continue to gain about as long as normal or
bright children." This belief is based on find-
ings from the use of point scales but it is con-
trary to generally accepted opinion.
Those who have been able to keep in touch
with the gradual development of mental test-
ing during the last twenty years scarcely
realise the mass of material that to-day faces
the young student of the subject. Here any-
how is a " comprehensive " textbook for him.
One can only hope that he will have in addition
the inspiration of a good teacher.
E. L. S. Ross.
Probation in Europe. By W. Trought, B.A.,
J.P. Basil Blackwell, Oxford. 7/6d. net.
1927.
" The general principle of Probation?the
suspension either of the passing or execution
of sentence to allow the offender a chance of
" making good," under the supervision and
direction of a person appointed by the Court?
has been widely adopted in many countries."
S. Margery Fry.
Alternatives to Imprisonment."
Mr. Trought's book is an excellent commen-
tary on that definition of Probation ; and is
made in the form of the collected replies to a
questionnaire sent to 31 European countries.
In addition we have a useful account of
American methods in some States, a varied
bibliography, and some interesting personal
comments from the compiler of the book. For
it is more a compilation about, than a study of,
" Probation," and as such will be used by pro-
bation officers and students of social science,
who will gratefully remember the patience and
work that have gone to the production of this
" First Synoptic view of European Probation
systems."
The author shows a wide knowledge of a
progressive study, and it is clear from his
" Brief Bibliography " that students of sociol-
ogy are being increasingly absorbed by this
branch of it. To them, who are really the
awakeners of national consciences, social
workers of all kinds must look for suggestive
help, as the subject becomes more and more
overlaid with books upon it.
Mr. Tronght's book illuminates the amount
of work being done for child welfare all over
Europe, and the progress in reformative meth-
ods of punishment. For Probation must not
be regarded as a " let-off." To quote the
author (p. 191), "Probation is a penalty to be
inflicted on those whose attitude is anti-social
.... not a means whereby the offender can
escape from the results of the wrong he has
done society." Boys and girls, even more than
their elders, can be helped to see this point of
view.
The book shows the various ways along
which other countries are progressing, not
necessarily in the lines practised in England,
but equally impressive in their evidence of
awakening desire to take care of the children.
For example, there are Belgium and Denmark
with their observation centres; Portugal with
its National Federation of Institutions for the
Protection of Children; Czecho-Slovakia with
its Counsel for Defence and its kindly Court
procedure; Finland with its Home for Home-
less, and its remarkable General Mannerheim
League. This is an association which seems to
have considered every side of child trouble and
to have planned for the way of helping it. In
France, in the Juvenile Court established in
1912, serious cases are heard separately before
3 Judges, and many representatives of soc-
ieties interested. An advocate is appointed to
defend each delinquent, and there is also a
social service for children in moral danger
which is proving of value.
Germany appears to be among the most ad-
vanced in dealing with Juvenile Delinquency,
Berlin in particular leading the way. It has a
central office, and is divided into 20 adminis-
trative districts with a local office in each; and
the account of Juvenile Court Law, sent by
Elsa von Liszt, of their Children's Welfare
Department, deserves close study (pp. 103-
106). Austria, Belgium and the Netherlands
are also well in the van with excellent schemes
of work.
We turn now to the reports on Mental Wel-
fare, and the means offered, through Proba-
tion, by the various Countries named in the
book for helping abnormal cases of all kinds
among juveniles.
Here we find that Austria, Belgium, Bul-
garia, Denmark, Esthonia, Finland, Germany,
Hungary, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
52 Mental welfare'.
Portugal, Prussia and Spain have mental clin-
ics, observation centres and homes, and ex-
pert examinations giving real possibilities of
grading the children concerned. Finland, Ger-
many and the Netherlands and Belgium (with
its famous home for observation at Moll) in
particular offer patterns that may well be
followed.
Great Britain, France, Ireland, Italy and
Rumania are among the countries whose men-
tal welfare work is for the most part carried
out by voluntary societies, and private inter-
est. We in England have much to learn, and
very far to go in these ways. But public opin-
ion is slowly being formed and informed, by
our many voluntary associations: a hopeful
sign, for " The world," says Elizabeth Drew,
" is not run by thought, nor by imagination,
but by opinion." And on the crest of public
opinion rides official recognition and approval.
To conclude with a glance at the agents of
all this work, the probation officers them-
selves : ?we find with some surprise that very
few countries have any plan of training for
them, or of choosing them. And it is not easy
to know what to say of the various counsels
of perfection promulgated here as training
schemes for probation officers.
There are always those who lay stress on
" training," a process that lessens or widens
in the mind of the critic; and there are the
others who lay equal stress on training " in
the school of life," and use the word " per-
sonality " as if it were the open sesame to that
school.
But we may get help from Miss Fry's sug-
gestions in the same paper quoted for a head-
ing : " It is indisputable that whilst person-
ality is of prime importance, a fair education
and suitable experience are valuable if not
essential qualities in a probation officer." To
this may be added another saying of Elizabeth
Drew's, " To have a gusto for life is its
essential root."
Mr. Trought must have brought such a
gusto to the assembling of his book; and pro-
bation officers, whatever else they lack, must
share it, for with it the common stuff of life is
shot through and enriched.
N. M. P. Blyth.
The New Era. (April, 19^8). The English
Organ of the New Education Fellowship.
Quarterly; January, April, July and Octo-
ber. Price l/-. 11, Tavistock Square, W.C.I.
Educationalists who have tackled the prob-
lem of providing the right training for a child
who is to take its place as a functioning unit
in our modern world, will undoubtedly derive
fresh inspiration from this energetic magazine.
Teachers who have realized the need for the
expansion of our educational system, but are
still suspicious of any new method which
makes for freedom, will receive an impetus
backed up by practical and vigorous sugges-
tion.
Those concerned with the development of
the mentally defective child should be particu-
larly interested in Miss Cook's account of her
experiment in Individual and Group Work, in
an Elementary School. In spite of the exigen-
cies of space, Miss Cook has revealed not only
her ideals, but also her actual means of
achievement, which include some most valu-
able details. Miss Scott's article on Present
Day Psychology in its Relation to Education
should be of vital interest to all who deal with
children. The writer emphasises the urgent
need for teachers to attend courses in Psy-
chology; and not to be satisfied with the brief
Training College Course which they are too
immature fully to assimilate.
A most useful list of publications, courses,
clinics, etc., is included in this volume: and
also a series of lessons in Esperanto. The Mag-
azine is undoubtedly an inspired and just ex-
position of the necessity for a reorganisation of
our educational methods; and an indication of
the direction which the reform must take. In
the words of the Editor: " Let it be under-
stood that the New Education is not a miracle-
working magic; it does not aim at producing
prodigies and geniuses ; it seeks to produce
happy and harmoniously living persons, ad-
justed as far as possible to the rapidly chang-
ing life around them."
E. L. Cosgrove.
