Making Citizens of the Mentally Limited
========================================

MENTAL WELFARE. 99
Book Reviews CS2 Abstracts.
By Helen D. Whipple, M.A. Bloomington
Public Schools Publishing Company. 1927.
Miss Whipple's book has been compiled to
supply teachers of M. D. pupils with suitable
curricula for children whose I. Q-'s range
from 50 to 75.
She wisely remarks that it is not sufficient
to be content with " keep the child busy," or
with a mere modification of the ordinary
curriculum worked at a slower pace. These
facts are recognised fundamentals where
Special School Work is well organised in this
country.
Miss Whipple assumes that the teacher has
some knowledge of psychology, of child life,
and has been well trained in methods. To a
teacher who has not taught M. D. pupils there
may be more value in this book, but it suffers
from prolixity and redundancy.
Most school subjects are fully detailed ex-
cept History and Geography. These get little
mention, but are probably meant to be taught
in correlation with other subjects.
Much that is given as suitable appears to be
beyond the capacities and requirements of
subnormal pupils. In Citizenship, for example,
such subjects as, The Bank, Investments,
Borrowing Money, and Insurance, are sug-
gested. In other subjects too much space is
given to minor details. In the chapter on
Housekeeping, a list of rules regarding Table
Etiquette occupies three pages. Our Ameri-
can cousins in the profession are surely not
ignorant of such everyday knowledge.
Stress is laid on the necessity of educative
aim in industrial and manual arts, and the
value of correlation in subjects taught is em-
phasised.
The book is quite an " Encyclopaedia
Americana " of Special School Work but
leaves the impression of " much cry but littl?
wool."
A comprehensive list of suitable literature,
chiefly American, is appended to each chapter.
C. Urquhart.
Motive Forces of the Mind. Bv Alice
Raven. W. Heffer & Sons. 3/6d. 1928.
We are told in the Preface that this book
has arisen out of a course of lectures for the
examination for "club leaders" at a Women's
Settlement and is designed to meet the needs
of those engaged in social and educational
work who have had neither time nor oppor-
tunity to make a study of Psychology, or for
the normally busy person who finds it im-
possible to keep abreast with modern thought
and literature on the subject. For this purpose
we can confidently recommend it.
An introductory chapter indicates the
various branches of the subject, and the
chapters then follow the usual sequence of
subjects found in a text-book on Psychology.
In writing 011 the various problems en-
countered in dealing with the adolescent, the
author expresses an opinion that is endorsed
by most educationists?that any educative in-
fluence should be directed towards helping the
adolescent to find external objects on which
to expend his or her emotional energy, and
that to this end social organisations should
provide an artistic environment for their mem-
bers, and that the " provision of pictorial art,
musical art and dramatic or literary art should
form part of all educational schemes for the
adolescent." The employment of decorative
work is suggested, any form of dancing, such
as Country Dancing or Eurhythmies and the
performance of dramatic art.
The author has avoided as far as possible
technicalities of expression and the psycho-
logical ' jargon " which is so frightening to
the average lay reader. It does not aspire to
)e a text-book, but it should be a useful con-
tention to " popular " scientific literature
which is certainly in demand to-day.
Public Health. Annual Report of the Lon-
don County Council. 1927. Vol TTT
Price 2/6d.
Some very interesting statistics are given in
the Report o? the County Medical Officer for
the year 1927. Amongst these are the figures
loi the incidence of Encephalitis Lethargica
149 cases were notified of which 114 are tc-
garded as genuine. Of these, 49 (23%) had
100 MENTAL WELFARE.
proved fatal up to March, 1928. In addition
23 cases were recorded amongst the non-
notified cases.
" Encephalitis lethargica and its distress-
ing sequelae which have been frequently and
fully described in previous anual reports, con-
tinue to present social problems which still
defy solution. From the medical point of
view it must be frankly stated that patient
investigations and research have brought us
no nearer the sccret of the cause or cure of the
disease. From the social point of view there
still remains a long-felt want of making pro-
vision for institutional treatment of those
unfortunate adult patients whose mental,
moral or physical deterioration resulting upon
an invasion of this disease lias unfitted them
for normal domestic and social life It
is true that the Mental Deficiency Act in 1927
may have some effect in securing the admission
to mental hospitals, or otherwise bringing
under supervision, those patients whose intell-
igence or moral outlook has so degenerated as
to bring them within the scope of the new
Act."
Later in the Report some account is given
of the research and treatment of these cases
which is carried out at the Northern Hospital,
Winchmore Hill. This treatment includes
massage, gymnastics, electrical therapy, arti-
ficial sunlight, etc., while splints and surgical
footwear are supplied when required. Ordinary
school lessons and instruction in various kinds
of handwork are also given. The prognosis of
these cases is not, however, very hopeful. As
Dr. Borthwick (Medical Superintendent of the
Northern Hospital) writes, "The experimental
unit has not been productive of any positive
curative results, but it has proved very
valuable as an observation station where cases
may be investigated and classified. . . . There
is very little hope that patients suffering from
the many after effects of encephalitis lethargica
will ever, generally speaking, be cured, for
evidence shows that the nerve cells attacked
by the virus are irretrievably damaged." Dr.
Borthwick's full report is given in the Metro-
politan Asylums' Board Report for the year
1927-28 which can be obtained at the Office of
the Board, Victoria Embankment, E.G.4.
In the section of the School Medical Officer's
Report on Defective Children an account is
given of the after-careers of children formerly
attending Special Schools. For the year ended
December 31st, 1927, 1,085 returns have been
made of the after-careers of children formerly
attending Special Schools for the mentally
defective. Of these 593 arc reported as having
been employed in industrial or manual occu-
pations; 178 in industrial occupations. 52 are
known to be incapable, by reason of mental or
physical defect, of undertaking employment.
Board of Control. Fourteenth Annual
Report for the Year 1927. Part I. H. M.
Stationery Office. l/9d.
The Board of Control have again issued their
Report in two parts, Part I. containing the
more general information and a review of the
year's work.
The question of shortage of accommodation
for cases both of mental disorder and of mental
deficiency remains a matter of grave concern.
Dealing with the lack of accommodation for
mentally defective cases only, the Report
states that " the lack of accommodation be-
comes every year more serious and unless a
great effort is made in the immediate future
to meet the constantly increasing demand for
beds, it will become difficult and even imposs-
ible to administer the most important sections
of the Mental Deficiency Act  On 1st
January, 1928, the number of cases dealt with
under the Act in Institutions w as 20,429. The
number for whom such provision is required,
taken at the moderate estimate of 1 per 1,000,
is 39,067." (p. 36). The case histories of six
mentally defective parents are given, the Board
pointing out that if these cases had originally
been dealt with under the Mental Deficiency
Act and segregated, the community would not
have had to support 29 further mentally
defective persons. " In face of our growing
knowledge of such family histories, no one
can dispute that mental deficiency is the
fundamental cause of much pauperism and of
a great deal of serious and petty crime. . . .
()n the other hand experience is leading to
the conclusion that the greater number of
defectives who are given training and pro-
tection in early life can be rendered harmless
and amenable .... and a certain number of
them can be made self-supporting under fav-
ourable conditions and proper supervision;
and even if they have to be detained in Insti-
tutions, large numbers can be taught to con-
tribute to their own support." (p. 39.)
MENTAL WELFARE. JQI
Whilst deploring the lack of accommodation
the Board recognise the admirable work
carried out by some Authorities in this
direction. Two new Institutions have been
opened by Local Authorities during the year
under review. The larger of these, opened by
the Newcastle County Borough, contains 344
beds and the Leicester County Borough has
opened a small Home for 33 young boys.
Estates on which to establish colonies have
been acquired by 11 Local Authorities and
several others have recognised the urgent need
and are bringing forward various schemes for
the approval of the Board. The Board again
emphasise the advisability of adopting the
Colony system in England. With reference to
this the Board state, "It is now generally
recognised that this is the most humane and
efficient way of carrying out the intention of the
Mental Deficiency Act, and it is hoped that in
the course of time, when the financial position
has improved, every large Local Authority
will have a Colony of this description and that
the smaller Local Authorities will have com-
bined to provide a joint Colony." (p. 43.)
With regard to the marriage of mental
defectives under Orders and the question of
Sterilisation the Board recall their last Report,
where a full expression of their opinions on
these problems was issued. Several Local
Authorities have written to the Board during
the year expressing the opinion that legislation
should be promoted in order to make illegal
the marriage of any certified mentally defective
person and urging for a legalized system of
sterilisation with subsequent supervision to be
brought forward. After giving specimen cases
which have been brought to their notice dur-
ing the year the Board state, " A careful study
of the information before us leads to the con-
clusion that the marriage of defectives has
disastrous consequences to the community and
that the time has come when definite legisla-
tive steps should be taken to prevent the
marriage of those under Order. ... We have
little to add on the question of Sterilisation to
the opinions expressed in our last two Reports.
These opinions may be summarized as
follows:?We do not consider that sterilisa-
tion would materially diminish the immediate
need for increased institutional accommoda-
tion or for the better provision for the care and
supervision of defectives outside Institutions.
Whether sterilised or not a large proportion of
defectives will continue to need institutional
care oil account of their inherent capacity to
look after themselves or their affairs; and, for
the same reason care and supervision will
always be necessary for those living in the
community." (p. 48). The Board also point
out that sterilisation would not obviate the
need for supervision and industrial training.
There has been an increase in ascertainment
again this year though less of an increase than
during the three previous years. It is inter-
esting to note that there is still a big variation
of the returns per thousand of the population
for different areas. The Board is of opinion
that this can be accounted for by the fact that
" in districts which merge into one another
geographically, and where the social, racial
and industrial conditions are the same, it is
more probable that marked variations are
caused by differences in the Local Authority's
methods, and in the persistence with which
they carry them out, than by any great varia-
tion in the incidence." (p. 49).
During the past year there has been an in-
crease of 1,751 cases under Statutory Super-
vision. The Board point out that if supervision
is to become a permanent and useful part of
provision for defectives the Local Authorities
should secure the services of specially trained
officers to ascertain and supervise, the visits
should be paid monthly or at more frequent
intervals and attendance at Occupation and
Industrial Centres should be encouraged.
I here have been 104 of these Centres estab-
lished by Voluntary Associations and 5 by
Local Authorities. The increased duty of
Supervision placed on the Local Authorities
by the 1927 Act will bring about the improve-
ment in the organisation of Supervision and
the Centres should prove useful to them in
enabling them to fulfil their Statutory duties.
Increased powers have been given to Local
Authorities under Section 30 (d) and there has
been an increase of 252 cases under Guardian-
ship on the numbers for the previous year.
Some interesting statistics are given in the
Report on the results of the discharge and
licence of cases from Institutions. Investiga-
tions were started in 1923 into the results of
dischargee and reports on all cases discharged
since 1926 have been considered, (p. 54). Of
the 89 high grade cases discharged in 1926
17 have been classed as failures, 59 as doubtl
iul [i.e., care and control sufficient at present)
8 as successes and 5 as not traced.
1Q2 MENTAL WELFARE.
Voluntary Social Services. A Handbook
of Information and Directory of Organisa-
tions. The National Council of Social
Service, 26, Bedford Square, W.C.I.
Price, 2/- net. 1928.
This Handbook should be a great asset to
the offices of all social organisations. It gives
in a concise form, details of the aims and
activities of all the most important voluntary
social services and, used in conjunction with
" Public Social Services," an earlier publica-
tion of the National Council of Social Service,
provides a complete and up-to-date directory
of voluntary and statutory social service.
