The Investigation and Diagnosis of Behaviour Disorders in Children
===================================================================

:Author: R. Evelyn Lucas, M.B., Ch.B.
[The following paper is a summary of two lectures given by Dr Lucas, of the Maudsley
Hospital, at the Secretaries' Course in February, and is reprinted at the request of those who
attended the Course.]

Behaviour disorders in childhood and adolescence are of more serious import
than is usually recognised. Too often are they the direct precursors of neurosis
and of crime in adult life, yet it is only within recent years that this fact has
received any recognition. To-day the subject of juvenile delinquency is attract-
ing considerable and increasing attention in other countries and here, also, public
opinion is being aroused to the necessity of more adequate and efficient treatment
of the young offender. It is perhaps well, at such a time, to make a brief survey
of the former theories as to the causation of delinquency and to consider whether
any of these theories now suffice for our needs, or whether in the light of our
present knowledge of the subject, the previous hypotheses need some modifica-
tion.

1 he attitude of society in general towards the anti-social behaviour of de-
linquents and criminals has altered considerably during the past century. At one
time, the criminal was considered to be a fixed and unalterable type, presenting
in inherited disposition and physical characteristics the stigmata of indubitable
and irremediable degeneracy. Lombroso showed us in portrait after portrait the
facial types which we have since learned to associate with feeble-mindedness and
constitutional inferiority, rather than with criminality per se. It is small wonder
that a wide-spread belief in a criminal type produced at the time a completely
paralysing effect upon constructive efforts towards the prevention of crime, the
attitude being that life-long incarceration was the only means of controlling this
menace to society.

At a later date, environmental conditions came into prominence as a causal
factor of delinquency. It was realised that many, perhaps the majority of law-

breakers lived in degrading surroundings under circumstances which provided
no stimulus for the formation of decent habits of ideation and behaviour. The view
was taken that a period of training in a correctional institution would suffice to
eradicate the delinquent tendencies and give the individual a new start in life.
Reformatories and training schools were therefore founded with this aim in view
and delinquents were put under a systematic and orderly regime and given educa-
tion and training in various types of work, in the hope that they would seek and
obtain honest employment upon their discharge. This method, though started
on a more rational and hopeful basis, was doomed at least to partial failure for the
following reasons: ?

In the first place, the duration of institutional treatment was often very short,
so short indeed that it could not be expected to correct those fixed habits into
whose formation the experience of years or even of a life-time had gone.
Secondly, the attempt at habit correction was made mainly through the exer-
tion of a repressive form of discipline and little was done in the matter of provid-
ing substitutive interests in thought and action. The fact of recurrent or
persistent ideation along former lines was totally neglected and attention was paid
only to what the delinquent did (and this under strict supervision), while his
ideational processes were entirely neglected. The attitude was somewhat akin to
that of the old time physician who caused his tubercular patients to wear masks,
thus protecting them from direct contact with the air which had originally borne
the infection, while neglecting, at the same time, the hidden disease which was
making its progress within.

Thirdly, the delinquents were treated en masse, no attempt being made to
understand and remedy the personal difficulties of the unit individual. It was not
realised that a few months of systematic training could not alter the whole trend
of a psychopathic personality or cure the innate suggestibility of a mental defect-
ive, any more than it could satisfy the intellectual thirst and urge of a super-
normal offender. The treatment was, throughout, as uniform as possible. To use
again the previous analogy of the patient, it was as if a physician, finding that one
person suffering from chest pains and cough, needed sanatorium treatment for
tuberculosis, assumed that the next patient with similar symptoms would benefit
by the same treatment, neglecting to consider the fact that a slippery banana
skin, a hard kerbstone and a resulting fractured rib could produce the same
apparent results.

Fourthly, the delinquent, after a shorter or longer period of detention, was
permitted without further investigation or constructive effort, to return again to
his past haunts with a resultant reawakening of old associations and renewed con-
tact with all the earlier temptations.

It is not to be denied that these flaws in the method were recognised, to some
extent at least, by a few far-sighted individuals, but the fact remains that the
system as a whole was, and indeed is now, permitted to remain unaltered in many
large areas both in England and in other countries.

Much more recent is the doctrine, still fashionable in some quarters, that
delinquency is due to disease. For a time, the medical world was so attracted by
the discovery of the effects of auto-intoxication and of hidden foci of sepsis that
it is not surprising to find these conditions blamed as being the causes of abnormal
behaviour. Some still hold that the delinquent individual is a diseased individual
and that, with the remedying of his physical ailments, one can cause also the
disappearance of his delinquent trends. There is a sufficiently large grain of truth
in these beliefs to make the theory apparently work out in practice providing that
the cases are carefully selected, but wider experience shows that this one factor
alone by no means suffices to explain the origin of delinquency as a whole. One
has more than once observed a physician expressing surprise at the fact that most
delinquents are not subnormal in stature, development and physical health, this
surprise being, no doubt, due to the fact that only those cases in which ill health
is a prominent factor would ordinarily cross the path of a practising physician.
One might also mention in passing the view held by a small group that delin-
quency is due to an injury to " moral " centre in the brain. The theory is that
criminal tendencies are the result of the impaired activity of a special area of
brain tissue which subserves the functions of morality. This belief rests upon
very insecure foundations and leaves unexplained so many important facts that
it is unnecessary to deal at length with the numerous arguments against its
acceptance.

Now most, if not all of these theories have a certain amount of truth in them
but fail in one important respect, in that each theory so far mentioned has ex-
plained delinquency by reference to only one possible causal factor. It is evidently
necessary to widen our conception of the nature and causation of the delinquent
reaction, a matter in which modern psychology may give some assistance.

Most psychologists of to-day, whatever the school to which they belong, hold
views that are to some extent deterministic. That is to say, they consider that no
thought or action occurs accidentally or without a definite cause. Just as a solid
object, which is acted upon by two forces, will move in a direction along which
the resultant of these two forces acts, so are our actions determined by the result-
ant of the forces which are and have been acting upon us, both in the present and
in the past. These forces, as we will call them, may be split up roughly into
three groups.

First there are our hereditary predispositions. It seems probable that children
inherit to some extent their temperamental characteristics and are born with a
tendency to react in a certain manner to certain situations. We know, however,
that these tendencies, particularly in the early years of life, can be considerably
modified. It is very unlikely, both on theoretical and on practical grounds, that
a child is ever born with criminal tendencies, but the reason for this statement
would take too long to discuss in the present paper.

Secondly we have what may be called the previous conditionings. This in-
cludes all the experiences to which the child has ever been subjected, whether
remembered or forgotten. We know now that past experiences, particularly those
of early life, affect our behaviour and our emotional attitudes to a far greater ex-
tent than was formerly realised. A person, who in childhood was badly frightened
by a dog, may grow up with an unreasonable terror of all dogs, even though the
original incident may have been long since forgotten. Many of our apparently
irrational likes and dislikes have their explanation in incidents long buried in the
past. In all people there is a tendency for the reaction to a present situa-
tion to be influenced by the previous reaction to a past experience which
the present one to some extent resembles. This tendency has very important
bearings on our dealings with delinquent children.

Thirdly there is the present environment. It is necessary to know something
of all those conditions which influence the child at the present time. His own
physical state, his home and people, his school or work, his intellectual interests,
his companions and his hobbies. Furthermore, we want to know the child's dis-
tinctive attitude towards these. To the outside observer there may be nothing
wrong with the home or the parents, yet if the child feels some cause of iin-
happiness or discontent, his response to the situation will be unsatisfactory. On
the other hand, the home, or some other section of the child's environment, may
fall far below our standards and yet be in no sense a causal factor of the delinquent
reaction. The investigation of the specific individual response of the child to
various situations is of paramount importance in the examination of a case and
unless great care is taken, it is sometimes surprisingly easy to lay the blame in the
wrong quarter. This, of course, renders our treatment of the case correspondingly-
ineffective.

We have thus three factors which influence behaviour and determine the type
of reaction which will be produced by a given situation. These factors?the
hereditary predispositions, the previous conditionings and the present environ-
ment all need investigation in any case of delinquency.

The majority of cases are somewhat complicated, as there may be many
factors more or less equally operative in producing the delinquent reaction. I
cannot recall a case in which heredity alone played a part or even one in which it
was the most important element. One becomes very sceptical at the fatalistic
doctrine that the tendency to crime is definitely inherited. Experience of child-
ren, whose family histories contain the most appalling combination of mental
defect, insanity, prostitution and crime, shows that the offspring of such families
need not become delinquent, provided that, at a sufficiently early age, they are
removed from their degrading surroundings and are given a decent chance in
life. Inborn tendencies of one kind or another, the individual must have, but if
too great a stress be laid upon these, the result is a hopeless and unhelpful attitude
towards the whole problem, since that which is inherited must remain there
throughout life. We can and must leave the hereditary predispositions and innate
characteristics to take care of themselves, but we have no right to throw down the
cards, until we have given due consideration to other possible causal factors. This
is the only satisfactory basis upon which we can hope to formulate and carry out
a constructive plan which will ultimately be for the benefit both of the individual
offender and of society as a whole.

In dealing with behaviour problems in young children, one always has to
begin with a recognition of the fact that no child is born with his morals ready
made. This seems an absurdly obvious statement, yet the truth of it is often
overlooked, especially by parents. The very young child is dominated by the
pleasure principle. He finds that certain actions produce pleasure and others
result in pain. The former tend to be repeated in order that further pleasure
may be obtained, while the latter are checked, owing to their previous painful
effects. This is the earliest and most primitive type of learning and one which,
though modified by other factors, remains with us throughout life.

Now, with repetition, the pleasure-producing action is each time performed
more readily and easily until in time it becomes more or less habitual and a slighter
stimulus is required to cause it. At length, a certain pattern of behaviour is laid
down, which is facilitated by constant use and which will not cease to exist until
no further advantage can be gained by its continuation. If misbehaviour is
allowed to result, as it so often does, in the attainment of desired ends, there is a
tendency for it to increase until the child may become definitely delinquent.

So-called uncontrollable tempers are often explicable along these lines. A
child shouts and cries until his wishes are granted. After this has happened several
times, the mother decides to remain firm, whereupon, the child, being disappointed,
cries louder and more lustily until, for the sake of peace, the mother at last gives
way. The child has again become master of the situation and, moreover, has
learned that if a little naughtiness will not bring about a desired end, increased
misbehaviour is sure to do so. The tempers become steadily worse until the
mother at last takes the child to a doctor, saying that he has fits or in some other
way blaming the child's nervous system for a condition which is, in reality, her own
fault. When a child has once learned to dominate his parents and his home envir-
onment, irregular and unsustained efforts at discipline will only drive him into fur-
ther excesses. In his desire to retain his command of the situation, the child may
eventually end by making himself and everyone else unhappy by aiming at an end
which he cannot be allowed to attain. If the parents are intelligent and co-opera-
tive, such cases can often be quite adequately treated at home, but with weak-
willed and nervous parents, it is sometimes necessary that the child should temp-
orarily be removed to more normal surroundings where no advantage can be
gained by violent temper.

The beginning of school life is often beset with difficulties. At home, the
young child has received individual care, while at school, however kindly he is
treated, he is, nevertheless, one of the crowd and is expected to take his place
in the group without any special attention being paid to his personal likes and
dislikes. The child who has been spoiled at home may find it very difficult to
adjust himself to the demands of this new situation, particularly when an early
dislike of school is fostered and encouraged by unwise sympathy at home. In such
a case, the child's objection to school may increase until, instead of disliking one
single teacher, his hatred extends to the whole system of education and everyone
associated therewith. A single punishment may suffice to create antagonism and
one has seen a boy of nearly 14 years, who had persistently truanted since the age
of five because he was on one occasion exposed to ridicule by his teacher. Though
of supernormal ability, he was unable to read, write or do simple sums and was,
indeed, sent to us to be certified as mentally deficient. He had developed violent
temper tantrums and was untruthful, suspicious and extremely self-absorbed.
His hatred of school had been encouraged by a devoted but unwise mother and
it was not until the boy was persuaded to work out the whole situation for him-
self, that his resistance could be broken down. He then asked to be sent away
from home and removal to a specially selected school resulted in a rapid and
complete change in behaviour, the development of normal interests and excellent
progress in learning.

Another common cause of misbehaviour is the unwise attention which child-
ren often receive from adults. Most parents cannot help being proud of their off-
spring. This would be quite a satisfactory state of affairs, were it not for the fact
that parents are often proud of behaviour which should really be checked and,
what is more, exhibit their pride in front of the child. A very young child learns
to make a pert remark and the parents laugh at his cleverness. The father smacks
him for some fault, the child hits back and the mother smiles indulgently at her
son's spirit. Time and again, one hears a mother ostensibly complaining of her
child's escapades, yet all the while, her pride in his originality is only half con-
cealed. Most children love to be noticed by adults and the root cause of a great
many misdemeanours is this desire to attract attention. This may occur in large
families, where a harassed, over-worked mother has no time to bother with the
children unless they are naughty. It happens with the only child, who is shown
off to an admiring audience of relatives and friends and it is, perhaps, particularly
frequent in children brought up in institutions, where the discipline is more or
less uniform and the amount of individual attention is small. In this case, it
is the naughtiest child who is the most noticed, and a child, who is really craving
for love, may adopt most bizarre behaviour in order to be different from the rest.
One has met many lovable and affectionate children, who were quite unable to
fit in with any institutional regime, for the simple fact that, as they themselves have
sometimes expressed it, they did not feel that they " belonged " anywhere. Such
children often do very well in foster homes, where they can feel that at least
one person has an affectionate interest in them.

On the other hand, children may be driven into delinquency by too strict
treatment at home. Some parents treat their offspring as crosses which must
grudgingly be borne and line the child's path with an imposing list of " don'ts."
Now a child who finds that everything he does is " naughty," soon begins to
think that, as all actions are equally reprehensible, it does not matter what he
does. The young child should constantly be finding out how to deal with his
surroundings and how to acquire more perfect muscular control. In the process
of this learning, he is continually doing things in relation to some one or other
aspect of his environment and the results may sometimes be unfortunate. Never-
theless the mother who, instead of repeatedly checking the child's actions, sets
out to make them serve a definitely useful purpose, can usually enlist the child's
co-operation to the advantage both of the child's temper and of her own nerves.
Uncongenial occupation and lack of opportunity for recreation are often
direct causes of delinquency. A child living in a crowded slum, with no facilities
for out-door sports, will sometimes start thieving or damaging property, merely
for the sake of getting a thrill out of life. Adolescents, with some specialised
ability for which they have no outlet, will often use their powers for anti-social
ends. This was the case with one boy who had quite an extensive criminal career.
He was an expert safe opener and his propensities in this direction were never
checked until his remarkable mechanical ability was recognised and he was given
work in which his manipulative skill was of use. He had burgled for the sheer
joy of using his hands rather than for any definite gain and his criminal tendencies
ceased to exist when he found work upon which he could exercise his powers.

A bright boy may become delinquent because his ordinary routine of school
or work does not provide sufficient challenge for his capabilities, whilst a back-
ward boy may commit the same offence for totally different reasons. In the first
place, defective children are usually more than normally suggestible. They lack
foresight and are thus easily led on by craftier companions. One often finds in
group activities, that it is the backward child who does the actual work, while
the brighter members of the gang avoid suspicion and share the spoils. One must
remember, however, that suggestibility can be used for good as well as for evil
ends, and that, in better surroundings, dull children are often equally responsive
to training which is directed towards the development of a law-abiding attitude.
The child who is somewhat backward, without showing any pronounced
mental defect, is frequently very sensitive. Too often he is reprimanded for poor
work at school and is the butt for his companions in the playground. In such
cases, a pronounced feeling of inferiority may arise and the child may endeavour
to assert his superiority in other directions. Not infrequently one meets with a
backward child who steals money in order to buy flowers for his teacher or objects
with which to impress his friends, the real motive being to re-establish himself on
terms of equality with his companions. The same thing may also occur with an
unwanted or neglected child, even though not backward in intellect, and one
sometimes finds that an ill-treated step-child will both steal from and give presents
to the step-parent, the underlying motive being a curious mixture of antagonism
and desire for affection.

Sex misdemeanours in children are very common, and their causes are
legion. They form an important problem in many cases, and well repay careful
study. In the first place, it is well to remember that so-called sex delinquency often
occurs without the child having any ideas which are " sexual " in the adult
meaning of the term. The very young child may discover that he can derive
pleasure from touching or rubbing certain parts of his body, including the genital
organs, the habit being, at an early age, comparable to thumb-sucking, nail-biting
or nose-picking, and needing treatment by similar methods. Severe punishment
or terrifying threats serve merely to frighten the child and to concentrate his
thoughts upon a habit which he would normally abandon on growing older.

During school age, a boy or girl is often introduced to the habit of masturba-
tion by another child who, owing to the manner in which the subject has been
treated at home, has come to the conclusion that there is something strange and
wicked about the habit and that he or she is defying some terrible, though little
understood, social taboo. Time and again, one meets with a little group which is
held together merely by the knowledge of some trivial sex habit, which the child-
ren think is unknown to the rest of the world. Remorse for such actions is often
accompanied by a hopeless and despairing feeling that no one else can possibly
be so wicked. The child feels shut out from normal social relationships and his
interest is therefore directed more and more towards himself, with a resultant
increase of auto-erotic behaviour. A child often exhibits tremendous relief when
he, at last, confesses his guilty secret and finds that it occasions no horror or sur-
prise. A calm discussion will often suffice to eradicate the habit without any
further treatment. I frequently explain it to children by saying that very tiny
babies are interested in nothing but their own bodies. They desire food, warmth,
nursing, in short, anything that causes pleasurable bodily sensations. As a child
grows older, his interests change. He thinks of his toys, his friends, his parents,
etc., and his thoughts, instead of turning in upon himself go out to various objects
in his environment. The older one grows the wider one's horizon should become,
and masturbation denotes a turning of interest back to oneself and a consequent
reversion to a more childish form of behaviour. The child who realises that he
is merely being self-absorbed and babyish, often finds it quite easy to direct his
interest into more normal channels.

Promiscuous sexual intercourse among adolescents is another condition which
one must be ready to deal with and here also one's treatment must depend rather
upon the delinquent's mental attitude, than upon any preconceived standards
of morality. Heterosexual experiences in themselves may not be of more serious
import than theft, lying or other adolescent misdemeanours. It entirely depends
upon the motive and upon the child's whole personality make-up. Some people
seem to think that delinquencies of this type only occur when the adolescent's
sex desires are strong, but this is not always true. Curiosity or imitation are often
far more important factors, though neither of these would be effective in provok-
ing misconduct had the child received adequate sex instruction. Unfortunately,
many parents cannot bring themselves to give the necessary guidance and they
tend to put off all enquiries with a tissue of lies, with the result that the child
obtains information from undesirable sources and feels that there is a sort of
terrible fascination about the whole matter. This leads either to a desire for
overt action or to a tendency to repress and avoid any ideas pertaining to sex
matters. In the former case, delinquency results, while the latter state is pro-
ductive of many of the nervous manifestations which are seen in the out-patient
departments of our hospitals.

In conclusion, I should like to say that, whatever the type of case, one ought
never to be discouraged by one's failures. The subject of the treatment of delin-
quent children is, as yet, in its infancy and we have a great deal still to learn.
Each time a failure is recorded, it should be the basis of a fresh start and a new
investigation. Were there any factors in the original causation which we have not
yet taken into account? Have new circumstances arisen which are making the
child's adaptation too difficult for him? It is only by patient, thoughtful and
thorough consideration of each individual case that we can hope to formulate any
really satisfactory plans for action. A scientific evaluation of all the factors con-
cerned in making the delinquent what he is, can be the only true basis of any
adequate and rational approach to the solution of what is, I consider, one of the
most vital and pressing social problems of our time.
