Institutional Accommodation
=============================

News and Notes.
Warwickshire Home for Mental Defectives.
At a meeting held last August the Warwickshire County Council sanctioned
the expenditure of a sum not exceeding ?20,000 for the purchase of Weston
Reformatory School, and for its conversion into a home for the reception of mental
defectives. The Mental Deficiency Act Committee was authorised by the County
Council to incur the above expenditure upon the purchase of the property and
upon the necessary alterations and additions.
Lancashire and Cheshire Home.
The Lancashire and Cheshire Society for the Permanent Care of the Feeble-
minded have steadily added to the number of their homes for mental defectives
at the Sandlebridge Colony, near Alderley Edge. The work, under the guidance
of Miss Dendy, has grown steadily and the latest addition is a new home intended
to accommodate fifty men. The property acquired is an old farmhouse and this
has been extended to provide quarters for the master and matron and dormitories
for the inmates. A big barn adjoining has been reconstructed to provide a dining-
room, recreation room and bathrooms. The Society has also acquired twenty-one
acres of grassland and gardens. The entire scheme has cost between ?7,000 and
?8,000.
94 MENTAL WELFARE.
Coldeast Colony for Mental Defectives.
A large colony for mental defectives has been provided by the Hampshire
County Council and was officially opened in August last. A mansion at Sarisbury
Green, Coldeast, was purchased and has been in the hands of the Council for two
years. It has been adapted for the treatment, at present, of 53 patients and a
scheme has also been prepared for the ultimate accommodation of 500 patients,
men, women and children's departments being self-contained. The ultimate cost
is estimated at ?160,000.
Many of the men patients are to be employed on the farm, in the fruit garden,
etc., and the women are to be engaged in the housework, laundry, rug and basket
making, etc. It is hoped to move the low grade cases from Knowle Mental
Hospital to Coldeast so as to leave room there for more urgent cases.
The Colony was opened by the Right Hon. Neville Chamberlain (Minister
of Health). He spoke of the great need of more Institutional accommodation in
the country, stating that only 27 per cent, of the whole number of defectives were
in certified institutions where they could get proper and adequate medical super-
vision and the continuous care and varied occupation and exercise necessary in
order that they might make the most of their lives. He congratulated the Hamp-
shire County Council on their grasp of the principles which governed the treat-
ment of this problem and expressed his admiration for the wisdom of the plans
which had been made for the development of a colony round the nucleus of the
Mansion centre.
Hostel for Feeble-Minded Boys.
Over four years ago a hostel for feeble-minded girls was opened at Eagle
House, Mitcham, by the Surrey Voluntary Association for Mental and Physical
Welfare. This Hostel has proved so successful that the Association has extended
its work and is about to open a Hostel at Royal Common, Elstead, for feeble-
minded boys. The Hostel is to be run on the same lines as Eagle House and is to
house 26 feeble-minded boys and young men. They are to receive six months
training in house and garden work and will then be placed out in daily service
in the neighbourhood.
Any enquiries as to this Hostel should be made to Miss W. Gibson, 18, Park
Street, Guildford.
Sterilization Laws.
Alrerta.
The Sexual Sterilization Act passed at the last Session of the Alberta Legisla-
ture has received Royal assent. The purpose of the Act is to sterilise cases whom
the Board (consisting of two medical and two laymen) consider could be dis-
charged from a mental hospital if the danger of procreation were eliminated.
The operation is not to be performed without the consent of the patient, " or,
where the Board is of the opinion that the inmate is not capable of giving such
consent, the husband or wife of the inmate or the parent or guardian of the inmate
if he is unmarried, has consented thereto, or where the inmate has no husband,
wife, parent or guardian resident in the Province, the Minister has consented
thereto." This Act will affect only a limited number of mental defectives, those
who are confined in mental hospitals.
MENTAL WELFARE. 95
Switzerland. , ,
The Legislature of the Swiss Canton of Valid has ^s^d ^ a^f'A(ft
sterilization of the mentally unfit. We have no details of the clauses of the Act
at present.
New Zealand.
The House of Representatives passed the Mental Defectives Bill in September,
but the clauses prohibiting marriage in cases of persons registered as dcfectn .
permitting sterilization, were both withdrawn. ? ? i 00 Mental
The Bill is of interest as it introduces the same principles as our Mental
Deficiency Acts, the idea of social standard of mental deficien y. f i
" Mentally Defective Person " is extended to include one who suffers from1 ?en
deficiency "associated with or manifested by anti-social conduct, and w q
supervision for his own protection or in the public interest.
Board of Education Regulations.
Since the passing of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1927, the Board of Educa-
tion have revised their regulations for the Notification of Children. The regu a-
tions have also been shortened and simplified. The Board has withdrawn t e
requirement that every proposal to notify a child who is not either an idiot, an
imbecile, or a moral imbecile, must be referred to the Board. These Regulations
came into operation on October 1st and the Board have issued a Circular (No 1399)
to Local Education Authorities on the subject of the revision and with copies of
the revised forms.
Child Guidance.
We are interested to hear that the staff of the Child Guidance Clinic which
is to be opened by the Child Guidance Council in London next spring has already
been appointed. The appointments have been made at so early a date to enable the
staff to spend some months studying the methods and organisation of such Clinics
in the United States.
It happens that both the Medical Director and the Assistant Psychiatrist are
resigning posts at the Maudsley Hospital to take up this new work. Dr. William
Hoodie, Deputy Medical Superintendent of the Maudsley Hospital has been
appointed Medical Director of the Clinic; he is already in the United States and
will be returning about February. His previous experience has been wide and
has included work with children both at the Maudsley and elsewhere. Dr. R.
Evelyn Lucas, at present Assistant Medical Officer at the Maudsley Hospital has
already spent some time in the United States at the Phipps Clinic, John Hopkins
Hospital and elsewhere; at the Maudsley Hospital she has made the children,
whethei out-patients or in-patients, her special care. She is shortly proceeding
to the United States for further study. Miss Lucy G. Fildes is already well-
know n to our readers as Educational Organiser of the Central Association for
Mental Welfare. As Psychologist of the Clinic in dealing with children in
our elementary schools she will be approaching the same educational problems
which she has for so many years been elucidating to teachers of mentally
defective, dull and backward children at the Central Association for Mental
Welfare Courses. Her research work at the Cambridge Psychological Laboratory
is well known. She will be assisted by Miss Mary MacTaggart who has been a
teacher under, and has acted as a psychological adviser to, the Renfrewshire
Education Authority, and has studied the psychological aspects of school
problems.
96 MENTAL WELFARE.
Miss Evelyn Lawrence has been appointed Chief Social Worker; and other
social workers who have been trained in the United States Child Guidance Clinics
will be, in due course, appointed to work under her. Miss Lawrence's experience
as a Teacher in London County Council Schools, her work as a psychologist at
the National Institute of Industrial Psychology, her sociological studies at the
London School of Economics, and her social work experience peculiarly fit her
for the post.
We think the Child Guidance Council are to be congratulated on having been
able to draw together such an able group of workers.
London.
The London County Council has decided to provide medical inspection and
treatment for minor ailments for children of school age who have been placed
under supervision in accordance with 30 (b) of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913,
and are attending Occupation Centres provided by or through the agency of the
London Association for Mental Welfare. Arrangements were made to carry this
into effect from 1st September.
International Social Welfare Fortnight. Paris, July 2nd-13th, 1928.
As noted in our last issue, four important Congresses were held in Paris
during the fortnight July 2nd?13th, 1928, dealing with various forms of social
work. Housing and Town Planning, Statutory and Voluntary Assistance, Child
Welfare, and Social Work generally. Mental Welfare work was dealt with
specifically in the second named, although, as is natural, speakers and writers of
papers dealing with other matters also touched on the subject in a greater or less
degree.
Over a thousand delegates attended the various meetings, all of which, with
the exception of those in connection with the Housing and Town Planning Con-
gress were held at the Salle Pleyel, Rue de Faubourg-St-Honore (since destroyed
by fire). The Congress fell during the hottest days of the heat-wave, but in spite
of this, the meetings were well attended, and at the various official and unofficial
receptions and informal gatherings, delegates from countries widely differing in
conditions and in outlook were able to make an exchange of experiences and views
which must have contributed to a better understanding between them. If one
may criticise, it would appear to have been wiser to have fewer formal papers,
and to allow more time for discussion; as it was, by the time that prepared speeches
had been delivered, there was little opportunity for useful discussion.
Miss Evelyn Fox, as Reporter General for the Section, was the chief speaker
at the session on Friday, July 6th, when the subject under consideration was "The
Assistance of Mentally Defective Persons " ; her paper had been previously circu-
lated in French and in English. (A few copies are still available and may be
obtained free, if desired, from the C.A.M.W.) Contributors to the brief discussion
that followed were Dr. Paul-Boncour (France), M. Valagussa (Italy) and Mme.
Mollweiss (Switzerland), who dealt with prominent features of mental welfare
work in their respective countries. One gained the impression that much remained
to be done in the way of " community care " and in the training and development
of home teaching of defectives, apart from the universal need for more institu-
tional accommodation and for more special schools. The following resolution was
passed unanimously: ?
MENTAL WELFARE. 97
" Oue les services de l'assistance publique et privee fassent des enquetes sur
to nombre des anmlux qui se trouvent panni les personnes qm demanden
lcur assistance et que dans chaque pays on explme toutes les posslbilltes
d'etablir des services sociaux speciaux.
Visits to social agencies in and around Paris wene arrai
of the Congress and the representatives of the C. .i ? ? ^ <? Hosnital in
the Henri Rousselle Hospital (an institution similar to the MaudskyHospitali
this country), the Lannelongue Institute, where there is a mental hygiene ce
for children, and a Special Class in a girls' school at Buttes Chaumont, Pans.
An important Exhibition of Housing and Social Pi ogi ess \\as arranged in
nection with the Congress, and exhibits from a very large number of countriesiw? e c
on view at the Pare des Expositions, Porte de Versailles. he ri is se _
organised by the staff of Leplay House, to whom the thanks of the britisn
delegates are due for the enormous amount of time and tiouble spen upon 1 .
1 his Association sent a 15 ft. exhibit illustrating mental welfaie woi an a
member of the C.A.M.W. staff was able to give considerable help and information
to the numbers of visitors who were interested, lhe President of the ^renci
Republic paid an official visit to the Exhibition on the afternoon of the 7th July
and shewed the greatest interest in the various sections.
We understand that an official report of the Congress is in course of prepara-
tion and will be obtainable from M. Georges Rondel, 49, Rue de Miromesnil, Paris.
Preliminary meetings have already been held in connection with the next
International Congress on Social Work, which is provisionally fixed for 1932,
and will probably be held in Amsterdam, by invitation of the Dutch Government.
C.A.M.W. Conference.
The C.A.M.W. Conference originally fixed for December 6th and 7th, 1928,
has been postponed until the end of April, 1929. The Council, at a meeting held
this month, decided that it was wiser to postpone the Conference as two of the
subjects chosen for discussion [i.e., the Report of the Joint Committee of the
Board of Education and the Board of Control on Mentally Defective Children,
and the Proposals with regard to the re-organisation of the duties of Poor Law
Guardians) would not appear to be far enough advanced by December to enable
useful discussion to be held on them. It is hoped that this postponement will not
inconvenience any of those who had intended to be present.
No. 1 Mental Welfare.
Has any reader a copy of the first number of Mental Welfare (January, 1920),
\\hich he oi she is willing to send us? It contains a Foreword by the late Dr.
Shuttleworth and we have been asked to secure a copy for a friend of his.
Board of Control Circulars No. 712 and 713.
No. 712.
The Board of Control have recently issued Circular 712, drawing the attention
of the Local Authorities to the Regulations made under Section 30 of the Mental
Deficiency Act. " Local Authorities have no duties with respect to defectives
who are dealt with by the Guardians, unless and until such cases have first been
98 MENTAL WELFARE.
reported by the Guardians in pursuance of the Regulations and the Board of
Control have issued a Certificate of Exception." The Circular also deals with the
terms of Section 15 of the Act of 1913. " In the Board's view, Local Authorities
are precluded from utilising the provisions of Section 15 in respect of alleged
defectives who are already being maintained by Poor Law Guardians in the Poor
Law Institution in which it is suggested they should be detained as in a ' place
of safety.' " Local Authorities are asked to draw the attention of certifying
officers to the substitution of the term " moral defective " for " moral imbecile."
No. 713.
This circular, to County and County Borough Councils, is concerned chiefly
with the preparation of Estimates which are to be prepared on the basis that the
duties of Ascertainment and Guardianship are to be fully carried out and that
some provision may be made for cost of Training or Occupation.
With regard to the establishment of Colonies, the Board point out that " on
grounds of efficiency as well as economy, a colony for mental defectives should
eventually provide for not less than 500 cases. The provision for as large a
number as 500 may be made gradually, but all sites chosen should be large
enough to accommodate at least that number."
