Psychological Retrospect
=========================
165
.
During the last few months the scientific world have been busily
discussing the " The Penge Mystery." The editor of this
journal acted as medical secretaiy to the Penge Defence Asso-
ciation, and obtained upwards of three hundred signatures to
the petition, the opinion expressed being that the deceased met
her death from brain disease and not from starvation. The
case has been so fully argued of late that we must content
ourselves by giving two letters from eminent medical autho-
rities forwarded to the editor of this journal, as well as the
published opinion of the editor, in which the case is freely
discussed. The editor writes:?"Now that public feeling
and sentiment have to a certain extent subsided in connection
with the Penge mystery, I propose to consider in detail the facts
connected with the case in their medico-legal aspect. Where
human life is at stake, and is to be sacrificed to theoretical
scientific evidence opposed by other evidence equally scientific,
but which proves results diametrically oj^posite, our gravest
considerations should be brought to bear in discussing the ques-
tion. I have frequently urged the advisability of the appoint-
ment of a medical assessor, who would be able to assist the
jury in their endeavours to ferret out the meaning of the
various technical terms made use of. Surely the life of a human
being is of more consequence than the life of a ship, and yet we
hear of Admiralty assessors who aid in investigations of ship-
wrecks. We cannot expect that a British jury, however intelli-
gent they may be, can understand the meaning of such terms as
tubercular, meningitis, diabetes, tubercles at the base of the
brain, and other expressions made use of during the trial, equally
confusing to a non-professional person, especially when the
various counsel, and lastly the judge himself, put their own con-
struction upon the terms uncontradicted. In a question of guilt
as opposed to innocence the jury are doubtless able to give a
163 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
shrewd opinion from the facts of tlie case and the circumstantial
evidence placed before them. But when their verdict depends
upon some pathological change in an organ, or upon some
morbid appearances variously described by medical experts, they
are as unfit to decide the question as they would he to make
the post-mortem examination of the body upon whose case they
are called to adjudicate. I propose briefly to consider a few
circumstances and facts connected with the case which are
conclusive to my mind that the deceased met her death from
natural causes. The principal evidence for the prosecution, and
upon which the prisoners have been convicted of wilful murder
and sentenced to death, is that of Dr. Longrigg, who was the
first medical man called to the case, and who alone can describe
the symptoms immediately preceding death. It appears that
he gave a certificate of death from cerebral disease associated
with apoplexy, but subsequently withdrew his certificate. He
informed the court that the post-mortem examination revealed
the following pathological changes : tubercular deposit on the
membranes of the brain, and also in one of the lungs; old
adhesions were also found, and congestion of the brain. These
conditions were all consistent with the cerebral symptoms
observed shortly previous to death. Dr. Longrigg, in reply to
Mr. Clarke, stated that it was congestion of the brain and lungs
that induced him to infer that death resulted from starvation,
but notwithstanding this he went on to say in reply to the
following question put to him by Mr. Clarke, ' Was not this
state of the brain indicative of ill-health ?' 'It was indicative
of good health.' I must confess I am at a loss to reconcile the
post-mortem changes and appearances as indicative of a healthy
brain. It would indeed be a sorry presumption for us to consider
that congestion of the brain, and a morbid deposit of tubercles
and adhesions were consistent with a healthy structure. The
congestion of the brain was not due to starvation. It was not the
result of post-mortem changes ; it was the effect of brain disease.
When death has taken place from starvation the organs are
wasted and ansemic, but free from all signs of congestion. The
morbid appearances found in the brain of the deceased were all
indicative of death from natural causes. One of the chief
symptoms met with in brain disease is intense emaciation, and
refusal of all nourishment is a very frequent occurrence. The
patient may have large quantities of food administered, but it
fails to nourish, and the patient sinks from exhaustion and
inanition, and if, as frequently happens, the case is accompanied
by tuberculosis, as was so in the case under discussion, the
emaciation becomes extreme. All the symptoms described as
having taken place before death were clear evidence of cerebral
rSYCIIOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 167
disease, tlie coma, stertorous breathing, and the inequality of
the pupils. It is contrary to general medical opinion that the
post-mortem appearances and the symptoms taken together can
prove that the deceased met her death by starvation per se.
With regard to the mental condition of the deceased, it would
have been far better if the proceedings which were commenced
by the mother to place her daughter and property under the
protection of the Court of Chaucery had been continued. It
does not appear from the evidence that this petition was ever
presented to the Lord Chancellor for him to grant a hearing
before the Lords Justices or Masters in Lunacy. It is seen
from the evidence that two medical certificates were obtained,
stating that the deceased was of sound mind, but what became
of these does not transpire. They could not of themselves stay
the proceedings in lunacy, which had already been commenced
by Mrs. Butterfield. It frequently happens that conflicting
medical evidence is given in commissions in lunacy, and the
decision is left to the discretion of the Judge to decide the
mental state. There must have been strong grounds for appre-
hension in this case, or Mrs. Butterfield would not have
initiated the proceedings she did to place her daughter, as a
person ' non compos mentis' under the protection of the Court
of Chancery. The case under consideration is a grave one, but
when sentence of death has been passed upon four human beings
based upon the mere theories of certain scientific witnesses and
denied by others, let me implore the authorities to ignore
public feeling, and to cause a thorough investigation to be made
into the true bearings of the case. The great question is
whether death might not have resulted from natural causes.
In my mind the symptoms and morbid appearances distinctly
point to this, and I have little doubt if further investigation is
made this doubt will be substantiated, and the prisoners will
have the benefit of it. It would be a disgrace to our country
to hurl the four victims into eternity without such inquiry."
Dr. B. writes :?" Having read the notes of the post-mortem
examination of the body of Mrs. Harriet Staunton, as published
in the British Medical Journal, and being convinced, from
these notes, and from Dr. Longrigg's description of the signs and
symptoms which he observed in Mrs. Staunton, that whatever
neglect there may have been in the case, there is sufficient evidence
of cerebral disease to account for the atrophy of the organs, and
for the death of Mrs. Staunton, I would therefore feel obliged
if you would add my name to the petition which is about to be
presented to the Home Secretary. My reasons for being con-
vinced that there was sufficient evidence of cerebral disease are
(when taken together) as follows, viz:?the adhesion of the
1G8 psychological retrospect.
membranes of the brain to each other, and to the ccdavarium ;
the congestion of the brain, of its membranes and blood-vessels;
the millet-seed deposits entangled in the meshes of the pia
mater; the inequality of the pupils before death; the pre-
sence of tubercle in the lung, which is so common in the
insane, even where there have been no symptoms during life of
phthisis; the presence of vermin, which will sometimes form
(almost) spontaneously upon an insane patient, and even after
death, notwithstanding the greatest care; the weights of the
various organs, so far as they have been given, do not, when
compared with the average weights of the same organs in the
insane, exhibit anything very unusual. During the last three
years I have performed thirty-three post-mortem examinations
of patients who have died insane, and previous to that I had
performed post-mortem examinations upon persons who had
died sane ; I trust, therefore, that you will not think it is a
presumption upon my part to offer so decided an opinion. In
this asylum the organs are weighed when a post-mortem
examination is made. I would therefore feel obliged if you
would compare the following weights with those taken at the
Penge post-mortem. The patient, C. B., was a lady aged 66
years, height 5 feet 1 inch, and the post-mortem examination
was performed 22 hours after death. The causes of death were
colloid cancer of the heart and melancholia. The weights were
as follows:?
Oz.
Encephalon 38^
Cerebellum . . . . ? 5^
Heart ...... 5f
Right lung 9f
Left ditto . . ? . ?
Liver* ...... 23
Spleen ...... 2
Right kidney 2f
Left ditto 2|
" I need scarcely add that this patient (who was a private
patient) was treated with every care and attention that we could
give her, and yet some of the organs weighed less than the same
organs weighed at the Penge post-mortem examination.
" Trusting that the petition may be the means of rescuing
these unhappy persons from a death which the medical evidence
does not justify."
Dr. W. writes :?" I hereby authorise you to use my name in
the matter of a reconsideration of the circumstances attending
the case of ' the Stauntons.'
* The gall bladder contained gall-stouos 97 graiiia bile.
PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 169
" 1st. Great doubts as to the credibility of Clara Brown.
" 2nd. The insufficient examination made during tbe lifetime
of Mrs. Harriet Staunton, as, for instance, the nurse who laid
her out after death alone discovered how dirty the skin was.
This ought to have been observed by a medical man called to
the bedside of an insensible person ; a dirty condition, seal}7, etc.
is pathognomic of certain diseases; the stethoscope can
scarcely have been carefully employed, without attracting atten-
tion to the state of the general surface of the body. The ther-
mometer was not used as means of investigation, now universally
employed by medical men.
" 3rd. A definite answer as to the cause of death could not be
given by an examination of a corpse six days after death, where
110 external or internal lesion existed, and where the absence of
poison was proved by direct evidence.
" 4th. No medical man should be permitted to report on oath
the results of a post-mortem examination of the envelopes of
the brain, who is not prepared with sealed microscopical
evidence."
Norfolk.?Sudden Insanity.?A few days ago Inspector Amiss,
of the Norfolk Police, arrived at Victoria Station, Norwich, from
Diss, on duty, but instead of proceeding to the Norfolk Central
Police Station, lie went and saw the station-master, and while in his
oflice burst out crying and behaved very strangely. His son was
accordingly sent for, but before he arrived Amiss left the oflice and
wandered up tbe platform. Upon an Ipswich train entering tbe
station be deliberately walked on to tbe metals, and was knocked
down before the train could be stopped. When the carriages were
brought to a standstill lie walked out from between tliem, saying
be meant to do it. His escape was owing to tbe fact that be fell
into a hollow place between tlie rails. He was subsequently found
to have broken a rib, and, as bo was labouring under suicidal mania,
he was removed home under control.
The above is a remarkable case of sudden insanity, but
there must have been some previous symptoms of insanity
apparent.
Increase op Lunacy.?The annual reports of the visiting justices
of the county asylums, presented at the last Quarter Sessions,
show in some instances a remarkable increase of pauper lunacy.
In Dorsetshire, Mr. Ployer, M.P., reported, as chairman of the
visitors, that the increase of pauper patients from unions in the
county had in the course of the past year been the largest that had
probably taken place since the establishment of the county lunatic
asylum. The number of this class now is 37/, as against 348 at
the close of 1870. Of these 177 are males, and 200 females. Mr.
Ployer mentioned that ?41,000 had been granted some eighteen
170 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
years ago for a new asylum, and that wliereas there were formerly
about 80 patients there were now nearly 400, both the old and tlie
new buildings being crowded. The committee of the Devonshire
Asylum reported that there were 747 patients at the end of the
year, against 724 at the commencement, and that but 25 beds
on the female side are unoccupied. They attributed this not to any
increase in the malady of insanity, but partly to the relief afforded
to the unions by the Treasury grant, and partly to the fact of many
being sent into the asylum for whom it was not originally intended.
The chairman, Mr. Sanders, said it was astonishing how the asylum
had filled. In Somerset the patients have increased since April
from G27 to 644. In this county arrangements are being made for
an additional asylum. In Wiltshire the visitors are building a new
wing, on the female side, at a cost of nearly ?4,000. At the
Sheffield Quarter Sessions, recently, the Earl of Whamcliffe, the
chairman, gave some startling statistics with reference to the con-
dition of the South Yorkshire Lunatic Asylum, at Wadsley. The
number of admissions this year had exceeded those of any previous
year since the opening. They were: males, 181 ; females, 200;
total, 381. The increase on the number of patients at the end of
1877, over the previous year, was 74; whilst the increase of the
previous year was only 60. The total number of patients under
care during the year had been 1,170. There were now only 35
beds unoccupied, and it was not expected that the new wings,
which would accommodato about 600 additional patients, would bo
ready before the autumn. In the meantime several houses on the
estate, lately occupied by attendants, are being prepared for the
reception of patients.
Increase of Lunacy in Surrey.?During tho last few years
there has been a considerable increase of lunacy in Surrey. Tho
lunatic asylum provided at Garratt Lane, Wandsworth, has recently
been enlarged, and a sum of ?10,000 expended on the building; and
there is an asylum at Earlswood for idiots. All this, however, is
not sufficient accommodation for pauper lunatics ; and a farm at
Coulsdon, near Croydon, consisting of 148 acres, has been purchased
for ?25,000, for the erection of an additional county lunatic asylum
for Surrey. The sum required will be borrowed upon the security
of the county rates. Tho cost of tho new asylum is estimated at
?70,000.
The British Medico! Journal contains the following:?
Tiie Hereditariness op Madness.?Tho current of hereditary
morbid tendencies presents various aspects in different families.
There is the broad stream, which carries with it the taints of gout,
consumption, criminality, as well as of insanity, each of these mala-
dies being developed in different consanguine relations, in accordance
with their moral and physical constitution, their habits, and sur-
rounding circumstances. There is the more limited transmission of
the factors or influences, whatever these may be, which invariably
culminate in certain forms of alienation or nervous diseases, but in
PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 171
no others; and, lastly, the heritage is limited to some particular
species of mental disturbance?to suicidal tendency, for example.
It would be rash and unpliilosopbical to conclude either that suicide
was frequently the result of hereditary vitiation ; that it was a sign
of moral perversion at all; or that it was other than the act of a
distempered or agitated, but not necessarily of a diseased mind. In
glancing over the sad genealogical descents collected by Esquirol,
Brierre de Boismont, and Moreau, there constantly recur instances
where whole families devote themselves to self-destruction, nearly
at the same age, and apparently without any more appreciable in-
centive than ennui, disgust at life, or intolerance of incidents which
would be regarded by healthier natures as insignificant and trifling.
In like manner, such tragedies may be found closing a useful and
prosperous career in several generations. In the endeavour to dis-
cover the cause of such conduct, inconsistent in many cases with the
character and interests and habits of the victim, it is natural to
adopt the nearest and readiest solution, especially when it seems
suflicient to explain what would otherwise remain inexplicable ; but
that such a step must frequently lead astray cannot be doubted, when
it is borne in mind that the laws of hereditary disease, even the fact
and nature of such a taint, still remain in great doubt and obscurity ;
and that in the history of every individual there are thousands of
physical affections, perverted sentiments, and wayward fancies and
impulses which are equally potent in bringing about self-murder,
and even in overriding all other proclivities, whether these lead to
hope and health or to trial and anxiety. Another element plays an
important, though less conspicuous, part in leading to such catas-
trophes. We refer to the incitation, not to the blind impulse which
precipitates various persons, strangers to each other, from the
Monument or the Vendome Column; but to that feeling which
actuates members of the same profession, social group, or family, to
resort to an act or a series of acts which have been perpetrated by
those whom they love and admire, or upon whom they depend, and
with whose opinions, dispositions, and course they have previously
placed themselves, or been unconsciously placed in harmony. Tlicso
observations have been suggested by the death of the younger
Prevost Paradol. This boy may have suffered from some constitu-
tional type ; but his age?seventeen?is as rarely influenced by
transmitted taints as by grief, depression, or despair. In the absence
of more reliable evidence, and in the knowledge that he must liavo
been long separated from all direct paternal influences, and that the
political or patriotic disappointment which hurried his father away
from the contemplation of his country's misfortunes could scarcely
reach the stripling, we are inclined to believe that some unknown
influence?it might be the crisis of puberty?directed his thoughts
to his father's last act; and that the similarity or identity of their
inner nature suggested emancipation by following his example.
We give the following extracts from an excellent little
pamphlet by Mr. Robert Johnson, of ^Voodbridge, on "Tlio
Amelioration of the Criminal Law ":?
172 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
Kleptomania.?Kleptomania, which has long been recognised
by the medical, is not recognised by the legal profession. Wc
boast of our advancement in physiology, psychology, and humani-
tarianism ; yet when a lady of otherwise blameless life suddenly
takes to pilfering mutton chops, children's boots, jewellery, or
anything else upon which she can lay hands, we throw our philo-
sophy and our humanity to the winds, we brand her as a thief, and,
regardless of the fearful consequences to herself, her husband, and
her children, we throw her into gaol, and utterly ruin the happiness
of her and hers for life. The doctors may be called to prove that
she is nervous or excitable, that she has been very ill in time past,
and has been obliged to take remedies which have more or less
affected her power of control: but all is useless. The evidence is
clear, she took the goods, she even secreted them. Her actions
have all the appearance of deliberate fraud, and yet her whole
conduct from first to last may have been due to physical disorganisa-
tion by which her power of self-control has become impaired,
leaving her at the mercy of her morbid impulses. But how can
she be acquitted, while poorer women, no more or less guilty, aro
sent to gaol by the score : so to gaol she goes, although the more
thoughtful among judges, magistrates, doctors, and jury feel the
hideous cruelty of the proceeding; feel that she should be treated
as a patient, and not as a criminal; and that there should be, both
for Tier and her poorer sisters in like circumstances, a loophole of escape
which does not, but which might exist, and that the infliction of a fine,
or of an order of restitution, or discharge upon recognisances to come
up for judgment if called upon, woidd be a more fitting punishment
than the cruel one of imprisonment.
Such imprisonments are the more to be reprehended as they
are utterly useless. The imprisonment of one kleptomaniac will
not deter another from pilfering, for the simple reason that in such
cases the power of self-control is more or less absent. A conclusive
proof of this exists in the fact that in many such cases on record,
the moment the prisoner is released, keenly as she has felt her
disgrace and degradation, she commcnces to pilfer again. These
are cases (and they are very much more numerous both among rich
and poor than might be supposed) for the kind supervision of
friends, not for the interposition of the Criminal Law.
I illustrate my argument by a few examples :
1. I am acquainted with a most estimable and talented man,
eminent as an author, who has nevertheless been a kleptomaniac at
various periods of his life. His friends recognise his propensity
and keep watch over him.
2. I also know a lady, eminent for her good works, and very
wealthy, but who nevertheless pilfers anything on which she can
lay her hands. She is the mother of a large family, and is greatly
respected.
3. Also another lady, who from the ago of seventeen to twenty-
five years always pilfered. She had a strong-minded father who
recognised her morbid propensity and watched her. At the age of
twenty-five years she ccased to steal, and for the following twenty-
PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 173
five years superintended a largo school, leading a most useful life.
Slie apparently appropriated tilings in a most artful manner, but it
is the belief of her friends that she was at the time scarcely con-
scious of what she was doing ; and she herself has not the slightest
recollection of her early failings.
All these good and useful lives might have been utterly ruined
had the persons in question fallen into less considerate hands.
4. I also remember the case of a lady by birth and education,
and of good property, who, otherwise apparently in her right mind,
and a much respected person, suddenly acquired a mania for
robbing shops. She was watched, and was seen to purloin a piece
of meat from a butcher's window, place it, raw and greasy as it
was, under her velvet jacket, and make off with it. The butcher
prosecuted her. The case was clear. She was committed to the
assizes. Her counsel did what he could. He pointed out the
grotesqueness of the act:?that an expensively dressed, refined, and
wealthy lady should place a piece of raw butcher's meat between a
velvet jacket and an expensive silk dress, was alone a proof thai
she was scarcely accountable for her actions. He showed the
absence of motive for the crime ; and the jury, seeing the force of
his arguments, although they could not say that she was insane,
and could not avoid finding her guilty, strongly recommended her
to mercy. But the judge (who clearly cared little for mental
pathology) said, that of all the prisoners who in his experience
had been recommended to mercy, she deserved it the least, for that
she had no excuse for her crime, that she was not needy, that she
was well educated, that she moved in excellent society, and therefore
knew what was right, and yet she did not withstand the miserable
temptation, &c., &c., &c. So the poor creature, nearly beside herself
with grief and shame, was carried off to prison. Think of her
position at the expiration of her sentence, if indeed she survive it,
and say if such an act, committed under such circumstances,
deserves such a fearfully vindictive retribution.
Another sad case which came under my notice was that of the
wife of a rising professional man, mother of five little children,
good and kind and lady-like, far advanced in pregnancy, head
probably a little affected, took an article value one shilling from a
shop counter: was prosecuted, sentenced to a month's imprison-
ment. This broke her heart, and led to the ruin of her home.
In all classes, rich and poor, there are persons who, from weak-
ness of will or some abnormal condition of body or mind, will,
now and then, commit a dishonest action, just as there are people
who are liable to outbursts of passion. It is very common for
women, at some period of their lives, to fall into the habit of pil-
fering. Do what you will with such persons, they will, until some
occult change takes place in their constitution, commit petty thefts.
Imprison them, and you break their hearts, or render them despe-
rate, often insane. What a mistaken policy to saddle the country
with the expense of their imprisonment, let alone the cruelty of
the proceeding as regards them and their families !
It is stated that of the criminal lunatics in custody, about G4
174 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
per cent, became insane after trial. How many of these poor
creatures are likely to have become insane as a consequence of their
imprisonment? And how many thousands of poor creatures have
had to date their rain from the time when our too severe laws made
them outcasts from society in consequence of one false step ?
Definition of Criminal Lunacy.?At present a man is held to
be legally responsible for his actions if he knows the difference
between right and wrong; at the same time it is a well known fact
that a large proportion of the inmates of our asylums do possess
the power of distinguishing between right and wrong in a greater
or less degree, but are recognised as lunatics nevertheless.
Here then is an anomaly?men and women are hanged or im-
prisoned for crimes of which they are held to be legally guilty,
although they would undoubtedly in large numbers of cases be ad-
judged by a jury of medical men, to be more or less?or even
totally?irresponsible for their actions on the ground of mental or
physical disease or disorder.
I well remember a case in which the principle was involved.
An educated and well-connected young man was found guilty of
stealing money and other valuables from the office of his employer.
" But," said his doctor, " I have attended this poor fellow for years.
He has epileptic attacks of such frequency and severity that his
power of self-control is weakened?place temptation of any kind
in his way and he will yield." "Sir," said the judge, "do you
suppose that he did not know that ho was doing wrong in stealing
this money ? " " Possibly he did," said the doctor, " but he had
not the strength of will to act on his knowledge." "Very well,"
said the judge, " I'll sentence him to five years' penal servitude. I
dare say he is an invalid, but he will be well looked after in prison."
I felt for the father, mother, young wife, and little children of that
poor young fellow.
County Lunacy Administration.?We append an excellent letter
from Dr. Lockhart Robertson which appeared in the Times, on
County Lunacy Administration.
Dr. Lockhart Robertson writes :?" One of the important duties
which will devolve on the new County Boards will be the adminis-
tration of the county lunatic asylums. I venture, therefore, before
the County Government Bill goes into Committee, to ask your atten-
tion to one important financial question relating to the maintenance
of the insane poor?viz. the grant to the unions from the Consoli-
dated Fund of 4s. a week for each lunatic confined in the county
asylums. When the Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1874 proposed
this grant he was careful to inform the House that it was of a tem-
porary and tentative kind, and a relief to the landed interest until
such time as the promised measures relating to local government
and local expenditure were matured. The County Prisons Bill?
the first of these measures?is law, and in my humble judgment is
PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 175
a wise and sound financial measure. This County Government Bill
is tlie next instalment of local financial reform, and under its provi-
sions ought, I think, to be included the permanent adjustment of
this grant of 4s. a week to each lunatic in the county asylum?a
grant amounting last year to ?380,000; while if the recent very
influential deputation which waited upon the President of the Local
Government Board were successful in procuring its extension to the
lunatics in workhouses it would soon be doubled.
" When this grant was first proposed by the Government you per-
mitted me in a short letter in the Times to express a fear that the
union authorities might be tempted by the 4s. profit to fill the
county asylums with the chronic lunatics detained in the union
houses, and that thus this grant?given in relief?would ultimately
increase the charge on the county rate by the required extensions of
the lunatic asylums. Practically throughout the county asylums I
have observed such unnecessary filling up of the wards by incurable
lunatics and imbeciles from the workhouses to have been steadily
and needlessly practised. In the report of the Lunacy Commissioners
for 187G, I find this opinion confirmed. 'It seems probable (they
state) that the pecuniary advantage to unions arising out of the
Parliamentary grant of 4s. per head per week for every pauper
patient maintained in an asylum has in some counties contributed
to increase the number in these institutions by the removal thereto
of many patients who but for such inducement would have been
retained in workhouses.' So again Mr. Sclater-Booth, in his 16th
report of the Visitors of the Hay wards Heath Asylum, writes :?
' There are 43 more patients in this asylum than there were a year
ago. In any inquiry into the causes which may have contributed
to this increase the Committee consider that the action of tlio
Government in making an allowance of 4s. per week to tho several
unions for every pauper lunatic in the asylum ought not to be lost
sight of.'
" Tho opportunity to which the Chancellor of tho Exchequer
looked of placing this 4s. tentative grant towards the county lunacy
expenditure on a sound and permanent basis is offered in this County
Government Bill. The suggestion I venture to offer is that the
amount of the grant instead of going to the union guardians be paid
by the Treasury to the new County Boards, to be applied to the
payment of two important items in the county asylum maintenance
rate?Tiz. the salaries, wages, and pensions, which now averago
under 3s. per week; and, secondly, tho repairs, alterations, and
future extensions of the fabric, which the remaining shilling of tho
4s. grant would amply cover. The several unions would thus re-
ceive a permanent reduction of 3s. a week on the asylum maintenance
rate, which would then average from (is. to 7s., while the county
rate would be directly relieved of the large sums yearly spent on
repair, alteration, and enlargement of the asylum fabric. Thus,
when the original cost of construction extended under the Act of
1845 to 30 years is once paid off', the care and treatment of the insane
poor would no longer be a yearly item in the county expenditure,
and the unions would have their lunatics treated and cured for the
176 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
small charge of 7s. per week. So altered and applied, the Govern-
ment grant of 4s. from the Consolidated Fund would be a direct and
permanent relief to the county expenditure, and the needless
crowding of the asylum wards with chronic and imbecile cases
would cease.
" Should this proposal find favour with the Government and the
House, I would add one further suggestion, which would moreover
meet the views of the important deputation of the Medico-Psycho-
logical Association which last week had an interview with Mr.
Sclater-Booth. According to my proposal the salaries, wages, and
pensions of the staff of the county asylums would be defrayed from
the 4 s. grant from the Consolidated Fund. Following the analogy
of the Prisons Bill (as also of the Poor Law administration) I would
suggest that the Government, as represented by the Lunacy Com-
missioners, should control the appointment and discharge of their
officers and servants by the Lunacy Committee of the new County
Boards, as also the grant of superannuation pensions under the
Lunacy Acts. The fixity of tenure?especially as regards the
medical superintendent?of office which this control of the Lunacy
Commissioners would imply can hardly be over-rated in its influence
on the well-being and good management of the county asylum.
Again, the fears expressed by the deputation of the Medico-Psycho-
logical Association as to their superannuation allowance would be
allayed by my proposal to transfer this charge from the asylum
union rate to the grant from the Consolidated Fund."
