Felo-De-Se
==========

309
Art. VIII?
:Author:  William R. HUGGARD, B.A., M.D., Assistant Medical Officer, Sussex and
Brandenburgli House Asylums, Hammersmith.

J- wo essays of great interest on suicide have recently appeared
in our American contemporary.* Mr. Palmer's paper is really
a criticism of a judgment given in one of the New York courts.
The judge " deliberately held, in an action upon a life insurance
policy, that suicide per se was evidence of insanity, and so ruled
in the case before him, and that the burden of proof that the
felo-de-se was not insane was upon the defendant. That judge
would, of course, have ruled, if the question had arisen in respect
to the ancient Stoic or Epicurean philosophers who destroyed
themselves, claiming the act to be one ol heroism, that they
were all insane."

Dr Gray's object in discussing the subject is different. The
moral barrier is, he thinks, the main safeguard against the
suicide of sane people; and it is a barrier that has not sufficient
stress laid upon it. Even in the insane the horror of suicide
inculcated by Christianity counts for something. " On my way
to lecture this morning I cut from the newspaper this slip, an
entire column, headed ' Gone from home or life; flight from
real or imaginary ills.' And this is the record, in this city, of
one day: five suicides, three of them manifestly insane people
wandering about at will, and two not insane. Those insane
were, or ought to have been, under the care of some physician or
responsible person, for even this newspaper gives a history of
disordered health and mental depression in all of them. But it
all goes in as neivs followed by no comments. Five murders
would have startled this great city to its centre, but these five
self-murders do not make even a ripple on the social surface.
This goes to show that suicide is of such common occurrence as
not to attract attention beyond that given to an ordinary acci-
dent, or that it is accepted, after all, as a justifiable mode of
getting out of the world." And he quotes the case of a boy
* "Suicide not Evidence of Insanity," by 0. H. Palmer, New York. Eead
before the Medico-Legal Society of the City of Now York. "Suicide," by John P.
Gray, M.D., LL.D., Professor of Psychological Medicine and Jurisprudence,
Superintendent of the New York State Lunatic Asylum, Utica; being a series of
Lectures delivered at Bellevue Hospital Medical School, March 1878. Both of
these papers are published in the American Journal of Insanity, April and July
1878.

310 FELO-DE-SE.

thirteen years old who attempted to commit suicide by shooting
himself. The injury, however, did not prove fatal. Dr Gray
says: " There was no condition of mental clouding, as he de-
liberately purchased the pistol and arranged his duties; and, as
he said to me, made up his mind that he could not do what was
required of him, and that he would rather kill himself than be
constantly talked to. He had not taken into consideration the
moral question, and was quite startled when I told him it was
wicked. He said the papers did not say so about Mr.
(a respectable citizen who had killed himself a few days before)."
This is an apt case, and it illustrates the state of public
feeling with regard to the act. The boy did not consider the
act wicked, neither in fact do the public. They regard it rather
as foolish. The law looks on suicide as a kind of murder. But
do the same feelings arise within us when we read that a man
has deliberately planned and executed the murder of his neigh-
bour, and when we read that a woman, sinned against, an out-
cast, branded by the finger of scorn, and treated with contumely
by those who were once her companions?when we read that she
has fled from the misery and wickedness of life, vainly (as some
think) seeking in death a period to her sorrow and to her crime ?
Or when we read of a man, poverty stricken in his old age, bed-
ridden, racked with incurable pain, and though surrounded by
devoted children that half starved themselves to supply him with
what comforts they might, has by his own act for ever departed
from the troubles and the pains of this world ? Are cases of
this kind to be looked on as the consummation of wickedness ?
Are they to be looked on as in themselves evidence of insanity ?
Or are they to be looked on as the deliberate and sane determi-
nation of persons borne down with remorse, with affliction, or
with pain ?

In endeavouring to clear up the subject we shall find it best
to consider first with some little detail whether suicide is in
itself evidence of insanity.

This view has been put forward by some writers, and indeed
it seems to be the view generally taken by coroners' juries. This
doctrine seems to have sprung out of the command, " Thou
shalt not kill," which has been generally interpreted to condemn
suicide. Whether the command bears this meaning or not will
be considered presently in examining whether suicide is always
a wicked act. But however that may be, the doctrine has been
pretty widely accepted. The consequence was that it seemed
wholly incomprehensible that any man in his right mind could
deliberately commit as the last act of his life a crime that in-
volved everlasting torment. That a man should live a life of
villany and commit without remorse crimes of the greatest
magnitude, excited no surprise. He was supposed to have
before liis mind the intention of future repentance. But that a
Bane man should do an act that was construed as defying God,
and that made repentance impossible?this was deemed in-
credible. The Church held out no hope of mercy to the sinner
that hurried himself into the presence of his Maker. It was no
excuse that his misery was greater than lie could endure. He
lacked faith in the good providence of God, and he must perish.
It is not to he wondered at that men who are not theologians
should recoil with horror from a verdict that not merely blackens
the reputation of one whom they know to have been blameless
through life, and whose chief sin consisted in sinking beneath
his misfortunes, but also seems to sentence him to everlasting
torment. Mental depression is eagerly made out to be equivalent
to insanity, and the jury consider that at least they have taken
the merciful view of the case; they have averted an undying
stigma from the family of the deceased, and they have done no
one any harm.

I may remark in passing that those very people who charge
suicides with madness because of their incomprehensible temerity,
often inconsistently charge them with cowardice at the same
time. It is very extraordinary that anyone can be blind to so
glaring a contradiction. I can account for it only by supposing
it is due to over-great anxiety to heap obloquy from all sides
upon the act.

There is generally a history of depression ; and, as I have
remarked, an attempt is always made to prove that the victim
really suffered from melancholia. But many people whose
sanity has never been questioned have committed suicide.
Samson and Judas Iscariot no doubt suffered from depression;
we do not, however, therefore call them insane, 01 say that they
were not responsible for their acts. Mr. Palmer cites many cases
of great interest. Men 011 the verge of bankruptcy have insured
their lives heavily: before the next premium fell due they have
committed suicide in such a way as to make it appear that they
had been murdered. In this way they hoped to swindle the
insurance company for the aggrandisement of their families.
Several cases are given in detail in his essay. He describes also
some Eastern customs which are worth quoting in full.
" Even under British rule in India to-day, suicide is very
common, and more or less tolerated of necessity by the autho-
rities. Among the many castes in that countiy is one held in
high esteem by reason of the great importance of the service its
members perform as carrier-messengers and mail-carriers.
Strange as it may seem, suicide has been the protection of this
caste against brigands and highwaymen from time immemorial

A peculiar and terrific custom of this caste is maintained as a
necessary safeguard to its calling. A carrier who has been
robbed is deemed to have been despoiled of what is a thousand
times dearer to him than life, his honour; and in the presence
of the robber, after vainly giving him full warning and an oppor-
tunity to restore the property stolen from him, he kills himself;
thereupon the whole caste of the carrier rises as one man and
swears a remorseless vendetta against the thief, his family, kins-
men, friends, and village, until the last soul of them is exter-
minated. There is no other atonement. The carrier, entering
the service of the public, bound himself, by the most solemn and
fearful oaths, under the sanction of his religion, to protect his
caste and to punish any attempt to dishonour one of its mem-
bers ; the Brahmins consecrated this service by pronouncing the
most appalling anathemas against the transgressor, and so the
custody and transportation of property by one of their caste
passed into a law. At this day, a package, however valuable,
in the hands of one of these men is safer than though guarded by
an army; much safer than public moneys under the control of
politicians, or trust funds in the care of some savings banks. It
might be a blessing if we had a similar caste in this country to
declare a relentless vendetta against the thieves and robbers.
" There is another Brahmin custom executed by this carrier
caste, which may be termed a short and effectual way for the
collection of debts. In many of the provinces of Malabar, the
carrier will become security for the payment of debts by pledging
his life to the creditor, for proper consideration, that the debtor
shall fulfil his obligations. If, on the day of payment, the
creditor is not satisfied, the carrier goes and sits quietly on the
debtor's verandah, and calls upon him to pay on the spot. If he
refuse, the carrier makes a few incisions in his breast with his
dagger, and in a loud voice gives notice that if, by sundown, the
debt is not paid, he will plunge the dagger into his own heart,
leaving vengeance to his caste. This process never fails; the
debtor cannot escape. Neither the ingenuity of lawyers, nor the
weakness of judges, nor the stupidity of jurors can save him.
No bills of exceptions or dilatory motions can postpone the day
of payment.

" The hari-kari custom of the Japanese is familiar to all,
but there is another custom peculiar to them which perhaps is
not so generally known. The man who resents an insult by dis-
embowelling himself, goes out of the world in the happy belief
that he can at once come back as an avenging spirit and work
his enemy tenfold more harm in that way; that he can hover
about his path, make his plans miscarry, bring sickness and all
sorts of evil upon him, and control his destiny to an evil end."
From these cases it is evident enough that even at the
present day suicide must not be looked on as always an insane
act. In the case of insurance company swindlers, great injustice
would arise from so looking on it. The question is an in-
teresting and an important one too, how shall we tell sane from
insane suicides. What warrants the belief in insanity ? and
what are the motives that lead sane people to the deed ? It is
not possible to lay down any one criterion applicable in all cases.
Dr Gray attempts to do so. This is what he says:?
" I have already said that the essential distinction between
suicide of sane and insane was a delusional state of mind in the
latter; and growing out of this there is a difference in what
naay be denominated the invasion or development of the intent.
I have never seen a case of suicidal attempt, where the person
was insane, however mild the type, which was not preceded
by more or less disturbance of physical health and mental
oscillation. This is sometimes the case in the sane, but is far
from being a rule. You will find that in most cases of de-
veloping suicide, in insanity, there is not only the disturbance
of health and mental oscillation, but the mental condition is a
tendency to depression?to a painful mental state. In the
majority of such cases the early symptoms are misleading to
one not familiar with them. Therefore, I desire to impress
them on your minds. Such persons become reticent, retiring,
timid, fearful, apprehensive, self-condemning, morbidly con-
scientious ; they may say they are too much trouble to their
friends and family, and especially they may desire to be alone,
or at least withdraw from society. This is a characteristic
group of mental phenomena which should demand your recog-
nition. From this mental state distinct delusions are soon
formed, and they are likely to be of a character to suggest ideas
of suicide."

This statement requires some qualification. Acute maniacs
and persons suffering from a kind of epilepsy (epilepsia lawee)
occasionally destroy themselves ; yet they do not invariably
suffer from delusions. Again, there is what is generally known
as insane impulse. This so-called insane impulse is in most
cases I believe not properly speaking an insane impulse; it is
rather an impulse springing from a normal constituent of the
mind ; but of this more shall be said presently. Of course it
may occur in the diseased mind. In that case it is perfectly
legitimate to speak of it as insane. With these exceptions,
Dr Gray's opinion is sound. Delusion is the main point of
distinction between the suicide of the sane and of the insane.
It is a well and long-established law of the healthy human
mind that any idea that engrosses the attention tends to work
itself into the actuality. The thought of some muscular action
is apt to be followed by the action itself. For example, " To
think is to speak low"; the thinking a word tends to put into
action the muscles of articulation. The idea is in fact the
actuality in a weaker form. The idea of yawning suggested
by seeing another yawn, or even by reading of yawning, has in
itself a power to transform itself into the very action. This
law is far-reaching in sweep, and explains many of the deepest
secrets of our nature. At present I am concerned with only a
very small portion of its influence. Most of us have felt, when
on the edge of some high precipice, an inclination to throw
ourselves from our lofty position. The idea of leaping down
is so strongly suggested that an effort has to be made to
restrain us from destruction. It is usual to call this " giddiness "
or " vertigo." It is really the principle of Fascination. Many
people, chiefly impressible people, tell us that they dare not
watch a train coming up to a platform. They feel that if
they do they must inevitably throw themselves beneath the
approaching mpnster. Now if these people were exposed to
the same circumstances without the possibilit}' of turning away
from the suggestion, is it not likely that the suggestion would
accomplish its own end? In this way is explained the fre-
quency of unpremeditated suicides in places of imposing danger.
It is not that the victim is paralysed by fear. The active
energies are really exerted; exerted, however, not for self-pre-
servation but for destruction. The idea of precipitation is so
strongly suggested that it becomes the sole and engrossing idea
of the mind, and the transformation of it into the action is
speedily effected.

But is it not an abuse of language to call these people
insane ? We do not call every impressible or impulsive person
mad. By insanity we understand a deviation from a person's
normal mental health. These people present no deviation from
their normal state. It is part of the healthy condition of their
minds to receive impressions and suggestions vividly, and to
transform them readily into act. Unless, in fact, we establish
an absolute standard of sanity, and take as the type of mental
health a character altogether devoid of foolishness and of
weakness, we are bound to consider these people sane. A posi-
tion of appalling danger commands the attention of the most
lethargic. To one not lethargic, to one keenly alive to the
outside world and to the pleasures of life, such a position does
more. It casts out all other thoughts, it imprints itself on the
mind with terrible reality as inevitable destruction; there is no
thought of turning aside; there is no thought of any but one
thing. Can we wonder at the issue ? Certainly no one that has
in the slightest degree attended to the working of the inner
life will be surprised at it.

In this case then a person in his usual mental state kills
himself without premeditation. The insane aspect of the same
psychical part of our nature is seen in epidemic madness. There
have been epidemics of madness of various kinds. A dancing
mania was prevalent at one time ; a suicidal at another. In these
cases the idea underlying the impulse is fixed; not a suddenly
suggested and transient idea. These, however, need not detain
us longer.

The cases just noticed have been ones of sudden impulse.
But cases are of frequent occurrence where self-destruction is a
deliberate act. It is our business now to examine very briefly
these cases, with a view of discovering, as far as possible, the
psychological condition of the mind that leads to the fatal deed.
Apart from suicide through sudden impulse, it may be laid
down as a general rule that pain of some kind is the determining
cause.

Mention has already been made of those scoundrels who,
when ruin is approaching, endeavour to swindle insurance com-
panies. They have no hope for themselves; their position is
irretrievable. Ashamed to act the part of honest men, and
take the consequences of their previous folly or ill-luck, as the
case may be, they not merely desert their post in the hour of
need, but attempt in dying to defraud their fellow-men. Their
crimes unhappily are beyond the reach of human laws, but no
words can too strongly condemn their wickedness.
The carriers of India too have been noticed. With them
the act is a duty, a part of their morality, inculcated by
religion.

Deep remorse and despair are nearly akin to a morbid state
of mind. Notwithstanding this, we have examples of their power
in men of sound mind. Criminals condemned to die have often
endeavoured by destroying themselves to avoid having their
sentence carried out in the legal manner. They know that in
any case they are doomed, and they wish to escape the ignominy
of a public death. No doubt in these cases despair is the chief
mover. Possibly, too, even at such a solemn moment there
may be a spice of revenge in depriving their enemies of a sup-
posed gratification. For suicides of this kind of course we
have no sympathy; though we certainly cannot feel surprised at
their action.

There is another class of people, common enough in France,
though happily not often found in England?I mean lovers that
shoot themselves because of some quarrel or momentary disap-
pointment with their sweethearts. Some petty jealousy, or
perhaps a jilting, unsettles these poor noodles. They have a
sickly and despicable kind of self-love, which leads them to try
to immortalise their constancy and devotion, and at the same
time inflict a petty retaliation on one unable to appreciate their
greatness. These people, indeed, deserve no sympathy. They
deserve nothing but contempt.

Another worthless class of suicides consists of those wretches
that have some real misfortune to bear, that have some helpless
and dependent ones, and nevertheless desert them in the time
of their greatest need. These seem to me to be the cases
really in the public mind when suicide is stigmatised as
cowardice. Cowardly such conduct undoubtedly is, and the
enormity of it is aggravated by the slur that falls on the family.
The survivors are the only ones to suffer by the disgrace that
belongs to the crime; the ignominious burial affects only them.
We now turn to another state of mind leading to suicide,
which does not strike us with the same horror. Severe bodily
pain, long-continued and without hope of relief, weighs heavily
on the mind. Suppose, too, there is no one dependent?no one
to provide for. In such a case it seems a harsh judgment
that pronounces him guilty of one of the most heinous crimes
known to English law who has sunk beneath an accumulated
load of misery, and has by his own act terminated his pain,
injuring no man but himself, if, indeed, he does injure himself.
If he sins at all, surely his sin is not a sin against his fellow-
men. The relation of the question to Scripture will be con-
sidered now.

Is there not a kind of fatalism, or rather feticliism, under-
lying the ordinary interpretation of the law of Gfod ? It is
assumed that God determines the destiny of all, and that
man has merely to sit by and wait the appointed time. This
view is indeed held at the present day by many very good, and
in other respects intelligent, people. Some persons have
carried this doctrine so far as to look on an army as the
embodiment of unbelief. Prayer, say these people, is the
proper weapon against foes; the Lord will defend His own.
In like manner the Peculiar People consider it a gross want of
faith to have recourse to a medical man in sickness; and in
proof of their assertion they cite a command quite as appro-
priate to their case as the Sixth Commandment is to suicide.
The spirit of the Ten Commandments is plain. They are
intended to enforce a devout, reverential, and pious attitude
towards God, and a righteous life towards man.

Notwithstanding the Commandment, we think it right in
many cases to take the life of our fellow-men. Nay, we are
directed to do so. The law, then, is not absolute ; it admits of
exceptions, and this confirms what I have just said about the
general spirit of the Commandments. Now, what is the object
of the law, " Thou shalt not kill," as shown by the exceptions ?
The object evidently is to make secure what men generally
cling tenaciously to and value most. Nowhere in the Bible is
there anything, so far as I am aware, to substantiate the belief
that the Sixth Commandment refers to killing one's self.

We have no reason to think that Samson thought he was
doing wrong in committing suicide. On the contrary, we have
reason to think not merely that he considered that he was
doing right, but that God approved of his intention. He
prayed to God to be strengthened " only this once," and added,
"Let me die with the Philistines." Thereupon his strength
returned; seizing the pillars he bowed himself with all his might,
and was crushed beneath the falling pile. F rom this, of course, it
does not follow that suicide is always right; it only shows that
all who take the Bible as the rule of life must look 011 it as an
act whose goodness or badness depends upon circumstances.
"For a good man some would even dare to die. ho but a
man of generous and noble mind would sacrifice his own life
to save the life of a good man ? Is there any question here
of lack of faith in God's providence ? Is it not meant to be
implied that it is one of the purest, loftiest, and holiest of
deeds to lay down life for a good man, for a great principle, or
for one's country ? There are not wanting many well-known
instances of this kind of self-sacrifice; instances that to this
day, in spite of ill-founded Christian prejudice, are held up by
Christian parents as examples of lofty-minded goodness. Hie
case of Codrus, the last King of Athens, may be taken as an
illustration. When the Dorians invaded Attica an oracle
declared they should be victorious if they spared the life of the
king. Codrus thereupon resolved to die for his country. He
disguised himself and went into the enemy s camp, picked a
quarrel with the soldiers, and was slain. It would be interesting
to mention many other cases of distinguished virtue of a like
kind; but as my object is merely to show that every case of
suicide should, as regards the morality of the act, be judged
upon its own merits, I must pass on.

Who would dare to call Lucretia mad ? And still more,
who would dare to blame her ?

The principle that seems to be established is this. Suicide
is in itself not to be regarded as irreverent towards God, or as
hurtful to man. Nevertheless I believe it to be in many cases
wicked, and in most cases foolish. It is wicked when the
person thereby deserts a post of duty, and in doing so fails
either to avert some harm or to accomplish some good for his
fellows. To give examples is of course unnecessary. Seneca,
a eulogist of suicide, who destroyed his own life when a fitting
time, as he conceived it, came, was deterred hy this sense of duty
from killing himself when he would have liked to do so. He says :
" Worn out with severe illness, I often thought of suicide, but
was recalled by the old age of a most indulgent father; for I
considered not how resolutely I could encounter death, but how
he could bear up under loss of me." Cicero, too, nobly says:
" The tears of my friends have prevented me from flying to
death as my refuge." In these cases, while it would have been
base to give way to the temptation, it was noble to with-
stand it.

As a last word for the morality, consider the power of the
stronger emotions to bias the judgment. Hope, fear, love, to a
great extent determine belief. In matters that closely affect our
interests we are seldom guided altogether by the evidence before
us. The lumen siccum intellectus is found only in men of the
highest culture; and even these do not always consider dispas-
sionately matters that affect themselves. What shall we say
then of a person overwhelmed with anguish or with despair, or
suffering, say, from malignant disease, dragging out with inde-
scribable torture weary days and still more weary nights, loath-
some alike to himself and to his dearest friends? Can we
wonder if such an one offer up a hurried prayer to his God, and
sever himself for ever from his earthly woe, persuading himself
that at worst there will be an intermission to his torment, and
that at best he may be forgiven ? Read the following painful
case (and it is a common one), which occurred last year in the
state of New York.

The daughter of a respectable farmer named Hoppin was
seduced, under promise of marriage, by a young man of good
family. The seducer then refused to marry the girl. She
thereupon attempted to poison herself; she was, however, shortly
afterwards discovered, and a fatal issue was averted. The fol-
lowing letter, written just before she took the poison, was
discovered:?

" Dear Parents, Brothers and Sisters,?Forgive me, but I
have committed a great crime, and care not to live; I haven't
spent a happy day or moment for a number of months; I have
tried to act natural, but found no pleasure anywhere ; there is
one person who might have saved me from this; but he thought
I was trying to deceive him. He knows why I die; God alone
knows what I have suffered; oh, death is the only relief; you
are all very dear to me, and it is hard to leave you, but it is best.
I once enjoyed religion ; oh, that I had continued to serve God,
I would not have been where I am now; oh, if I was the girl I
was when I went to the Valley; I had always said I would never
cause you any trouble; but I have fallen, and am for ever ruined.
I hope you will all meet in heaven, I trust you will, but I shall
never go there. Think of me as lost; I might have been a
Christian now. The Bible says, the vilest sinner may return,
hut it is better that I die than live as I am; you will soon for-
get, and it is better that you should; tears prevent my writing,
and I bid you Farewell for ever,
" Lina.

" My young friends will think I have done them great injus-
tice in accepting their invitation, but I knew it was the last
time, and I tried to forget the troubled future in so doing.
" Lina."

This poor girl was not mad: her mind was swayed by power-
ful emotions?remorse, despair, and affection. We can condemn
her action as foolish; but we can hardly call it criminal.
This leads me to speak of the law at present with regard to
suicide. A verdict of felo-de-se involves disgrace and pecuniary
loss to the surviving relatives. The person that commits the
crime is not punished. The crime of those that are punished is
kinship with the deceased. This law can never be a deterrent
in those cases where suicide is a crime ; those who do the act
criminally care little for their friends as a rule. Whilst in those
cases where suicide is not a crime the action of the law is mani-
festly unjust to all. It may be said that no harm ever really does
come out of the law as it stands; a verdict of felo-de-se is never
given. But why should we have our statistics falsified and our
reason shocked by the stereotyped expression of " temporary
insanity" ? To escape having our feelings outraged by an unjust
and purposeless vicarious punishment. It is no doubt a smaller
evil that the verdict should be incorrect but harmless than that
it should be correct but pregnant with injustice. There is no
need for either evil. The remedy for criminal suicide is not to
be found in punishments which cannot reach the defaulter.
The true remedy is at present far off, but is, I trust, gradually
approaching. It consists in a purer and loftier morality than is
generally prevalent nowadays: not a morality of ceremony or of
show; but a morality that really regards one's neighbour as
one's self.

By way of summary the following conclusions may be enu-
merated :?
1. Suicide is not evidence of insanity.
2. The suicide of sane persons does not always deserve to be
regarded as criminal.

3. The law of suicide is not merely useless: it is unjust.
