Tiie Case of the Rev. Mr. Dodwell
==================================

321
Art. X.?

Tiie case of 1 his unfortunate gentleman has justly excited much
sympathy. The public have been made fully acquainted with
the arguments of the medical men who have advocated this
gentleman's sanity, but the opinions of the Government officials
and others who have visited him remain at present a secret.
The particulars of the case have been so freely discussed in the
public press as to need but few remarks from us. Mr. Dodwell
was tried at the Old Bailey in March last for an assault on the
Master of the Rolls with intent to murder by discharging a
" deadly " pistol at his lordship. The charge of intent was not
substantiated, and he was found guilty of a common assault.
At the trial he refused all assistance from counsel, and defended
himself. He was acquitted on the ground of insanity, and was
sent as a criminal lunatic to Broadmoor.

The chief points to which we wish to direct our readers'
attention are the manner in which the trial was conducted,
pronouncing a man insane without calling any medical evi-
dence of his mental condition ; and, secondly, the obscurity in
which the public have been left by the authorities' refusal to
make known the reports of the Government officials.

Mr. Dodwell was visited twice, whilst incarcerated in
Newgate, by Dr Winn and Dr L. Forbes Winslow. These visits
were made at the request of Mr. Dodwell's friends, and also of
himself. Copies of these reports were sent to the Home
Secretary, and certain questions asked in the House of Commons
in reference to Mr. Dodwell's sanity. A reply was given to the
effect that no reports had been forwarded by the medical officers
of Broadmoor. A subsequent visit was made to Mr. Dodwell,
in Broadmoor, by Drs. Winn and Winslow, and a second
report forwarded to the Home Secretary. The question was
revived in the House, and the public Press were indignant at
the secrecy with which the official reports were kept, and
Parliament came to a termination without anything definite
being done, or the public enlightened in the matter. We learn
that Mr. Dodwell has been, during the last few days, visited at
Broadmoor by Dr Maudsley and Dr Blandford, but at the
moment of our going to press we have not seen the reports of
these gentlemen. We, however, trust that the authorities will
soon liberate Mr. Dodwell and permit him to return to his
family, for we think he has had sufficient incarceration for his
unjustifiable act.

The following are copies of the reports of Drs. Winn and
Winslow, alluded to before :?

"Dr L. S. Forbes Winslow's Report.
" I have on two separate occasions, in consultation with
Dr Gibson and Dr Winn, had lengthy interviews with the
Rev. Mr. Dodwell, now in Newgate.
" Alleged Grievances.

"1. He described in detail his alleged grievances: his
dismissal from the Brighton Industrial Schools, inability to
obtain a rehearing of his case, and the treatment he received
from the governors of a school in Devonshire, to which he had
been appointed master.

" Actions in Courts of Law.
" 2. He gave a very lucid description of the course of action
pursued by him in Courts of Justice, and its result; of his
endeavouring to obtain what he considered to be his rights,
and his failure in every instance to obtain a proper hearing.
" Acutely Conscious of his Grievances.

" 3. He gave an accurate description of the various peti-
tions he had presented. He appears acutely conscious that lie
possesses a grievance for which he can obtain no redress. He
believes in consequence that his family and himself have been
brought to the brink of ruin.

" Inability to earn a Livelihood.
" 4. He informed me that, having failed in obtaining a re-
hearing of his case, he had made fruitless attempts to obtain
clerical duty. He had applied for such an agency, but without
success. He had also endeavoured to get pupils, but in this he
had also failed.

" Proof of non-murderous Intent.

" 5. The act for which he is now in Newgate had been pre-
meditated for the last six months. As a proof of this he read
me an extract from a letter written by him to the Lord
Chancellor, in which he stated that it was his intention to
break the law in order to obtain a hearing. His first idea was
to fire off a pistol in Vice-Chancellor Malins' Court, but
lie found by so doing he would simply be committed for
contempt of Court, and the purpose he had in view would
remain unaccomplished. He was anxious to impress on me
that lie never had the intention of committing- murder. To
prevent or rebut a charge of so serious a character, he purchased
a pistol and not a revolver, as he only intended to fire once.
He also informed me that a few weeks previous to his attempt
he read of a man who was injured by the discharge of a pistol
containing blank cartridge. This accident would have been
avoided had not the pistol been close to the injured man. * To
avoid any possible injury being incurred by the Master of the
Kolls, lie (the prisoner) stood at what he considered to be a safe
distance from his Lordship before discharging his pistol.

" State of his Affairs one Month previous to Assault.

" 6. A month previous to the assault he met a friend in the
Strand. At that time he considered that he was suffering from
gross injustice, and, having failed in obtaining clerical employ-
dent, had only a few shillings in the world with which to support
a wife and four children. On this occasion he exclaimed: ' I
will not go to the workhouse except through the gate of the
dock; and if by so doing my case is placed before reflecting
people of England and I sink, I must sink!' He is a man
apparently of determined purpose, and this seems to have been
his character through life. I have carefully inquired into the
history of his antecedents, and can detect no evidence of
hereditary disease.

" Opinion of Case.

" 7. During the whole of my conversation with him he was
calm and collected; there were no symptoms indicative of a
morbid impulse. He appeared to be a man driven to despera-
tion and ruin by circumstances. He did not labour under any
delusions. He declared that he had only acted unlawfully with
a view to securing the attention of his countrymen to the sub-
ject of his alleged wrongs. He gave clearly and distinctly an
account of his previous history. His memory seemed to be
excellent. His conversation, manner, and general demeanour
were most rational in every respect; and I was unable to detect
any symptoms indicative of mental disorder. I am of opinion,
from a careful and anxious consideration of the case, that he is
of sound mind, and there is nothing to justify his detention as a
criminal lunatic.

" L. S. Forbes Winslow,
" M.B. Camb., M.R.C.P. Lond., D.C.L. Oxon., LL.M. Camb.
" Lecturer on Mental Diseases, Charing Cross Hospital.
" 23 Cavendish Square:
?' March 23, 1878."
z 2
324 the case of tiie rev. mr. dodwell. .

" Dr Winn's Report.

" During a long interview with the Rev. H. J. Dodwell, on
Thursday, March 20th, and another on the 21st, I could not dis-
cover the slightest indication of insanity. He was neither excited
nor depressed, and his manner throughout both visits was calm
and self-possessed. His conversation was perfectly coherent, with-
out any inconsequence of words or thoughts. There was not a
trace of a delusion, and his memory was never at fault. In all
he said, he gave unmistakable proof of his being a man of
great ability and learning, and having feelings keenly sensitive
to the least doubt thrown on his honour or truthfulness. His
general health was good, and he stated that he never had had any
serious attack of illness, and that there was no hereditary taint
of insanity in his family. He gave a clear and logical account
of the motives and circumstances which led him to commit a
breach of the peace.

" He stated that six years ago he held the appointment of
Chaplain to the Industrial Schools at Brighton. From this office
he was dismissed in consequence of his having complained of the
conduct of some of the officials, thereby giving offence to some
members of the Board of Guardians. He demanded a full and
fair inquiry into all the circumstances of the case; and although
he was supported by seven clergymen and other members of the
Board, his reasonable request was not granted, nor could he get
any redress for the grievous wrong and ruinous loss he had sus-
tained. Since that time he has made repeated efforts to get
justice done him in vain. He says that if he can only get
his character cleared he would be satisfied. Fifteen months
ago he applied to the Court of Chancery, but was told by Vice-
Chancellor Malins that he had no jurisdiction in the matter.
On asking him what induced him to fire a blank cartridge at
the Master of the Rolls, he said, it was from no vindictive
feeling or murderous intention, but with the hope that it might
be the means of bringing his case before the public, being
driven to it by extreme poverty, and that if he must go to the
workhouse, he preferred that it should be through the criminal
dock; that he did not fire from sudden impulse: he had for
months previously contemplated doing something to force him-
self on the attention of the public, having on his mind the
example of the officer who struck the Duke of Cambridge in
order to get himself heard.

" Mr. Gibson, the Surgeon of Newgate, informed me that
during his imprisonment his conduct has been most exemplary,
his manner and habits perfectly rational, and he has never
complained of the prison diet.

" From a careful consideration of all these facts, I have come
to the conclusion that the Rev. H. J. Dodwell is not insane.
" J. M. Winn, M.D., M.R.C.P.

"Member of the Medico-Psychological Society, &c."
"Joint Report of Drs. L. S. Forbes Winslow and Winn.
" On the 21st inst., and at the request of the friends of the
Kev. Mr. Dodwell, and with the special sanction of the Home
Secretary, we visited this gentleman, now confined as a criminal
lunatic in Broadmoor Asylum.

" We found him calm, collected, and perfectly rational. He
alluded, as he had done on our two previous visits to him in
Newgate, to his alleged grievances, and to the motives which
induced him to commit a breach of the peace.
" He admitted that it was an unwise course of action, but
contended that he was driven by circumstances to commit
the act.

" We were unable to detect, either from his demeanour or
conversation, any symptoms to justify his detention as a
criminal lunatic.
" L. S. Forbes Winslow.
" J. M. Winn.
" Cavendish Square, W.:
11 June 24, 1878."

The truth of this theory was strikingly exemplified in a
case of melancholia which lately came under our notice. The
patient was a young lady who had been for some time in a
state of extreme depression, bordering on suicidal mania. Her
case resisted treatment until a copious eruption of eczema
appeared in different parts of her body, when the feelings of
the patient underwent a change, and she expressed herself as
being much better. She stated that this was not the first time
that skin disease and mental depression had alternated.?Ed.
