Mad Poets
==========

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
(V
Art. I.?.
No. I.
This wretched brain gave way,
And I became a wreck, at random driven,
Without one glimpse of reason or of heaven.?Moore.
Tiieee are manifold considerations which give to mad poets as
a class a romantic interest, even a fascination, to scientific
minds. Among these are the inquiries, first, whether the
mental exaltation, excitement, the transcendental ecstasy, being
carried above themselves, out of themselves, attributed to the
stage of inspired composition, as the psychologist contends, or
the hyperemia, the blush of redundant blood which then suffuses
the grey matter and the genetic cells which it contains, as the
physicist believes, tend directly to the production of diseased
thought and feeling; secondly, whether the descent, the original
or acquired predispositions, the nurture, the situation, the sur-
roundings of imaginative natures augment the proclivities to
insanity; thirdly, whether the ideal world in which these
inventors live and have their being, the phantoms and phan-
tasmata with which this creation is peopled, the exaggerated
sentiments and sensations, even the hyperbolical expressions
to which they accustom themselves, may not impart morbid
tendencies to consciousness, even to their physical constitution ;
fourthly, whether their habits, conduct, sense of moral and
religious responsibility, are calculated to disturb or conserve the
mental equilibrium; fifthly, whether the proportion of poets
who become insane is larger than that in other cesthetical
classes ; sixthly, whether the alienation to which such men of
genius are subject differs in kind and symptoms from that
which invades the capacities of less gifted mortals; seventhly,
PART II. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. 0
178 MAD POETS.
where the poetic vein of golden ore may be detected in the
outpourings of ideality after it has been blighted. It would
be vainglorious to conceive that all or many of these profound
and perplexing questionings will be answered in the following
observations. An attempt has been made to give typical, at
least prominent, illustrations ; to confine the description to such
features of character as may justify the formation of a judgment
as to the matters under discussion; and entering a caveat
against the sweeping practice of M. Moreau in the construction
of his Black List of infected minds in his " Mani Lucide," in
which the selection has been made exclusively from those who
were notoriously of unsound mind, and not from that vast legion
of ill-constituted, irregular, excitable, sentimental, sensitive,
crotchety but clever and dreamy individuals who are seen in
the twilight which connects the sunshine of right reason and
the darkness of derangement.
Victoria Alfieri, 1749.
Moral Insanity.
If the aphorism "poeta nascitur, non fit" be not a mere
obstetric platitude, it must be made sufficiently elastic to com-
prehend the larger proposition that many poets are born insane
and never reach mental health, even if and although a niche in
the Temple of Fame, or, what is less hyperbolical but more
important, a place in the hearts and memory of mankind.
Vittoria Alfieri must be known in history chiefly as a Radical
Piedmontese noble, who unfortunately succeeded to his posses-
sions in very early life, which were dilapidated or destroyed in
France at least, the very name of which he detested, in virtue
of that natural law of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity which he
pretended to admire ; as a rebel against all authority except the
tyranny of his own vile and vicious passions ; as the most profli-
gate and extravagant of the diseased and degraded class to
which he belonged; and as the Cavalier Cervantes, or, as seen
through a more gossamer medium, the husband ofthe unfortu-
nate widow by divorce of Charles Edward Stuart, long proudly
called the Prince of Wales.
The love or admiration with which he inspired this lady,
hereditarily Princess ofJ Stolberg, titulary Countess of Albany,
seemed to indicate the existence of amiable qualities unknown
to the world, but which she recorded in an appropriate monument
by Canova, and in the publication of a magnificent edition of
MAD POETS. 179
the works of her friend. In literature Vittoria Alfieri obtained
fame, if not popularity and love, among critics and dramatists.
His works consisted chiefly of tragedies adapted to the stage, of
which the best known are "Cleopatra," "Saul," "Filippo," and
"Don Carlos," for he,as well as Schiller, Otway, and others, was
attracted by what to us has always appeared the most revolting
event in modern history. His advent was propitious, for either
from perverse antagonism to all that had been established and
recognised, or, what is much more unlikely, from a specific plan
and principle he attempted, and to a certain extent effected, a
grand and wide reformation of the drama. He was the con-
temporary of Metastacio, whom, as well as almost all other great
men and useful human instruments, he disliked, and whose
acquaintance he declined on the absurd ground that his rival
had observed the ordinary courtesies of the Court of Austria.
Widely separated by their capacities, tastes, and tendencies as
these writers were, they were fellow-conspirators against the
established order of things on the stage; while Metastacio
employed as his agents the sentiments, the higher sympathies
of our nature, and all the influences supplied by music and
beauty and expression, Alfieri, while preserving the Unities,
endeavoured to obtain the same result by stoical hardness and
frigidity, by dispensing with imagery and attractive graces, by
painting villains and patriots in their coldest, barest, most
repulsive features, by making his muse an Amazon and the
whole scenic representation as painfully realistic; and a deep
and lasting revolution was effected by both. Although Alfieri
repelled many of the worshippers of the tragic muse by his
lack of delicate delineation, by stripping his plays of almost all
the redeeming, reforming, and softening influences which may
be interwoven even with catastrophes, the stiff and harsh
formalism of the older authors became animated, the men of
buckram were somewhat galvanised, if still stiff and mechanical;
choruses and confidants and all the obtrusive helps to reading
the meaning were swept away, the drama was made to tell its
own tale in action, and the audience were partially at least
deceived into the belief that they were witnessing the display of
human passions and affections, the course of human events which
had occurred and were occurring, and not a mere puppet show,
in which the figures were marionettes of large size, instinct
with motion, like other well-worked automata, but not with life.
Viewed with relation to the higher, even to the commonplace
springs of character and conduct, many of Alfieri's productions
were monstrous and revolting; but it is worthy of grave note,
that while licentious beyond conception in conduct, his histrionic
writings are comparatively pure and free from any gross offence
o 2
ISO MAD POETS.
against religion and morality, and his thorough exposure and
condemnation of the corruptions under Roman rule afford an
illustration of his signal power of detecting deformity and
degradation in other ages and forms of society than his own.
Amongst his greatest literary achievements should be recorded
his acquisition of the classical languages after he arrived at
maturity and of the written structure of his own (French), of
which he had been left in ignorance. In psychology this poet
must be depicted as the most detestable of national monsters, or
as an unparalleled instance of criminal insanity. Every event in
his life is either a factor of disease or a symptom of alienation.
In childhood he is represented as subject to a loathsome dis-
ease, although its name or nature is not stated; as, subsequently,
having been attacked by convulsions, and it must not be omitted
in this catalogue of physical infirmities that long afterwards his
involuntary restlessness or motivity was such that while composing
the tragedies on which his reputation rests he caused himself to
be tied firm and fast into a chair, so that the ligations resisted
muscular volition and compelled the brain to eliminate thought
or emotion in place of mere animal energy. A dullard, and,
as generally happens in the untrained enfants arrieres, violent
in temper and intractable, he was sent to school, where the
classics were net taught, where indolence, perversity, and
mischievous propensities were not corrected, and where evil
habits were encouraged by the example if not positively by the
precepts of the instructor.
Besides idleness, there seems to have been insubordination
while a schoolboy, as his imprisonment for three months is
spoken of. Apparently unguidei, unadvised, or rejecting
whatever virtuous and prudential counsel might have been
offered, he became the proprietor of the family estate when
only sixteen. At this time he may be described as having
bound himself, Mazeppa-like, to a wild horse of the Ukraine,
and literally galloped through every country of Europe,
without any object except excess and the gratification of the
foulest appetites, contracting antipathies, however, towards
almost every place and person he encountered, some of the
grounds of his dislike or partiality being of the most foolish
and contradictory character. He disliked France because the
weather was bad and the ladies rouged. He was pleased with
Denmark because it was unlike Prussia. He recoiled from
Frederick of Prussia and Catherine of Russia, apparently be-
cause they were monarchs; rushed through Italy and the
south without caring for or noticing paintings or statuary, the
beauties of the country or the climate; preferred Sweden
because the lakes were ice, the rain snow, and the gloomy
MAD POETS. 181
landscape shrouded in forests; but upon the whole England
appears to have presented the greatest attractions to this wild
and wayward being. But even here his insane and degraded
disposition betrayed itself during a whole winter season in his
avoidance of society and its elegancies and luxuries, and not
merely in ostracising those of his own rank, but in descending
as low as he could in becoming a night cabman, and in con-
veying fares to the very palaces where he should have been a
visitor. His delirious desire for rapidity of motion and change
of place, irrespective of the objects by which he was surrounded,
reminds us of his early muscular irritability, of certain forms
of epilepsy, and of the "mania furibunda," as described by
Sauvage. Abandoned and erratic everywhere, he passes over
to Holland, where a love intrigue with a married woman--and
it should be remembered that most of his biographers attri-
buted his poetic inspiration to impure passion?led him to make
an attempt to commit suicide. And here I would leave this
unfortunate victim of constitutional, perhaps inherited diseases,
of pernicious training and gross proclivities, with the concluding
remark, that his later years appear to have been calmer and
more rational, and spent in study and composition, apparently
under the influence of his mistress.*
Dr Beattie, 1735.
Senile Dementia?Paralysis.
In the history of this individual we have a gentle,
studious life; a narrow, sequestered path, starting from
a romantic nook of " Caledonia stern and wild," unmarked
by striking or conspicuous landmarks or events, but ever
winding upwards until it reached the extreme point towards
which the ambition of him who trod it pointed: this " thing
of beauty" will assuredly prove, in the words of another
dreamer of the immortality of genius, " a joy for ever," but
while retired, obscure in its growth, and rarely visited by the
genial and glorious sunshine which even fancy craves after,
bearing abundant and lasting fruit, it faded and fell in sad and
solemn decay.
James Beattie, the author of " The Minstrel," which is
supposed to euphonise his mind's history, was born in the
* Hose's Biographical Dictionary. Sclilegel's Dramatic Literature (Bolin's
edition, p. 221),
182 MAD POETS.
hamlet of Laurencekirk, N.B., was the child of intelligent but
self-educated peasants, themselves the descendants of a long
and unsullied lineage of cottagers. The house in which he
was born was ivy-covered, which has been accepted as a living
analogy to the laurel at Virgil's tomb.
The first notable step in the poet's career was his education
in the parish school, an institution now so developed or trans-
muted as to create dismay in the hearts of those who once
boasted of this as the only triumph and trophy of the Eefor-
mation. There he acquired, as the youth of his county were
all formerly accustomed to acquire, not merely the rudiments
of knowledge, but a taste for literature, and there his imagi-
nation may be said to have been kindled by first seeing verse
in a translation of Virgil, who remained during life his favourite
classic; such taste even then obtaining for him, from his school-
fellows, the soubriquet of " the poet." He is next described as
climbing mountains in order to gaze upon the majesty of
ocean, as seeking the recesses of wild woods and glens where
contemplation seems to have passed into reverie, and reverie
into somnambulism, and where upon one occasion he was seen
to walk for a long distance in a state of unconsciousness ; and
his subsequent night vigils, during which, still as a boy, he yielded
to inspiration in poetic composition, must have approached this
abnormal state.
This poor villager's mother, like those of most men of
genius, was distinguished by her intelligence, but, unlike
many of these, she was frugal, forethinking, and from the
proceeds of a field or two she supported her family and con-
trived to send the precocious boy to the University of Aberdeen.
There is much of sentiment and self-denial as well as of
struggle in such "simple annals of the poor." His academical
course was cheered by a successful competition for an exhi-
bition ; by an assurance from the professor of Greek that he
possessed abilities; by a severe study and annotation of Homer
and the Italian poets; by the delivery of a preliminary discourse
in the Divinity Hall, which, in the estimate of his fellow-
students, partook more of poetry than theology, and displayed
such industry and talent, such modesty and gentleness of
manner, as secured alike the respect and the affection of all his
compeers.
From a successful curriculum he emerges as the school-
master of a remote rural parish.
From this obscurity he is drawn by his election as a
teacher in the High School of Aberdeen, and from thence,
after two years' service, he was elevated to a professorship in
Marischal College. It is affirmed that the proposal to nominate
MAD POETS. 183
him to such a position filled him with amazement, and it is
probable that the rapid ascent of a friendless, almost unknown
teacher was in part due to the narrow field of competition in
which he moved, although mainly to his merit, to his high
qualifications, to his retired and indefatigable habits as a
student, and to that quiet, sincere, spotless course, which con-
ciliated all with whom he came in contact. From this point,
which may be styled the climax of his progress, his life flowed
on in one continuous, almost unruffled stream of public duties
in his class, of which there is preserved a minute diary for
thirty years, most earnestly and conscientiously performed, of
private study and composition of copious, friendly and literary
correspondence with the most celebrated men of his time,
including Gray, Arbuthnot, Montague, etc., etc., and in inter-
course with the learned and wise and witty contemporaries who
then conferred distinction upon his beloved Aberdeen, from
which, although tempted by invitations to exchange his chair
for one in Edinburgh, to seek rank and riches by affiliation
with the Church of England, for which and for whose liturgy
he seems to have entertained a warm attachment, he never
could summon courage and cupidity enough, notwithstanding
his meagre emoluments and the small gains accruing from his
publications, to tear himself away.
It may be intelligible to a studious recluse that the oppor-
tunities for calm contemplation afforded in a remote, almost
monastic university, surrounded with large libraries, cheered
but not interrupted by those engaged in similar pursuits,
endowed with similar tastes, and undisturbed by any other
rivalry than the enlivenment of conversation or the comparative
merits of essays, were favourable to those studies and that class
of composition in which he engaged. It should be added that,
there were various other circumstances calculated to foster the
same literary and retired habits, such as attendance upon a
modest club which numbered Eeid the philosopher, Gregory the
physician, Stewart the mathematician, where essays were read
and debated, and whose fortnightly meetings closed with a quiet
repast. His long vacations encouraged private contemplation,
his summer visits to the seats of wealthy friends who partici-
pated in his love for the pure and the beautiful, and appreciated
the elegance, refinement, and elevation of all that he said or
wrote. The very constitution of his mind, his desire for retire-
ment, repose, and the picturesque, must have cherished this
spirit. We find him in the heyday of youth and health and at
various times selecting his place of sepulture, the choice being
some ruined chapel on a northern promontory or dictated by
some romantic fancy; and if the structure of his works, prose
184 MAD POETS.
as well as poetic, be examined, a trace of imagination and sen-
timent is never absent.
"The Minstrel" is the vehicle rather of sweetness and
sentiment than of strength or passion. It is an embodiment of
all that is pure and peaceful, lofty and lovely, which might
have impressed the imagination of a poet-philosopher living
above and apart from the world's maelstrom in a higher firma-
ment from which the throbs and throes of human motives might
be seen but faintly felt. But his mind grasped nobler and
deeper truths and trains of thought than could have been pre-
dicated from his earlier promise. He became the champion of
revelation and religion, the antagonist and, in the opinion of
the soundest and the sagest intellects, the conqueror of David
Hume and the sceptical phalanx which he led or followed; and
though the victor and the vanquished now share one common
grave, and their respective triumphs are known to the book-
worm chiefly, yet the influence of the essay on Truth was for a
long period worldwide, its success unparalleled, the first edition
having been exhausted in a year; it became the solace and
support of those who dreaded, demurred, doubted, and the
enlightenment even of those who disbelieved. It proved an
era in the career of its author. Acting upon the universal
respect and reputation almost suddenly attained, and guided by
the advice of wise counsellors, he proceeded to the metropolis
in the hope that the good service done to sound philosophy
might meet with some suitable and substantial reward. He
there acquired the intimacy of all who were eminent in rank,
learning, and art; he was chosen an honorary Doctor of Laws
of Oxford ; he secured the good offices of the astute North, the
kind countenance of the friendly Dartmouth, and the personal
favour and acquaintance of the King, who granted him a pension
of ?200 per annum. His interview and conversation with the
monarch, which lasted, for an hour, and embraced all the subjects
suggested by his book, he has most minutely described; it was
marked by many curious incidents, but two only can be cited ;
his loyal awe and confusion were such as to engender the belief
that the Queen spoke good English, and the King poured forth
expressions of admiration, concluding with the compliment, " I
never stole but one book, and that was yours." It would be
vain to speculate as to whether the transition from the quiet
and regularity of the student and the solitary to the rush and
the tumult and the honours of active life exercised any or what
detrimental effect over his sensitive, susceptible nature ; for,
independently altogether of such causes, he was surrounded for
years by factors of disease, sometimes slow and insidious in their
operation, sometimes sudden and startling, to explain the dark-
MAD POETS. 185
ness which clouded the close of life. Dr Beattie married in
1867 a lady in the same station as his own, possessing the accom-
plishments, especially the musical accomplishments of the time,
and those graces and affections which augured favourably for
future happiness ; but this was a short-lived gleam of sunshine.
Hereditary, chronic, continuous madness appeared in her,
became an ever-present and ever-pressing plague spot, which
embittered every hour and contributed to shorten life. That
this sombre colouring of every domestic event must have cast a
shadow of deep and corroding, though concealed sorrow, upon
her companion is proved by experience. More than once I
have known twin sisters mutually deteriorate each other by
incessant intercourse, until insanity, and the same form of
insanity, has been established in both. More frequently have I
been called to the interior of homes to which females, widowed
or maiden, had retired, " the world forgetting, by the world
forgot," who, ignoring the sanitary benefits of society, had
infected each other with moodiness, melancholy, and not merely
an inaptitude, but an incapacity for the doings and duties
incumbent upon them. Still oftener have I had to deal with
alienation in those to whom the custody and care of patients
were entrusted, and who, though occasionally able to escape
from the contagion, the occhelesis in which they lived, became
victims to the presence of the delusions or delirium which
became a sort of moral training, or to the privation of those
antidotes, those antiseptics, those disinfectants which are inac-
cessible to the uneducated. Even every superintendent must
at the close of a day spent constantly in close intimacy with
unhealthy intellects, have felt a vagueness, a confusion, a ques-
tioning?What is truth ? What in this tangled web can I
recognise as fact, what as fiction ?
Then, without a refuge or resting-place except his Grod,
came the death of Dr Beattie's eldest son, his favourite, his
gifted son; and while still reeling under the shock, his
youngest and only surviving child was taken from him. This
bereavement falling on a shattered constitution completely un-
hinged his mind. His memory seems first to have given way ;
even the recollection of his recent love was obliterated, and it
is mournful to hear of him searching the deserted and desolate
apartment for his son, and inquiring where he was or if he had
a son. On gazing at the corpse he ejaculated, evidently in
allusion to his wife's affliction, perhaps with a glimmering sus-
picion of his own, as evidenced by quotations from " Leah," " It
is well that I have no child." He added : " I have now done with
the world and it was true, for he scarcely ever afterwards
engaged in correspondence, reading, or other occupation, sank
s.
186 mad poets.
into senile dementia (aggravated, hastened perhaps, by stimu-
lants, in which he sought protection from his wife's aggressions),
with its frequent accompaniment of mild dejection, and in-
activity merging into repeated attacks of paralysis, with aphasia,
and terminating in death.
This memorial would be defective were not the fate of this
good and great man adduced as typical of a class. It is sad-
dening to confess that poets of more brilliant, though not
perhaps of more useful abilities and attainments, of as earnest
and inexhaustible industry, and of as unblemished and beautiful
bearing, have apparently succumbed under similar morbid
proclivities, prolonged brain work, even when the source of
gratification, as graduated in accordance with safe and sanitary
rules, seems to entail a Nemesis upon the powers called into
action. It is with a solemn, certainly with no sacrilegious
hand, that I withdraw the veil from the last hours of these
benefactors of mankind.
Of Kobert Southey it is known that when fleeing from
certain warnings of decay and decline on the Continent, his
step was observed to be slow, his manner to be abstracted and
irresolute. He lost his way in familiar places, he ceased to
journalise, his writing was altered. He was not unconscious of
these infirmities, and was accustomed, when his wonted aptitude
forsook him, to touch his forehead, and, while a melancholy
smile flitted over his features, to exclaim, "Memory, memory,
where art thou gone ? " In consequence rather than in despite
of these observances, and of his now desolate home, he con-
tracted his second marriage, and selected, as his last stay and
support, a kindred spirit, who could not merely return affection
and reverence, but the sympathies of genius and fellow-feeling.
His formerly beloved home soon became to him unfamiliar, his
friends and relatives strangers; he moved as an automaton
among them, and among the scenes and the materials of his
former labours of love, his intellect a blank, his kindness and
love dulled, and all but his frame dead. He continued to
wander mechanically in his favourite library, gazing at the
volumes which had been his companions, his coadjutors, his
very mental food, mental nourishment and enjoyment, some-
times reading a portion, but without object and without com-
prehending what he read. The last year of his existence was
passed in a waking sleep, even undisturbed by dreams of con-
sciousness, but complicated by disorders which ended in death.
C. Rogers.?A bachelor all his lifetime. After his eightieth
year he proposed to a young lady of twenty, who received his
MAD POETS. 187
addresses somewhat scornfully. Long after lie had passed his
ninetieth year, and when he had almost wholly lost his memory,
he remembered in a dim, faint manner, this particular lady.
" When Mr. Rogers was in an almost unconscious state," said
Lady Morgan to me, " I called at his house with Miss  ,
whom he had offered to marry, in order to inquire after his
health, and leave our cards. His carriage was at the door, and
he was about to be lifted into it for an airing. His faithful
valet suggested that we should accompany him on his ride,
adding that he would surely recognise me, and that he would
take it kindly of me. Miss objected slightly at first, but
we both got into the carriage. After a time I took the old
man by the hand, and said, ' You don't know me, Mr. Eogers,
do you ?' He looked at me with lack-lustre eyes for a while,
but gradually a little gleam of intelligence appeared in them,
and he said very slowly, ' Yes ! I think I know you, but I am
not quite sure. Is it Lady Morgan ?' I told him he was
right. 4 Ah! Lady Morgan,' he replied, ' it is very kind of
you to come and see me.' He then relapsed into unconscious-
ness, and so remained for about ten minutes, when I again took
his hand, and said, ' And as you know me, Mr. Eogers, perhaps
you know this lady also ?' Miss sat on the seat opposite,
and Mr. Rogers, who had not previously observed her, looked at
her attentively, and after an effort, as if he was recalling some fast
disappearing train of thought, said slowly, 'Yes, I know her ;
she has come to marry me.' My companion afterwards told
me she felt as if she could have sunk through the floor of the
carriage ; but Mr. Eogers relapsed into utter unconsciousness,
closed his eyes, and never said another word, or bestowed a
look upon either of us until we deposited him safely at the
door of No. 22, and left him to the care of his valet." *
Sir W. Scott.?It is piteous to read of the last days of Sir
Walter Scott. " His mind, though hopelessly obscured, appeared,
when there was any symptom of consciousness, to be dwelling,
with rare exceptions, on serious and solemn things
Now and then he imagined himself to be administering justice
as sheriff; and once or twice he seemed to be ordering Tom
Purdie about trees. A few times also . . . we could
perceive that his fancy was at Jedburgli, and ' Burk Sir
Walter' escaped him in a melancholy tone. But commonly
whatever we could follow him in was a fragment of the Bible
(especially the prophecies of Isaiah and the Book of Job), or
some petition in the Litany, or a verse of some psalm (in the
* Charles Mackay's Forty Years' Recollections, Vol. i., p. 218.
188 mad poets.
old Scottish metrical version), or some of the magnificent hymns
of the Eomish ritual, in which he had always delighted, but
which probably hung on his memory now in connection with
the Church services he had attended while in Italy. We very
often heard distinctly the cadence of the ' Dies Irseand I think
the very last ' stanza' that we could make out was the first of
a still greater favourite :?
Stabat Mater dolorosa
Juxta crucem lacrymosa,
Dum pendebat Alius.
" The river being in a flood we had to go round a few miles
by Melrose bridge, and during the time this occupied, his woods
and house being within prospect, it required occasionally both
Dr Watson's strength and mine, in addition to Nicolson's, to
keep him in the carriage. After passing the bridge the road
for a couple of miles loses sight of Abbotsford, and he relapsed
into his stupor, but on gaining the bank immediately above it,
his excitement became again ungovernable." * Then came calm,
comparative lucidness, and then silence, and the sleep that
knows no waking. The results of a post-mortem examination
of the brain seem to have been that there was slight turgidity of
the vessels on the surface of the brain ; the cineritious substance
was found of a darker hue than natural; there was a greater
quantity than usual of serum in the ventricles; there were
several small hydatids found in the choroid plexus in the left
hemisphere, and there was distinct ramollissement of the corpus
striatum on the same side. The brain was not large, and the
cranium thinner than it is usually found to be.
Robert Bloomfield, 1766.
Monomania? Partial Dementia.
The golden roll of obscure authors might be greatly
lengthened in England as well as in Scotland, but we shall
confine this record to a few of the noblest names which it
contains. Robert Bloomfield, more generally known as the
"Farmer's Boy," which was the title of his first poem, won the
distinction of elevating the subjects of which he sung above the
level of vulgar or vile country gossip and platitudes, and, in
virtue of this creation of the rude, and the rough, and the
uninviting, into beautiful and graceful fancies and forms, of
raising himself to a rank in which Crabbe and Cowper might
* Lockhart's Life of Sir Walter Scott, "Vol. iv., pp. 321-22.
MAD POETS. 189
not have disdained to sliare. His father, a tailor, died while he
was an infant; his mother, for her support, kept a dame school,
where he, and we suppose his five brothers and sisters, were
imbued with the first, and we suspect the final rudiments of
education. His next stage of training was as a " farmer's boy,"
in which capacity he acquired that passion for country objects,
and that power of dignifying and describing them, which gives
the combined charms of reality and ideality to the most
commonplace operations and incidents in agricultural life.
Frailty of frame transferred him from his favourite pursuit to
his next experience in the stall of a cobbler, and a garret in
London, where, toiling with six or seven others who paid a shilling
a week for their lodging, and conning the pages of a newspaper
and some stray volumes of poetry, especially Thomson's "Seasons,"
the womb of fame gave birth to his first poem. This offspring
was cradled by the liberality of Capel Lofft, Esq., but on its
public appearance it not only suddenly grew into mature strength
and manhood, but obtained a celebrity which was denied to
" Paradise Lost" ; although the early fate of each was nearly
the same. Within three years 26,000 copies were sold, and sub-
sequently it was translated into French, Italian, and Latin. His
fecundity and fertility seemed to be inexhaustible, and there
appeared in rapid succession, and fulfilling the promise of his
youthful genius, " Wild Flowers," etc. A small sinecure obtained
by the Duke of Grafton proved too burdensome for his delicate
constitution, and although his Grace generously supplied a
pension of a shilling a day, and although he supplemented his
trade as a ladies' shoemaker, to which he returned, by the
construction of iEolian harps, his health and means gave way,
and a forced retirement took place to Shefford, a village in
Bedfordshire. There he died, but of the wreck of his bodily
and mental faculties, or of the storm which may have preceded
the end, we have ascertained nothing except " after much bodily
and mental suffering he sank." * I would conclude by stating on
the authority of Cyrus Redding, who visited the poet when
insane, that he was gentle and harmless in confinement, and
enjoyed considerable freedom of person and action ; his delusions
seem to have been the product of his original fancy, which,
however, they transcended, resembling more clairvoyance than
mere invention. These visions appeared to identify him, per-
sonally, with every striking scene which his memory or reading
had made him familiar with, carrying him from the execution
of Charles I. to the battle of the Nile, which he depicted in
nautical phrases, although he had never seen the sea. It was
remarked, however, that the scene of such phantasmagoria was
* See Vol. i., p. 126. Knight's Biographical Dictionary.
190 MAD POETS.
no longer the rich level meadows of Northamptonshire, but tbe
hills and dales of Epping Forest. From poems supposed to have
been written while in seclusion, we may quote the following :?
Maid ofWalkherd, meet again
By the wilding in the glen,
By the oak against the door,
"Where we often met before ;
By thy bosom's heaving snow,
By the fondness love shall know,
Maid of Walkherd, meet again
By the wilding in the glen.
By thy hand of slender make,
By thy love I'll ne'er forsake,
By thy heart I'll ne'er betray,
Let me kiss thy tears away ;
I will live and love thee ever,
Love thee and forsake thee never,
Tho' far in other lands to be,
Yet never far from love and thee.*
Thomas Ciiatterton, 1752.
Monomania?Suicide.
It does appear as if fruit of a certain ripeness could be
gathered from thistles or brambles. Thomas Chatterton, the
marvellous boy of Bristol, is accused of having fabricated, between
his twelfth and sixteenth years, not merely heraldic blazonry and
pedigrees, but a large number of poems, which he affirmed had
been written by a monk several hundred years previously, but
discovered by him in a muniment chest in St. Mary's, Redcliffe,
and which presented such a similitude in the language, style,
and the character employed, and such genius, capacity, ancl
elegance of diction, as to have deceived at once the archceologist
and the critic. The unlettered, conceited youth must have
acted from one of three impulses, or under these three com-
bined : First, he must have been actuated either by that form of
moral perversity or alienation which seeks gratification in
deceiving, cheating, hoaxing, while the fraudulent actor laughs
merrily behind his mask over the gullibility of his victims; or,
second, diffident or doubting his own powers?and yet he was
ambitious and self-confident?he must have sought shelter
behind the ideal monk in order to test the merit and reception
of his productions, resting content with the reflected lustre and
praise which might be awarded to ancient rhymes, which, how-
ever, when stript of the masquerading dress of historic antiquity
* Recollections of a Literary Life, p. 194. By M. R. Mitford.
MAD TOETS. 191
and quaint language, were generally pronounced to be the
effusions of a genuine poet; but third, when the subterfuge
had triumphed, when the ecclesiastic Eowley had been admitted
within the pale of literary eminence, and when repeated
attempts were made to identify him as the author, he persevered
in the deception, reiterated and amplified the romance, and
must have continued this impersonation and falsification under
the instigations of moral insanity, of the craving for even
criminal notoriety, and of a belief in what was originally a
deception, but what had become a delusion. Byron affirmed
that Chatterton was mad?and the poor lad confessed himself
to be so, and frantic?and his verdict has been confirmed by all
subsequent research and evidence. An attempt has been made
to form a group of imitators or simulators of the same kind,
including the authors of " Voltigern," " Ossian," and the
" Waverley Novels but it is manifest that in the character
and conduct of the sponsor of the Eowley poems there was
a strong taint of mental unhealth, that his training and tuition
were at once imperfect and pernicious, that there were incon-
gruous and grotesque elements associated with great capa-
bilities, and that all the events of his history, but, above all, the
central movement, were irreconcilable with natural and legiti-
mate intelligence and sentiment.
His father, to whom had descended the tendency to disease
as well as to dissipation, was a drunken, wife-beating, glee-
singing sub-chaunter in St. Mary's, Eedcliffe, with which mag-
nificent pile his humble ancestors had been connected for
centuries in the capacity of sexton. It has been my lot to mark
a part or single symptom of the sot or the madman perpetuated
in offspring who were exempted from the actual disease. I
have seen the vacillation, almost the staggering, the mumbling
articulation, the stupid gaze, the irregularity and impulsiveness
in articulation in the son of an inebriate who had escaped the
vicious tendency. It was so with Chatterton. He had the
aspect of an imbecile, he was a dullard, an enfant arriere, who,
sent to school when five years old, was dismissed as incorrigible
and ineducable. By the kind exertions of an oppressed, loving,
but proud mother, through whose solicitude the family history
has been effectually concealed, he was taught to read first, be it
observed, from an illuminated alphabet, which he admired
intensely, next from a black-lettered Bible, and was, when he
reached the age of 11 or 12 years, so gluttonous and omnivorous
as to devour every book and at all times, the number read
then amounting, according to a catalogue made out by himself,
to seventy. Coincident with this insatiable appetite was the
composition of his first verses. In keeping with this
192 MAD POETS.
feeling he once entreated a friend to paint him an angel
with wings who might trumpet his fame over the world.
He received the rudiments of a commonplace education in
the Bluecoat School, which he entered when about eight years
old, and became subsequently, and for seven long years, an
apprentice to a scrivener, where long hours, stern disci-
pline, and engrossing precedents were supposed to lay the
foundation for the practice of the law. But his native and
characteristic tendencies burst forth and blossomed in secret.
When immuring himself in an old lumber-room he pursued his
discoveries and delineations by the aid of ochre, black lead, and
scraps of vellum, plundered, first by some defunct sexton from
the charters in the church with which he was connected, and
then stolen by the artist from the boards of the books to which
they had acted as covers. His mechanical ingenuity was
frequently tested in household matters, but his imitations of
antiquated caligraphy, his emblazoned devices, and adaptations
of languages which he did not understand, effected without
known tuition or model and with such rude and intractable
materials, created astonishment and incredulity in those who
knew him best. His first most ingenious and successful
imposture consisted of a pretended genealogical chart, which he
confided to a worthy breeches-maker as the pedigree of his
family, which was traced to or beyond the Norman Conquest,
and as having been discovered by him in the inexhaustible
chest from which all his treasures were drawn. His forgery,
though absurd and easily detectable, imposed not only upon
Mr. Burgon, its hero, a credulous, illiterate person, panting for
social rank, but upon others, and so completely that it was by
them laid before the Marshall's College. After this essay, for
which he was rewarded with the munificent sum of five shillings,
the contents of his secret fountain flowed forth continuously and
prodigally. An imaginary procession of monks, knights, and
other dignitaries, dexterously clothed and painted in appropriate
armour and colouring, was published in a local paper, and was
not accepted as a trick or a travestie, was followed by sonnets,
satires, fragments, and complete epics, tragedies, etc., etc., all
purporting to be not merely from the works, but written by the
pen of the Friar Rowley. This exuberance of invention, like his
fantastic schemes of preferment, continued until the very end,
as may be learned from the multitudinous and multifarious
specimens of poems avowedly his own, librettos, of anonymous
political essays, squibs, satires, published and unpublished,
preserved in the British Museum. But while thus em-
ployed, and, it may be, listening to the accents of that second-
hand fame which he coveted, he was under the shelter of his
MAD POETS. 193
mother's roof, morose, abstracted, sitting silent for days, wept
for hours, was seized with attacks of ecstasy or cramp, even in
the presence of strangers, and seemed to require some external
stimulus in order to assume his hold and defiant manner, or to
prosecute his contraband manufactures. Measuring the lack of
applause and appreciation which greeted his effusions by his
insensate pride and the stupendous estimate which he had
formed of his own achievements, Chatterton resolved to manifest
his indignation by spurning his native city and by migrating
to the metropolis as a sphere more worthy of his ambition and
his talents. It is not for me to defend the scanty and super-
cilious encouragement which this poor adventurer received, nor
to attribute this coolness or indifference to the detection or even
suspicion of his mystifications, which might have justified such
a process of " damning by faint praise," for it is not proved that
any notion of falsification prevailed, or that until a much later
period his fellow-citizens had detected the genuine golden ore
which lurked underneath the Brummagem glitter of phrases
stolen from Chaucer or old vocabularies or rendered mediaeval
by barbarous orthography.
That the Rowley poems attracted the attention although
they did not disarm the doubts of Samuel Johnson, who
pronounced him " the most extraordinary young man that had
encountered his knowledge": that they procured the young poet
a visit from Hannah More; that ultimately, partly from their
intrinsic qualities, partly from the furor of controversy which
surrounded their origin, they became so popular, and demanded
so large a sale as to secure a comfortable livelihood for the
poet's surviving sister; that they imposed upon numbers of the
learned as genuine monastic relics, and have still defenders,
and lastly, that they still retain a certain rank among the
literary productions of the period, are indications that the
author was so far right and his readers so far wrong. Animated
by such convictions of his powers and by brilliant anticipations,
he journeys to London?but on eleemosynary funds?as to an
El Dorado, or as if going to the Capitol to wear the wreath
that Petrarch had worn, instead of to humble lodgings in
Shoreditch Street. From thence his communications to his
home circle are in the same strain of self-deception. It may
be that he desired to spare those he loved from anxiety and
alarm; yet his exaggerations are so strictly in keeping with his
own dreams and expectations, that they may be looked upon as
the spontaneous outpourings of his own delusions. He an-
nounced that, through an introduction to Lord Mayor Beckford,
he had entered high civic, if not courtly circles; that he was about
to be connected with literary coteries; that he was receiving
PAET II. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. P
194 MAD POETS.
considerable emoluments from the publishers for his writings;
that he would speedily transmit ?5,000 and silk dresses to his
sisters; and he actually did send small offerings to his beloved
home, confirmatory at once of his sincerity and poverty, for at
the time he was subsisting on a penny tart and a glass of
water per day?that, to use his own words, " My company is
courted everywhere and could I humble myself to go into a
comptoir, I could have had twenty places before now, but I
must be among the great; State matters suit me better than
commercial." Yet this poor creature, now sunk to the very
depths of wretchedness and misery, succumbing to moody
reveries and abstraction, so feeble as to fall into a new-made
grave, was squalid in dress, ate voraciously when concealment
of the truth was practicable, starved haughtily and hungrily
when offers of food were made, never having actually received
more than a few pounds for his brain work during four months
residence in town, and at last died of want or arsenic, or both,
the threat of suicide having been often upon his lips as an
alternative of becoming a Methodist parson; but the act was
evidently committed under proud pre-determination, as he
previously destroyed all his manuscripts. The end of this
" strange, eventful history" was that this lunatic died, set.
18, a professing infidel, unnoticed and unknown, and was
buried in a poorhouse ditch. Vague reports have been circu-
lated that a certain amount of posthumous respect was
attempted to be paid to his remains, but these have not been
substantiated.
His towering pride, which he designates "my pride, my
damned, native, unconquerable pride, which plunges me into
distraction," was in his downward course mingled with vin-
dictiveness and vituperation of those who were his superiors in
position, or had been more successful in his own walk of life.
Aspersions have been cast upon his morality, founded upon
gross or indecent expressions in the Rowley poems ; but these
have been interpreted as designedly intended to resemble the
speech, idiom, and the manners of the pretended author, as
there is undoubted testimony that he was not profligate, and
that his passions were as cold and temperate as the water which
formed his only beverage.
It seems but justice to the memory of one who was so
freely and fearfully censured, that the opinions of recent, and
consequently dispassionate critics, should be quoted here.
Professor Wilson, of Toronto, in p. 261 of " Chatterton ; a
Biographical Study" (1869), says: "It is the same in every
department of prose and verse. Chameleon-like he catches the
satiric vein of Churchill, the envenomed prejudice of Wilkes;
MAD TOETS. 195
and the lofty-toned, yet narrow bitterness of Junius. He
assumes, not unsuccessfully, the rough vigour of Smollett;
apes at times the rhythmical niceties and the antitheses of
Pope, or the polished grace of Gray or Collins; or, in the guise
of a Saxon monk, rivals the Gaelic Ossian in his heroic
affectations."
The following quotations are from " Chatterton ; a Story of
the Year 1770," by Masson (1874) :?
"These poems are as worthy of being read consecutively
as many portions of the poetry of Byron, Shelley, or Keats,
bat are marked by ' uncouthness.' "?P. 274.
Impersonation "passed into the soul of Rowley."?P. 270.
" True poetry, copious quotations?wonderfully precocious."
?P. 267.
" Compared with other English poets of the part of that
century immediately prior to the new era begun by Burns and
Wordsworth, he was almost solitary in the possession of the
highest poetic gift."?P. 284.
John Clare, 1793.
Monomania?Partial Dementia.
This Northamptonshire pastoral poet cannot be introduced
as a natural, though a notable, product of the English
agricultural labourer at nine shillings a week, although a
child of such a drudge. Food, perhaps fuel, was scanty in
his cottage. As a child he became a ploughboy, toiled
beyond hours in order to attend school, and achieved the
reading of the Bible; but the growing necessities, perhaps
infirmities, of his father, entailed poverty, and then pauperism.
At thirteen he composed verses, and a scrap of blotted paper
subsequently revealed his tendency to a bookseller, who, im-
pressed by the simplicity and freshness of the style, published
on his own responsibility a volume of poems by this Northamp-
tonshire peasant. The interest created by these records of a
genuine love and appreciation of rural nature induced kind,
but perhaps unwise philanthropists, to place him above absolute
indigence, and thus to encourage his native powers. This
comparative affluence, amounting temporarily to ?45 per
annum, permitted marriage with the Patty, the Beatrice of his
imagination, and the sheltering of his now paralytic father.
But the spasmodic beneficence of his patrons subsided as his
emulation of a higher grade of society increased, and as his
r '2
196 mad poets.
family multiplied. His history is further chequered by humble,
though imprudent, speculation, by pecuniary difficulties, by the
production of additional proofs of his genius, then by dejec-
tion, melancholy, and positive alienation, which eventuated in
the feebleness and placidity of a fatuity which did not always
demand restraint or removal from home.
There is not a speck nor suspicion affecting this man's repu-
tation, except the modest ambition of aiming to be something
higher than a clodhopper or clown, as he styles himself; he
continued, while of sound mind, honest and upright, incapaci-
tated probably by his intellectual pursuits for rude or re-
munerative labour, but the faithful, if not fervid or highly-
gifted, yet marvellous expositor of rural scenes, habits, associa-
tions, as impressed upon a nature alike softened and elevated
by imagination. As an indication of the co-existence of poetic,
or, at least, rhythmical powers, with long-confirmed alienation,
and of the lingering beauties of imagination in ruins, one of the
last of poor Clare's inspirations, written in seclusion, may be
cited:?
I am! yet what I am none cares or knows,
My friends forsake mo like a memory lost:
I am the self-consumer of my woes,
They rise and vanish in oblivious host,
Like shades in love and death's oblivion tost;
And yet I am?and live with shadows lost.
Into the nothingness of scorn and noise,
Into the living sea of waking dreams,
Where there is neither sense of life nor joys,
But the vast shipwreck of my life's esteems,
And e'en the dearest?that I loved the best?
Aro strange?nay, rather stranger than the rest.
I long for scenes where man has never trod,
A place where woman never smiled or wept;
There to abide with my Creator, God,
And sleep as I in childhood sweetly slept:
Untroubling and untroubled where I lie,
The grass below?above, the vaulted sky.*
In introducing the above verses, Dr Wing says: " It had
been my purpose, had space and my physical strength per-
mitted, to have written somewhat at length on the character of
insanity, and to have pointed out the frequent connection
between mental aberration and genius, and especially as illus-
trated by some of our most noted poets. Latterly his intellect
had become sadly clouded, yet there were periods when the
shadow would be temporarily lifted."
Annual Report of Northamptonshire Lunatic Asylum, 1864.
MAD POETS. 197
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, 1772.
Monomania?Opiophagism.
Could the enthusiasts who bowed down before the sunrise of
genius, or should the admirers who still extol the trail of glory
which followed the darkened sunset see this name associated
with the others in our melancholy catalogue, they might be
excited to scorn or indignation. But were they to pass from
his original fame, and from the writings which must render
that fame imperishable to the record of his general mental
manifestations, and to the events of his latter days, they would
arrive at nearly the same conclusions as I have reluctantly done,
that unsoundness and morbidity were either elements in his
nature, or were the consequences of his modes of living and
thinking. Coleridge himself averred that could the human
heart be laid bare and seen by every passer-by, society would
become impossible, and every man would recoil from or avoid
all approach to his brothers and fellows. Without endorsing
this very strong denunciation of our innate corruption, and of
the repulsive qualities and tendencies with which we are
endowed, it must be confessed that there is an inner life as
well as a secret history connected with every human being, and
that even the purest of poets has not been exempt from this
doom. Even while entertaining this conviction, I feel un-
willing to prefix the epithet insane to the most gifted of our
countrymen, to the author of "Aids to Kefiection," " The
Friend," and the productions which flowed so long, so copiously,
and so beautifully from his fancy and affections; to a poet, a
philosopher, a conversationist, who stood foremost in the most
marked era, and among the most distinguished competitors for
literary eminence that have given a sign and significance to the
present century. It is with all reverence that we shall with-
draw the veil from what must be regarded as the dark side of
Coleridge's character, as the ruins of a temple originally august
and magnificent, as the outcome of disease, delirium, or moral
death; and I shall generally devolve upon other hands the act
of this painful disclosure. As in other cases, we shall in-
tentionally eschew all attempts to extract illustrations of the
proposition that this author was of imperfect or perverted
moral organisation from his writings, although this process would
be practicable, and might prove to certain imaginative minds
more satisfactory and demonstrative of the fact to be established.
One example may be given: While Kubla Khan may be accepted
198 mad poets.
with the explanation presented by its author as a psychological
curiosity, or as a dream while under the influence of a narcotic,
it is impossible to see in the exquisite fragment of " Chris-
tabel" merely an extravaganza, and not a disjointed series of
sweet, but spasmodic utterances, which might have been
fashioned into a wild romance, but which were not. Again,
were the wild and somewhat repulsive pictures in the lay of the
" Ancient Mariner" presented to an unimaginative, prosaic,
or even classically critical reader?to any reader, perhaps, seeing
them fifty years from the present period, or even to readers still
alive, who marvelled, it may be shuddered, in their youth over
the " diablerie " of the voyage, or to any one ignorant of the
circumstances under which the poem was composed?they must
come to the conclusion that, while it abounds in beautiful
passages which must remain for ever proofs of genius and
geniality, as a whole it is incoherent, unintelligible, and would
require a taste and an intelligence elevated or perverted, as
the case may be, by opium, either to understand its meaning
or to appreciate its excellence. In tracing the family tra-
ditions and even the early history of the poet himself, there may
be discovered an abundant etiology of an originally morbidly
constituted and ill-balanced mind.
His father was abstracted, extravagant, even to the verge
of absurdity, forgot or outraged the unities of time, place,
etc., and the ordinary usages of society ; and though a powerful
and eloquent declaimer, occasionally addressed his congregation
in Hebrew; while the son was feeble as a child, erratic and
dreaming in boyhood, leaving his university without sufficient
motive or object, enlisting as a dragoon, making a debut as a
Unitarian preacher, joining other fervid and fanciful spirits in
a dream of pantisocracy in the woods of America, passing from
faith to scepticism, and from scepticism to rational religion;
being solitary, sensitive, quailing under the fear of death,
incapable of continuous, useful application, and ultimately
resorting to habitual indulgence in drugs, in order to subdue
or to soothe his perturbed spirit, which while it presented to
those who watched its uplieavings and products unequalled out-
pourings of living, sparkling, ever-suggestive thought, inflicted
upon himself exquisite travail and pain, mind-shocks from
which he often desired to escape, and from which he actually
did escape by a furtive and destructive process. It is somewhat
doubtful how much of his life was passed in the day-visions of
fancy, how much under the delusions and imperfect intuitions
of a hypnotic; whether he was after boyhood perfectly and
clearly alive to his external relations, it is certain, however,
that he frequently wrote and acted in a state of semi-slumber
MAD TOETS. 199
or semi-intoxication; but of many inst ances one may be
selected, when, in the crowded streets of London, he continued
to move his arms, as if in the act of swimming, acting- at the
time under the conviction that he was crossing the Hellespont.*
I shall put aside all such considerations, and depend upon
extracts from the works of admirers and friends in proof of the
conviction that he cannot be regarded as othewise, at all events
towards the close of life, than acting under a disease of dilapi-
dated nature.
Cottle, De Quincey, etc., furnish the following glimpses of
one side of his morbid manifestations, the total abolition of
natural ties and affections, his estrangement from and in-
difference to his family, his lavish expenditure of all his means
upon secret indulgence, his pretended penitence, piety and
reformation, while he adhered to his indulgence, deceived his
physicians, friends, guardians, craved protection in an asylum,
and felt so humiliated as to prefer " annihilation to heaven," his
disregard of truthfulness, honesty, and sincerity, and his in-
ability to exert his will in any other direction, or for any other
purpose, except the gratification of his morbid appetite, an
infirmity which he has most graphically defined " as an utter
impotence of volition."
Dr Thos. Carlyle, in his life of John Sterling, states that in
Coleridge's first interview with that bright but blighted youth,
over whom it is conceived he exercised a disastrous influence,
his conversation extended uninterruptedly over two hours, and
although described as " bottled moonshine" evidently fascinated
his listener. Anecdotes are rife of monologues which extended
over much longer periods, and in which the sentences were so
sonorous, the ideas so lofty or profound, and the illustrations so
startling and suggestive, that even learned and philosophic men
were constrained to wonder and admire rather than comprehend.
Dr Carlyle was one of those, and confesses that " nothing could
be more copious than his talk; and, furthermore, it was always,
virtually and literally, of the nature of a monologue; suffering
no interruption, however reverent; hastily putting aside all
foreign additions, annotations, or most ingenious desires for
elucidation as well-meant superfluities, which would never do.
Besides, it was talk not flowing anywliither like a river,
but spreading everywhere in inextricable currents and regur-
gitations like a lake or sea; terribly deficient in definite goal or
aim, nay often in logical intelligibility ; what you were to
believe or do, or any earthly or heavenly thing, obstinately
refusing to appear from it, so that most times you felt logically
* Gillman's Life of Coleridge.
200 mad poets.
lost, swamped near to drowning in this tide of ingenious
vocables, spreading out boundless as if to submerge the world.
To sit as a passive bucket and be pumped into, whether you
consent or not, can in the long run be exhilarating to no
creature, how eloquent soever the flood of utterance that is
descending. But if it be withal a confused unintelligible flood
of utterance threatening to submerge all known landmarks of
thought, and drown the world and you! I have heard Coleridge
talk with eager musical energy two stricken hours, his face
radiant and moist, and communicate no meaning whatsoever to
any individual of his hearers, certain of whom, I for one, still
kept eagerly listening in hope ; the most had long before given
up, and formed (if the room were large enough) secondary
humming groups of their own His talk, alas! was
distinguished like himself by inattention; it disliked to be
troubled with conditions, abstinences, definite fulfilments ; loved
to wander at its own sweet will, and make its auditor, and his
claims, and humble wishes a mere passive bucket for itself!
He had knowledge about many things and topics, much curious
reading; but generally all topics led him, after a pass or two,
into the high seas of theosophic philosophy, the hazy infinitude
of Kantean transcendentalism, with its sum-m-mjects and om-
nrn-mjects. Sad enough, for with such indolent impatience of
the claims and ignorances of others, he had not the least talent
for explaining this or anything unknown to them; and you
swam and fluttered in the mistied, wide, unintelligible deluge
of things, for the most part in a rather profitless uncomfortable
manner. Glorious islets, too, I have seen rise out of the haze;
but they were few and soon swallowed in the general element
again." In the face of such revelations it would be impossible to
maintain that this individual, still gifted, retained the unity,
lucidity, and sense of responsibility which constitute the charac-
teristics of sane and sound judgment.*
William Collins, 1720.
Melancholia.
Pope has sung that " as the twig is bent the tree's inclined,"
but the humble raiser of grapes or gooseberries can predict
further, this is the fruitbud, this is the leafbud, this is the
* Dr Carlyle's Life of Sterling, pp. 232-33.
MAD POETS. 201
cankenvorm. Of the dolt, dullard boy, it is easy to draw the
horoscope of a future darkened by sluggish temperament, heavy
and obtuse intellect, stolidity, and impassiveness; it is easy to
see in the bright, excitable, impulsive, idle scholar, the struggle
between passions and intellect, the indecisive will, the toss-up
between good and evil; but of the calm but irresolute, the
ambitious, but unstable, the spasmodically imaginative, what
are we to anticipate ?
The first glimpses we get of this poet display a character
like this. He is described as distinguished at Queen's College
for " genius and indolence," and " the few exercises which he
could be induced to write bear evident marks of both qualities."
When embarked upon the troubled waters of a literary career in
London, it became doubtful whether " his habitual irresolution
was the result of the annoyance of importunate creditors or an
original infirmity of mind, or from these causes combined."
He is stamped by Sam Johnson as " an adventurer with many
projects in his head and little money in his pocket." In certain
individuals the instability and spasmodic force of genius have
been traced to hereditary excitability, but Collins appears to
have belonged to a steady and sober stock, to a citizen's family
of credit and renown in Chichester, and the only lurid feature
in their history is that a sister, the consort of his darkened
days, was an incarnation of greed, and so far an iconoclast that
she destroyed all her brother's manuscripts as they were pro-
duced, which, though they may have been pregnant with fame,
were not convertible into hard cash. He left the University
abruptly after failing to secure a fellowship, but perhaps in
disgust and intolerance of its monastic dulness, interrupted as
that certainly was by the importunity of creditors. His eclogues,
written when a boy of 18 at Winchester, and published in the
Gentleman's Magazine, gave the first promise of his future
excellence, but not until his settlement in London, 1743-4,
subsequent to his flight from college, did his imagination dis-
play its full strength and lustre. His efforts were more like
flashes of lightning than the radiance of mature sentiment.
" To plan, much rather than to execute anything; to commence
to-day an ode, to-morrow a tragedy, and to turn on the follow-
ing morning to a different subject, was the chief occupation of
his life for several years, during which he destroyed the prin-
cipal part of the little that he wrote." This variableness, rather
than versatility was so marked, and occurred at the precise
period when irregularities and eccentricities of habit were no
longer accepted or palliated as the privilege or passport of
genius, that a critic has detected " in that indecision and vacilla-
tion the germs of that disease which so speedily ripened into
202 MAD POETS.
the most frightful of human calamities." The close of such a
course is understood and sympathised with; the steps by which
it is reached, or rather the preliminary symptoms are not; and
he who could compose the magnificent "Ode on the Passions" was
condemned for writing so little or for writing nothiug equal to
his great effort. It is worthy of note and commiseration that
while blamed for inconsistencies and unproductiveness, his
malady was subtly and secretly gaining ground, that its
presence and its progress were known to the sufferer alone.
Many examples might be cited where the failure of mind
or of memory has been palpable to consciousness, but
effectually concealed, revealed only in a death-bed confession
or an obituary testament, and have been carried as an unknown
and unsuspected curse to the grave. Yet this terrible doom,
this ever-threatening spectre was shrouded from general obser-
vation by affability, good nature, warmth of friendship, by
refined taste, love of music, knowledge of modern languages,
even by his visionary pursuits, which never led him into
intemperance or immorality. A higher tone is given to this
struggle by his seeking support and consolation from the great
Physician, and from the revelation which he has granted to
relieve and remedy the stricken spirit, for it is recorded that
when human aid had failed, when even the pleasures of imagi-
nation had ceased to please, and when, conscious of his fate, he
bore his sorrow within his own breast, he said to Johnson,
" I have but one book," showing a schoolboy's Testament, " but
that is the best." Recourse was vainly had to travelling, change
of scene, new impressions ; but while carrying out this plan,
and during a visit to Oxford, the final catastrophe occurred,
and a witness draws the sad picture of " Collins struggling and
being conveyed by the main force of two or three men towards
the parish of St. Clement's, in which was a house that took in
such unhappy objects." From this parish cell he was trans-
ferred to the house of his sister in Chichester, where, all
violence and excitement having subsided, slight weakness or
fatuity appears to have ensued. Johnson, who loved, was
kind to, and visited the poet, affirms that " his disorder was
no alienation of mind, but general laxity and feebleness?a
deficiency rather of his vital than his intellectual powers. He
wanted neither judgment nor spirit, but a few minutes ex-
hausted him." These impressions were probably derived from
a brief interview; but from other authorities it is learned that
such lucidity was disturbed by exacerbations of excitement, even
violence. This partial dementia continued for six or seven
years, life becoming gradually more burdensome to the sufferer,
and he died, aged thirty-nine years.
MAD POETS. 203
He was not a voluminous writer; his habits, or perhaps his
lack of established habits, or the irregular flow of his fancy,
rendered continued mental exertion impracticable ; his compo-
sitions are small, sharp, sparkling, diamond dust; his critics
would narrow the pedestal of his fame to the single " Ode on
the Passions," which, when compared with the complex and arti-
ficial machinery of Dryden's " Alexander's Feast," and similar
poems, is at once simple and majestic; while choice, but more
enthusiastic admirers would widen the basis in order to include
the " Odes to Pity," " Simplicity," even that on " Highland
Superstition." The extent of his productions must have been
greatly cramped by his leaving many unfinished, and by the
destruction of others which he judged unworthy 'of a better
fate. His acts of incremation may have arisen from fastidious-
ness, or from the failing of impulsive minds to carry out and
complete what they have begun with ardour, or from the
qualified approbation which was at first extended to his poems.
There was a grim facetiousness in his saturnine acts of devour-
ing his own offspring in order to defeat and disappoint the
estimate and intentions of his friends and patrons. It is not
my province to criticise, but in those writings which Johnson
distinguished, while he spoke of their obscurity, harshness, and
obsoleteness,* and from which Gray condescended to borrow
epithets which have now passed into household words through
the medium of his " Elegy," there may be traced presages or
intuitions of that malady which clung to him through life.
With the publication of his celebrated odes seems to have
expired his literary invention, but whether this extinction
was caused by, or coeval with, mental or bodily decay, is not
known.
His idealisation of human passions and their turmoil,
though pure and exquisite, is almost appallingly true and
insensate. It reminds us of the inmates of Fuseli's " Lazar-
house." His Fear that
Back recoiled, he knew not why,
E'en at the sound himself had made,
is panphobic; his Anger " rushing with his eyes on fire " and
" rude clash " is maniacal; while Melancholy, " with eyes up-
raised as one inspired," " and from her wild sequestered seat
poured out her pensive soul," reminds us of his own " last scene
of all."
His Freedom " sunk in deep despair" in " the death of
Colonel Ross " is a personification of his own gloom, while the
whole of the machinery in his " Ode on Highland Superstition,"
* See Johnson's Life, Vol. iii., p. 269, and p. 71.
204 mad poets.
the barren wastes peopled with " gliding ghosts that embodied
troop," is a picture of that wild, spiritual, and superstitious
region in which, according to Johnson, he lived, moved, and
had his being.
There is profound pathos in his apostrophe to his fellow-
sufferer Tasso:
Prevailing poet! whose undoubting mind
Believed the magic wonders which he sung!
Hence, at each sound, imagination glows!
Hence, at each picture, vivid life starts here !
Hence, his warm lay with softest sweetness flows !
Melting it flows, pure, murmuring, strong and clear,
And fills the impassioned heart, and wins th' harmonious ear.
It is not merely a presage or a presentiment realising itself:
it is a confession of belief in unrealities, to the one all shadow,
to the other all sunshine.
William Cowper, 1731.
Religious Melancholia.
Eobust and manly though the mind of Cowper was within
the circle of moral probity and purity, beyond it there are
ever-recurring traits of feebleness and pusillanimity. His
organisation, physical and psychical, was highly strung, refined,
delicate, and such a combination of qualities approaches so
closely to effeminacy in the struggle of life as to be treated as
weakness. That he was not morose his address to his mothers
picture and many other kind and affectionate poems prove;
that he was not in fancy gloomy or melancholy "John Grilpin,"
and almost every line of his didactic writings show; and
that he was capable of securing the friendship and support of
many strong minds engaged in the struggle of life, his history
affords evidence, although it be a record of privacy or seclusion,
and of the avoidance of the great tests and trials of courage,
perseverance, and endurance. Puny, puerile, and morbid, the
indelible stamp of subjugation and dependence was impressed
upon his crushed spirit from the moment he entered upon
school-life, and he has left it to be inferred that before reaching
manhood his system had been shaken to its very foundations
and broken down in terror and despair altogether unconnected
with religious creeds or convictions. He became the fag, in
ruder phrase the slave of a big fellow, a bully, a blackguard,
who exacted not merely what are recognised as legitimate
MAD POETS. 205
services, but corrupted his gentle, too ductile nature by leading
him to practices of which he was thoroughly ashamed, but of
the influence of which in undermining health and strength and
in predisposing to nervous diseases he was of course altogether
ignorant. At Westminster, subsequent, it should be noticed,
to his first attack of alienation, he became a versifier, or
rather a weaver of fancy's web, for he compares his work to
tapestry of varied colour and beauty, or what seemed to him to
be such. It would seem that the clouds which often darkened
his hours of gladness were even then fruitful in distorted images,
in other words delusions, the most extraordinary of which was
a conviction of his own immortality.
Idleness as a student in the Middle Temple, in other terms
a profound study of Greorge Herbert, an enthusiastic but
bashful admiration of a cousin, upon whom unfortunately he
only devoted the courtesies, the advances which form the flowery
path to marriage, which might have saved him from lifelong
misery, his separation from this friend while he regretted the
breach, his being called to the bar, his appointment as clerk to
the House of Lords, of which his malady prevented his accept-
ance, constitute what may be designated the first chapter of this
gloomy biography. That this engagement might have ripened
into a permanent union is probable, had not the father of the
lady foreseen the destiny of his nephew, and that from him
could not be expected any other energy than that of imagination,
any other labour than that of a dreamer or religious enthusiast.
When we examine the engravings generally prefixed to Cowper's
poems and trace the deeply-chiselled features, the nervous care-
worn expression; when we recall this man of genius tremulous,
almost panic-stricken in the discharge of mere routine duties,
when we know that his chief companions and correspondents
were females or individuals of intense pietism, and that his chief
study was the disposition of the timid, terrified, persecuted hare,
it can be readily understood that what are called practical men
would shrink from an alliance with so visionary and in their
estimate so vapid a " litterateur," whose definition of poverty
without disgrace was clean linen and good company. The im-
mediate result of his disappointment before the House of Lords
was an attack of acute melancholia which necessitated his confine-
ment in an asylum for eighteen months, and which was marked
by horrible anticipations of impending perdition, and, when this
imaginary sentence was temporarily suspended, by hardihood
and defiance of the judgment. His condition fully justified, it
is to be hoped even in the mind of the patient himself, the tem-
porary seclusion determined upon in the family council. During
the long lucid interval which followed, he formed an intimacy
206 mad poets.
with the family of Unwin, with whom he went to reside at
Olney. Here he became the friend of the Rev. J. Newton, in
conjunction with whom the Olney hymns were written, which
have obtained a popularity, or, it would be more reverential to
say, have exercised a degree of evangelical influence unrivalled
by any others of similar scope, if the compositions of the brothers
Wesley and " Hymns Ancient and Modern " be excepted. It
would be foreign to my purpose to venture upon an analysis of
the religious views of William Cowper, as my conviction is that,
had his susceptible nature been cast amid Anglo-Catholics he
would have sought strength from worship, ritual, primitive
usage ; that whereas his lot brought him into intimate contact
with those of evangelical principles, his convictions became
subjective, spiritual, and puritan ; and that lastly, in whatever
school he might have been trained, and whatever the dogma
and discipline to which he might have been subjected, the
influence exercised over the production and recurrence of
his mental aberration would have been precisely the same ;
nay, that had he been deprived of all pious instruction, had he
been fortified or enfeebled by hard, cold scepticism, the only
difference detectable would have been in the form of certain of
the symptoms and delusions. Canon Farrar has asserted that
" Cowper's disease was due to the c pitiless anathemas of man,'
which he afterwards attributed to God, but it is certain that his
malady originated, and that he had made three attempts to
commit suicide before he became in earnest about salvation."*
Even when under what he himself would have recognised as
full enlightenment, when he was environed and supported by all
the means of grace external or internal known either to the
humble Christian or to the casuist, he became of unsound mind
and attempted to destroy life, not, according to his own argu-
mentation, in order to extinguish suffering or escape from sin,
but as a sacrifice for his own enormous guilt. This paroxysm con-
tinued for two years, and. even after the most urgent symptoms
had subsided, he contended that the Almighty had called upon
him to seek death, that he had committed an offence in not
effecting his purpose, and that eternal condemnation was now
the inevitable consequence. These fearful ideas are very similar
to such as pass through the consciousness of the most common-
place lypemaniac, but to a being of so sensitive a temper and
temperament, of so highly cultivated and elevated a reason, and
of such earnest and intense religious feelings as Cowper assuredly
possessed, the mental torture and terror must have been intense.
It has been ascertained that some of his hymns and many of his
* Canon Farrar, " How is sin to end ?" British and Foreign Evangelical Review,
p. 425.
MAD POETS. 207
minor pieces were composed while lie was prostrated b}r dejection,
and may have proved remedial and soothing amid his sorrows.
I possess a small volume called " Songs of the Night," the pro-
duction of a lady resembling William Cowper in the aspect of
her malady, in her opinions and cast of imagination. It is
believed that some of his larger poems, the " Progress of Error,"
for instance, were committed to writing and corrected coincident
with the return of reason, and it is highly probable that the
framework, if not the precise phraseology and illustrations, were
in progress of growth and maturation while he was in confine-
ment. Since the publication of works by lunatics and the
regular appearance of serials composed and printed by inmates
of asylums, such achievements are less wonderful, but they suffice
to show,both from the class of subjects dealt with and the standard
of mediocre merit reached at, how many points the unhealthy
approaches the sane mind, and by what a vast number of levers,
drastics, and anodynes it may be roused, purged, and soothed,
whether its course be upward or downward. To the readers of
Cowper it must be well known that his correspondence consti-
tutes a large portion of his works, that these writings are little
inferior in beauty and ethical features to his poems, and that
they lay bare the darkest chambers of his heart as well as the
superficial sores which defied the kind and judicious ministration
of those relatives and friends who surrounded him to the last.
That last scene combined the extremes which have been
previously alluded to. His kind, gentle, affectionate spirit
welled up in passionate feeling on the death of his faithful
friend, Mrs. Unwin; he revived his translation of Homer, wrote
his last words " The Castaway," and died protesting that he was
plunged in " unutterable despair."*
* Haylcy's Life, Southcy's, Grimshawe's, and various other memoirs.
( To be continued.)
