Report of the Medical Superintendent of the Asylum for the Insane, Toronto
============================================================================

" ?"? 1 ' .CI -1 7. OA lO'T'T
,,
for the year ending September 30, 1877.
By Daniel Clark, M.D.
On the 1st October 1876, there remained in this asylum 631
patients?321 men and 310 women; and during the past twelve
months, 232?129 men and 103 women ?were admitted, making
a total of 863 persons who received treatment and care during
the year ending September 30, 1877, as against 956 in the
previous year. As compared with the statistics of the preceding
year, neither the number admitted nor the total number under
treatment is so great, chiefly owing to the large number of
chronic and incurable cases that were transferred in 1876 to
REVIEWS. 335
the Hamilton Asylum, which left an unusually large number of
vacant beds for new awards. During the latter part of the past
year vacancies only occurred through deaths and discharges.
Dr Clark speaks strongly against an " enshrouded moral
pestilence." Owing to the delicate nature of the subject
he appi'oaches it with diffidence; and it is only from a sense of
duty after mature deliberation that he portrays a " deplorable
class who make up nearly one-half of the population of our
asylums, and specimens of whom are seen in numberless homes
in every part of the land." He then draws a graphic picture of
those degraded wretches who make self-abuse a habit, and who
are so well known to alienist physicians everywhere. He quotes
his predecessor, Dr Workman, who in 186.5 wrote touching
this vice:?
" Its victims are not intemperate?nay, indeed, not unfre-
quently very temperate?as to indulgence in alcoholic beverages;
these are very modest, very shy, very (dare I say it?) pious?as
sueh, at least, they often are sent here with sufficient creden-
tials?very studious, very everything but what they really are.
Would that one-tenth of all the zeal and intelligence and
stirring eloquence which has been expended on other not unim-
portant reforms could be enlisted in the exposition and ameliora-
tion of this enshrouded pestilence! But who will venture on
such a work ?
In the report of 18GG Dr Workman truthfully says : "The
time has now come when, in my opinion, silence or inaction, not
merely on the part of medical superintendents, but of every man
in society who knows anything of the evil under consideration, or
who can in any way contribute to its removal or mitigation,
should be regarded as criminal. The responsibility of the medical
profession and of the clergy, as well as that of the whole body
of educationalists, is infinitely more weighty than they have
ever yet regarded it. They well know that all I have written
on the subject not only is true but it falls very far short of the
whole truth, and yet it seems impossible to move them. What
sort of account of the use made by them of the talents com-
mitted and of the opportunities presented to them will they be
able to present at the great day of reckoning ? It is, however,
but just to the clergy to state that some of them are very im-
perfectly informed in relation to the subject now treated of. I
have known numerous instances in which clergymen have given
to patients whose insanity was mainly ascribed to secret vice the
highest testimonials of moral excellence and even of religious
worth.
" The first rational step towards the removal of an evil is
the recognition of its existence and the ascertainment of its
336 REVIEWS.
magnitude. Many persons are, I believe, in the present instance,
ignorant of these facts; yet such persons may be parents, or
may have the guardianship of youth. How are they to protect
those under their care against an evil the existence of which
is unknown to them ? "
" These," says Dr Clark, " are weighty words from men of
experienceand he calls on medical men and on clergymen to
proclaim the enormity of the vice, and on parents to warn their
children of its dire effects. Parents have been too modest,
timid, and reticent; and in view of this fact Dr Clark speaks
with energy : " I would that the combined testimony of asylum
officers were hung up in the sight of every family, and conned
in the light of unimpeachable statistics of insanity and morality!
If no other way to reach the public is likely to be adopted than
through the press, then I would suggest that a pamphlet should
be issued on the subject, and sent broadcast throughout the
community. It might be objected that many who are ignorant
of this habit might learn it in the suggestions thus promul-
gated. In reply to this I may say it is my firm conviction that
there are not two per cent, of the adult population who can be
classed in this way, and ' the greatest good to the greatest
number' is a wise rule to go by.
" There is no doubt that the statements made concerning
this secret vice will be vehemently denied by those who know
nothing about its prevalency, except in a very limited degree.
Let such visit asylums, and also read the reports presented by
their officers from all parts of Britain and America year after
year, especially the tables of ' Causes of Insanity,' and if they
have any ' bowels of compassion' left, they will shudder at the
record. Cutting irony, withering sarcasm, and unsparing invec-
tive, are launched in power and profusion?and justly too?
against flagrant vice and national sins. Let each of us con-
tribute our mite and influence to excoriate a viper passion,
which is silently doing a deadly work among our loved ones
unheeded and unrebuked. The Hebrews took heroic measures
to purge themselves of the ' uncleanness.' The ancients and
modern heathens record its evils, and the latter take vigorous
steps to prevent it. If a Christian community fears for the
modesty of it's youth in expressing it and condemning it, not-
withstanding its soul-destroying influence, I cannot help it;
my duty has been performed, for ' I am in a place where I am
demanded of conscience to speak the truth; the truth therefore
speak I, impugn it whoso listeth.' "
The question of mechanical restraint is also treated with
much detail. In the Toronto Asylum, during the year the
report deals with, ten months passed without a camisole having
REVIEWS. 337
been used. " Wristlets, mitts, and muffs were used in isolated
cases, but always as the more humane treatment of the violent
and dangerous. This sparing use of restraint was not adopted
because I felt constrained to give way to the ultra hobbyists,
but because few cases presented in which I thought it necessary."
Dr Clark quotes from a monograph on " Mechanical Pro-
tection for the Insane," by Dr Grrissom, Superintendent of the
Insane Asylum of North Carolina: " Mechanical restraint is far
better in many cases:?
" First.?Because of the absence of the personal antagonism
between the attendant and the patient, sure to arouse evil
passions stirring to excitement, and followed by proportionate
depression.
" Second.?Because of the certainty and uniformity of its
action, unaffected by momentary strength or weakness, by
sudden access of feeling, or the impatient weariness of fatigue.
" Third.?Because it does not excite the passions of the
patient, by the mere sight of disturbance in the over-wrought
and worn-out attendant.
" Fourth.?Because, when recognised as irresistible, it may
be said to establish an environment which the patient accepts,
as there is no hope of suddenly overcoming it.
" Fifth.?Because it is far better for female patients, espe-
cially the epileptic and hysterical, than the sight of long con-
tinued struggles with attendants. On the other hand, if
manual restraint is used only out of sight, then seclusion is
added, with its evils.
" Sixth.?Because it may be applied uniformly at night,
when necessary, to the suicidal, who could not otherwise be
safely cared for, unless at enormous expense, and with the dis-
advantage of the attendants keeping the patient awake by
their presence.
" Seventh.?Because in the mild form it may be applied to
the homicidal during the day, and still allow him outdoor
exercise and air with safety."
The following cases illustrate some of the points emphasised
in the foregoing quotation:?
" There is now in this asylum a powerful mulatto who has
homicidal tendencies, and when these are about to manifest
themselves, he begs to have wristlets on, or to be secluded, lest,
as he says, ' he may kill somebody.' He will spurn attendants
from him, but will submit to mechanical restraint with the
greatest docility. On the female side there is an estimable
lady, who a few weeks ago made a desperate attempt to commit
suicide, and immediately afterwards bitterly repented of it;
when she feels the uncontrollable impulse coming on, she beo-s
PART II. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. A A?
338 REVIEWS.
to have her hands enclosed in leather muffs. I have suggested
to many such cases the choice of being watched by attendants,
or having* mechanical restraint imposed, and with few excep-
tions they have chosen the latter. There is a natural repug-
nance to being forcibly restrained by friends or attendants.
The feeling of being vanquished by them excites intuitive anta-
gonism, and the knowledge of our kind being spectators of our
sufferings, trials, and struggles is far from palatable to a much
larger percentage of insane than the public suppose. At least
this is the expressed experience of many of those who relate
their retrospects of these periods of insane impulse."
Amongst many other things bearing on this subject, Dr.
Clark says, " As a class, the servants in asylums are as kind as
any other respectable class of the community. I can truthfully
say they are more kind-hearted, because they are selected prin-
cipally from being possessed of this trait of character, and not
retained if found to be the reverse in the smallest degree. Not-
withstanding this fact, I have yet to learn from the Bucknill
School that two or three of the best nurses in any asylum can,
by grips, grasps, seizures, or any manual method, do less harm
to a maniacal patient than canvas or leather. The latter has
no temper, but the former, after hours of struggling with a
violent patient, may possess enough of Adam to lose the
sweetness of patience, even if blessed with angelic dispositions.
The reports of those asylums where manual restraint is only
used, show records of casualties as frequent and as tragical as
in those which lay no claim to the so-called humanitarian
methods. Both plans have been adopted here; and after seeing
the struggles of patients for hours to free themselves from the
hands and arms of attendants, and often successfully, I confess
that gentle mechanical restraint was a beneficial change. The
patients often have the delusion that attendants are conspirators
against them, and consequently enemies plotting to kill them.
This being a reality to them, they will struggle frantically to
free themselves from their supposed foes. They have no such
intense and ever-present feeling against mild mechanical re-
straint ; and after a few futile efforts, will often at once subside
into quietude and repose, accepting the inevitable much more
readily than they would from human hands, whose clutches they
cunningly know they can often escape from, even at the risk of
receiving bruises and scratches."
One plan of treating troublesome patients is severely con-
demned, the treatment by sedatives. Dr Clark thinks that
such drugs, continuously given, produce hyperana3inia of the
cerebro-spinal system, and hurry an acute stage into the chronic
and incurable.
REVIEWS. 330
The whole report is characterised by thoughtfulness and by-
hearty interest in the welfare of those that by reason of mental
infirmity are thrown helpless on the clemency of the world.
In the Annual Report of the Royal Edinburgh Asylum, Dr.
Clouston remarks, in reference to the increasing number of
patients:* " About one thing the general public need be under no
alarm whatever. It is not due to any great increase of lunacy.
As one of the eight reasons I assigned in my last Iveport for the
increase, one was, that ' cases of slighter mental disturbance, the
result of old age, of paralytic attacks, of bodily diseases affecting
the brain, and of general breaking down ot the bodily powers,
that formerly would not have been reckoned insanity at all, are
now sent here to be nursed and cared forand this reason has
received such a powerful illustration within the past few weeks,
that I cannot forbear alluding to it in passing. A woman who
had attained the venerable age of 90 years was sent to us,
declared not only to be a lunatic, but' dangerous to others.
This is, so far as I am aware, an unprecedented fact in the his-
tory of lunacy. No person of that age was ever probably sent
as a dangerous lunatic to an asylum before in the world. She
was, it is true, mentally feeble from dotage, and had none of
the outward appearances of having been well cared for. Since
she came to us, and with proper care, food, and attention, she
has simply exhibited want of memory and some confusion of
mind, but is quiet, cleanly, and profoundly grateful for the care
bestowed on her. Her case represents the highest point to
which the cause I have alluded to has yet attained. Should it
become a precedent, the managers of this institution will have
at once to set about providing extensive accommodation suitable
for aged persons whose mental faculties have become obtuse
from old age. Within the past week another aged man, of
88, has been sent to us as dangerous too.f I find the mean age
of the patients sent to us is steadily rising since 1874, it
having been 38-2, 40*2, 40-9, and 41 years, in the four years
ending with 1877."
* Annual Report of the Physician Superintendent, T. S. Clouston, M.l).f
F.R.C.P., Royal Edinburgh Asylum for Insano._ _
f Who lived for only twelve days aftor admission.
