Diseases of the Nervous System
===============================

82
Art. VII.?.
'' No. V.?Partial Insanity.
BY ROBERT BOYD, M.D. Edin., F.R.C.P. Bond.
President Medico-Psychological Association, 1870 ; Late Physician and Superintendent Somerset
County Lunatic Asylum; Formerly Resident Physician St. Marylebone Infirmary, and
Lecturer on Medicine.
In continuation of previous communications to the Journal the
following is an analysis of the records of admissions under the
above head, to the Somerset County Lunatic Asylum. These
records were commenced thirty years ago, and under the original
form were continually added to for upwards of twenty succeeding
years. With this analysis is included an occasional cursory
abstract from the annual reports of the asylum of any special
references to cases of melancholia, moral insanity, etc.
In all fatal cases, unless expressly prohibited, post-mortem
examinations were made, as a rule, and the appearances and
weight of the organs systematically entered. This system
adopted of weighing, insures the inspection of each organ
separately, and was following out what I had previously been
accustomed to at the St. Marylebone Infirmary, and which
enabled Dr Clendinning, in his Croonian lectures in 1838, to
give the regular average absolute weight of the human organs
for the whole of life above puberty in ounces avoirdupois, in
males and females.
The average weight of the brains of the insane examined
in the Somerset County Asylum was found to be one-twenty-
fourth heavier than the average weight of the same above
puberty in both sexes, as given by Dr Clendinning.
In comparing the weights of the cerebral hemispheres, in
more than half they were found to be equal; in the remainder
the right was heaviest in about one-third, and the left in about
two-thirds ; the average weight of the left was greatest. The
difference in weight was most frequent in epileptics; some of these
cases, where remarkable differences occurred, have been published
in the Medico-Chirurgical Transactions, Vol. XXXIX., 1856.
In one remarkable instance, that of a male, the right hemisphere
weighed only 9? ounces, the left 18^ ounces ; there was an arrest
of development of the extremities on the opposite side, the left
arm and leg being shorter and smaller than those on the right.
There was sudden death in this case, and no mental deficiency.
The case occurred in 1842. Similar cases were found showing
deficiency in one cerebral hemisphere to the extent of several
ounces, with short limbs, contracted joints, hemiplegia on the
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 83
opposite side of the body. The brain of one of these cases was
placed in the Museum of the Royal College of Physicians.
The symptoms attending helpless cases of general paralysis
seemed clearly to indicate disease of the spinal cord, and led to
the examination of it after death in all cases. Unmistakeable
signs of inflammation were frequently found, and will be found
by any one who has the opportunity and will take the trouble
to examine the spinal cord in cases of general paralysis. There
was usually softening of parts of the cord, or else unusual firm-
ness in parts of the cord. The membranes were sometimes
found inflamed and with pus on surface. Specimens of the
spinal cords were sent to be microscopically examined by Mr.
Gulliver, who found indications of inflammation, exudation
corpuscles in all, with few exceptions; in one there was dis-
integration. Mr. Queckett, Mr. Obre, and Dr Ogle were supplied
with portions of diseased spinal cord from cases of general
paralysis, and were of a similar opinion regarding their origin
from inflammation. There is no better criterion of the amount
of disease in the pulmonary organs than is to be obtained by
weighing them, as in pneumonia and tubercular disease; the
heart will also be frequently found to be increased to double
and sometimes to almost treble the average weight.
The abdominal organs will be found to vary considerably
from the average weight; the stomach sometimes, more
frequently the liver; the pancreas and renal capsules seldom ;
the kidneys often?not unfrequently below the average ; the
spleen varies very often in weight and condition, being
frequently softened.
(a) Under that form of mental disorder commonly termed
Melancholia, there were admitted into the Somerset. Asylum
from March 1, 1848, to July 1, 1867, 600 cases?262 males
and 338 females. Civil condition as to marriage: 81 males
and 150 females were single, 160 males and 136 females
married, and 21 males and 62 females widowed.
Ages Males Females
Under 20 years .... 6 6
From 20 to 30 . . . .44 72
? 30 to 40 . . . . 52 64
? 40 to 50 . . . . 53 80
? 50 to 60 . . . . 49 59
? 60 to 70 . . . . 49 51
? 70 to 80 . . . .9 6
262 338
Causes.?Much trouble was experienced in ascertaining
the history of those patients who were transferred from other
G 2
8 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
asylums, or who had been for any length of time in confine-
ment. The primary causes were often difficult to be assigned,
were sometimes various, and in many instances quite unknown,
even in cases admitted for the first time. Where hereditary
predisposition existed it is here given as the cause, the only
one, although there may have been a second, or proximate
cause. In the same manner, previous illness has sometimes
been the predisposing cause, succeeded by a second, or proxi-
mate cause, which has not here been distinguished, as, for
example, a fit of drinking, which frequently was the immediate
cause where a predisposition existed.
Causes assigned Males Females
Hereditary . . . . .59 79
Previous illness  53 69
Distress and poverty
Domestic affliction, grief
Delusions, religious
Ill-usage and desertion
Disappointed love
Pride and jealousy
Over-study, anxiety .
Fright and witchcraft
Injuries, accidents
Intemperance
Unknown causes
27 12
23 49
13 29
4 9
4 11
4 2
4 4
2 12
9 2
8 3
52 57
262 338
In the first four cases from hereditary predisposition in
males, the proximate cause was in one case, grief at the loss of
his situation; in a second, religious fanaticism, attended with
visions ; in a third, poverty ; and in a fourth, intemperance in
drink. Likewise, in the first four females, the exciting causes
were poverty, grief, passion, and hysteria. In cases following
protracted illness, sudden suicidal tendencies were sometimes
observed.
Of all the symptoms in these cases of melancholia the
suicidal tendency was the most prevalent and was reported in
22? per cent, of the males and in 25 per cent, of the females. Of
the attempts made, that by strangulation was the most usual.
11 males and 25 females refused food, and required to be forcibly
fed by the stomach tube. Of the males 20^ per cent, and of
the females 18^ per cent, were reported as dangerous or violent,
and 11^ per cent, males and 13f per cent, females were rest-
less, noisy, and stubborn ; 18 per cent, males and 13^ per cent,
females were in a feeble state and quiet, a tew were suspicious,
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 85
strange, visited by spirits, and addicted to wander purposelessly.
It may broadly be stated that nearly one-third the patients had
suicidal tendencies either by actual attempts on their lives or
starvation ; a third were violent, dangerous, restless, and des-
tructive ; and a third had illusions of vision or hearing, strange
suspicions, and in feeble health. The conduct of 8 per cent,
the males and 6^ per cent, the females was orderly, and about
8 per cent, the males and 3^ per cent, the females were noted
as rational in their conversation. There were employed in
their various callings as tradesmen, in the garden, and on the
farm, 37 per cent, of the males ; and in the laundry, the kitchen,
in needlework, and assisting the attendants in the dining
hall and elsewhere, 30 per cent, of the females. All patients of
both sexes, not confined in the infirmaries from illness or in an
excited state, had their meals in the dining-hall, and attended
weekly entertainments there, as dancing, music, and theatricals.
In hot weather a large tent in front of the asylum was used for
the meals and for the weekly entertainments instead of the
large hall.
The duration of the existing attack at the time of admission
varied from 5 days to 17^ years in 217 of the males and from
1 day to 19 years in 27G of the females, the average duration
being nearly alike in both sexes, viz. 494 days in males and
491 days in females.
The results were in 262 males and 338 females :?
Males Females
Recovered . 51*6 per cent. 53*1 per cent.
Not recovered 7*6 ? 7*1 ,,
Died . . 25-0 ? 24*4 ?
Remaining . 15*8 ? 15*4 ?
100 100
Causes of Death.?Post-mortem examinations revealed
adhesions and thickening of the dura mater, meningitis, in 12
males and 9 females; arachnitis and fluid in the cerebral
ventricles in 8 males and 8 females; cerebral apoplexy
in 2 females; cerebritis and softening of the brain in 3
males and 3 females; fluid in spinal canal in 2 males. In the
chest, pleuritis in 3 males and 3 females ; bronchitis and asthma
in 1 male and 4 females; broncho-pneumonia in 2 males and 2
females; pneumonia in 2 males and 5 females ; pleuro-pneumonia
in 2 males and 2 females ; pulmonary phthisis in 17 males and
22 females ; hydro-thorax in 1 male and 3 females; pericarditis in
2 males; enlarged heart in 4 males ; Bright's kidneys in 2 males
and 1 female; ulceration in gall bladder in 1 male, coats
86 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
purple, thickened, the liver fatty, weight 46^ ounces ; liver
enlarged in 1 female, weighing 66 ounces ; and the gall bladder
distended to the size of a goose egg; in another female there
were white hard cancerous tumours in the liver, the weight 43^
ounces; dysentery, enteritis, and ulceration in the intestines in
6 males and 9 females; gastritis in 2 females; dropsy in 1 male
and 1 female ; pyaemia in 1 female; erysipelas in 2 males and 1
female; cachexy and starvation in 2 males and 4 females ;
suicides by hanging and drowning in 4 males and 1 female, and
by scalding in 1 female (555). The latter case had been 10^
years in the asylum, and worked regularly in the laundry. She
was occasionally subject to outbursts of violence, when she
would break windows. She had not previously displayed any
suicidal tendency, but on this occasion she got into the boiler
in the wash-house, and was scalded from the hips downwards.
After the first day, when she partially recovered from the shock
and sickness, she took food and conversed rationally ; there was
sloughing of the skin over the left hip and thigh. Death
occurred in ten days after the receipt of the injury.
Amongst patients of this class, so many having suicidal
propensities, some of them managed to elude detection and
effectually succeeded in compassing their determination of self-
destruction. One female went into a room opening directly from
the corridor, where there were several other persons, only closed
the door, tore the hem off one of her garments, turned the bed-
stead on end, and hung herself to the leg. One man strangled
himself in bed by attaching his stockings to the bedstead,
having first tied them round his neck, and then throwing the
weight of his body over the side. Another man hanged him-
self with his braces from a gas-pipe. A third was found sus-
pended in a loft in the farm-yard. One man escaped, and
after some time his body was found in a pond on the Mendip
Hills, about three miles distant. One man concealed a knife,
and ended his existence by that means.
Suicide by starvation, if the following instances may
be so designated, was not uncommon. One female, remark-
able for her obstinacy, refusing to go to bed, noisy at night,
standing constantly, was fed daily for three months ; she was
extremely emaciated, only weighing when dead 50 lbs.; her
brain was unusually large, weighing 53f ounces. One man who
required feeding was also in the habit of standing constantly
in one position; his weight when dead was 72 lbs., and his
brain 52 ounces. Another man who required to be fed, only
weighed 68 lbs. when dead; he had pulmonary phthisis. In a
third man fed three times a day, pulmonary tubercles were
found combined with pneumonia and congestion of blood in the
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 87
cerebral vessels. Two females who required to be fed died
shortly after admission, one in fourteen days ; there were small
tumours in the liver, size of musket bullets ; the liver weighed
35 ounces ; the spleen was unusually large, 17^ ounces; there
was also pneumonia; the body weighed 92 lbs. and the brain
5(H ounces, which is much above the average weight. The
other female lived nineteen days after admission; she had
meningitis and a large and soft spleen. More extensive disease
was found in another female, who required to be forcibly fed,
and was noisy at night (680) ; upwards of five months in the
asylum ; feeble; she did not require to be fed until a month
before her death; body emaciated, 72 lbs.; three scrofulous
tumours in right cerebral hemisphere : one on the surface at the
falx, size of a pea, one on the lower surface, and the third
embedded in the corpus striatum external to the central white
fibres ; the lateral ventricles distended with clear fluid; en-
cephalon 46 ? ounces ; psoas abscess on the right side, containing
half a pint of foetid fluid.
There is one remarkable feature that has long been observed
respecting suicidal cases, namely, their great frequency in some
years and times compared with others ; in one year out of 122
admissions 36 were reported as having made most determined
and deliberate attempts upon their lives?12 males and 24
females; 3 males had severe wounds in their throats; one of
them, unable to swallow, had to be fed by means of a tube ;
7 females were reported to have made similar attempts; 6 had
been rescued from drowning, 5 from hanging, 2 from strangula-
tion ; others had precipitated themselves from windows, and one
or more had taken poison. An old man was admitted with a
wound in his neck. As he arrived at the door of the asylum,
he took a razor from his pocket, and handing it to the person
who brought him, observed that he would have no occasion for
it there. Although depressed he was rational, the loss of blood
from the wound relieved the congestion of blood from the brain,
which was probably the cause of his insane attempt.
Comparative Weight of the Cerebral Hemispheres in 53
Cases of Melancholia in Males and 73 in Females.?The oppo-
site hemispheres were both alike in weight in 28 males and 39
females; the right hemisphere was the heaviest in 10 males and
11 females; the left hemisphere was the heaviest in 15 males
and 23 females; the right cerebral hemisphere varied in weight
from 14| to 25^ ounces, and in females from 11 f to 24 ounces;
the left cerebral hemisphere varied in weight from 14^ to 25i
ounces in males, and from llf to 24^ ounces in females; the
average weight of the right cerebral hemisphere was 20*48, and
the left 20*54 ounces in males, and 19*02 the right, and 19*15
88 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
ounces the left, in females, thus showing the preponderance in
weight of the left cerebral hemisphere in both sexes. The en-
cephalon varied in weight in the males from 35? to 58 ounces,
and in the females from 21 \ to 55f ounces; the average weight
being in males 47^- ounces, and in females ounces.
The first male patient admitted to the Somerset Asylum
suffered from melancholia; aged 47, married, first attack; an
agricultural labourer, reported as being a well-disposed, quiet, in-
dustrious man. The cause assigned was hereditary predisposi-
tion and grief and distress of mind at leaving an old master with
whom he had lived fifteen or sixteen years, and to whom he was
greatly attached. His conduct most exemplary, conversation
subdued, relating to his malady; he had an idea that he had
not slept for years; propensities to wander; he left his home
without any cause, and had an unusual desire, for him, to take
stimulants. Pulse 90 on admission, tongue clean, appetite
good, bowels regular, motion slow, expression melancholy.
Since admission he has been very industrious in assisting the
attendants in cleaning, collecting the dinner utensils, always
willing and obliging. He complained at first of want of sleep,
but he acknowledged afterwards that he had obtained a little.
He wished to be allowed to return home to his family for the
purpose of cultivating his garden ; his discharge on probation
was granted by the visitors, as allowed by 8 and 9 Vic., c. 120,
sec. 71. At the end of the time he was discharged off the books,
recovered.
Another early case of admission and recovery in melancholia
was the case of a marble mason (4), aged 55, married, transferred
from a licensed house. There was hereditary predisposition in his
case, and he had a brother and a sister insane; there were seven
of the family ; his father was a mason. He was quiet, silent,
moping, sat by himself, idle. This condition had existed for a
year previously, came on when at work in London. General
health indifferent, pulse 78, tongue coated yellow, skin harsh,
appetite good, bowels rather relaxed. There was no material
improvement in this case for fifteen months; his bodily health
quickly improved, but he could not be induced to occupy
himself in any way, until he was visited about this time by an
old master of his, who said he was an excellent workman, but
that he could not be kept sober. A montli afterwards he was
discharged on probation, and it was found that he had obtained
work at his trade in Bath, and was quite well in his mind.
The third male admitted was also of the same class, a black-
smith, aged 58, married ; second attack, of two years' duration;
also a transfer from the same licensed house as the preceding;
the assigned cause, domestic grief, from the conduct of his wife.
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 89
He was reported as being of ail amiable, obliging disposition.
He had seven children; one daughter had epileptic fits. On his first
attack he felt an irresistible desire to destroy himself. On the
first appearance of the disorder, about thirty years before, during
a thunderstorm, he said he heard a woman's voice, a woman he
had known at that time; after reading the 4th chapter of the
1st Epistle of Peter and 12th verse, he thought he was to
undergo a fiery trial; conduct exemplary, memory good, conver-
sation connected; had visions of spirits, principally at night; he
liked to be reading his Bible, and pointing out concording
passages.
His general health fairly good ; pulse 78, skin cool, appetite
small; lame on left leg, owing to chronic rheumatism. When
able, he assisted willingly in the kitchen; he suffered from
pains and sickness occasionally. His health improved; one
month after admission heweighed 157 lbs.;height,5 feet Ginclies;
circumference of head, 23 inches; antero-posterior measurement
from nasal and frontal depression to the occipital protuberance,
14 inches ; transverse, 11^ inches from one external auditory
foramen to the other ; height of forehead, 2 inches. Eye dull,
pupil sluggish, colour grey. Temperature of head, 72?; under
tongue, 96?; improved, continued to assist in the kitchen, sleeps
better. In the autumn he was in the infirmary for pains in
his limbs ; his mind wTas much troubled ; he fancied he saw
spirits and animals in his room, and on three occasions was
noisy at night; he blamed the spirits for the pains in his limbs ;
believed " he was possessed of the devil, who sent them to trouble
him as he troubled Job of old." In the spring he was again in
the kitchen, and in the summer he was visited by his son and
daughter from London, who had not seen him for two and a-half
years; they thought him improved; he was glad to see them,
and he conversed with them rationally.
For four years he continued in much the same state, some-
times in the kitchen, at others ill in the infirmary; weight 155 lbs.
The following year (1855) his weight had increased to 179 lbs.
In 1858 his limbs failed him, he could scarcely get about;
he was, as usual, quiet, but still had his delusions. In 1859
and I860 there was no change in his mental or bodily state.
In 1862 he was mostly confined to bed; in 1863 he had an
attack of bronchitis; in 1866 he was completely bedridden in
the infirmary ; and in 1868 I left him still an inmate of the
asylum after a residence of twenty years and three months.
From amongst the female recoveries are shortly to be
noticed the following cases:?The first (No. 28), a female, aged
23, single; first attack of six months' duration previous to
admission, owing to grief at the death of her mother : hereditary
90 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
predisposition on the mother's side; she attempted suicide by
taking laudanum a fortnight before her admission; was quiet,
and impressed with the idea that she would shortly die ; she
had religious impressions, and was inactive, peevish and indo-
lent. Pulse 96, skin hot, tongue clean, appetite good. She
knocked at her door at night. After the first month her health
and spirits improved, and she occupied herself with needlework ;
in a fortnight afterwards she had a relapse, became sullen, and
cried about home and her father ; this condition did not long
continue ; she gradually improved, and six weeks afterwards
bore a cheerful countenance, had grown fat, and seemed almost
well enough to be discharged. At the end of another month
she was entirely free from delusions, was discharged recovered,
atter a stay of 177 days in the asylum.
A second case (423) was in a female, aged 21, married ; had
one child; first attack of one month's duration; ten months
after her child's birth she said her eye had offended, and she
attempted to pluck it out with her fingers. Her couversation
was repeating an eye for an eye, and her ideas of her lost and
wicked state ; her memory bad ; her general health indifferent;
pulse 84, tongue clean, skin cold, appetite bad, bowels regular.
Melancholy expression, black hair, sallow complexion, grey
irides. She fancies that she has injured her child and other-
wise done a great deal of harm. The day after being ad-
mitted she required to be fed by the stomach tube. She
afterwards took food without being forced, and gradually im-
proved in health. At the end of six weeks she became rational,
was comparatively well in health, and was removed from the
infirmary to the convalescent ward. At the end of four and a
half months she was taken home by her husband, recovered.
Seven years afterwards she was re-admitted, in a similar state
of melancholia; very feeble, scarcely able to walk, her illness of
two weeks' duration ; she has been in very destitute circumstances.
Pulse 84, skin cold, tongue clean, appetite ravenous. She
gradually recovered from this attack, and at the end of three
months was again discharged quite well.
The last female case of melancholia now to be noticed was one
which was so remarkably characteristic of the disorder, that a
drawing was made of her in the asylum by a lady. Ihe patient
was Not 34, an agricultural labourer, aged 34, single ; the second
attack of two weeks' duration. She was a quiet, good-tempered
woman, a Baptist, rather indolent, could neither read nor write,
which was unusual, as all the preceding cases were more or less
educated. The cause assigned for the present attack was
grief for the death of a friend and neighbour. She fancied she
had taken a false oath respecting the identity of a man who was
DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 91
taken up, and that the devil was coming to fetch her. Her
memory was good. She was discharged from a licensed house
after her first attack six years before, and had been a pensioner
on the parish ever since.
Three months after admission she had very much improved ;
her countenance, from being the picture of melancholy, had
quite changed, and become quite cheerful. Her likeness was
taken a second time, to show the happy change in it, by the same
lady. She went to work in the laundry, and in about six
months was discharged perfectly recovered.
Exactly eleven years afterwards she was re-admitted in a
similar state of melancholia; had been three weeks ill, and
had made an attempt to drown herself; health very bad;
dejected, lying on the floor, quite incapable of exertion. After
thirteen months in the asylum for this attack, she was once
more discharged recovered.
Four and a-half years afterwards she was re-admitted for the
third time, having arrived at the age of 63. Six months after-
wards she was in a convalescent state, and was discharged home
at her own request.
Two years after her last discharge she was re-admitted in a
similar state as on the previous occasion. This time she was
noisy at night, fancied the devil was throwing fire down her
throat. By degrees she improved, and at the end of nine months
she had become rational, and was discharged recovered.
(b) Moral Insanity.?There were but few which came
strictly under this head amongst the class of patients admitted
to the asylum, only 8 males and 3 females. Their ages were:
Under 20 years, 1 female; from 20 to 30, 2 males and 1 female ;
30 to 40, 3 males and 1 female, 40 to 50, 1 male; 50 to GO, 1
male. Civil state : 5 males and 2 females were single; 3 males
and 2 females married.
Causes.?Intemperance and an epileptic mother were the
assigned causes in 1 male, and 1 male was paralysed and had
thieving propensities ; 1 male was greedy and slovenly in his
habits. Excessive pride was the cause assigned in 1 male ; in
1 male fear, in 1 male disappointment; the two last were
rational; also 2 males found wandering were rational. In 2
females the desertion of their husbands was the supposed cause,
and in 1 female grief at the loss of her situation; one of the
females was suicidal. Results: 2 of the males and the 3 females
recovered ; 3 males were discharged relieved, and 1 male not
improved. The duration of the attack prior to admission varied
in the males from 1 week to 8 years, and in the females from 2
weeks to 4 years.
An example of this form of mental disorder occurred in
92 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
one of the early admissions to the asylum, in a male, No. 11, by
trade a shoemaker, aged 26, single, transferred from a licensed
house ; a first attack of thirteen months' duration. He could read
and write well, and was a member of the Church of England ;
proud, self-conceited, and idle in his habits. It was reported
that he had fallen in love with a clergyman's daughter, and
expected to get married. His conversation was connected,
manner^ cheerful, expression cunning, black hair, grey eyes,
pulse 78, tongue clean, skin cool, appetite good, had a
shuffling gait, height 5'feet 7 inches, weight 135 lbs., the cir-
cumference of head 22 inches, antero-posterior measurement
14 and transverse 11? inches. He was fond of reading,
attended church regularly, and joined in the singing, in which
he was an adept. After the first month lie was induced to
work at his trade occasionally, with reluctance; he was quarrel-
some. On one occasion he made his escape, and was brought
back frum his father's. He remained in the asylum for
seven and a-half years, in much the same state, till towards the
end, when lie suffered from pulmonary phthisis, and was taken
home to his native place.
A female domestic servant, No. 20, aged 18, single, first
attack, of three weeks'duration, able to read and write, a
member of the Church of England, fair complexion, skin warm,
pulse 100, tongue clean, good expression, conversation con-
nected. Cause assigned : Unkind treatment; it was reported
that she had attempted suicide. Very quiet; was employed at
needlework. She remained forty-three days in the asylum, and
was taken home by her sister, recovered.
(c) Delirium tremens, if it may not be considered as coming
under the same head, seems to be closely allied to moral
insanity. Within the period, there were admitted to the
asylum 30 males and 3 females of this class. Their ages,
from 20 to 30 years, 1 male ; from 30 to 40 years, 13 males
and 1 female; from 40 to 50, 13 males and 1 female; from
50 to 60 years, 3 males and 1 female. Social condition?
8 males unmarried, 19 males and 2 females married, and
3 males and 1 female widowed. Suicidal attempts were made
by 5 of the males ; 21 males and 2 females were reported as
violent or dangerous, 2 males destructive, 1 male quarrelsome,
1 male and 1 female helpless. Of the males 14 were employed
and 2 of the females. Duration of the attack prior to admis-
sion varied in 30 males from 2 days to 2 years, and in
3 females from 5 days to 6 months. Results were?recoveries
in 23 males and 2 females; discharged not recovered,
5 males and 1 female ; died, 2 males. One male died con-
vulsed and the second one died from dropsy.
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 93
A labourer (1045), aged 36, married, five children, first
attack ; duration, two months ; could neither read nor write. An
hereditary predisposition to insanity, of intemperate habits, was
violent, and had a quarrel with a man in a public-house ; his
head was injured. He was brought to the asylum in a mori-
bund state ; pulse 54, cold skin, pupils contracted, unconscious ;
he was able to swallow some fluid; he died about three hours
after his admission. A coroner's inquest was held. His wife
stated that " during the last two months he complained of his
head, was convulsed, and said he thought he should go out of
his mind." The body was examined seventeen hours after death.
There were no external marks or bruises; it was fat and well
formed; weight, 146 lbs.; length, 5 feet 8 inches. Circum-
ference of head, 23 inches ; antero-posterior, 13 ; and transverse
measurement 11^ inches; effusion of blood beneath the scalp,
skull thick ; dura mater tense, the hemispheres protruded over
the edge directly the membranes were divided; the brain was
unusually pale; the left lateral ventricle was distended with
fluid: some of it in cysts size of a walnut, two fluid ounces by
measure, escaped. From the fornix on the right side was sus-
pended a cyst, size of a pigeon's egg, containing straw-coloured
fluid, which occupied the position of the " septum lucidum." In
the anterior and outer side of the right cerebral hemisphere was a
firm pale tumour, size of a walnut; the " corpus striatum " on
that side was unusually pale and soft, and the softening ex-
tending downwards to the right crus cerebri and its junction
with the pons was infiltrated with blood. The right cerebral
hemisphere was 4^ ounces heavier than the left, owing partly,
no doubt, to the escape of the fluid from the left side. The
right ventricle was closed, the sides pressed together, and the
cerebral structure denser on that side than the left. Weight
of the right cerebral hemisphere, 25 ; left, 20? ounces. About
5 ounces of dark-coloured blood escaped when the spinal cord
was opened; the spinal cord was unusually firm; weight 14
ounce. All the other organs natural.
Here was an extraordinary amount of cerebral disease
accidentally discovered, it might be said, in a drinking man'
supposed to be only in a state of delirium tremens.
A case (446) occurred in a male, aged 35, single, a pedlar;
in a state of delirium tremens, was found wandering very de-
pressed and unhappy, supposed himself to be deserted by the
Creator, became violent, and threatened to kill himself. After
a few days' residence in the asylum he quite recovered his
senses and was discharged recovered. About a fortnight after-
wards he returned to the asylum in a deranged state, said he
was unable to refrain from drink, and begged to be again
94 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
admitted. His application could not be entertained without
a fresh order and certificates.
A second case (458) in a male, aged 34, also a pedlar; he
was admitted in a state of delirium tremens, reported as
dangerous to others; he was discharged, recovered, in six months
after his admission. The following year he was found wander-
ing about, neglecting his business and drinking. He dis-
turbed the congregation at the Methodist Chapel by slapping
the children about the ears, and was brought back to the
asylum. He became noisy, his health declined, and after three
years he was removed to the union, in a helpless and harmless
state, and with symptoms of general paralysis.
A female (564), aged 50, married, a mason's wife; first
attack of five days' duration ; had been drinking; occasionally
violent ; destructive to her clothing; was admitted in a state of
delirium tremens; two months after admission she began to
improve, and three months subsequently was discharged re-
covered.
(cZ) Dementia, or Incoherence, is a form of mental disorder
sometimes met with as a first attack in an acute form, but more
frequently in a chronic stage, as a termination of one or other
of the various forms of insanity ; hence the recoveries in this
disorder are but few. Cases of mania and melancholia frequently
terminate in dementia, and it is often combined with epilepsy
and general paralysis.
The admissions under the head of Dementia during the
twenty years amounted to 381. In this number were included
73 who were in a state of fatuity, persons in the decline of life
after 70 years of age, sent for care to the Asylum, being poor.
They ought not to be classed with the insane, and will be con-
sidered separately. Deducting these 73 cases, there were 208;
of these 93 were males, and 115 were females.
As regards their ages on admission, 1 male was 19 only ;
between the ages of 20 and 30 there were 12 males and 16
females:?
Males. Females.
From 30 to 40 . . . .20 22
? 40 to 50 . . . . 16 24
? 50 to 60 . . . ? 14 21
? 60 to 70, inclusive 30 32
Their civil state as to marriage: 45 males and 56 females were
unmarried; 41 males and 42 females were married; 7 males
and 14 females were widowed; in 3 females not ascertained.
Causes.? These were attributed to hereditary predisposition
in 12 males and 15 females, or 8 per cent, in the one and 10^
per cent, in the other. In 12 males and 1 female the mental
DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 95
disorder followed various injuries, principally of the head ; in
13 males and 9 females it was consequent on paralysis or organic
cerebral disease ; in 13 males and 14 females on previous bodily
illness ; in 2 males and 12 females on domestic distress, grief,
or poverty ; in 4 males and 2 females it was attributed to intem-
perance ; in 1 female from love; in 1 male from overwork ; and
in 1 male and 1 female from fright. In males 28 per cent, and
in females 17 per cent, were from physical causes; from moral
causes, 8 per cent, in males and 10 per cent, in females. Cases
found wandering and transferred from other asylums amounted
to 28 per cent, in males and 51 per cent, in females; and a large
number of the causes were unknown. Suicidal propensities were
reported in 6 males and 10 females, some of whom required to
be fed forcibly.
One-fourth of both sexes were reported as being violent or
dangerous to others; several were restless, and 15 males and 30
females destructive; 23 males and 34 females were feeble or
helpless; and 22 males and 23 females quiet and harmless.
Fuund capable and employed, 40 males and 31 females; 11
males and 25 females were wilfully idle.
The results were :?
Males. Females.
Eecovered ..... 3 5
Not recovered . . . .30 29
Died   85 80
Bemaining . . . . .17 32
Total . . .135 146
Causes of death were various, and in many instances the
immediate cause was difficult to be ascertained, as many organs
were found diseased in the same individual. Enumeration of
the causes was as follows:?Inflammation, preternatural adhesions,
thickening of the membranes covering the brain, meningitis,
found in 31 males and 14 females; signs of inflammation of the
brain itself, cerebritis, in 3 males and 8 females ; softening of
the brain in 8 males and 8 females ; unusual firmness of brain in
1 female, and remarkable atrophy or wasting of it in 3 males;
cerebral apoplexy in 6 males and 3 females; paralysis in 3
males and 2 females; and true bone found imbedded in the
brain in 1 female (288), weighing grains, attached to the
dura mater about the middle of the right cerebral hemisphere
and an inch from the longitudinal sinus. It was sent to the
College of Surgeons, to Mr. Queckett, who wrote that" the bone
sent for examination is true bone, containing corpuscles and
Haversian canals, like the bone of the extremities. I have
never but in one instance seen such a tiling from within the
96 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
cranium, and this was attached to the falx." The cause of death
was in this case pulmonary phthisis.
Inflammation of the spinal cord, myelitis, was found in 2 males
and 3 females; inflammation of the lungs, pneumonia, in 24 males
and 11 females; pleuro-pneumoniain 4 males and2 females; bron-
chitis in 9 males and 5 females; asthma and emphysema in 6 males
and 8 females ; fluid in the chest, hydrothorax, in 2 males and 4
females; pulmonary phthisis in 10 males and 7 females; influenza
in 2 males; pericarditis in 1 and enlarged heart in 5 females.
No. 464 was aged 66, a widow ; one year previous to admission
in very bad health, demented and helpless, hemiplegia from
apoplexy, unable to stand alone, had to be carried to the
infirmary, where she was suddenly seized with dyspnoea eighteen
weeks after admission, and died in six days. Weight of the body,
94 lbs.; length, 5 feet; circumference of head, 22\ ; antero-
posterior, 13; and transverse measurement, 13^ inches. The
lateral ventricles were distended with clear fluid ; in the right
corpus striatum there was a rusty-coloured stain and cicatrix,
showing the union of the surfaces of brain after the absorption
of the clot of blood. Some of the white central fibres of the
corpus striatum had been destroyed by the clot; the hemiplegia
was of the left side ; there was a rusty deposit also in the left
optic thalamus the size of a split pea ; there were several rusty
deposits on the surface of the hemispheres ; the cerebral arteries
contained numerous atheromatous deposits, and were very gene-
rally diseased; the right cerebral hemisphere weighed 17^, the
left 17? ounces. There was more fluid than usual in the spinal
canal, and the upper part of the spinal cord was softer than natural.
In the chest there was a pint of fluid in the right pleura;
the lower lobe of the right lung was compressed and tough, the
bronchial lining membrane of both being red and covered with
muco-purulent matter. The heart very much enlarged, and the
valves thickened; weight, 15? ounces. The kidneys wasted and
granular, right 2f, left ounces. Bright's disease in 2 other
females and 1 male, dropsy in 1 male and 3 females. Peritonitis
in 1 male and 2 females; enteritis in 2 males and 9 females ;
ulcer in stomach in 1 female, and ulcer in colon in 1.
No. 399, aged 60, married, no children, feeble health, afflicted
with bleeding piles for sixteen years, but recently the bleeding
had been stopped. She fancied her food was poisoned, and was
disinclined to eat. She was noisy at night, and was given
anodynes. Six months after admission she passed clots of blood
from her bowels, and for several weeks was principally con-
fined to bed. When she left her bed she was still feeble.
In the following summer she had a second attack, and passed a
considerable quantity of blood with each evacuation from her
DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 97
bowels, and died in a week after the attack. The body only
weighed 68 pounds; length, 5 feet 3 inches; it was examined
30 hours after death. The circumference of head 21?, antero-
posterior 13?, and the transverse measurement 13i inches. The
skull and brain appeared natural; the right cerebral hemisphere
was 19, the left 19? ounces. Spinal cord natural. Chest, a portion
of the middle lobe size of a hen's egg, in a state of pneumonia,
some miliary tubercles in both lungs; heart small, 7i ounces.
In the pelvis of the right kidney was a calculus the size of a
marble, dark-coloured, and smooth on surface; each kidney
weighed 5 ounces. The mucous membrane of the colon ulcerated
throughout, and cause of death dysentery. Dysentery was the
cause of death in 4 males and in 8 other females. Cancer of
stomach in 1 male; cancer of liver in 1 male and in 1 female;
enlargement of liver in 1 female; cancer in uterus of 1 ; and
ovarian tumour in 1 (No. 300), aged 56, single, first attack,
duration many years, in very bad health; has ovarian disease and
oedema of legs ; her breathing short and difficult. Six months
after admission she had sickness, and a month afterwards she
became faint and died. The body weighed 145 pounds ; length,
5 feet 3 inches ; circumference of head 21, antero-posterior 14,
transverse 10 inches. The brain unusually pale; each cerebral
hemisphere weighed 19 ounces ; spinal cord was also pale. Both
lungs were emphysematous, one pint of fluid in the right pleura,
the right lung congested with blood ; weight, 17^ ; the left,
10 ounces; the heart, 11 ounces; thickening of the mitral
valve. Abdomen filled by an immense ovarian tumour 41 inches
in circumference ; there were three small lateral tumours on
each side of it, and one rather behind, on the right, under the
great lobe of the liver, which contained about a pint of straw-
coloured fluid in a thinner membrane of sac than the others,
which had thicker coats, and had each a communicating opening
with the large tumour or cyst; it contained a thick, creamy
fluid, was mixed with gelatinous broken-down membrane ; the
contents filled a three gallon bucket, and the smaller tumours
contained about half a gallon more. In a drop of the contents
Mr. Gulliver distinguished by the microscope pus, bits of fibrine,
serum, an excess of fatty matter, some pus-like cells ; no frag-
ments of entozoa or true hydatids, and nothing like them.
One male sank from erysipelas, combined with cerebritis
(No. 632), aged 42, married, 8 children, a carman ; he had been
taken to the union, and five days previous to his admission he
stood on a hot bar of the grate in the workhouse, trying to get
up the chimney; he also tried to get through the windows.
There were burns on both feet, and phlegmanous erysipelas
of both legs. He died a fortnight after admission. Body
PART I. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. II
98 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
examined 25 hours after death; weight, 107 lbs.; length,
5 feet 7 inches; circumference of head, 22 ; anteroposterior
and transverse measurements, each 14 inches. The dura mater
firmly adherent to the skull and dry, the cerebrum on right
side of a pinkish hue at the centrum ovale of Yicq. D'Azyr, not
so on the left side, but the veins on the left side were congested
with blood, and numerous bloody dots were present on the cut
surfaces; the right hemisphere weighed 21, the left 22 ounces;
spinal cord natural, weight 1 ounce. Slight pleuritic adhesions of
the lungs, and cadaveric congestion. Heart enlarged, 15 ounces;
bony deposit in the aorta near the heart. Other organs natural.
One male (48) died from a sad accident, a severe burn,
aged 36, single, transferred from a licensed house, by occupation
a gardener, quiet and harmless. He was always cheerful, and
went out to work, but quite demented; he had been in the same
state for nearly seven years in the Asylum, and was latterly in the
habit of assisting the engineer at the fires and at the gas works,
when he was seen rushing at the top of his speed in front of the
Asylum from towards the limekiln all in a blaze ; a blanket was
thrown round him, his burning clothes torn off, the only part
remaining the wristbands of his shirt and his boots; his whole
body was burned and face scorched ; the epidermis peeled off
his legs, knees, and hands, and the nail of middle finger of left
hand with it. The body was covered with cotton wadding, and
some parts dredged with carbonate of magnesia. He said that in
stepping across the limekiln, which was 4 feet wide at the top,
his foot slipped, and it flamed up and set fire to his clothes.
He was very sick and restless during the night; he only sur-
vived the accident about nineteen hours.
One male died of typhoid fever.
A female (No. 492), aged 68, married, was admitted in a
state of dementia of five years' duration, attributed to grief. She
had a violent temper, was destructive in her habits, and in a bad
state of health. She gesticulated constantly, was in the habit
of lying on the floor, and had cataleptic symptoms, which in-
creased in severity. She had repeated jerkings of the upper
extremities, and had lost control of the lower, so that she was
scarcely able to walk. Her mental faculties did not become
worse. At the end of a fortnight she had opisthotonos tetanic
spasms. The spine was blistered, and a solution of atropine
on lint applied to the surface. The tetanic spasms were after-
wards less violent, and she found less difficulty in swallow-
ing ; it was afterwards found easier to teed her with the stomach
tube. She died five months and three weeks after admission.
Body examined fourteen hours after death; weight, 79 lbs;
length, 5 feet 2 inches ; circumference of head 21, antero-
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 99
posterior 12, and transverse 13 inches. The brain was rather
soft, dark in colour, and there was more fluid than usual in the
pia mater and in the lateral ventricles ; each cerebral hemi-
sphere only weighed 14| ounces ; encephalon, 34^ ounces, about
9 ounces below the average weight. There was a"plate of bone,
size of a silver 3d., on the arachnoid membrane of the spinal
cord itself at this point, and the spine was curved forward in
the same situation. The heart was 9| ounces, which is above
the average weight; the other organs were natural.
A second case (1319), in a married female, aged 30, of choraic
convulsions was, after four months in the Asylum, discharged
recovered.
The youngest male admitted recovered apparently for a
time, and was taken home by his father after sixteen months in
the Asylum; his age was 19 years, and he had been previously
sixteen months in a licensed house; was occasionally violent, of
filthy habits, indifferent health; chattered incoherently; under
tonics, cod liver oil, and phosphate of strychnine, his health veiy
much improved.
Two years and a half afterwards he was readmitted, with the
premonitory symptoms of general paralysis. He was cheerful,
in fair bodily condition. He gradually got worse, became rest-
less and excitable, and so violent that lie had to be removed to
another ward. Six months afterwards he required to be fed,
and tottered in walking. In the course of a few weeks he was
better; could feed himself; pulse 72, full; tongue clean ; appe-
tite good; pupils irregular, right more dilated than the left.;
was blistered on the nape, took bichloride of mercury. The
week after sensation continued dull ; temperature, 90? in axilla,
97? between his mouth ; temperature of room, 65?. At the
end of three months, in May 1868, he was improved, walking
about, and remained in the Asylum.
A female (590), aged 22, single, first attack, duration 2i
years; hereditary predisposition on both sides ; violent, wild,
excited. She was confined to bed for several weeks with a
gangrenous ulcer in the left leg, which got better under charcoal and
linseed-meal poultices, and bark and opium taken inwardly. Her
general health improved, but her mental condition did not alter.
She was often noisy at night, addicted to swearing and shouting,
and occasionally to tearing her clothes and breaking windows.
She had a shower-bath, after which she slept quietly; and the
shower-bath, continued for about three minutes, agreed with
her so well that it was used about twice a week. She walked
better; she used to walk formerly on her toes, and sometimes
she herself asked for a bath. At the end of thirteen years she
remained, in much the same state, an inmate of the Asylum.
H 2
100 DISEASES OF TIIE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
A female (263), aged 33, married, transferred from a licensed
house, two years ill, said to have been paralysed ; motion per-
fect ; silent, disposed to laugh ; in good health ; weight, 159? lbs.;
quiet and harmless. Three years after admission she was in-
duced to occupy herself at needlework. Two years afterwards
there was a decided improvement; she rapidly got better, and
was discharged recovered.
The duration of the disorder at the time of admission varied
in the males from 4 days to 37 years, and in the females from 1
week to 28 years.
The comparative weight of the cerebral hemispheres in cases
of dementia in 46 males gave an average of 20*05 for the right
and 20*2 ounces for the left; and in 53 females 18 for the right
and 18*1 ounces for the left. The cerebral hemispheres were of
equal weight in 22 males and in 24 females. The right was the
heaviest in 9 males and 11 females ; and the left was the heaviest
in 15 males and 18 females. The smallest hemispheres in the
males were in a shoemaker (1184), aged 21, two years ill, when
his right leg became paralysed ; small head, circumference 21 ;
antero-posterior 12, and transverse 10 inches ; body emaciated,
72 lbs.; length, 5 feet 3 inches ; dura mater strongly adherent
to the skull; more fluid than usual in the ventricles ; left cere-
bral hemisphere smaller than the right and 1 ounce lighter, 13^
ounces; the encephalon, 33 ounces; pneumonia and gangrene
of right lung. The lightest encephalon in the females (566) was
31 ounces; cerebral hemispheres were equal in weight, each 13
ounces. The heaviest, and the one in which there was the greatest
difference between the cerebral hemispheres, was in a male (775),
aged 30, single ; second attack, hereditary predisposition ; first
attack, 8 years previous; he died from typhoid fever ; weight,
158 lbs.; length, 6 feet; circumference of head, 23; antero-
posterior and transverse measurements, each 14 inches ; brain
and membranes appeared natural, only a small amount of fluid
in the lateral ventricles; right cerebral hemisphere 23, left 25
ounces ; the encephalon, 55i ounces. The largest female ence-
phalon weighed 52 ounces (738), aged 35, first attack, 7 years'
duration; died suddenly, fainted ; weight of the body, 97 lbs.;
length, 5 feet 3 inches; head large, skull unusually thick,
opacity of the arachnoid ; the lateral ventricles much distended
with fluid; the brain firm; the right cerebral hemisphere 23?,
the left 23 ounces; the mitral valve of the heart thickened ;
weight, 7| ounces; the other organs natural.
The average weight of the left cerebral hemisphere was
greater than that of the right in the preceding cases, the
difference being about the tenth of an ounce, in both sexes, in
dementia.
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 101
(e) Fatuity, dotage, or second childhood, some authors have
stated to be commonly observed in females after 70, and in
males after 75 years of age. Individuals, however, vary greatly
in this respect; in some dotage has been observed at an earlier,
and in others at a much later time of life. Of the 73 cases
admitted to the Somerset County Asylum after 70 years of age,
coming under the head of Dementia, 50 only were registered as
cases of senile fatuity, notwithstanding all the 73, for the
for the sake of convenience, have been placed under the head of
Fatuity. At this late period of existence the physical as well
as the mental powers rapidly decline, emaciation takes place,
the cerebral membranes become thickened and opaque, the
brain is diminished in size, firmer, and tougher; all the other
organs partake of the general decay, and the senses gradually
become blunted.
The two following rather remarkable cases were admitted to
the Asylum in the last stage of human existence: a male aged
96, and a female reported to be 90.
The male (861) aged 96, married, seven children, a basket-
maker by trade; first attack, one day excited. He attempted
to commit suicide in consequence of the removal of his wife to
the workhouse; he was married to his third wife. General
health good, considering his age; he was deaf and feeble, and
was placed in the infirmary, were he remained quiet and harm-
less. He occasionally occupied himself in repairing baskets.
In the winter, after a residence of ten months, he had an attack
of bronchitis and died. The body was examined 15 hours
after death; weight, 124 lbs.; length, 5 feet 4 inches; circum-
ference 22, antero-posterior 13^, and transverse measurement
14 inches. The dura mater very strongly adherent to the skull;
more fluid than natural in the lateral ventricles; brain firm,
right cerebral hemisphere weighed 19, the left 18f ounces,
cerebellum 5, enceplialon 44 ounces, about 3 ounces under the
average. The spinal cord natural. The left side of the chest
contained a considerable quantity of fluid, which compressed the
lung; redness of the lining membrane of bronchial tubes in
both lungs. Heart large, 12 inches, valves natural. Other
organs healthy. Cause of death, hydrothorax, bronchitis, and
chronic meningitis.
Female (1459); her daughter-in-law stated her age to be 90;
a widow; had two sons; first attack of eight months' duration ; in
a feeble state of health, incoherent, using threatening language;
memory lost, expression vacant, noisy at night. Three months
after admission she was very ill, confined to bed in infirmary,
and died five weeks afterwards from natural decay.
Autopsy twelve hours after death. Weight of the body,
102 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
78 Ids.; length, 5 feet; circumference of head 21, denuded of
scalp 20? inches; antero-posterior 12, denuded 1H; transverse
measurement 10^, denuded 10 inches. The brain unusually
pale; there was more fluid than natural in the cerebral ven-
tricles; each hemisphere weighed 16^ ounces, and the ence-
phalon 38?, nearly 5 ounces under the average. The spinal
cord natural, weight 1 ounce. Chest: no pleuritic adhesions,
lungs emphysematous; the right weighed 7, the left 6 ounces;
heart, 7 ounces. Abdominal organs natural.
The ages of the others were, between 70 and 80, 30 males
and 20 females; and from 80 to 90 years, 11 males and 10
females.
Civil state : 1 male and 5 females were single, 21 males and
10 females were married, and 20 males widowers and 16 females
widows.
The results were, that 81 per cent, of males and 68 per
cent, of females died; 14 per cent, males and 26 per cent,
females were after a time removed to their homes or to the
workhouses to end their days ; and 5 per cent, males and 6 per
cent, females remained in the Asylum. The causes of death
were : from inflammation of the cerebrum, meningitis, in 4 males
and in 1 female ; from effusion of blood, cerebral apoplexy, in
15 males and 8 females, in combination with which there was
frequently grave disease of the lungs, a cerebral tumour in 1
male, cerebritis in 4 males and 6 females; much fluid in the
ventricles in 4 males and 5 females ; pneumonia in 10 males and
2 females; pleura-pneumonia in 1 male, and broncho-pneumo-
nia in 2 females; hydrothorax in 1 male and 2 females; bron-
chitis or asthma in 9 males and 4 females; enteritis in 1 male
and 8 females ; dysentery in 1 female; cancer of the stomach in
1 male, an ulcer size of half-a-crown at the cardiac end, no
symptom of it during life, appetite good ; cancer of the liver in
1 male. With respect to the cerebral hemispheres, they were
of equal weight in 15 males and 6 females; the right prepon-
derated in 8 males and 6 females, and the left in 9 males and
9 females. The right hemisphere varied in weight in 32 males
from 16? to 24^ ounces, and the left from 16 to 23 ounces.
In 21 females the right hemisphere varied in weight from 14^
to 21 ounces, and the left from 15 to 21 ounces. The average
weight of the right cerebral hemisphere was in the males 19*57,
and of the left 19*69 ounces. The average weight of the right
cerebral hemisphere was in the females 17*40, and of the left
17*46 ounces. Thus we find the preponderance of weight, in
the left cerebral hemisphere, still existing at this most advanced
period of life.
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 103
Note on Genekal Paralysis of tiie Insane.
In the number of the Journal of Psychological Medicine,
for April 1877, there is an able review of the works of three
French writers on General Paralysis.
It is there stated that one of those writers, " M. Magnan,
claims priority in having determined the centre, or it may be
one of many centres, of that disorganising process which is in-
dicated by the symptoms of general paralysis, which penetrates
throughout all parts of the encephalon, and produces those
secondary pathological appearances which have previously been
identified as the cause of the disorders of mobility and sensi-
bility which follow."
" These microscopic features, as well as those conspicuous to
the naked eye, may appear first in the brain and its appendages,
and afterwards in the medulla ; or they may appear first in the
medulla and afterwards in the brain; and they may appear
simultaneously in both organs ; or, in other words, the progress
may be upwards or downwards along these nervous tracts. Ac-
cording to priority in the development of these pathological
conditions are observed perversions of mind, of mobility, of
sensibility. Should the brain be originally attacked, the psy-
chical signs predominate, or are exclusively manifested ; should
the medulla be the primary seat of the disease, muscidar pain,
tremor, in fact, ataxic symptoms, spreading gradually to the
lips and tongue, disturbance of the visceral organs correspon-
ding to the portions of the spinal column involved, precede
alienation and greatly augment the difficulties in diagnosis;
and, lastly, when the whole cerebro-spinal axis participates at
once in the degeneration, the characteristic indications of general
paralysis will appear simultaneously, or in rapid succession."
The appearances described by M. Magnan fully coincide
with my own observations, and it will be found that I have, in
my reports from time to time, described the naked eye and
microscopic appearances of the cord, and likewise the granula-
tions on the membranes in the lateral and fourth ventricles,
which latter, as M. Magnan's reviewer truly states, have been
found in numerous cases other than those of general paralysis.
I take this opportunity of claiming priority in the discovery
of the pathological changes in this disease, to substantiate which
I here briefly recapitulate some of my observations made upwards
of thirty years ago, and confirmed by the examination from time
to time of the bodies of nearly 160 patients who died whilst
under my care in the Somerset County Asylum.
104 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
In the first report of the Somerset County Lunatic Asylum,
for 1848, it is stated that fatal cases of general paralysis or
palsy were found on examination to be accompanied by, and
probably dependent on, softening and other results of inflamma-
tion of the spinal marrow, and frequently of the ventricles and
membranes of the base of the brain. Subsequent examinations
have confirmed this statement, and these will be found in the
obituary in the second report, of the following year 1849.
The attention of pathologists is called to this important
subject, no reference being found to it in any English writer.
Although so little seems to be known respecting the morbid
anatomy of general paralysis, so fatal a disease of the insane, it
results, from my observations, that there is no affection of the
nervous centres occurring in insanity which presents such well
marked and constant morbid changes, and these are seated
chiefly in the spinal cord, although the brain or its membranes
are commonly implicated. These changes are chiefly-inflam-
mation of the cord itself or its membranes (meningo-myelitis),
thickening and preternatural adhesions of the arachnoid, soften-
ing induration, enlargement or atrophy of the spinal cord itself.
In the brain, thickening of the arachnoid, with fluid at the base
of the skull, and in the ventricles and spinal canal, gelatinous
fluid beneath the arachnoid (166 m.) concealing the gyrse, and
a roughness from crystals, as if minute particles of sand were
sprinkled on the floor of the 4th, and sometimes to a slighter
extent also in the lateral ventricles.
It may further be observed that general paralysis or palsy
sometimes precedes the mental derangement. This would occur
where the spinal cord first became diseased, and disease after-
wards attacked the brain ; such cases, originating in the spinal
cord, are most likely to be checked if detected early. The
application of warmth to the spine caused manifestations of pain
in some patients when percussion failed to do so. General
paralysis is, however, mostly preceded by some form of insanity,
and is commonly the forerunner of a speedy and fatal termina-
tion, unless a more precise knowledge of its true nature should
lead to a corresponding improvement in its treatment.
The acute cases of palsy, or those in which the disease was
of short duration and death ensued quickly, were distinguished by
softening of the spinal cord, and in one case by enlargement of it.
In the last of the eases in the obituary of 1849, the symptoms
of palsy only existed four or five weeks, death occurred rather
suddenly after a convulsive fit; there was softening of the cord,
and a considerable quantity of fluid in the cerebral ventricles
and spinal canal. Many cases of sudden death have, I believe,
been wrongly attributed to what has been termed serous apoplexy,
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 105
where fluid has been found in the lateral ventricles?a very-
frequent occurrence in the aged?and in which the fatal event,
if the spinal cord had been carefully examined, would have been
found to have been caused from softening in it. The chronic
cases of palsy, those in which the fatal termination did not
occur for several months, were distinguished by induration,
sometimes by atrophy of the spinal cord, and by the thickening
of its membranes.
Besides the cases of general paralysis there will be found in
the obituary of 1849 cases of paralysis dependent on old injury,
or disease of the brain different from the disease already pointed
out, and distinguished by rigid muscular contractions in some
of the limbs, with more or less loss of motion, and in one loss
of speech and power of swallowing; these symptoms were the
result of cerebral apoplexy and injury to the structure of the
brain itself; the spinal cord was in a healthy state.?From
the " Second Annual Eeport of the Somerset County Asylum."
